THE Breaches and Contraventions OF FRANCE, Since the Peace of NIMIGUEN,
Betwixt His Most Catholic Majesty, AND The Most Christian King, Concluded
January 15, 1682.

Particularly relating to Luxembourgh, Namur, and Brabant.

LONDON, Printed for R. Baldwin, in Old Baily Corner, 1684.

MEMOIRES OF EHE BREACHES AND CONTRAVENTIONS OF France, etc.
Contraventions by delaying the Evacuation of Places
BY the Fourth, Fifth, and Eighth Articles of the said Treaty it was agreed,
That the places to be restored on either side, should immediately after the
exchange of the Ratifications be really and Bona fide Evacuated, without delay
or difficulty, for any Cause whatever.

Notwithstanding this agreement, and all the instances of his Catholic Majesty
to have the Treaty observed, The Ministers of France, designing to reduce the
whole Country, they were obliged to restore, to a point of irrecoverable Ruin
and Desolation, have notoriously delayed the Evacuation of the Places:
Pretending, as to the Towns where there were Rivers, that the Ice had rendered
them unpassable for Vessels to carry away their Ammunition: And, as to the
Country, That the Commonalty of the Provinces, under the Obedience of his
Catholic Majesty, being in arrear for Contributions demanded by France, had
not given Security sufficient to satisfy all their pretensions.

The oppression and Ruin of the same Places.
Offers were made on the part of his Catholic Majesty, that the French
Ammunition should be carried by Wagons, and that it might be done after the
Restitution of the Towns, according to the Seventeenth Article of the Treaty:
As to the Contributions, the Spaniards would have given all reasonable
satisfaction, and made it appear the Evacuation ought not however to be
retarded on that account; but all to no purpose: For the French continued their
Exactions of Aids and Subsidies from Town and Country, and Quartered their
Troops there Ten Weeks after the publication of the Peace, and forced the
Inhabitants to pay every Company eight hundred Florins toward Recruits,
besides Free Quarter.

And when the Levyes for Recruits were ended, they made the Officers pay the
Moneys in their Hands, received on that Account, into the Treasury of the most
Christian King.

The Charge on this occasion has been so excessive, that it has amounted to
above Fifty thousand Florins a day, and for the Ten Weeks time to several
Millions. The French, not content with this, extended their Exactions over
several places, which have always belonged to his Catholic Majesty,
particularly over the Countries of Alost, Grammont, and Waes, and generally all
those Countries that had paid Aids and Subsidies with the City of Ghent.

Any Country that had been assess'd with Ghent toward payment of Taxes, the
French took themselves sufficiently entitled to, and made absolute Proprietors
of by right of War, as a Dependent of the City of Ghent, which they had
possessed themselves of, but were obliged by the Treaty to have restored to his
Catholic Majesty, at the time they exacted Aids and Subsidies from them.

And though by the Fifth and Eighth Articles of the Treaty it was agreed, That
the places to be Evacuated should not be dammag'd, and that the Inhabitants
should not be charged, nor any demand be made of payment by them for any thing
pretended due to the Soldiers quartered among them; yet the severity of the
French, in exacting Aids and Subsidies, was such, that the Inhabitants of
several Villages in Flanders, Hainault, and elsewhere, having deserted their
abode, the States of the Provinces, or those Towns which had any thing left,
were forced to pay the Rates assess'd on the depopulated Places.

The oppression of his Catholic Majesty's Subjects under pretense of Arrears
of Contribution.
The Rigor they have used in the matter of Contributions, without regard to
Reason or Covenant, or the moderation agreed on, is unparalleled.

They forced the Subjects of his Catholic Majesty to travel from place to
place, and dance attendance wherever the Intendents of France thought fit to
Command them: They made them pay, not only after the conclusion but publication
of the Peace, the charge of Envoys, Reprizals, and Counter-Reprizals past in
time of the War, though his Catholic Majesty had revoked all Orders of that
kind. And when his Majesty's Subjects could not produce particular Acquittances
(which had been burnt, or lost, or mislaid in the War time) the French
compelled them to pay the same Duty twice, not satisfied with later
Acquittances, by which it appeared the former Duty was discharged; and his
Catholic Majesty was obliged to pay what was demanded of such of his subjects
as were insolvent.

Besides, they extended their Contributions in full Peace, to places that had
not been subject to them in the time of War, nor paid any Aid or Subsidy to his
Catholic Majesty.

It Is evident by the Sixteenth Article of the Treaty, That the Contributions
were not to be demanded after the Sixteenth of October, 1678. But it was the
pleasure of France, they should be paid for two Months longer, under pretense,
that his Catholic Majesty had delayed the exchange of the Ratification; though
in truth, the Term was prolonged by mutual consent, without altering the Treaty
in any particular; and that, in the mean time the Suspension of Arms continued,
so that there was not any need of Guards or safe Conducts, and consequently no
cause to raise Contributions; but the Exaction ought to have ceased upon that
very account, if the Treaty had not limited when it should determine.

Breach by destroying of Woods.
The Thirteenth Article of the Treaty says in express terms, That the Subjects
of either Part, should from the day of Signing the Treaty be put into full
possession of their Estates, and particularly of the Woods in the several
Places, and that from that day no Wood should be fallen by right of War.

The French Intendants have been Guilty of a formal Contravention in this
point; having caused a fall of Woods to be begun after the Treaty had been
signed, and a prodigious quantity to be cut down, which did belong to the
Subjects of his Catholic Majesty: The pretense being, they had order to do so,
if the Ratifications were not perfected within the time limited for that
purpose: And when it was made appear the Ratification had been effectually
exchanged within the time prefixed, their answer was, the Woods were fallen
before they had the News; as if they had not been obliged in the least to
inquire after the progress of the Treaty, and that their distance from
Nimmighen had given them full right to act the violences they pleased, upon
supposition it was possible a thing was not done which had been effectually
accomplished.

Besides, they were so far from harkening to the Instances made them, that they
would leave to the Owners such of the Trees fallen as remained on their
Grounds, that they caused them to be carried away, and disposed of them as they
pleased.

Waste and ruin by the March of their Troops.
Their Forces, before they were drawn off, in pursuance of the Treaty concluded
and ratified, committed great spoil, and excessively wasted the Province of
Namur, by Marches and Counter-Marches of purpose, wherein they were Guilty of
disorders in abundance, using the Spanish Subjects at discretion, Robbing their
Houses, and forceing them to ransom their Persons, as in the heat of the War.

The Chevalier de Sourdis, who, pursuant to the Treaty concluded with the
Elector of Brandenbourgh, brought back the French Forces from the Duchy of
Cleves, through the Provinces of Gueldres and Luxemburgh, abstained not from
the like disorders; having forced his Catholic Majesty's Subjects of Welst
and Breehdorf to Build a Bridge over the Roer, for carrying over his
Ammunition; the Officers of his Dragoons having compelled the same Subjects to
furnish them with Victuals and Forage unpaid for.

This was certainly against the Laws of Nations and of Hospitality: For though
this passage had been granted them on the account of the Elector of
Brandenbourhg and the States of the United Provinces, to rid the Country of the
former of these Forces, and the States of so dangerous Neighbors, they ought
to have been content with the liberty of passage, and not have forced the
Subjects of his Catholic Majesty to bear their Charges.

Breaches by invading and taking Towns and Places of his Catholic Majesty's.
These Contraventions ushered in an inundation of others, that quickly followed
in several parts of the Provinces subject to his Catholic Majesty, wherein the
French took several Towns and open places, many whereof they had quitted and
restored into the possession of his Catholic Majesty, in pursuance of the
Treaty.

In Hainault.
The Town of Chevre in Hainault holds immediately of his Catholic Majesty and
the Sovereign Court of Mons: The most Christian Kings Attorney, at the
Conferences held in execution of the Treaty of Aix la Chappelle, which granted
to France the Town and Castlewick of Aeth, had inserted the Town of Chevre in
his List of the Dependences of that Castlewick, and pretended it belonged to
the most Christian King, as a Member of the Castle of Aeth: His Catholic
Majesty's Attorney maintained the contrary: The Commissioners of the two Crowns
were divided in Opinion, those of his Catholic Majesty insisting it ought to
continue his, as holding immediately of him and the Court of Mons: The French
urged, it belonged to their King, as a dependent of Aeth passed to him by the
Treaty of Aix la Chappelle.

And thought the matter was put out of question, by the Retrocession of the
said Castlewick of Aeth, to his most Catholic Majesty by the last Treaty; so
that it must of right belong to him, whether you allow the opinion of the
French or Spanish Commissioners and Attorneyes of the Crowns: Yet in December,
1679. Count Monbron, Lieutenant General of the Armies of France, was sent with
considerable Forces of Horse and Foot, with Engineers, to make himself Master
of that Castlewick by force of Arms, in a time of full Peace, and when the
Commissioners of the two Crowns were actually met for Execution of the Treaty.

They possessed themselves the same time of about twenty Villages lying within
the Castlewick of Aeth, intermixed with the Members of it, and called Free
Lands, for that they are not dependents of the Castle, but are holden
immediately of his Catholic Majesty as Earl of Hainault: Notwithstanding this,
the French pretended to them since the Treaty of Aix la Chappelle, and took
possession of them as dependdents of the Castle of Aeth, though his Catholic
Majesty had also the perception of the Rights and Profits belonging to him.

When their pretended Title by the Treaty of Aix la Chappelle, ceased by that
of Nimmighen, wherein they agreed to restore Aeth and its Castlewick to his
Catholic Majesty, the same time that they drew out of Aeth and its Castlewick,
they did without difficulty evacuate those Villages, leaving them in the full
and free possession of his Catholic Majesty, as agreed by the Treaty: But,
after about a years time, they entered again upon the Castlewick of Aeth, and
took actual possession of it; and (for want of other reason) pretended, they
had right to it, for that they had in the last War taken and possessed it by
force of Arms, and that the most Christian King in his Proposals for Peace, had
not only demanded the Cession of the places there mentioned, but added this
Clause, In a word, the Places and Countries he was in Possession of, except
only those he should think fit to restore.

And though this general Clause was rejected by the Act of acceptance, and the
Treaty thereupon, and that by the mediation of the States General, it was
agreed, That all places to remain in the possession of France should be
particularly expressed and named in the Treaty of Peace, and a general Clause
inserted, That all that had been or should be possessed till the Publication of
the Peace, (except the places to remain by the Treaty in the Possession of
France) should be restored: And that besides this agreement, the Castlewick of
Aeth and its Dependents, were expressly named among the places to be restored to
his Catholic Majesty, whereby all the right and pretense of the French was
absolutely annulled: Notwithstanding all this, and that they had not any color
to claim again their pretended possession, having divested themselves of it,
and of the Title they had made use of as the sole ground of their possession;
Yet within twelve Months after evacuation of those places, pursuant to this
Treaty, the French without right, and contrary to the Treaty, possessed
themselves of the same places by force of Arms: They possessed themselves also
of the Town of Fountain L'Evesque, which holds of his Catholic Majesty as Earl
of Hainault: And in December, 1679. they seized the Towns of Fumay and Revin,
situate on the Meuse, and belonging to his Catholic Majesty, as Dependences of
the County of Beaumont, for which seizure they had not, nor pretended any
right, other than that they had found, that about nine hundred years ago, those
Towns had been reputed part of France.

At the same time they made themselves Masters of Bourg D'Estrun, the Villages
of Feron and Roully, and afterward that of Rock and other Hamlettes,
pretending them to be Dependences of Maubenge; though in truth they are part of
the Principality of Chimay, belonging to his Catholic Majesty, under the
immediate Jurisdiction of his Sovereign Court of Mons.

An Order dated the sixth of February, 1680. was sent to those of Cerfontain,
Tirimon, Bersilly, Le Val, and Audrelu, to force them to swear Fealty to the
most Christian King: Under pretense, they had found some old Registers wherein
those Villages were mentioned as Dependences of Maubenge: Though in truth, they
neither were, nor are so; but the four first of those Villages have ever since
the year 1518, been United to the Provostship of Beaumont, and Andrelu to that
of Binch.

Breaches in the Province of Flanders.
The Violences done by the French in the Province of Flanders are no less
suprizing and groundless than the former.

They have possessed themselves there of several open places belonging to his
Catholic Majesty, and among others, of the three Towns of Loo, Roulers, and
Renaix.

The Town Loo is immediately subject to his Catholic Majesty as Earl of
Flanders, having been always Governed by particular Officers, without other
dependence than that of contributing in Assessments with the Freedom of Bruges,
whose Customs it follows, as may be seen by the Records of the Province, and
the Customs of the Freedom of Bruges, Tit. 1. Art. 6, 7.

After the Peace of Aix la Chappelle, France pretended to it as a dependent of
Furnes, and the Sieur Bobert, the French Intendant, quartered Forces there
under that pretense in the year 1668. But those of the Council of Flanders
having made the contrary appear by Letter of the eighth of June that year, the
Intendant acknowledged himself satisfied, and by Letter of the 13th of the same
Month answered, that had he been so informed before, he would not have sent any
Forces thither; his answer was confirmed by Order he sent for the speedy
dislodging of the Troops quartered there; which being accordingly done, his
Catholic Majesty's unquestionable right to that Town was owned and confirmed
by the confession of the French: Notwithstanding this, after the Peace of
Nimmighen, they made use of the same pretense for appropriating to them the
Sovereignty of that Town; in pursuance whereof, they placed new Magistrates
there, in 1679.

The same year they possessed themselves of the Town of Roullers, pretending it
a Dependent of the Castlewick of Ipre; though it be in truth a Signiory in
chief, and is called as such to the States of Flanders in all Assessments of
Aids and Subsidies, and is part of the Land of Wynendall within the Freedom of
Bruges: The Aids and Subsidies charged on the Castlewick of Ipre, as well as
those on the Town of Roullers, are paid at Roullers; in all other things the
Town of Roullers is wholly separate and distinct from the Castlewick of Ipre,
and so absolutely independent, that the Inhabitants of Roullers have never
contributed to the Charges of the Castlewick: and Roullers has been so far
from being reputed a dependent of the Castlewick of Ipre, that it had not any
benifit of the redemption quarters purchased by that Castlewick, or granted it
from time to time: And the independence of it from the Castlewick, has been
confirmed by a Sentence upon Appeal in 1578.

The Town and Territory of Renaix is immediately subject to his Catholic
Majesty, as Earl of Flanders; and pays its Services in his Chamber of Justice
established in the Town of Ghent.

It belonged formerly to the Abbots of the Monastery of St. Cornelius, and in
the year 1280, was sold to Guy Earl of Flanders, and united to that Province:
The same Guy gave it to one of his Sons in Fee, to hold of him his Heirs and
Successors Earls of Flanders; and it was accordingly held for several Ages.

This possession is grounded on abundance of Evidences and Decrees of
Confiscation to the use of the Earl of Flanders, as Sovereign Lord; so that the
Right of his Catholic Majesty to it is beyond contradiction; but the French,
whose Right consists in their Arms, have sent Troops to quarter there, and
usurp the Sovereignty of the place against his Catholic Majesty.

Breaches in the Duchy of Luxemburgh.
The Province of Luxemburgh has more than any other felt their daily
Contraventions against the Treaty of Peace; for, in the time of full Peace, the
French have taken in that Province without any reason, other than that of the
Right of Arms, a great number of Towns, Castles, and Territories of very large
extent.

The Castle of Bourg of Rodemacker is a Signiory in chief, depending
immediately of his Catholic Majesty, as Duke of Luxemburgh; it holds
immediately of his Majesty's Person, and does its Fealty and other Services due
to his Majesty before the General Governor of that Province, as appears by
Surveys and other Records, particularly those of 1552, and 1553. And by the
admission of the Marquess of Baden in 1562. The French pretended to it as
belonging to them by the Cession of Thionville by the Treaty of the Pyrenees:
But in the Conferences held for execution of that Treaty, the Right of his
Catholic Majesty was so clearly made out and maintained, that he continued in
possession of the Castle and Borough; and in the beginning of the War in 1667.
His most Christian Majesty granted them a Neutrality at the request of the
Marchioness of Baden.

The Public Faith ought in that case to have secured them from his Arms, but
has been so far from securing them, that the French Troops, expressly contrary
to the Neutrality, possessed themselves both of the Castle and Borough: By the
Treaty of Aix la Chapelle reparation was agreed to be made for this Violence;
but the last War breaking out before reparation obtained, his Catholic Majesty
retook the the Borough and Castle, and continued a Garrison there till both
were demolished: So that the last possession has gone with the right of his
Catholic Majesty.

Yet, though after this, and especially after the conclusion of the Peace at
Nimmighen, all violent attempts and seizures by force ought to have ceased; the
Ministers of France have not only possessed themselves of the said Castle and
Borough, (for no other reason than that Right must submit to Might) but have
seized other Lands to the Gates of Luxembourgh, pretending they are Dependences
of the Borough or Castle of Rodemacker, for which there is not any more color
than for the pretended dependence of Rodemacker on Thionville.

Upon this ground it was, that in October 1679. they seized the Castle of
Esperange within half a League of Luxemburgh, forced the Inhabitants of the
Signiory to swear Fealty to the most Christian King, abused the Mayor of the
place for opposing them, and prohibited the Inhabitants to acknowledge any
longer the Sovereignty of his Catholic Majesty as Duke of Luxemburgh, or
resort to the Fairs held in that City, upon pain of Corporal punishment, though
it clearly appears by the Records of admissions of the Tenants of Rodemacker,
that the Territory of Rodemacker extends not to Esperange, nor the Villages its
Dependents: And by the admissions of the Tenants of Esperange it is equally
evident, it is held immediately of his Catholic Majesty as Duke of Luxemburgh,
being a Seigniory in chief, and as independent as Rodemacker it self.

The complaints made on this account to the Court of France appeared so
reasonable, that Monsieur de Pompone the twentieth of October, 1679. declared
to the Sieur Del Val, by express Order of his most Christian Majesty, that the
Intendant having been charged to cause all the Inhabitants of the places his
Majesty was possessed of in Alsace and Lorain to swear Allegiance to him, had
of his own head extended the Order to the places above mentioned: But that no
advantage should be taken of it; and when it should be made appear, at the
Conference, that they belonged to his Catholic Majesty, he should without
difficulty be put into Possession of them.

After this Answer it was expected they would have at least abstained from
Force; but the fifteenth of November, 1679. they took those places again, and
farmed out the Toll of the Bridge of Esperange, belonging to his Catholic
Majesty; and without any regard to the Protestation made by his Attorney
General, and accepted by him they had constituted Commander of Rodemacker, they
ordered the Ancient Farmer of that Duty under his Catholic Majesty to pay it
to the use of his most Christian Majesty; and let the Governor of Luxemburgh
know, they would not permit his Catholic Majesty to receive any Aids or
Impositions from the places they had obliged to swear Allegiance to the most
Christian King, and that they would make the Subjects of his Catholic Majesty
pay double what should be so imposed or received on his part.

In January, 1680. they seized Ryaville, and seventeen Villages annexed to it,
pretending they were Dependents of Metz, though in truth they are not, but
belong to his Catholic Majesty, and depend absolutely on his Duchy of
Luxemburgh.

Their proceedings as to the Seigniories and Lands of Russy, Putlange, and
Presche are yet more enormous; for the fifth of May, 1680. the Count de Bussy
presented himself at the Frontier of Luxemburgh with a Body of French Horse and
Dragoons, with resolution to enter that Province on the morrow, if the
Soldiers his Catholic Majesty had in those Castles did not retire thence in
the mean time; which, to prevent greater inconveniences, they did: And the
Count de Bussy immediately possessed himself of the Places, placed French
Garrisons in them, and forced the Province of Luxemburgh to pay the Charges the
Victuallers of his Troops said they had been at, and imprisoned the Provost of
Verton, till he had Compounded with them for a hundred Pistols.

These Violences were the more surprising, as grounded on no other pretense
than an imaginary Dependence of those places on Thionville and Rodemacker:
Though Russy be a County and Seigniory held immediately of the Person of his
Catholic Majesty, to whom it does Homage and other Services, which it performs
to his Majesty in the Person of his Governour-General of that Province, to whom
alone under his Majesty it is obliged to pay them, having always been a place
independent of any other, and its Inhabitants subject to the immediate
Jurisdiction of the Council Provincial of Luxemburgh. Besides it is Registered
as a County, and more ancient than Thionville and Rodemacker, as appears by the
Surveys and Admissions, particularly of the years 1270, and 1563.

The Castle of Putlange is also a Seigniory in Chief, holden immediately of his
Catholic Majesty as Duke of Luxemburgh, and the Territory of it is under the
Jurisdiction of the Provostship of Luxemburgh, with which it has been always
taxed, and contributes to all Charges public and private, ordinary and
extraordinary, as appears by the Registers of Fires in the years 1552, 1563,
1624, 1656, and 1659. By the Original Assessments, the Accounts of the
Provostship, and the Sentence given in the point the last of June, 1624.

And that the Lordship of Preische, consisting in a Castle and some Farms,
hemmed in and encompassed with Villages of the provostship of Luxemburgh, is a
distinct Fiefe and Seigniory holden in Chief, and depending immediately on his
Catholic Majesty, as Duke of Luxemburgh; as appears by many Admissions of
Tenants, and Surveys, particularly those of 1563, 1597, and 1624.

Breach as to Charlemont.
By the Treaty of Peace his Catholic Majesty was to have his Election, to
yield up to the most Christian King the Town of Charlemont, or in lieu thereof,
to procure Dinaut to be yielded to him, with the consent of the Prince of
Liege, the Emperor and the Empire, within a year from the Ratification of the
Peace between the Emperor and his most Christian Majesty: The Catholic King
having determined his Election by choosing the Cession of Dinaut, The Ministers
of France without any scruple publicly used all the means in their power to
deprive his Catholic Majesty of the Effect of his Choice; And, two Months
before the year was expired, employed open Force to possess themselves of
Charlemont: The year was to begin from the Ratification of the Treaty between
the Emperor and France, (being the twenty eighth of April, 1679. the day the
Ratifications were exchanged) and to end the same day in the year 1680. But the
French were so impatiently eager to be Masters of that Town, that two Months
before, they drew down many Forces to the Frontier, and declared to the
Governor of the Spanish Netherlands, that if that Town were not Evacuated in
February 1680, they would right themselves by Arms: Pretending it sufficient,
the Ratification of the Peace by the most Christian King was Dated in February
1679, though the Ratification by the Emperor, and the Exchange was made after.

This proceeding was more unjust, as contrary to the Nature of Treaties, which
is grounded on the mutual consent of Parties: Which the Ministers of France
thought so necessary in regard of the Ratification of the Treaty with Spain,
that the delay of it by his Catholic Majesty for a time agreed on for that
purpose, served them for a pretense to force his Majesty's Subjects to pay them
Contributions two Months beyond the term agreed on.

And though their pretenses were wide from the purpose, it being evident that
the time for demanding the Cession of Dinaut was not to begin till the
Ratification of the Peace by the Emperor, without which the Instances of his
Catholic Majesty in the Empire could not be effectual; yet the Representations
made on this Subject by the Spanish Ambassador, and those of England and
Holland, were altogether vain; And his Catholic Majesty was obliged to comply
with them, to prevent the Oppression of his Country by their Troops; which, in
default of compliance with their pleasure, had order to fall into his Majesty's
Countries four several ways.

More Contraventions in Luxemburgh and Namur.
They were no sooner in possession of Charlemont, but they made themselves
Masters of several Places of Luxemburgh and Namur, as Dependents of that Town,
which is but a Fortress or place of Arms, having not any Dependent, nor
mentioned in the Treaty.

Under this pretense Fifty Men under the Command of Count Montbron took the
Castle of Agimont, and forced the Spanish Garrison to quit it; though Agimont
be so far from being a Dependent of Charlemont, that on the contrary Charlemont
has been always a Dependent, and reputed part of Agimont, till separated from
it by Charles the Fifth: The Protestations against this proceeding were
altogether fruitless, and his Catholic Majesty connived at the Attempt, to
prevent the irruption his Countries were threatened with in case of opposition.

The same time they seized Givet, and afterward possessed themselves of above
thirty Villages belonging to his Catholic Majesty, pretending them to be
Dependents of Agimont, though the pretense for the most part be as groundless
as that of the Dependence of Agimont on the Fortress of Charlemont: Part of
those Villages being of the Duchy of Luxemburgh; as the Seigniories of Rienne
and Viereux les Walraut, the former whereof is held of the Castle of Orchimont,
and the other a Seigniory in Chief, independent of any other place, as appears
by the Admissions and Surveys of both; and part of them not only are parcel of
that Duchy, but have been acknowledged such by the Intendant Faultrier, who
being asked the reason of this Infraction of the Peace, answered he very well
knew the Articles of it: And that this Village being not above half a League
from Givet, and surrounded on all sides with the Lands of Agimont, his most
Christian Majesty was at liberty to appropriate to himself the Sovereignty of
it, by disinteresting his Catholic Majesty of the Right he had in it. Though
in truth such Exchanges and Disinteressments, as the Intendant seemed to
intimate, could not be regulated by the will of either of the Crowns: It being
expressly provided by the fifteenth and sixteenth Articles of the Treaty, that
Commissioners should be appointed on both sides for adjusting them, with
directions for clearing such difficulties as might arise on that Subject.

A third part of those Villages belongs to the County of Namur, and depends not
of Agimont, but other places of that Province belonging to his Catholic
Majesty: But there is no end of the Dependences they pretend to: In April 1680,
the Villages of Spontin, Falmaigne, Pondrosme, Sorinnes, Maismil, St. Blaise,
Hargnies, and the two Bourseignes, were seized by the French, as obliged to
follow the Fortune of the Seigniory of Polvache in the same County.

Contraventions and Violences against several Abbeys in diverse Provinces.
In the same Month of April they possessed themselves of the Abbey and Villages
of Waulsors, Hastier, and Ermeton, belonging to his Catholic Majesty in the
same County: They attempted the Abbey of Moulin, and used all sorts of Artifice
to induce the Monks in the absence of their Prelat to swear Allegiance to the
Crown of France.

Having found at St. Gerrard, a Prior that had the baseness to desire their
protection, they seized the Lands of Broigne and St. Gerrard, having sent
thither for that purpose an Officer with Dragoons in July 1680. The pretense
being, that the Monks of the Priory of St. Gerrard had opposed the Union made
of that Priory to the Bishopwrick of Namur in the last Age: And that the Sea of
Namur being void, they had Right to defend and support those Monks, that the
Profits and Revenues of the Bishopwrick might be preserved for the use of them
they should belong to.

They committed the like attempts against other Abbeys in Haynault and
Flanders, and refused to admit the Abbot of Hannon, nominated by his Catholic
Majesty while the Abbey was under his Obedience: They forced the Abbot of Aumont
to go to the French Court, pretending he was rendered a Dependent of it by the
Cession of the Provostship of Maubenge, though his Abbey is not of that
Provostship, but depends immediately of the Court of Mons.

They have treated and continue to treat with rigor the Abbey of Dunes
transferred long since into the City of Bruges, having in effect taken away all
its Subsistence, by seizing the Lands it has under the French Kings Dominion,
and giving them to a revolted Monk, who has procured himself to be made an
Abbot in one of the Farms of the said Abbey called Bogard: So that the Prelat
and Monks of Dunes at Bruges, being thirty in number, having not wherewith to
maintain themselves, have for their nourishment been forced to sell the
Consecrated Vessels of their Church; and having now nothing left, are reduced
to the utmost extremity, having not been able to prevail for any thing to
maintain them in the mean time till Justice be done them, which they have
demanded, and are sent to the Conference at Courtray, in order to obtaining it.

Not content herewith, they pretended a Right to take from that Priory all its
Effects, and the poor Remains it has under the Dominion of his Catholic
Majesty, and for that purpose seized by way of Reprizal the Estate of the Abbey
of St. Peter in Ghent, to the value of six thousand Florins a year.

Contraventions and Attempts in the Woods and Forests of his Catholic Majesty,
Their Attempts in the Woods and Forests of his Catholic Majesty in several
Provinces, are no less considerable than destitute of any color of Reason.

They possessed themselves of the Woods of Nieppe, Mourma^, and Oosthulst,
which were neither yielded up to them, nor depend on any of the Places yielded;
and extended their Usurpation (in regard of the Woods of Oosthulst) into the
Territory of Merckem which is within the Freedom of Bruges.

Their pretended protection of the Estate of the Monastery of St. Gerrard
before mentioned, has sufficed to entitle them, not only to dispose of the
Estate of that Monastery, but to Usurp his Catholic Majesty's Forests
bordering on the County of Namur, particularly Biert, Marlaigne, and Foix,
having hindered the Sergeants to make distress there, carried them Prisoners to
St. Gerrard, and obliged them by all sorts of Menaces to swear Fealty to them,
and to discover what was done in those Woods for his Catholic Majesty.

When complaint was made of the injustice of this proceeding, the Intendent
Faultrier answered, if those Woods belonged to his Catholic Majesty he should
have them; and that the matter should be regulated in the Conference at
Courtray.

And his Subjects.
They have taken the same liberty as to the Woods of his Subjects, having
caused those of the County of Beaumont to be cut down for the Fortifications of
Maubenge, without consent of the Owners.

The Tolls and Customs of his Catholic Majesty are not exempt from the
Violences of the French, who in the Territories subject to their Dominion, have
at their pleasure erected Offices for gathering them in the very sight of his
Majesty's Towns: And when the like was endeavored to have been done on his
Majesty's part at St. Antony's, about three quarters of a League from Tournay,
they not only hindered it by force, pretending it too near the City of Tournay,
but possessed themselves of the Village where the Office was intended to have
been set up.

Nor will they permit that their Subjects shall pay any Duty for Importation or
Exportation of Goods they carry through the Spanish Dominions, from one Town
under their Obedience to another: Because it is said in the sixteenth Article
of the Treaty, that if Difference arise about any Lands belonging to either
Crown, surrounded by those belonging to the other, no Office may be erected on
either side, to perplex and render more difficult the Communication of Places
under the same Obedience: And on this ground they have hindered the
Establishment of Offices in several places where there are not any Enclaves or
Lands surrounded as aforesaid.

The French Subjects need no more than the Countenance and Assistance of an
Interstant to defraud (without fear of Punishment) His Catholic Majesty of
these and other Rights in his Countries, where this Establishment is not
contradicted, and to be discharged of the Forfeitures and Confiscations they
have incurred, and the Compositions they have agreed to.

This has been made appear on several occasions, particularly in December
1680, in the Duchy of Luxembourgh, when a Merchant of Marville, who would have
conveyed severel Stuffs from Luxembourgh into France, without bringing them to
the Staple, without Entering their Quantity or Quality, and without paying the
Duties of Importation or Exportation, or that of Safe Conduct, which is
generally due for whatever goes out of Luxembourgh; and had Treated with the
Officers of his Catholic Majesty to pay fourscore Patacoons to discharge
himself from the Penalties incurred. He no sooner addressed himself to the
Intendant of Metz, under pretense of a Privilege granted those of Marville by
Archduke Albert, to bring thither their Merchandises in their passage through
his Dominions, without paying any Duties; but the Intendant declared his
pleasure the Merchant should be absolutely discharged; otherwise, that Right
should be done ^^m by way of Reprizal, which he gave the Governor of
Thionville order to make upon the Inhabitants of Luxembourgh: So that to stop
his course, the Officers of Spain were forced to restore to the Merchant the
four-score Patacoons, pay him his Costs of Suit, and to give him two hundred
and four-score Crowns Damages: Though the Privilege granted the Inhabitants
of Marville, when under the Obedience of Archduke Albert could not take place
after it had past into the subjection of France; and that it was declared
before, it extended not to the said Duty of Safe Conduct, and consequently
cannot warrant the Contraventions against his Catholic Majesty's Placarts.

By prohibiting them to Alien their Estates without License.
They have not only ill used the Subjects of his Catholic Majesty, and
particularly the Nobility, but have taken their Measures to take from them the
Liberty of Alienating the Lands they have under the Dominion of France: For
under pretense there was heretofore an Order that the French must purchase
License to sell their Lands in any part of the Low Countries, particularly in
Artois and Cambresy; they made a general Ordinance the fifth of December 1679.
Prohibiting the Subjects of his Catholic Majesty to Alien their Estates, in
any part of the French Dominions, to the use either of French or Strangers,
without License from the most Christian King; contrary to what was agreed by
the Treaty of Peace, That every one should be restored to the full property and
enjoyment of his Estate, which consists principally in the liberty to dispose
as one thinks best of his own.

By drowning their grounds.
In the time of full Peace they damm'd up the Waters at Conde, and afterward
opening the Sluices laid under Water all the Lands of Bernissart, the Meadows
and greatest part of the Lands of Harchies, Preau, Tiuvette, Hensy, Neufville,
Sarty, and a great part of Pommerevil, all under the Dominion of his Catholic
Majesty: This done, Bonnier is a measure of Land somewhat above the French Acre
or Arpent.
they laid a Tax of fifty Florins on every Bonnier of Land and Meadow under
Water, for redeeming the Inundation, and threatened the Proprietors to seize
upon the Meadows, and Unite them to the Crown of France, in default of payment
of the Tax: And several not submitting to this Oppression, they caused those
Meadows to be Mowed in July and October 1680, and let them out to Farm to the
use of his most Christian Majesty for the Term of seven years.

This Violent and Notorious Usurpation upon the Sovereignty of his Catholic
Majesty is the more surprising, for that the French pretend to a Right to
oblige the Governors of his Majesty's Places in the Netherlands, by way of
Reprizal, to open their Sluices, when their Subjects suffer the least
inconvenience by the stopping them.

They made the Sluices of Newport be opened at the first demand, for the benefit
of the Meadows of Furnes: And during the Peace of Aix la Chappelle, they made
use of a pretense of some Damage received in their Lands by the Inhabitants of
Bernissart, by the stopping of the Waters of Conde, to seize upon the Effects
of several of the Nobility, and other Subjects of his Catholic Majesty, and
disinterested the said Inhabitants from any Concern in the Affair, taking the
matter wholly upon themselves: And though in the year 1680, the Waters of
Courtray were let down at their request beyond the usual marks, so that his
Catholic Majesty's Customary Mill, where his Tenants in those Parts were
obliged to bring their Grists, could not Grind of a long time, only that they
might be furnished with the Water they said they wanted, for working more
easily in some Foundations of the Fortifications of Menin.

Not satisfied with this, they would have made the Governor of Coutray
responsable for the inconveniences they suffered by the Rains; and on another
occasion sent him word, that if he did not let down the Waters to a greater
height than they were at, they would send Forces into the Castlewick of
Courtray to Quarter at discretion, and that Count Montbron had received Orders
to that purpose: So that the Governor of Courtray was obliged to desire the
French to send some Persons to Courtray to inform themselves of the Truth, and
be convinced upon sight that they had done all in their power to pleasure them,
that he might prevent the Reprizal they were going to put in Execution, and
whereof they make use every moment, even in private Affairs.

By stopping the course of Justice.
For, for a Sentence pronounced in the Court of Mons, against a Person the
Intendant Faultrier pretended to belong to the Dominion of France, they seized
Goods of the Spanish Subjects amounting to above a hundred times the value of
the Sum in Question.

The Burgomaster and Sheriff of Zenecon were imprisoned for having exacted a
Labourer in the Land of Agimont.

If a Robbery or any disorder be committed in their Country, it is enough if
they can suspect it has been done by the Subjects or Soldiers of the
Neighboring Spanish Garrisons; this serves them for ground sufficient not only
to demand Justice, but to do themselves the Right they pretend to, by way of
Reprizal; as they did in Luxembourgh and Flanders in December 1680, so that the
States of those Provinces were obliged to charge themselves with Restitution of
what the French said had been taken from them.

Contraventions and Violences on the account of Palisades at Bovignes.
If they apprehend any Fortification of Places belonging to his Catholic
Majesty, or have not a mind they should go on, they proclaim Reprizal
beforehand, as was done the beginning of the year 1681. When being alarmed at
the News of some Palisades made at Bovignes by a company of Soldiers Quartered
there, they sent to Brussells the French Lieutenant of Tournay, to declare to
the Governor of the Netherlands, that having Forces in Dinaut they would not
permit Bovignes, being so near it, to be Fortified, and that if they ceased not
Forifying on this warning, they would employ Force to stop them. And though
they were made sensible that Fortification was nothing, and that they might be
convinced by a sight of it on the place, they were not satisfied, but disposed
of their Troops in readiness to enter his Catholic Majesty's Countries, and
forced the Governor to take away the Palisade: Though in the mean time they
Fortify where they please, have raised a regular Fortification at Menin near
Courtray, and cannot pretend the Town of Dinaut to be theirs, but the Bishops
of Liege, to whom they are obliged to restore it, and have by the Cardinal of
Bouillon solicited the Chapter of that Bishopric not to consent it should be
exchanged and separated from their Church, that by this means they may have the
Town of Charlemont, and retain Dinaut also, the better to block up the Town and
Province of Namur.

The constant success they have in these Attempts and Violences, and the
inability of the Spanish Netherlands to oppose them, makes them look upon the
whole Country as a place invested by their Arms, to be harrass'd on all sides,
that it may at last wholly fall under their Power.

New Violences in Namur, by taking the Towns and Places of his Catholic Majesty
'Twas not on any other account, that the seventeenth of May 1681. they
prohibited the Inhabitants of Arbre and Lesues belonging to his Catholic
Majesty, as part of the Baylywick of Bovignes in the County of Namur, to pay
his Majesty any more Taxes, upon pain of being chastis'd as disobedient to the
Orders of the most Christian King: And that on the twenty sixth of June 1681,
they granted to him that gave most, the Great and Small Tithes of the Village
of Bioulx and the Neighboring Places between the Sambre and the Meuse.

In July 1681, they possessed themselves of the Villages of Biesmes, Gerpinnes,
Villers-la-posterie, Acos, Ioncret, a la Stache, Orez, Gougnies, Bois, de
Sart-Villers, Romree, and Furnau, Dependents of the Bayliage of Bovignes, and
forced the Mayors and Inhabitants of the said Villages to come to Biesmes, and
there swear Allegiance to the most Christian King: They seized also the
Bayliage of Anthee between the Sambre and the Meuse, with all its Dependences,
and possessed themselves of them, particularly Morville, Fontaine, Meanvoye,
Sierville, Flavions, Rosee, Kestrevins, Metz, Wespins, Melins, River, Somer,
Ontraye, Wellien, and other places, all unquestionably belonging to his
Catholic Majesty as Earl of Namur. They extended their Usurpation over the
Forest of Marlaigne, which is part of his Catholic Majesty's Demaines, over
six hundred Bonniers more, and forbad all the Chapmen of the Fellettes to fall
any of the Woods sold them, or to make any use of them, without paying their
Commissary for them.

In Hainalt.
They continued their Violences in the Province of Hainalt, where the fifth of
April 1681. they possessed themselves of the Villages of Vaux, Fontenoy, Veron,
Maubray, Bras-maisme, and Bourgeon, though unquestionably belonging to his
Catholic Majesty, as part of the Castlewick of Aeth, as was agreed by the
Procurators and Commissioners of both Crowns at the Conference at Lille, in
Execution of the Treaty of Aix la Chappelle, where it was Decreed by consent,
That these Villages should continue in the List Exhibited by the Procurator of
the most Christian King, who enjoyed them on that account, till by the Treaty
of Nimmighen he was engaged to restore them to his Catholic Majesty, in
pursuance whereof, he caused them to be Evacuated with the rest of that
Castlewick, that his Catholic Majesty might have free Possession of them,
wherein he continued till the said fifth of April 1681.

New and horrible Violences in taking all the Towns in the Territory of
Luxemburgh, except the Provostship of the City.
Their Principal Designs have always been against the Province of Luxemburgh,
for its great extent as well on their side as on the side of the Empire, and
the Netherlands, to the Province of Namur; and their Exhorbitances to bring it
under their power, have been greater than the Disorders and Enormities
committed in other Places.

For, under pretense that the County of Verton had some Ages past been holden
of the Bishop of Verdun, and that the Counts had done Homage, and other
Services, to the Bishop for that County; the French (without Color of
Jurisdiction) in the Name of the pretended Lord of that place, caused his
Catholic Majesty (in the Person of one of his Officers) to be Summoned to
appear in their Chamber of Reunion Established at Metz, to do his Service due
for the County of Verton, upon pain of Forfeiture: Which pain they not only
Decreed, but would have Executed by Force of Arms in the Territories of his
Catholic Majesty: Having sent the thirteenth of March 1681, the Count De Bussy
with a Troop of Horse and Dragoons into the Duchy of Luxemburgh, where he
presented himself at the Gate of Verton, and Summond him who Commanded there
for his Catholic Majesty to quit the place with his Garrison. The Commander
declaring he could not do it without Order from the Governor of the Province,
the Count De Bussy with about two thousand five hundred Horse Quartered in the
same Province, and continued there till thet wenty fourth of April following,
having in that time committed several Acts of Hostility, by the Spoil and Ruin
of the Estates and Effects of his Catholic Majesty's Subjects, by taking away
their Cattle and other Movables, and imprisoning their Persons, and putting
them to the Ransom, without desisting his violent Enterprises till his
Catholic Majesty had ordered his Garrison to be drawn out of Verton.

And though this was done the eighteenth of April 1681, the Count De Bussy, not
satisfied therewith, continued his Violences, till the Spaniards Evacuated St.
Mard, though a Dependent of another Provostship.

The same Count possessed himself of the Seigniories and Castles of Tour la
Val, Gomeriers, and Mont Quintin, having sent toward this last place a Company
of Granadeers to drive out the Spanish Garrison thence, and damnified the
Province by his Spoils and Oppressions to the value of a hundred and fifty
thousand Crowns.

They seized also the Provostship of Orchimont, and several Lordships included
in it, and Neighboring to it: And forced the Officers both of State and
Justice, the Lawyers and other Inhabitants, to swear Allegiance to the most
Christian King, and forbad them to pay any Aids or Taxes to the States of
Luxemburgh.

They possessed themselves also of the Castles of Rochfort and Beaurain, where
they have placed a Garrison, though these Places are part of the Dominions of
his Catholic Majesty in Right of his Duchy of Luxemburgh, to which they have
belonged several Ages.

And that they might seize the Territory of the County of Chiny, and so open a
way to invade the rest of that Province, they have searched out a pretense of
Tenure, that Homage ought to be paid to his most Christian Majesty for that
County: Which in truth is part of the Ancient Demeans of his Catholic Majesty
as Duke of Luxemburgh, and has been many Ages in the Possession of his Majesty
and his Predecessors independent of any other Power.

True it is, the Dukes of Lorain pretended a Right to have Homage done them, as
Dukes of Bar, for a Moiety of that County; and several Conferences were had on
that Subject toward the end of the last Age, and the beginning of this, betwixt
the Deputies of Archduke Albertus, and those of the Duke of Lorrain and Bar:
But it is as true, and appears by the Treaty had in pursuance of those
Conferences, That it was agreed, the County of Chiny should be absolutely
exempted from the Fealty and Homage pretended to for it by the Duke of Lorrain
and Bar, who granted to the said Archduke and his Successors all the Right he
had or could have to it, in consideration of a Release the Archduke made to
him of the Services due for some places of the Dukedom of Bar.

Notwithstanding this, the French Summoned, (at a House of an Officer of the
said County) the pretended Count of Chiny to appear in the said Chamber of
Reunion at Metz, (which has not any Authority or Jurisdiction in the Case) to
do Homage to his most Christian Majesty, as being in Possession of the Dukedom
of Bar without any Grant.

And though this Summons and Proceedings thereupon have been Vacuated by the
Councils of his Catholic Majesty, as Judges of the Territory, the French have
not ceased to pursue their Point. And the better to gain it, in a place where
could be no contradiction, the most Christian Kings Attorney made use of those
Evidences only which had been exhibited in the said Conferences on the part of
the Duke of Lorrain and Bar, without mentioning the Evidences Exhibitied on
the part of Archduke Albertus, nor the Treaty concluded.

Pursuant hereto the said Chamber of Metz upon a pretended default gave
Judgment the twenty first of April 1681, whereby the pretended Count of Chiny
was condemned to hold the said County of the Dukedom of Bar, and to do Homage
for its Appurtenances, Dependences, and places annexed to it, upon pain of
Forfeiture to be incurred within a Month, without further Order.

This Judgment was sent into almost every place of the said Province, though
altogether independent of Chiny; and Prohibition added in the Name of his most
Christian Majesty, that no Money should, without express Order from him, and
the appointment of the Officers of the Generalship of Metz, be raised or
imposed on the Inhabitants of those Places; nor any Quarter or Subsistence
allowed there for any Officers or Soldiers of any Nation whatever, without
like Order and Appointment, on pain of a thousand Livers.

And as these strange Orders, (being absolutely null by the Makers want of
Jurisdiction and Authority within the Territory and Dominions of his Catholic
Majesty) could not be obeyed there; the count De Bussy entered again into the
Province of Luxemburgh the tenth of July 1681. with a Body of Horse and
Dragoons, and caused the Commander of Chiny for his Catholic Majesty to be
Summoned to draw his Garrison out of Chiny, and leave the place to the French,
adding Threats in case of refusal. The Commander Answering, his Duty permitted
him not to comply with the Summons, the Count De Bussy first Quartered his
Troops in the County of his Catholic Majesty about Chiny, and afterward at
Neuf-Chasteau in the Country of St. Hubert, Mirwart, March, Durbuy, and other
Places, having not only forced the Inhabitants to receive the said Troops, but
obliged some of them to swear Allegiance to the most Christian King: Afterward
he went with the same Troops to Ortheville, Asnonlez, Bastoigne, Martelange,
Ell, and then to Mersch, having posted himself between Mersch and Lintgen, till
the thirteenth of August.

Yet the Ministers of France thought this a Proceeding not brisk enough, and
therefore the sooner to attain their end, sent an Envoy to Brussels to signify
to his Highness the Prince of Parma, Governor of the Netherlands, that if
within eight days he caused not the Spanish Garrisons to be all drawn out of
the County of Chiny, and all its Dependences, they would make a further
Irruption into the Lands of his Catholic Majesty in Flanders and Hainalt, with
two Bodies of Horse, Commanded by Count Montbron and the Chevalier de Sourdis,
whom they had ordered to March for that purpose to the Frontiers of both
Provinces.

So that to prevent the total overthrow of his Catholic Majesty's Interest in
the Netherlands, the Spanish Garrisons were drawn out of Chiny and all its
Dependences.

Yet all this would not satisfy them; but to compass their Design of making
themselves Masters of other places in Luxemburgh, as Dependents of Chiny,
(though in truth they were not, nor had their Chamber of Reunion Decreed any
thing in that point) they let his Highness know further, the two Bodies of
Horse abovementioned should fall into his Catholic Majesty's Country, unless
he would Evacuate all those places the Count de Bussy should name to be
Dependents of Chiny, having ordered the said Troops to forage in the interim
in Flanders and Hainalt upon the Lands belonging to his Catholic Majesty, into
which they caused their forragers to enter, and forced the Subjects (to prevent
their Ruin) to carry to the French Camp the Forage they demanded, being
double the quantity they needed, and to pay in the Country subject to France
the Subsistence of those Troops.

To these Violences they added the Usurpation of his Catholic Majesty's
Sovereignty over his Subjects, prohibiting them by Proclamation to carry their
Effects into his Majesty's Walled Towns, on pain of Confiscation, which they
Executed in some places.

Besides all this, they forced the Spanish Subjects to make Presents to the
Commanders of these Troops for their Oppression and Injuries, as the Effects of
the Amity and fair Correspondence they had promised to observe by the Treaty of
Peace: So that (to put a stop to those Violences) they had delivered up to them
(besides Chiny and its Dependences) all the Towns, Lordships, and Countries of
the Duchy of Luxemburgh, demanded by the Count de Bussy, except the City of
Luxemburgh and the Provostship thereof, with some Lordships included: Whereby
they have not only extended their Power over a large quantity of Ground,
containing above a thousand Towns, Buroughs and Villages, but also opened the
way for subduing Luxemburgh, especially by continuing the measures they have
taken to stop the Importation of Necessaries for its subsistence.

All which is directly contrary to the Treaty of Peace, (whereby to prevent all
occasions of proceeding by force) it is agreed by the fifteenth Article that
Commssioners should be sent to Courtray, to put an amicable end to all
differences that should arise about Execution of the Treaty.

Their refusing to treat of any business at the Conference.
But they have made it evidently appear they intended no such matter, nor sent
their Deputies to Courtray for any other end, than merely to make a show, and
amuse the Neighboring Princes and States, without any the least effectual
satisfaction.

Difficulty raised about the Title of Duke of Burgundy.
For the Commissioners of the two Crowns having met in December 1679, the
French raised a Preliminary difficulty about the Title of Duke of Burgundy
inserted in the Commission from his Catholic Majesty; pretending that Dukedom
had been granted to the most Christian King, by the Treaty of Crepy.

And though there be not any ground for the Objection, but on the contrary, the
said Treaty mentions not any, otherwise than Conditionally and Alternatively:
That the Netherlands should be granted, with a Renunciation of the Duchy of
Burgundy, to Prince Charles, younger Son of Francis the First; in case he
should Marry the Daughter of Charles the Fifth: Or that the Duchy of Milan
should be granted to that Prince if he Married the Daughter of Ferdinand King
of the Romans, at the Election of the Emperor: That the Emperor determined
his Election by the Marriage of his Daughter with Ferdinand; that the intended
Marriage of the said younger Son of France was prevented by his sudden Death,
and consequently, the condition of the Grant was not fiulfill'd, in which case
the Title and pretension to the Duchy of Burgundy was expressly reserved, in
that as in all following Treaties that relate to it: Besides it was made
appear, the discussion of this point was out of the Power of the Commissioners,
which was limited to the Execution of the Treaty of Nimmighen which mentions it
not: And that there was so much the less reason to raise this Objection in a
place where they were obliged to disallow and oppose it, for that this Title
belongs to his Catholic Majesty by Birth right: That since the Union of the
House of Austria with that of Burgundy, all the Princes of both Branches, (as
well that of Spain as Germany) have used it, and use it to this day: That with
the full privity, and without any contradiction of France, it has been
constantly inserted in all the Treaties made since that of Crepy, for an Age
and a half; that it is found in the Powers granted for the present Treaty of
Peace, the Execution whereof is the sole matter in question; as also in the
Ratification of the Articles, and the Proxy for the Espousals given by his
Catholic Majesty to the most Christian King, who accepted it without scruple,
and by virtue of it substituted the Prince of Conty in that Affair.

Notwithstanding all this, they persisted in their Demand, and the third of
May, 1680. caused it to be declared to the Spanish Commissioners, that if they
did not procure themselves another Commission to the satisfaction of the
French, within the Term limited for that purpose, the most Christian King would
order his Commissioners to retire from the Conference, and possess himself of
all the places he should judge ought to belong to him by virtue of the Treaty.

And though this difficulty ceased since September 1680. and that the
Commissioners of France the fifteenth of that Month dclar'd they were satisfied
with the Powers Communicated to them that day; and that they were content to
enter upon the business; yet they sought out several pretenses to delay the
Affair for several Months. And when they could not find any more; but expressed
themselves satisfied with the Reasons of the Spaniards; 'twas but in appearance
and merely to amuse them, for they continued to decide all by the way of Arms,
eluding all instances made to the contrary.

And when the Commissioners of his Catholic Majesty desired to Treat at
Courtray of the Affairs of Luxemburgh; the Commissioners of France declared
openly, they had not any Commission or power to Treat of them there, and that
they concerned the Execution of the Treaty of Munster, and not that of
Nimmighen; though they very well knew, neither his Catholic Majesty, nor any
on his behalf intervened in the Treaty of Munster, nor in that of Nimmighen, as
relating to that of Munster; the one and the other having been made seperately
between the Plenipotentiaries of the Emperor and the most Christian King.

And as to the restoring his Catholic Majesty to the Possession of the Places
and Countries Usurped from him by Force since the Publishing of the Peace; the
French have been so far from doing his Majesty Right, that they have
incessantly acted new Violences and Injuries, and formed other pretensions at
the Conference, not only destitute of Ground, but any appearance of Reason:
Insomuch, that they insisted the most Christian King had Right over the Towns
and Countries of Alost, Niuoue, Gramont, and abundance of other Places, to the
very Lands of the States of the United Provinces: And demanded an Equivalent
for them from his Catholic Majesty, pretending that by the taking of Ghent,
their Arms had given them Right of Entry into those Countries; and that they
had had some kind of Possession of them. Whereas in truth they are open places,
and have so continued during the War: So that France could not on that account
gain any right to them, nor hinder his Catholic Majesty from access to them,
and consequently from preserving his Right and Possession as he has done. And
that the most Christian King, after the taking of Ghent, pretended not to them
but as Dependences of that City, which he is particularly and expressly obliged
to restore to his Catholic Majesty.

Besides, after the Publication of the Peace, the French were Quartered in
those Countries, as Places belonging to his Catholic Majesty, to Force Spain
to pay the Residue of the Contributions as pretended to by France: And when
they were paid as is mentioned before, the most Christian King drew his Forces
out of those Places at the time he Evacuated Ghent, that his Catholic Majesty
might be left in the peaceable Possession of them.

Add hereto, that these Places are essential Parts of the Barriere, for which
the most Christian King has obliged himself to rest satisfied with the Cession
of certain Places agreed to be given him in exchange. And that in the List of
Places named in the Treaty to be given in exchange of the Barriere, the Places
we speak of are not comprised: And that after the Enumeration of Places to
remain in the Possession of either Crown, or to be restored to them, an Article
was added by way of enlargement, that all Towns, Place, Posts, etc. should be
restored, that had been or should be possessed by either Party till the
Publication of the Peace, as appears by the seventh Article of the Treaty.

More Contraventions and Violences in Namur and Haynault.
After all this they gave us to understand they were not minded to stop there;
for they renewed their Usurpations in the Provinces of Haynault and Namur with
as much or more Violence than formerly: For in October 1681, they compelled the
Commonality of Long-Pret and Beutonville, two Villages near Beaumont in
Haynault, to swear Allegiance to the most Christian King: And sent Orders to
the same purpose to those of Profonde-ville, Wepion, Aveloy, and
Thyle-Chasteau, in the Province of Namur; and having posted themselves at
Wepion adjoining close and contiguous to the City of Luxemburgh, they stopped the
Importation of any Grain into it by Land or by Water* and the fourth of October
1681, seized some Horses Laden with Oats and other Grain, and caused the Boats
that were going down the Meuse to come ashore, to be searched whether they had
aboard any Grain to be carried to Luxemburgh.

Not content with this, they caused some of the Inhabitants of Wepion to be
carried away in November 1681, on pretense those of that Village had not sworn
Allegiance to France; and threatened to Plunder and set Fire on the Place if
they complied not forthwith.

Besides, they caused an Ordinance to be published, Dated the fourth of that
Month, prohibiting all Gentlemen and others having Votes in the Assembly of the
States of Namur, and those who were Lords or Inhabitants of any Lands or
Villages pretended by the French to have submitted to them, to appear any more
in the said Assembly on pain of being proceeded against as disobedient, with
further prohibition to the Inhabitants of the Villages between the Sambre and
the Meuse, to acknowledge any Sovereign, other than the most Christian King, or
to receive any order from Spain, or pay any Rights, Taxes, Aids, or Duties, to
any but those deputed by the Intendant of France: With express order to carry
Prisoners to Philippe-Ville or Charlemont, those who should bring any Orders of
that Nature from Spain or any place but France, and the Persons Commissioned by
it.

To let the World see how unlimited they would make their Attemps, they
extended them beyond the Meuse over all the Villages of the Provostship of
Poilvache; for though his Catholic Majesty continued in peaceable possession
of them to the fifteenth of November 1681. (Except only the Month of April,
1680.) They possessed themselves of the Villages of Houx under Polivache,
setting up there the Arms of France, and afterward sent orders to the like
Effect to Spontin and Sursinnes, pretending the most Christian King had taken
possession of all the said Provostship of Polivache, and gained the Sovereignty
over all the Inhabitants and the Villages its Dependents.

Pursuant to this pretense, in Ostober and November, 1681, they sent Orders to
the Mayors and Inhabitants of the Ban of Leignon, the Villages of Chaltin,
Emptines, Spontin, Obey, Halliot, Gaun, Hodemon, Walay, Wauremont, Asies, the
Mayoralty of Rendarche, containing several Villages, Gesues, Corier, Falmaign,
and other places dependent and under the Jurisdiction of the said Provostship,
to force them to swear Allegiance to France, and to send into Dinaut Oats,
Hay, and Straw, for Maintenance of their Horse (which was accordingly done)
with Prohibition to the Inhabitants to receive any Orders from his Catholic
Majesty, or carry any Money to the Receipt of of his Domaine, on any pretense
whatever, upon pain of being punished as disloyal Subjects: After which they
placed Soldiers in the Castles and strong Places of that Provostship to be
maintained at the Charge of the Country: Without setting up any pretense for
seizing those Places other than the pretended possession of their King, as
appears by the following expressions contained in every Order relating to this
Affair: viz. Though the possession his Majesty is in of the Sovereignty of
Poilvache and the Provostship thereof, may sufficiently inform all the Subjects
of the Provostship they ought not to acknowledge any Sovereign but his Majesty,
etc.

They took the same course with the Mayors and Inhabitants of the Village of
Ahin, a Dependent of the Bailiage of Enter meuze and Arche, and with those of
the Mayorality of Houx a Dependent of Bovignes, and consisting in the Villages
of Lisoigne, d' Auvaigne, Purnode, Eurd'haille, Juoix and Godiness, and in the
Hamlettes of Lois, Faynoulle, Champall, Venate, Furvoy, Frappeud, Fresne and
Talfier, all Situate beyond the Meuse, and unquestionably belonging to his
Catholic Majesty as Count of Namur.

Nor did they think it sufficient to make themselves Masters of the Woods of
Biert, Marlaigne, and Foy, but they possessed themselves also of the Forests of
Marly, Bielme, Vieux-fourneau, Halloy, Weillon, Hez, Bruvieres, and Heronart;
for having caused the said Woods and Forests to be felled, they sold them in
October 1681, to him that bid most for the use of his most Christian Majesty:
And the fourth of December following, compelled the Ranger of the Forests of
High and Low Arche (both Dependents of the said Bailiage of Entremeuse and
Arche) to appear at Dinnut to swear Allegiance to France.

They pretend also a property in the Woods of Anwez in the same Province,
consisting in eight hundred forty six Bonniers situate beyond the Meuse; and in
November 1681, prohibited the Officers of the Woods of that Quarter to come any
more to Namur to make any Report concerning those Woods to the Officers of his
Catholic Majesty, but required them to make their Reports for the future at
Dinaut, on pain of being hanged or sent to the Galleys.

Other Violences in the Provinces of Lothier, Limburgh, Luxemburgh and Flanders.
They extend their Usurpations to the Villages of the Duchy of Lothier or
Brabant, having about the end of September 1681, sent orders (which were
renewed the seventeenth of November the same year) to the Mayor and Inhabitants
of Ayseaux, Le Roux, Abbaye d' Ogines, and their Dependences, being all under
the Jurisdiction of the said Duchy, to force them, (as they did,) to swear
Allegiance to the most Christian King: Notwithstanding the Remonstrance made to
them by the Marquisse d'Aysseaux, that these Places were Dependents of the said
Duchy of Lothier and not of the County of Namur.

They have also left Marks of their Violences in the Counting House of the
Duties for Exportation and Importation established at Honyles Esseneux in the
Country of Limbourgh, as well by taking away all the Ancient Controlles of
Claude Noell the Controller deceased, as by other Attempts and Violences
against his Widow, who foreseeing their Enterprise withdrew with her Money to
Liege.

In the beginning of December 1681. They made the Province of Flanders feel
more sharply the smart of their Opressions; for under pretense of some Attempts
and Spoils pretended to have been committed in the Country of Luxemburgh by the
Troops of his Catholic Majesty (though caused by the French,) they invaded the
said Province, and committed more Cruelties than in a time of open War; having
Plundered and sacked several Villages in the Country within the Freedom; and in
the Castlewick of Courtray, taking away above six hundred Horse, a Multitude of
horned Beasts, and carried with them the Bailiffs, Burgomasters and Sheriffs of
Harlebeck, Thielt, and Deinse, the Provost of Harlebeck, the Baron of Winghene,
several Curates and other Gentlemen of the Country, whom they used ill, and
imprisoned them at Menin among the common Malefactors, where they endured very
great incoveniences: the Sieur Voorden Commissioner for France at the
Conference of Courtray, having declared to a Deputy of the said Castlewick,
that the pretension insisted on by France, was to have payment from the
Subjects of Spain, of the Sum of sixty thousand Florins for Interest and
Damages pretended to have been suffered by them in the Country of Luxemburgh,
and of three and thirty thousand Patacoons for the Charges of the Execution
above mentioned: And that if these Sums were not presently paid, the Marshal
d'Humieres would send orders for making more terrible Executions, and taking
persons of greater Quality than those who were then Prisoners.

To make it appear yet more clearly, that France scruples not any sort of
Contravention against the Treaty of Peace: An Ordinance was issued, dated the
twenty seventh of November 1681, whereby they caused all the Lands in Artois,
belonging to the Subjects of his Catholic Majesty, to be seized, with
prohibition to the Farmers or Receivers to pay thenceforward any thing that
should be due to the Proprieters for Arrears or growing Rents till further
order: In pursuance whereof, they caused all the Lands, Signiories, and other
Effects belonging to the Baron of Couriers, Governor of Audenard, to be
seized; though by the Treaties of Peace the Subjects of the one King
unquestionably may and ought to enjoy peaceably their Estates within the
Dominion of the other.

Till then we were ignorant of the cause of these Seizures: But the Ministers
of France have since sufficiently explained themselves, having by Order of the
most Christian King, caused a general seizure to be made of all the Estates,
Lands and Signiories of the Subjects of his Catholic Majesty, situate in any
Country yielded to France; and having settled Commissioners to receive the
Profits and Revenues thereof, and pressed the Receivers to pay them what was
already accrewed. Declaring further, that those Estates should continue under
seizure till the Ministers of his Catholic Majesty at Brussels made Reparation
to the Prince d'Isenghien for the vexation he had suffered; though what they
call vexation, is but the Sentence and Execution given and awarded by Competent
Judges, whom the said Prince petitioned to have Assigned in a Cause wherein he
was Plaintiff, and acknowledged their Jurisdiction from the time of the Action
brought to the decision of the Cause, having Personally, or by his Lady or
Agents, constantly solicited the dispatch of the business, procured the
assistance of the Commissioners who attended the Inquests, taxed the Costs, and
made up the Report of the Proceedings.

It was afterward observed also, as to the Office at Esseneux spoken of
before, that the Ministers of France had no other design but to destroy it, and
utterly ruin the Province of Limburgh as well as the rest; for under several
feigned pretenses purposely set on foot, and principally for that the Officer
at Esseneux had made the Tradesmen of Liege pay the Duties for Importation and
Exportation, who, to defraud his Catholic Majesty, pretended themselves
Subjects of France, though their being so would have been so far from exempting
them, that it obliged them to pay: Yet on this pretense principally they first
threatened high, and afterward Plundered and ^uined several Villages of
Limburgh, which they also pretend to under the false Title of Dependences of
the County of Chiny and others.

These Attempts and Violences being endless, they exacted two hundred Measures
of Oats from the Bank of Sprimont in the same Province, threatening to Plunder
the Boares if they did not presently deliver the Oats; and would have obliged
the Count d'Esseneux Lord of Sprimont to swear Allegiance to the most Christian
King, though that Lordship is notoriously known to be holden of the Duchy and
Sovereignty of Limburgh.

In a word, it clearly appears by all these proceedings, that all hitherto done
by France and its Ministers is not to be justified either in form or substance.

For as to form the whole World has seen, and known they have not acted
otherwise than by Force, but have violated the Law of Nations, and broke that
Seal of sincerity and truth, affixt so solemnly to the Treaty of Nimmighen, to
declare it was intended to be made firm and stable, and to be perpetually
observed.

As to the substance and ground of the pretensions of France, it has been made
appear, they have not any Foundation of Title, Possession, or Color of Right:
And that on the contrary the Title, Possession, and Right of his Catholic
Majesty are so fully justified and so clearly made out, that they are really
unquestionable, and not to be contradicted with Reason or Truth: Yet for
further satisfaction to the World, as to Luxemburgh and Namur, we have thought
fit to deduce more particularly the lawful Right and Possession of his
Catholic Majesty, in all the French have possessed themselves of in those two
Provinces since the Publication of the Peace.

A PARTICULAR DEDUCTION OF THE EVIDENCES and PROOFS OF The Right and Possession
of His Catholic Majesty IN AND TO All the Places France has taken actual
Possession of in the Province of Luxemburgh, since the Publication of the Peace
of Nimmighen.
The Castle, Borrough, and Signiory of Rodemacheren, with twenty Villages its
Dependents.
1. FRance began with the Castle and Borrough of Rodenmacheren, of which the
French possessed themselves the thirtieth of December 1678. and afterward of
twenty Villages in which the Lordship of Rodenmacheren consists; though the
said Lordship, Castle, and Borrough be a particular and distinct Signiory in
chief, depending only of the Duke of Luxemburgh, and held immediately of his
Person, as appears by the admissions of the Tenants and Feoffees thereof;
particularly in the years 1302, 1314, 1532, 1562, 1605, and several others: as
also by the Gift of the said Signiory made by Maximilian King of the Romans,
the fifteenth of November, 1492, to Christopher Marquess of Baden, with
condition that he and his Heirs, Lords of the said Signiory, should upon every
Descent or Alienation do the Services due for their admission, and hold it in
Fee of the Duke of Luxemburgh, of whom the said Signiory is holden of old, with
all Royalties, Jurisdictions, Fees, and Rights possessory, as expressed in the
Grant: It appears further by the Register of Fires, in the years 1552, 1553,
and others: Notwithstanding all which, and that Rodenmacheren has not been
granted by any Treaty to the French, yet have they possessed themselves of it,
as aforesaid.

The Castle and Lordship of Hesperange, and four Villages.
2. In October 1679, the French seized the Castle of Hesperange (distant only
half a League from the City of Luxemburgh) pretending it to be a Dependent of
Rodenmacheren; and forced the Inhabitants of Hesperange, and four Villages that
make up the Signiory, to swear Fealty to the most Christian King; and that they
would no longer acknowledge the Duke of Luxemburgh their Sovereign, nor pay him
any Aid or Imposition; though by the Surveys of the Lordship of Rodenmacheren,
it appears clearly, it extends not to Hesperange, nor those four Villages its
Dependents: And the Records of admissions demonstrate evidently, it is held
immediately of the Duke of Luxemburgh as a distinct Signiory in Chief, and is
as independent as Rodenmacheren it self, as by the Rolls of Admissions in 1532,
1562, 1605.

The Castle and Lordship of Raville with 17 Villages its Dependents.
3. In January 1680, the French possessed themselves of the Land and Lordship
of Raville, (consisting in seventeen Villages, situate by the River Niedt and
thereabouts) as a Dependent of Metz: Whereas in truth the said Land and
Signiory has been always held and reputed parcel of the Sovereignty of
Luxemburgh: And the Lords as well as the under-Tenants of Raville have always
owned and submitted to the Jurisdiction of the Provincial Council of
Luxemburgh, and held immediately of the Duke of Luxemburgh, as appears by the
admission of John de Roldenge in the year 1323, by the Earl of Luxemburgh; and
by the admissions in the years 1461, 1546, 1548, 1570, 1572, and others: And in
the Conference and Partition made the twenty third of September 1615, and the
Ratification thereof the twenty fifth of October 1615. it was agreed and
declared, That the Duke of Luxemburgh should continue in possession and quiet
enjoyment of the exercise of all Acts of Sovereignty in the Village of Raville,
without impeachment or innovation by those of Metz, in any point whatsoever:
And that thenceforth the Lord Bishop of Metz should be for ever debarred from
pretending to any Sovereignty or Jurisdiction whatever in Raville aforesaid: So
that not only the Castle but the Signiory of Raville, and its Dependences,
belong to the Duke of Luxemburgh.

4. The fifth of May 1680. the Count de Bissy presented himself upon the
Frontier of the Province of Luxemburgh, with a Body of French Horse and
Dragoons, threatening an Irruption on the morrow, unless the Soldiers his
Catholic Majesty had in the Castles of Russy, Putlange, and Preisch were drawn
off in the mean time: The Spaniards to prevent the Ruin of the Province, were
forced to comply, and Evacuated the three Castles: This was no sooner done, but
the Count de Bissy put French Garrisons in them, and obliged the Province of
Luxemburgh to pay the Charges the Victuallers of his Troops said they had been
at.

The Castle and County of Russy, with eleven Villages its Dependents.
The pretense for these Usurpations was, that those Castles were Dependents of:
Thionville and Rodenmacheren: Though Russy be a County holden in Chief of the
Duke of Luxemburgh, as appears by the Admissions in the years 1270, 1287, 1304,
1563, 1624, and others; and has been Surveyed by it self, as a County; as
appears by the Register of Fires of the Province; and has been always under
the immediate Jurisdiction and ordering of the Governor of the Province:
Besides it is in truth more Ancient then Thionville or Rodemacheren, and was
heretofore given by Henry Earl of Luxemburgh to his Brother Walerand.
Notwithstanding this, the French have possessed themselves of the said Castle
and County of Russy, and eleven Villages its Dependents.

The Castle and Jurisdiction of Putlange, and fifteen Villages
5. As also the Castle of Putlange, though held in chief of the Duke of
Luxemburgh, as by the Records of Admissions in 1551, 1574, and others; and that
the Lord of Putlange, with the rest of the Gentlemen and Feoffees of that
Country, swore Fealty to Winceslaus Duke of Luxemburgh in the year 1398.

6. The French possessed themselves also of the Land of Putlange, and fifteen
Villages in which it consists; though it is in truth a F^^nchise of the
Provostship of Luxemburgh, with which it has been always Taxed and Assess'd,
in all Charges Ordinary and Extraordinary, as appears not only by the Registers
of Fires in 1552, 1563, 1624, 1656, and 1659, but by the Accounts of the Office
of the Provostship, and a Sentence given in the point the last of June 1624.

The Castle and Lordship of Pritsch.
7. The Castle and Lordship of Pritsch is a distinct Fee and Signiory,
depending immediately, and held of the Duke of Luxemburgh, as appears by the
Admissions in 1562, 1597, 1624, and others; yet the French seized both the
Signiory and Castle.

8. They possessed themselves of the Castle of Agrimont, as a Dependent of
Charlemont, which in truth has not any Dependent, but was Built and Fortified
by Charles the Fifth, in the Territory of Agimont: And the Castle of Agimont,
the Capital Seat of the Territory, or any Land depending of it, was never by
any Treaty granted to France: But the French have also seized the Lordships of
Riennes and Vireux le Walerand, The Lordships of Vireux le Walerand and Rienne.
though parcels of the Duchy of Luxemburgh; the former held of it as a
Signiory in chief, independent of any other place, and the other holden of the
Duke, as of his Castle of Orchimont, as appears by the Admissions and Surveys
in the years 1598, 1600, and others.

The Lordships of Chastepierre, Riviere, and.
9. Claud Verdavoine Usher of the Chamber of Metz, Summoned the last of
February 1681, the Deteyners of the Lands and Lordships of the County of
Rochefort and Montagn, the Provostship of Orchymont and New Castle, and
Lordships of Chastepierre, Riviere, Fontenoilla, S. Cecile, Lesch, Le Mesnil,
Cugnon, Les Bertris, Ban d' Orjo, Baillamont, Marpout, Dochamps, Herbumont, Ban
de Hutailles, Ban de Musson, and several other Villages, to appear and answer
the Articles of the Attorney General of the said Chamber of Metz: Pretending it
did appear those Lands and Lordships were Dependences of the County of Chiny,
though in truth not any of them but New Castle be a Dependent of it; and that
France had not then set up the least pretension to the County of Chiny: yet in
process of time, the French possessed themselves of those Places.

The Castle and Provostship of Orcymont, with 6 Villages and ten Lordships.
10. Particularly, having by Force of Arms possessed themselves of the Castle
of Orcymont and its Provostship, consisting in twenty one Villages, and also of
ten Signiories included within the Limits of the Provostship, they compelled
the Justices and Officers of the Provostship and Lordships to swear Fealty to
the most Christian King, and prohibited them under grievous Penalties to pay
any thing thenceforth to those of Luxemburgh: Though the said Provostship and
Lordships have time out of mind been held and reputed parcel of the Duchy of
Luxemburgh, and the Dukes of Luxemburgh have enjoyed all Royal Rights,
Jurisdiction and Sovereignty over them. And when Orcymont has been out of the
immediate possession of the Duke, the present Owner always did Fealty and other
Services for it to the Duke, by the Hands of the Governor General of the
Province, as appears by the Admissions in 1545, 1598, 1600, 1678, and others:
And in 1260. John Lord of Orcymont acknowledged he held his Lordship of the
Earl of Luxemburgh.

The Castle and County of Rochfort, with four Villages.
11. The French by Force of Arms possessed themselves likewise of the Castle of
Rochfort, a place very considerable, and that has for above four hundred years
acknowledged, as to part, the Duke of Luxemburgh Lord, (as appears by several
Admissions, particularly in the years 1283, 1545, 1598, 1599, 1600, 1673, and
others) and, as to the residue, the Bishop of Liege, according to agreement
with him.

12. Under pretense that Verton holds of the Bishop of Verdun, and ought to pay
him relief and other Services, the Chamber of Metz, by Arrest of the 24th. of
October, 1680. condemned His Catholic Majesty to receive admission to his
Tenancy of Verton from the Church of Verdun, and to appear personally in the
said Chamber, to do his Fealty and Homage to the Most Christian King: tho it
cannot be made appear, that Verton has at any time within three hundred and
forty years last past been taken as a Fee of the Bishop of Verdun; but, on the
contrary, the Dukes of Luxemburgh have possessed and enjoyed it ever since the
year 1340 when John King of Bohemia, then Earl of Luxemburgh, purchased it of
the then rightful Lord of it, to hold to the said Earl and his Successors, in
all Sovereignty, Jurisdiction, and Demeans; which Purchase was made in the face
of all the World, and without the least trouble or impeachment by any. So that,
admitting it true, that Verton above three hundred and forty years since has
been taken of the Bishop of Verdun, as Lord of the Fee; yet what can that be to
the purpose, after so many Revolutions and Changes since happened in Kingdoms,
Principalities, and Sovereignties? when nothing can be more clear, than that
the Conquest one Sovereign gains over another in War, must be regulated by
inspexion of the last Estate of the thing conquered: that is, The Conqueror
cannot otherwise possess his Conquest than in such manner and form as it was
possessed by the Disseizee at the time of the Disseizin by the Arms of his
Enemy. Consequently, it being unquestionably true, that the Empire, when by the
Treaty of Munster it granced to France the Sovereignty of the Bishopric of
Verdun, was not seized of any Seigniory over Verton in Right of that
Bishopric; it follows, that the Most Christian King cannot by virtue of that
Grant pretend to any such Seigniory.

14. This Rule is grounded on the Right of Arms, and derived from the Law of
War, by which it is generally holden, the Conqueror succeeds him that is
dispossessed, and represents him in his Conquests. So that the Grants of
Dependences, and Cessions (of things annexed) in Treaties of Peace, are to be
understood (by a tacit condition in Law) to have relation always to the last
Possession of the Dispossessed, tho it be not so expressed in the Treaty.

15. This Maxim is allowed by all to have the force of Common Law, except the
Ministers of France, who not only reject the Interpretation and Constructions
in Law of such Cessions and Grants, but without scruple break express
Stipulations.

16. For, by the Latin Original of the Treaty of Munster it is clear, that the
Cession of the Sovereignty of the three Bishoprics of Metz, Toul, and Verdun,
with their Appendences and Dependences, was no otherwise granted to France,
Quam sicuti Imperium hactenus pessedit; that is, Than as the Empire has
hitherto possessed it: which is altered in the French Translation of the
Treaty, where the Word Hactenus is not rendered Jesques icy, Hitherto; but
Cy-devant, Heretofore: which gives quite another sense to the Period.

17. Notwithstanding this, Count Bissy, accompanied with about two thousand
Horse, entered the Province, Mar. 13. 1681. and caused the Commander and
Inhabitants of Verton to be summoned three times to yield themselves to France;
and upon their refusal, he lodged his Troopsin the Province, and ruined several
Villages depending on the Provostship of Verton, St. Mard, d' Arlon, Boulogne,
Estalle, and Luxemburgh, and diverse other Lordships; where he committed many
Cruelties and Exactions, having put the Inhabitants to Composition and Ransom,
carried away many Goods, and a great quantity of all sorts of Beasts. Not
content with this, he sent several Prisoners into the Towns of France, and
declared publicly he would not draw out his Forces before the Evacuation of
Verton, but would march with them throughout the Province, consuming and
ruining one Place after another.

The Town, Suburbs, and Provostship of Verton, with 17 Villages.
18. So that the Spaniards, forced to comply, evacuated the Town and Suburbs of
Verton, which France took possession of, as well as of the Provostship, with
seventeen Villages.

19. But notwithstanding this Evacuation, Count Bissy would not leave the
Province till St. Mard was likewise evacuated, tho a Provostship different from
Verton, and for several Ages under the Jurisdiction and Sovereignty of
Luxemburgh, and time out of mind before the Purchase of Verton. The Spaniards
submitted also to the Evacuation of St. Mard, thinking thereby to prevent the
total Ruin of the Province, which the French Troops had by their Oppressions,
Devastations, and carrying away Men and Beasts, damnified to the Value of One
hundred and fifty thousand Crowns.

20. Thus France possessed it self of St. Mard, and sixteen Villages, its
Dependents.

The Castles and Lordships de la Tour, Mont-Quintin, Lavaux, Grommery, etc.
21. Not content with this, the French have seized the Seigniories and Castles
de la Tour, Mont-Quintin, Lavax, Gommery, Bassail, Ruette, Villers la Loupe,
tho Capital Places, held of the Duke of Luxemburgh, and part of them granted
him by a Cession made 15 July, 1602. confirmed 26 March, 1603.

The Town and County of Chiny, with 27 Towns, Villages, Hamlets, etc. And the
Lorship of Neuf-Chasteau; consisting in 40 Villages.
22. France staid not here; but the Chamber-Royal established at Metz, having
by an Arrest of 21 April, 1681. condemned the pretended Earl of Chiny to appear
pesonally in the said Chamber, to do his Fealty and Homage (due for the said
Earldom, its Appurtenances, Dependences, Rights, and Places annexed) and within
forty days after to bring in a Survery thereof, with Acknowledgment of his
Tenure; they would have recorded this Arrest in the Town of Chiny, by Claud
Verdavoire their Usher, had he not been hindered by the Commander of the Town,
who made him retire.

23. And tho this pretended Arrest be null by the highest of Nullities, the
want of Jurisdiction in that Chamber over his Catholic Majesty, who has the
Right and Possession of the Sovereignty of the County of Chiny, with all its
Appendences and Dependences, it is besides most unjust, and full of Errors,
both in Law, and in Fact.

24. For although the Duke of Luxemburgh purchased the County of Chiny in the
year 1364. and possessed it ever since in Demensn, with all Sovereignty and
Jurisdiction, without doing any Service, or paying any Relief for it to the
Duke of Bar, who, on the contrary, by Grant of 15 July, 1602. confirmed 26
March, 1603. released all Rights and Obligations of Vassalship, direct
Seigniory, and Feodal Tenure, he had, or could pretend to, or demand, over the
said County of Chiny, in exchange for the Services and Reliefs due from the
said Duke of Bar for several considerable Lands, to wit, the Town and
Castlewick of S^thenay, the Town and Castlewick of Marville, the Provostship of
Arancy, the Ban or Manor of Marry and Conflans in Gernesey, which the
Archdukes Albert and Isabel released to that Duke; yet the Chamber of Metz
condemned the Lord of the County of Chiny to do in Person his Fealty and
Homage, whereof he had been acquitted by solemn Acts, executed with all
Formality requisite: Not to mention that the Duke of Bar pretended to the
Seigniory of no more than a moiety of the said County, as appears by the said
Grant of 15 July, 1602. and by another of 10 September, 1553.

25. However, the Count de Bissy, the tenth of July, 1681. entered the Province
again with a Body of Horse and Dragoons, and caused the Commander of Chiny to
be summoned to quit that Place with his Garrison, threatening him with ill usage
in case of refusal: But the Commander having not thought fit to obey the
Summons, Count Bissy staid some days with his Troops about Chiny, and
afterward marched with them from one end of the province to the other,
requiring the Subjects of his Catholic Majesty to receive them, and to swear
Fealty and Homage to the most Christian King, which some were forced to do: And
having continued some days at Aye, he marched with his Troops to Ortevilli,
Asnoi lez Bastoigne, Martelange, and Elle, and afterward went on to the
further end of the Marshes, and posted himself between Mersch and Luxemburgh
till about the end of August.

26. So that the Spaniards were obliged to evacuate Chiny, to prevent the Ruin
of the Province, and of Brabant, Flanders, and Hainalt, threatened by the
French, who use in such cases to be too true to their Words, as appears
sufficiently by many fresh Instances here before mentioned.

27. But France not satisfied with the Evacuation of Chiny, demanded that the
following Places should be evacuated; to wit, Remich, Greven-Macheren,
Wasserbillig, Echternach, Vianden, Dickrich, S. Vith, La Roche, Houstalize,
Durbuy, Clervaux, March, Mirwart, Bastoigne, Arlon, and their Dependents; to
which the Spaniards were forced to submit.

28. Thus France got possession of them, and generally of all the Places,
Lands, and Lordships of the Duchy of Luxemburgh, except the Villages of the
Provostship of Luxemburgh, and obliged the Officers and Lawyers to swear
Allegiance to the most Christian King, tho the Places, Lands, and Lordships
abovementioned, or any of them, have not any dependence on the County of
Chiny, or any other Capital Place belonging to France, but have always been
part of the Duchy of Luxemburgh, and for several Ages held of the duke as
Sovereign Lord thereof, as will particularly appear by what shall be observed
concerning every Place hereafter specified and possessed by France.

29. The Provostship of Luxemburgh is composed of three Jurisdictions; Kuntzig
or Clemancy, Putlange, and Bettingen; three Land-Mayories, Bettemburgh,
Sand-Weiler, and Kehlen; and three Mayoralties, Steinsel, Lingtgen, and
Schittenigen: consisting together in seventy one Villages and Hamlets, and
thirty five more, called The Villages of the provost. this Provostship is of
the Ancient Patrimony of the Earls and Dukes of Luxemburgh, having heretofore
belonged to Sigisfroid first Earl of Luxemburgh, who having purchased in the
year 963. of Wikerus Abbot of St. Maximin at Treves, the Castle of Luxemburgh,
in exchange for an Estate in the village of Tealen, immediately caused this
Town of Luxemburgh to be built there: And the Earls and Dukes of Luxemburgh
have ever since successively enjoyed the said City and Provostship in Demean,
with all Rights of Jurisdiction and Sovereignty, till Count Bissy possessed
himself of the said Provostship.

30. Besides, the said Jurisdictions, Land. Mayoralties, Mayoralties, and
Villages of the Provostship, have been always surveyed together, and taxed
jointly toward all Public Charges, ordinary and extraordinary, under the name
of The provostship of Luxemburgh, as appears by the Register of Fires in 1552,
1553, 1604, 1656, 1659. Every of them being governed by a Sheriff and Assessor,
who with the Provost make up the Provost-Court, kept in the City of Luxemburgh,
where the Assessors are obliged to reside. And it cannot be proved, the said
provostship, or any part of it, is a Dependent of the Lordship of Rodenmacker,
(but has always acknowledged the Earls and Dukes of Luxemburgh its Sovereigns,
and is held of them) nor yet of the County of Chiny, nor of any other Capital
Place; the County of Chiny having been first purchased by Wenceslaus first Duke
of Luxemburgh, in the Year 1364. as has been already made out; and
consequently, above four hundred Years after the Earls of Luxemburgh were first
seized of that Provostship, which now is entirely in the possession of France,
except only the thirty five Villages and Hamlets of the Provost.

The Borrough, Franchise, and mayoralty of Remich, consisting in 20 Villages
and Hamlets.
31. If any Place in the province may be reputed annexed to the Town and
Provostship of Luxemburgh, the Mayoralty of Remich must certainly be so, having
belonged to the first Earls of Luxemburgh; and the Inhabitants are free of City
of Luxemburgh, as well as of Remich: And the Court or Mayordom of Remich has
also belonged to the first Earls of Luxemburgh, who, as well as their
Successors, the Earls and Dukes of that Place, have always enjoyed it in
Demesne, and exercised in it all Jurisdiction and Sovereignty; the ninth part
of all Wine and Grain within the Mayordom having been paid his Catholic
Majesty, by the Hands of the Receiver of his Demesns in the City of Luxemburgh,
who resides there, and receives also the Demesns of the Provostship of
Luxemburgh. Walerand and Ermesind, Earl and Countess of Luxemburgh in the Year
1225. assigned to their Daughter Catharin (promised in Marriage to Matthew Duke
of Lorrain) Three thousand Livers Messinois, on the Demesns of Remich, and
other Places, which in 1229. were paid the said Duke. Henry the ninth Earl of
Luxemburgh, and Son of Walerand and Ermesind, with Margaret his Wife, paid the
Cloister of Clairfontain, near Arlon, Thirty Awms of Wine, to be taken out of
their Demesns of Remich and Graven-Mackeren: By which it appears the Mayordom
of Remich is of the ancient Patrimony and Demesns of the Earls and Dukes of
Luxemburgh, who have from time to time caused it to be Assess'd, and to pay
toward all Public Charges, ordinary and extraordinary.

The Jurisdiction of Mackeren le Conte, consisting in the Town and thirty four
Villages and Hamlets.
32. The Jurisdiction of Mackeren le Conte, consisting in the Town of that
Name, and four and thirty Villages and Hamlets, lies near adjacent to the
Mayordom of Remich, and belonged to the first Earls of Luxemburgh, from whom it
came to the Dukes of the same Place, and successively to his Catholic Majesty
in Demesne, with all Rights of Jurisdiction and Sovereignty. Henry the second of
that Name, the ninth Earl of Luxemburgh, having in the year 1251. assigned to
the Monastery of Clairfontain Fifty Measures of Rye, upon his Demesns of
Mackeren le Count, as a Foundation for five Prebends in the said Monastery: and
in 1270. the said Earl sold the said Monastery Thirty Awms of Wine, to be taken
Annually out of his Demesns of Graven-Mackeren and Remich, as was observed
before. Besides, in the Year 1252. the Borough of Mackeren was farmed out by
order of the said Earl Henry, from whom it bears to this day the Name of
Mackeren le count, or Earls-Mackeren: The Inhabitants were made Freemen of
Luxemburgh, and afterward, in 1327. gratified with many other Privileges, by
John the Twelfth King of Bohemia, and Wenceslaus his Son, first Duke of of
Luxemburgh, who in 1357. granted them a Weekly Market; and lastly, by
Wenceslaus the Emperor, second Duke of Luxemburgh, who in 1584. confirmed all
their Privileges.

The Provostship of Echternach, consisting in the Town, and thirty three
Villages and Hamlets, etc.
33. The Provostship of Echternach, consisting in the Town of that Name, and
three and thirty Villages and Hamlets, divided into the four Mayordoms of
Osweiller, Irrel, Erenhen, and Bollendorff, belonged to the first Earls of
Luxemburgh in Demesne, with full Right of all Jurisdiction and Sovereignty:
Which Earls had granted the Greatest part of their said Demesne to the Abbeys of
St. Willebrod and St. Clair at Echternach, for Pious Uses. Henry the second of
that Name, and Mineth Earl of Luxemburgh, the Son of Wallerand de Limbourgh,
and Ermesinde Countess of Luxemburgh, assigned in the Year 1240. 700 Livers a
Year on his Lands in Echternach and Biedbourgh, in Dower to his Wife Margaret
de Bar. His Son, Henry the Tenth, Earl of Luxemburgh, in 1277. ratified the
Foundation made by Thiry de Kerpen and Margaret his Wife, of an Anniversary in
the Abbey of Echternach, out of his Rents at Wallendorf. In 1398. the Deputies
of the Town of Echternach did Fealty and Homage to the Emperor Wenceslaus,
second Duke of Luxemburgh; and the Subjects of that Place have acknowledged his
Catholic Majesty, and his August Predecessors, Earls and Dukes of Luxemburgh,
their Sovereigns, and paid them Aids and Subsidies, as well as other Places of
the Province, to this day.

The Town and Provostship of Biedbourgh, consisting in the Franchise of
Dusseldorf, and 34 Villages.
34. The Town and provostship of Biedbourgh, consisting in the Franchise of
Dusseldorf, and four and thirty Villages, having belonged in Demesne, with full
Right of Jurisdiction and Sovereignty, to Sigisfroid first Earl of Luxemburgh,
and descended from him to other Earls and Dukes of Luxemburgh successively, the
Subjects of the Territory have to this day acknowledged his Catholic Majesty
their Sovereign, and paid him Aids and Subsidies, with other Subjects of the
Province, as formerly, in 1359. Henry Earl of, Luxemburgh, the Son of Walerand
Earl of Limbourgh and Ermesinde Countess of Luxemburgh, assigned in the Year
1240. in Dower to Margaret the Daughter of Henry Earl of Bar, his Wife, seven
hundred Livers a Year, on his Demesns of Biedbourgh and Echternach: And in
1398. the Deputies of Biedbourgh, with the Deputies of other Towns, did Fealty
and Homage to the Emperor Wenceslaus, as Duke of Luxemburgh.

The Town and Provostship of Dickrich, etc.
35. The Sovereignty and Jurisdiction over the Town and provostship of
Dickrich, consisting in the Town of that name, and five and twenty Villages and
Hamlets, has ever belonged to the Earls and Dukes of Luxemburgh; and so have
the Demesns of it: part whereof Walerand Earl of Luxemburgh purchased of Robert
d'Esch, in 1221. Besides, the said Provostship has contributed with other
Towns of the Province, to the Aids and Subsidies paid his Majesty: And the Town
of Dickrich has lately sent Deputies to the Assembly of the States, as it had
formerly done in the year 1400. in the Town of Arlon.

The Town and Provostship of Arlon.
36. The Town and Provostship of Arlon, consisting in the Town of that name,
and 119 Villages and Hamlets, under fifteen Bannes or Mayoralties, is a
Provostship of large extent, and comprehends a great part of Ardenne; which
having belonged to Sigisfroid first Earl of Luxemburgh, came many years after,
by marriage, to the Family of Limbourg, and afterward returned, by the like
way of Marriage, to the House of Luxemburgh: Since which his Catholic Majesty
(as his Royal Predecessors) enjoyed it in Demesne, with full Right and Exercise
of Jurisdiction and Sovereignty: For clearning whereof, it may not be
impertinent to give you the following Account.

37. Sigisfroid, the first of Luxemburgh, having, as Successor to the Earls of
Arden, had in his possession the Town and Provostship of Arlon, enjoyed it
during Life, and at his Death left it to his Son Henry, under the Title of the
Earldom of Ardenne. Frederick, elder Son of the said Henry, having by
Inheritance succeeded in the Earldom of Luxemburgh, left Conrade the Son of his
Brother Gisilbert his Successor, to whom the said Town and Provostship of Arlon
descended, by the name of the Earldom of Ardenne. Conrade had Issue Wallerand
Earl of Arlon, who first qualified himself in Writing with the Title of Earl of
Arson. He married Adela the Daughter of Theodore Earl of Bar and Brie, Niece
of Frederick Duke of Lorrain, who built the Town of Bar. Adela, who had her
usual Residence at Arlon, having survived her Husband, left Issue by him two
Sons, Walerand and Foulk, and a Daughter named Adela. Walerand and Foulk dying
without Issue, the County of Arlon fell in possession to their Sister Adela;
who having married Henry Earl of Limbourgh, brought him in Marriage the Earldom
of Arlon. The same Henry, afterward created Duke of Lothier, by Henry the
Emperor, about the Year 1101. retained the same Title, tho deprived of it
about 1106. and left Walerand, surnamed The Pagan, his Heir, as well of the
Duchy of Limbourgh, as the Earldom of Arlon, and all his Father had been
seized of about Thionville. This Walerand had three Sons, Henry Duke of
Limbourgh, Walerand Earl of Arlon, and Gerard. His son Walerand Earl of Arlon,
in the Year 1210. gave by Deed to the Abbey of Munster near Luxemburgh, for an
Anniversary Obit to be sung on the day of his death, the Church of Kittenlwuen,
with the Right of Patronage; in which Deed he first took the Title of Marquess
of Arlon. Walerand the Marquess left (besides other Sons) Walerand second
Husband if Ermesinde Countess of Luxemburgh, to whom, in 1214. with consent of
his two sons by a former Venture, he gave in Marriage the Marquisate of Arlon,
with its appurtenences and dependences, upon condition the Issue he should have
by that Marriage should inherit the said Marquisate, together with the County
of Luxemburgh. Accordingly, the said Marquisate of Arlon, together with the
Earldom of Luxemburgh and La Roche, fell to Henry eldest son of Wallerand by
Ermesinde; which Henry left it to his Successors, Earls and Dukes of
Luxemburgh. And thereupon the said Marquisate remained annexed to the Duchy of
Luxemburgh; and the August Successors of the Dukes of that Place have from time
to time peaceably enjoyed the Patrimony and Fees depending thereon, and
exercised therein all Acts of Jurisdiction and Sovereignty, 150 Years before
the Purchase of the County of Chiny in 1364. by Wenceslaus the first Duke of
Luxemburgh.

The Town and Provostship of Bastoigne.
38. The Town, Mayoralty, and Provostship of Bastoigne, consisting in the Town
of that name, and one hundred forty five Villages and Hamlets, under ten
Mayordoms, has ever since the Year 963. belonged to the first Earls of
Luxemburgh in Demesne, with full Right of Jurisdiction and Sovereignty, as
comprehended under the Title of the Earldom of Ardenne. Walerand and Ermesinde,
Earl and Countess of Luxemburgh, having by Deed, in 1225. assigned to their
daughter Catharin (who had been promised in Marriage to Matthew Duke of
Lorrain) three thousand Livers Messinois, upon their Demesne of Bastoigne,
(except the Town) and upon their Courts of Remich and Anliers, which were
accordingly paid the said Matthew of Lorrain in 1229. Since which time, the
Town and Provostship of Bastoigne has been reputed a Member of the County and
Duchy of Luxemburgh, and the Earls and Dukes thereof have enjoyed it, with all
Sovereignty and Jurisdiction, to this day.

The Town and Provostship of March, etc.
39. The Town, Mayoralty, and Provostship of March; consisting in the Town of
that name, and nineteen Villages and Hamlets, has many Ages belonged to the
Earls and Dukes of Luxemburgh in Demesne, with full Right of Sovereignty and
Jurisdiction. Henry the second of that name, Earl of Luxemburgh, the Son of
Ermesinde, gave it in the Year 1247. to his Brother Gerard, in full of all
demands of Inheritance in Right of his Father and Mother. This Provostship was
then granted by the name of The Land of Tamenne, above the Castle and Town of
Durbuy, with all its Dependences, Villance, the Land of Dalem, and Filstorff,
upon condition expressed in the Grant, That Gerrard should hold the said Lands
in Fee of the Earl of Luxemburgh. The said Lands of Tamenne, Durbuy, and
Vallence were in the Year 1304. reunited to the County of Luxemburgh, by Count
Henry the fourth of that name, Son of Henry the third and Beatrix Daughter of
Baldwyn of Avennes, pursuant to an Agreement made that Year between Gerard Earl
of Grandprez, Lord of Houstalize, Son of Henry of Grandprez and Beatrix
Daughter of Gerard Lord of Durbuy, and the said Henry Earl of Luxemburgh, by
the Mediation of his Mother the Countess Dowager of Luxemburgh, called Beatrix,
to whose Arbitrament the Parties submitted, the Sunday after Christmas, 1303.
upon condition nevertheless, that the Lordship of Russy whereof Dalem and
Filstorff are part) should remain to the said Gerard of Grandprez, and that
Count Henry should pay him an Annuity of One hundred Livers. The like Agreement
was made by Gerrard Lord of Blackenheim and Irmgard his Wife, Daughter also of
Gerard Lord of Durbuy, by Deed, in February, 1306. whereby the said Lord of
Blackenheim and his Wife have renounced and released all Right they could any
way have to the Estate of Gerard Lord of Durbuy, their Father-in-Law, and
Father respectively; which Renunciation and Release was ratified in 1314. by
John and Gerard Sons of the said Gerard of Blackenheim; and afterward the
Earls and Dukes of Luxemburgh enjoyed it in Demesne, with full Jurisdiction and
Sovereignty.

The Town and Provostship of Durbuy, etc.
40. The Town and Provostship of Durbuy, consisting in the Town of that name,
and forty four Villages and Hamlets, divided into four Courts, and nineteen
Lordships of the Soil, Composed of two and thirty Villages, have likewise
belonged some Ages to the Earls and Dukes of Luxemburgh in Demesne, with full
Right of Jurisdiction and Sovereignty: And his Catholic Majesty has continued
in possession of it, as appears by what has been said before as to the
Provostship of March.

The County of La Roche, etc.
41. The Earldom of La Roche, consisting in the Castle and Town so called, and
one and fifty Villages and Hamlets, divided into four Mayordoms, and the
Seigniory of Beausaint, is an ancient Patrimony of the Earls and Dukes of
Luxemburgh, who assumed the Title of Earls de la Roche ever since the year
1214. and enjoyed the said Castle, Town, and their Dependences, in Demesne, with
full Right of Jurisdiction and Sovereignty, till dispossessed of them forcibly
by the French, as aforesaid.

The County of Salm, etc.
42. The County of Salm, consisting in a Castle, Borough, and thirty two
Villages and Hamlets is very ancient, having taken its Original from the first
Family of the Earls of Luxemburgh: Gislibert the Son of Frederick the second
Earl of Luxemburgh having taken the Title of Earl of Salm, in which Earldom his
Son Herman succeeded, who afterward was chosen Emperor of the Romans, and
left the said Earldom to his Son Herman also by name, who had his Son Conrade
his Successor; Henry the Son of Conrade succeeded him, and by Deed of 15 May,
1240. declared, That as his Ancestor the Earl of Salm had done Fealty and
Homage to the Noble Man the Earl of Luxemburgh, he would renew the said Homage,
and did for him, and his Heirs and Successors, Earls of Salm, take of Henry
Earl of Luxemburgh and La Roche, and Marquess of Arlon, (which Henry, being the
second of that name, was the ninth Earl of Luxemburgh) the Castle and
Castlewick of Salm, with all their Appurtenances, Rights, Inheritances, Fiefes,
Wards, Homages, Burgessships, and Seigniories whatsoever, to be holden of the
Earl of Luxemburgh in Fee, and by Homage-Liege. Henry, the Son of the said
Henry Earl of Salm, did the like Fealty and Homage, on Thursday next after the
Feast of All Saints, in the Year 1248. for the same Castle of Salm, to the same
Henry Earl of Luxemburgh, with a formal Declaration, That the Earl of
Luxemburgh might and ought to have Aid of the Castle of Salm, and Lands
belonging to it, against all Men; and that the Castle was to be surrendered to
him when occasion required. In 1306. Henry Earl of Salm, Son of Henry
aforesaid, did the like Services for the said Earldom of Salm, to Henry the
fourth of that name, the eleventh Earl of Luxemburgh, and seventh Emperor of
that name. After him, Henry his Son, Earl of Salm, did the like Services for
the said Earldom, to John King of Bohemia, twelfth Earl of Luxemburgh, on
Monday the eighth of December, 1343. The Family of Salm being extinct in 1408.
the Lords of Reiferscheidt succeeding as next of Blood, did the like Services
for the said County, till a certain Lord of Reiferscheidt, Earl of Salm, having
for Violences and Outrages by him committed, been banished out of these
Countries, and his Estate declared confiscated to the use of the Emperor
Charles, the Fifth Duke of Luxemburgh, by Sentence of the Great Council at
Malines, 16 January, 1528. his Son John of Reiferscheidt, Earl of Salm, was
summoned to appear at the said Council, to hear Execution awarded of the said
Sentence, at his peril: But this John having submitted himself, by agreement
made at Bruxelles, with the Queen Dowager of Hungary and Bohemia, Governess of
the Low Countries, 21 February, 1549. the said Earldom of Salm, and all the
Estate thereto belonging, were granted to the said John of Reiferscheidt Earl
of Salm: but upon express condition, that he should take and hold them in Fee
of the Emperor Charles the Fifth, as Duke of Luxemburgh, by the Services
accustomed: And the third of January, 1551. the said John took them
accordingly; and ever since, the successors of the said Earl of Salm have been
used and reputed (as his Predecessors had been) Vassals of his Catholic
Majesty and his Ancestors, Dukes and Earls of Luxemburgh; and the Subjects of
the said Earldom have contributed to all public Charges imposed on the
Province of Luxemburgh.

The Country of Vianden.
43 The County of Vianden consists in a Castle, Town, and forty nine Villages
and Hamlets, divided into six Mayordoms, of which several other Castles and
Lands hold as Mesne Fees. It is of large extent, and for several Ages past has
been held in Fee of the Earl of Luxemburgh. The first Earl of Vianden was
Frederick in the Year 1124. who left Signisfroid his Son his Successor, to whom
succeeded Frederick about the Year 1193. and to Him his Son Philip, who dying
without Heirs of his Body, left the said County to his Brother Henry; who
having been kept Prisoner by Walerand Duke of Limburgh and Earl of Luxemburgh,
was set at liberty, on Condition he should acknowledge Walerand Lord of the Fee
of the said County of Vianden. the next Earl of Vianden was Philip, Son of the
said Henry, who was kept Prisoner by his Nephew Henry, upon some difference
between them about the Succession of the County of Vianden. On this occasion it
was that Henry Bishop of Utrecht, Brother to Philip Count Vianden, passed an
Act in the Year 1264. in favor of Henry Earl of Luxemburgh; by which he
promises that Philip his Brother, and his Successors, should hold the said
County of Vianden as a Fief Liege immediately of the Earl of Luxemburgh, on
Condition the said Henry Earl of Luxemburgh should use all the means he could
to set at liberty the said Philip Earl of Vianden, and to restore to him the
Castle of Schonecken, usurped by his Nephew Henry. The said Philip accordingly
took the Earldom of Vianden of Margaret Countess of Luxemburgh, Wife of Henry
the Second, Earl of Luxemburgh, and of Henry the Third of that Name, their Son,
on Tuesday before Lent in the Year 1270. Godfrey having succeeded his Father
Philip, left Heir of the County of Vianden, Philip, begotten of Lintgarde, Lady
of Lignie, etc. which Philip took in like manner the said County of Vianden in
1306. of Henry the Fourth of that Name, Earl of Luxemburgh, and Emperor of the
Romans. Afterward the said County came by Marriage to the House and Family of
Nassau above three hundred years ago, and the Princes of Orange have
successively taken it of his Catholic Majesty and his Predecessors, Dukes of
Luxemburgh; and the Subjects of Vianden have from time to time constantly
contributed to all Aids and public Charges, ordinary and extraordinary, with
other Subjects of the Province of Luxemburgh; and his Majesty, whenever he
pleased, put a Garrison into the Castle and Town of Vianden.

The Land and Seigniory of St. Vithe, etc.
44. The Land and Seigniory of St. Vithe, consisting in a Town and forty seven
Villages, divided into six Courts, is an ancient Fee of Luxemburgh, Count Henry
the Second of that Name having long since had Toll and Conduct-Money in St.
Vithe and Bullenge in the Year 1253. as appears by the Agreement between the
said Count Henry and his Sister Elizabeth, Wife of Walerand, Lord Faulcomont
and Montjoy, in the Year 1270. Walerand, Lord Faulcomont and Montjoy, did
Fealty and Homage for the said Land and Seigniory to Henry the Second of that
Name, Earl of Luxemburgh, and Margaret his Wife: So did Reynald Lord Faulcomont
and Montjoy in 1306. to Henry the Fourth of that Name, Earl of Luxemburgh, for
the Lordship of St. Vithe; which coming afterward to Simon Earl of Spanheim,
he did Fealty and Homage for it to Winceslaus Duke of Luxemburgh, in the Year
1380. The same Lordship passing since by Marriage into the Family of Nassau,
the Princes of Orange have always done Fealty for it, (with the County of
Vianden, and other Lands and Lordships in the Country of Luxemburgh) as a Fee
held of the Duke of Luxemburgh: And the Inhabitants of the said Land and
Lordship have always Contributed, with the rest of his Catholic Majesty's
Subjects, toward all public Aids and Charges, ordinary and extraordinary: And
his Majesty has placed a Garrison in the Town of St. Vithe, when ever he
thought it convenient.

The Lordship of Munster, etc.
45. The Lordship of Munster, near the City of Luxemburgh is a Capital place,
consisting of our and twenty Villages, Hamlets and Farms, and has been of the
ancient Patrimony of the Earls of Luxemburgh, who in the year 1080, endowed
therewith the Abbey of Munster, as appears by the Foundation of Conrade, the
second of that Name, Earl of Luxemburgh, in the year 1083, Confirmed by Earl
William his Son, and Walerand, Earl of Luxemburgh, in the year 1225: And the
Privileges and Exemptions granted them have been confirmed successively, by
Wenceslaus, Earl of Luxemburgh, in the year 1398; by Philip, Duke of Burgundy,
in 1432; by Maximilian the Emperor, in 1486, and by Charles the Fifth, the
15th of July 1531.

The Lordship of Mont St. Jean, etc.
46. The Lordship of Mont St. Jean, consisting in four Villages and Hamlets,
with an old demolished Castle, has ever been under the Sovereignty of the
Earls and Dukes of Luxemburgh, and held in Fee immediately of them, as appears
by the Records of Fealty and Homage, in the years 1563, 1573, 1600, 1624.

The Castle and Lordship of Differtange, and Solleuvre, etc.
47. The Castle and Lordship of Differtange and Solleuvre, with three and
twenty Villages, Hamlets, and Farms its Dependents, has been part of the
ancient Demesnes of the Earls of Luxemburgh, as appears by Deed, in 1238,
wherein Alexander Lord of Solleuvre has acknowledged the said Lordship to have
descended to him as a Fee from Ermesinde, Countess of Luxemburgh, who having,
in the year 1236, confirmed the Privileges of the Town of Echternach, the said
ALexander, obliged himself to observe them, on pain of losing his Fee: The Lord
of the same place did Fealty and Homage for it to Duke Wenceslaus, in the year
1398, with other Lords and Feoffees of that Country; and his Successors did
the like in the years 1532, 1546, 1563, 1573, and 1600.

The Castle and Lordship of Bertrange, etc.
48. The Castle and Lordship of Bertrange, (the Lords whereof have not only
been Lords, Feodals, and Gentlement of that Country, but had Jurisdiction over
the Gentlemen Feoffees of the same, as appears by the Act of Sale of the Towns
of Verton, Ivoix, and la Ferte, conveyed to Jeffrey de Bertrange, in the year
1340.) is not distant above a 11 hours Journey from the Capital City, and
stands enclosed within the Provostship of Luxemburgh.

The Castle and Lordship of Ansembourgh, etc.
49. The Castle and Lordship of Ansembourgh consists in three Villages and
Hamlets, wherein his Catholic Majesty's Predecessors, and his Majesty, have
for several Ages exercised to this day all acts of Sovereign Jurisdiction, by
their Provost of Luxemburgh, particularly by the Execution of Malefactors
condemned to dye: And the Lord of Ansembourgh, in the year 1398, did Fealty and
Homage with the other Feoffees and Subjects of that Country to Duke Wenceslaus.

The Castle and Lordship of Hellenfelts, etc.
50. The Castle and Lordship of Hellenfelts, consists in twelve Villages and
Hamlets, the Lords whereof have been Feoffees of that Country. And John de
Helvetz, above three hundred and sixty years past was Justicier of the Nobles
there. And the Conveyance of the said Lordship was made before the Justicier
and Bench of Nobles of that Country, as appears by the Sale and Conveyance made
in the year, 1477: Since which, as before, it has been taken in Fee from the
Dukes of Luxemburgh, as appears by the Records of Fealty and Homage, in 1546,
1547, 1570, 1577, and 1624.

The Castle and Lordship of Mersch, etc.
51. The Castle and Lordship of Mersch, consisting in fourteen Villages and
Hamlets, has also been an ancient Demesne of the Earls of Luxemburgh, as
appears by the Gift of part thereof, made by Sigisfroid, first Earl of
Luxemburgh, to the Monastery of St. Maximin; the residue thereof, with the high
Jurisdiction, or right of doing Justice in Capital matters, as well as those of
inferior Nature, having been held in Fee of his Catholic Majesty, by Temporal
Lords, who have been always Cavaleers of that Country, and assisted as such at
the Sessons of Nobles held at Luxemburgh, particularly at the Sessions held in
the year 1407, and with other Feoffees of the same Country did Fealty and
Homage to the Emperor Wenceslaus, as Duke of Luxemburgh, in the year 1398, and
afterward received the said Lordship as a Fee of the Dukes of Luxemburgh, in
1520, 1534, and 1571.

The Castle and Lordship of Pittange, etc.
52. The Castle and Lordship of Pittange, consisting in sixteen Villages and
Hamlets, the high Justice whereof the King of Bohemia, in the year 1311, gave
to Arnold, Lord of Pittange, for enlargement of his Fee: The Lord of Pittange
did Homage for it to the Emperor Wenceslaus, in the year 1398: The Sale and
Conveyance of it was past before the Justicier and Bench of Nobles of that
Country, as appears by the Grant thereof, made by Margaret Lady Pittange, in
the year 1458, since which, the Lords thereof have successively taken it of the
Dukes of Luxemburgh, as appears by the Records of Services done upon admission
in the years 1520, 1532, 1546, 1547, 1562, 1570, and 1572.

The Lordship of Huperdange.
53. The Lordship of Huperdange is a Dependent of that of Pittange, and was
given by Henry Earl of Luxemburgh, to Arnold of Pittange, in the year 1281, on
condition he should hold it in Fee, by Fealty and Homage: And for enlargement
of the said Fee, the King of Bohemia granted the said Arnold the Right and
Power of High Justice, or Criminal Jurisdiction, in the year 1311.

The Lordship of Arlon-Court.
54. The Lordship of Arlon-Court consists in three Villages and Hamlets, and is
a Capital place, and ancient Fee of the said Province. John King of Bohemia
having granted Arnold de Pittange High Justice there, in the year 1311, for
enlargement of his Fee. And in 1570 the Lord of Arlon-Court did Homage for it.

The Lordship of Meissenburgh.
55. The Lordship of Meissenbourgh consists in fifteen Villages and Hamlets:
The Lords thereof have been Counselors to the ancient Earls of Luxemburgh,
before, and since the year 1237, and in 1398 did Fealty and Homage for it to
the Dukes of Luxemburgh, and afterward in the year 1532, 1547, 1556, and 1624.

The Castle and Lordship of Fischbach.
56. The Castle and Lordship of Fischbach consists in three Villages and
Hamlets: The Lords thereof have been Cavaleers of that Country, done Fealty and
Homage to the Duke in 1398, and assisted at the Session of Nobles in 1407. The
High Justice thereof was given by Justus, Marquess of Brandenburgh, to Robert
and John de Fischbach, on Friday before the Visitation, in 1407. And
Wenceslaus, King of the Romans, on St. Simons day, in the year 1409, confirmed
the said Gift: The Conveyance of Sale of part of the said Lordship was passed
before the Justicier and Bench of Nobles of Luxemburgh the 13 of September
1581, and the 18 of May, 1628; and the Lords of it have done Fealty and Homage
for it to the Dukes of Luxemburgh.

The Castle and Lordship of Leinster, etc.
57. The Castle and Lordship of Leinster, or Linceren, consists in nine
Villages and Hamlets: The Lords thereof have been ancient Feoffees of that
Country, and in 1236 obliged themselves to observe the Privileges granted to
the Inhabitants of Echternech, by the Countess of Ermesinde, on pain of
forfeiting their Fee: The Lord of Leinster, in 1230, did Fealty and Homage for
it; the like was done for it to Duke Wenceslaus in 1398, and afterward to
other Dukes in 1447, and 1556.

The Castle and Lordship of Heffingen.
58. That the Castle and Lordship of Heffingen is a Capital place, and held in
Chief of the Duke of Luxemburgh, appears by the Records of Services upon
Admissions in 1563.

The Lordship of la Rochette, with the Wall of an old Castle, and fifteen
Villages and Hamlets, etc.
59. The Lordship of la Rochette consists in fifteen Villages and Hamlets, the
Lords thereof have been ancient Feoffees of that Country, and as such have
purchased several Lordships there, and in 1398, and since in 1546, 1563, 1570,
1600, and 1621, have done Fealty and Homage for it to the Dukes of Luxemburgh,
as appears of Record.

The Lordship of Heringen.
60. In 1570 the Duke of Luxemburgh had Fealty and Homage done him by the Lord
of Heringen, for his Lordship of Heringen, consisting in a Village and a Hamlet.

The Castle and Lordship of Beaufort, etc.
61. The Castle and Lordship of Beaufort, consisting in eleven Villages and
Hamlets, is a Fee and Capital place of the Duchy of Luxemburgh: In 1338, among
other the Feoffees of the Duchy, the Lord of Beaufort did Homage to the Duke.
The Lordship having since been Confiscated by Archduke Maximilian, he invested
in it Messire Jean Bayer of Bapport, as appears by the Act of Donation made the
7th of August, 1478. And the Successors of the Donee have since done Fealty and
Homage for it to the Dukes of Luxemburgh, as appears by the Records thereof in
1506, and 1621.

The Castle and Lordship of Berbourg.
62. The Castle and Lordship of Berbourg, or Beaurepart, consisting in eleven
Villages and Hamlets, is an ancient Fee of the Duchy of Luxemburgh, as appears
by the Act of Renovation of the Privileges of Echternach, by which Viry, Lord
of Berbourg, is obliged to observe them upon pain of being deprived of his Fee.
In 1238 the Lord of Berbourg did Homage for it to the Duke of Luxemburgh; the
Successors of the said Lord did the like in 1563, 1573, and 1600: The Lords of
the said place having been the ancient Chancellors of that Country, and
acknowledged to b e so in the Session of Nobles held at Luxemburgh in 1407.

The Lordship of Herberen and Mompach.
63. The Seigniory of Herberen and Mompach is a Fee held of the Duke of
Luxemburg, and in 1451, John de Sirk did Homage for Mompach to the Duke.

The Castle and Lordship of Reulandt.
64. The Castle and Lordship of Reulandt, consisting in fifteen Villages and
Hamlets, is an ancient Fee of the Duchy of Luxemburgh, as appears by the Act
of Sale made by Elizabeth of Blackenheim to the King of Bohemia, in 1327,
wherein she declares she sells it in the same manner, as the late Feris of
Blackenheim held it in Fee of the said King, by Homage and Fealty: And the said
Lordship having afterward been granted out in Fee: it was taken in the year
1384, of King Wenceslaus, as Duke of Luxemburgh, and annexed to the Office of
Chamberlain of the Duchy; and in the year 1549 Homage was again done for it.

The Castle and Lordship of Ouren.
65. The Castle and Lordship of Ouren consists in six Villages and Hamlets; the
Lord thereof, with other Subjects and Vassals of the Duchy of Luxemburgh, did
Fealty and Homage to Duke Wenceslaus in 1398.

The Castle and Lordship of Clervaux.
66. The Castle and Lordship of Clervaux, consists in four and forty Villages
and Hamlets, the Lords whereof have anciently been Chancellors of this Country,
as appears by the Sale of Ivoix, the Conveyance whereof was made before Walter
de Chervaux, and Chancellor of the Province, who with other Cavaleers of those
parts did Fealty and Homage to Duke Wenceslaus, in the year 1398.

The Castle and County of Wiltz.
67. In the year 1398 and after, Fealty and Homage have been performed to the
Dukes of Luxemburgh, for the Castle and County of Wiltz, consisting in three
and twenty Villages and Hamlets.

The Castle and Lordship of Esch.
68. The Castle and Lordship of Esch, or Aisse, consists in nineteen Villages
and Hamlets, the Lords whereof were anciently Chancellors of the Country,
having assisted the Earls of Luxemburgh in Council, and in quality of Noble
Feoffees, taken Cognizance of Sales and Grants of the Lordships of the same
Country, as appears by an Act passed in 1230, before Robin d'Esch, Knight: This
Lordship was formerly held of the Earl of Vianden, who having afterward
consented it should be holden immediately of the Earl of Luxemburgh, Homage was
done to him immediately for it, in 1270, 1306, 1506, 1551, and 1624: And in
1398 the Lord of Esch, with other Chancellors of the Country, swore Allegiance
to Duke VVenceslaus. And in 1402 John d'Esch acknowledged himself his Subject.

The Castle and Lordship of Bourscheidt.
69. The Castle and Lordship of Bourscheidt, consists in twelve Villages and
Hamlets: The Lords thereof were anciently Cavaleers of the Earls of Luxemburgh,
particularly Solver de Bourscheidt, who was Justicier of the Nobles there, and
by Act in 1233, acknowledged himself a Liegeman of Luxemburgh, and entered into
obligation to guard and defend the Castle of Luxemburgh, and declared that the
Countess of Luxemburgh, ought (as heretofore) to have aid of the Castle of
Bourscheidt: Fery de Bourscheidt acknowledged himself under the like Obligation
in the year 1317. The Lord of Bourscheidt in 1398, with other Chancellors of
the Country, paid Homage to VVenceslaus Duke of Luxemburgh: VVerner Zanden of
Bourscheidt, and John Theodore Zanden did the like to the Duke of Luxemburgh,
in 1551, and 1624.

The Town, Castle and Lordship of Newerbourgh.
70. The Town, Castle, and Lordship of Newerbourgh, consisting in the Town of
Newerbourgh, and two and fifty Villages and Hamlets, is a very ancient Fee of
the Country of Luxemburgh: the Earls of Vianden having acknowledged they held
it in Fee of the Earls of Luxemburgh, by Acts and Services done for it, in the
years 1257, 1270, and 1306: Since which time the Lords of Newerbourgh, with
consent of the Earls of Vianden, have taken it in Fee, immediately of the Earls
and Dukes of Luxembourgh, as appears by the Records of Homage in 1547, 1551,
and 1598: And in 1398, Everard de la Marck, as Lord of Newerburgh did Fealty
and Homage for it to Duke VVenceslaus.

The Castle and Lordship of Brandenburgh
71. The Castle and Lordship of Brandenburgh, consists in six Villages and
Hamlets, and in the years 1270, and 1306 has been acknowledged a Fee of
Luxemburgh, by the Earls of Vianden: in 1398 the Sieur de Brandenbourgh, with
the other Gentlemen of this Country, swore Allegiance to Duke VVenceslaus.

The Castle and Lordship of Kayll.
72. The Castle and Lordship of Kayll, consisting in two Villages, has by
Thiry of Blackenheim been acknowledged a Fee held of the Duchy of Luxembourgh,
as appears by an Act of Recognition in 1449: Arnold de Blackenheim did Homage
for his part of it in the years 1357, and 1378, and William and Philip Theodore
of Manderscheidt, in 1482, and 1624.

The Castle and Lordship of Falkenstein.
73. The Castle and Lordship of Falkenstein, or Faulconpiere, consisting in
three Villages and Hamlets, is an ancient Fee of Luxemburgh, as appears by the
Records of Homage done for it by Arnold de Faulconpiere, in 1270, and by other
in 1451, and 1624.

The Castle and Lordship of Bettingen.
74. The Castle and Lordship of Bettingen consists of nine Villages and
Hamlets; the Lord thereof did Fealty and Homage to the Emperor Wenceslaus,
Duke of Luxemburgh, in 1398: the like Services were done for it, as a Fee of
the Dukes of Luxemburgh, in 1451, and 1624.

The Castle and Lordship of Ham.
75. The Castle and Lordship of Ham, consisting in four Villages and Hamlets,
is a Fee, and part of the ancient Patrimony of the Earls of Luxemburgh: as
appears by the Act in 1334, whereby the King of Bohemia gave the High Justice
of Ham to Gerard of Ham, for improvement of his Fee: And the Lord of this
place, in 1398, did Homage for it, with other Feoffees, to Duke Wenceslaus.

The Lordship of Brouch.
76. The Lordship of Brouch, consisting in twelve Villages and Hamlets, is an
ancient Fee of the Duchy of Luxemburgh, and acknowledged to be so by the Lord
of the place, in 1394, who with other Feoffees of the Country did Homage for
it in 1398.

The Lordship of Malberg.
77. The Lordship of Malberg consists in three Villages and Hamlets, and was
taken in Fee of the Duke of Luxemburgh in 1306; and in 1398 the Lord of
Malberg, with other Feoffees of the Province, did Homage for Malberg.

The Lordship of Rosport.
78. The Lordship of Rosport, consisting in six Villages and Hamlets, was in
the year 1303 acknowledged a Fee of the Earldom of Luxemburgh.

The Castle and Lordship of Mirevart.
79. The Castle and Lordship of Mirevart consists in six and twenty Villages
and Hamlets, and has been an ancient Patrimony of the Earls of Luxemburgh; the
parts of which it consists having ever since the year 1311, been accounted and
recorded among the Demesns of the Earls of Luxemburgh, and made parcel of the
particular thereof. Archduke Maximilian gave it since to Everard de la Marck,
who, and his Successors the Dukes of Aremberg, have from time to time paid
Homage for it to this day.

The Castle and Lordship of Focant.
80. That the Castle and Lordship of Focant was parcel of the ancient Demesns
of the Earls of Luxemburgh, appears by the accounts of the Revenues thereof,
ever since the year 1311.

The County of Montague.
81. That the County of Montague, consisting in thirteen Villages and Hamlets,
is also a Fee of Luxemburgh, appears by the Records of Homage done for it in
1545, 1598, 1600, 1673.

The Lordship of Rachamps.
82. The Lordship of Rachamps, consisting in a Village and Hamlet, is an
ancient dependent of Luxemburgh: King Wenceslaus having the 12th of October,
1384, confirmed the Privileges his Predecessors, the Earls of Luxemburgh, had
granted the Lord and Tenants of this Lordship.

The Lordship of Ayvaille.
83. The Lordship of Ayvaille, consisting in eight Villages and Hamlets, has
been an ancient Patrimony of the Earls of Luxemburgh, as appears by the Gift
the King of Bohemia made of the Bridge of Ayvaille, to the Inhabitants of the
place, 23 July, 1346.

The Lordship of Harzet.
84. Lewis de Clermont, in the year 1302, did Homage for the Lordship of
Harzet, consisting in three Villages and Hamlets, as a Fee held of the Earl of
Luxemburgh.

The Lordship of Bascille.
85. Alard de Bascille by Act in 1307, acknowledged himself a Leige-man of the
Earl of Luxemburgh, for the Lodship of Bascille, as a Fee of the Earldom.

The Lordship of Chesne.
86. The Lord of the Signiory of Chesne, consisting in three Villages and
Hamlets, did among other Subjects and Feoffes of the Province, perform his
Homage to the Emperor Wenceslaus Duke of Luxemburgh, in 1398.

The Castle and Lordship of Witry.
87. The Castle and Lordship of Witry, consisting in four Villages and Hamlets,
is a Capital place, and of the ancient Demesns of the Earl of Luxemburgh, as
appears by the Gift thereof made by Henry Earl of Luxemburgh, to Arnold de
Pittange in 1281, on condition he should hold it of him in Fee by Homage: And
in 1311, the King of Bohemia, then Earl of Luxemburgh, granted the said Arnold
the High Justice of Witry for improvement of his Fee.

The Castle and Lordship of Useldange.
88. That the Castle and Lordship of Useldange, consisting in sixteen Villages
and Hamlets, is an ancient Fee of the Earldom of Luxemburgh, appears by an Act
in 1298, wherein Robert Lord Useldange has acknowledged Homage due from him to
the Earl of Luxemburgh: This Lordship came afterward by Confiscation to
Maximilian the Emperor; who, and his Son Archduke Philip, as Dukes of
Luxemburgh, gave the said Castle and Lordship to Philip. Marquis of Baden, in
the year 1494: After which Homage was paid for it in 1532, 1562, and 1605.

The Castle and Lordship of Autel, etc.
89. That the Castle and Lordship of Autel, consisting in six Villages and
Hamlets; is an ancient Fee of the Earldom of Luxemburgh, appears by an Act in
1223, when Henry de Dune having been made Marshall of Luxemburgh, annexed to
that Office the Lordship of Autel, acknowledging he held it in Fee of the Earls
of Luxemburgh, to whom Homage was done for it in 1270; and afterward in 1398,
by the then Lord of Autel, to Wenceslaus the Emperor: This is confirmed by the
Sale Richard de Dune made in 1254, to the Covent of Clairfontain of some Estate
in Autel, which the Lords thereof had not power to alien without leave of the
Earl of Luxemburgh.

The Castle and Lordship of Girsch.
90. The Castle and Lordship of Girsch, consisting in fifteen Villages and
Hamlets, is an ancient Fee of the Earldom of Luxemburgh; and Homage was done
for it to the Duke of Luxemburgh in 1556.

The Castle and Lordship of Koerich.
91. Tillman of Koerich in 1314 did Homage to the Earl of Luxemburgh for the
Lordship of Koerich, consisting in five Villages and Hamlets, as a Fee held by
Homage of the Earl. And in the years 1400, and 1617, the Successors of Tillman
did Homage for it to the then Dukes of Luxemburgh: And in 1398 Homage was done
for it to Wenceslaus the Emperor, in the right of the Earldom of Luxemburgh.

The Castle and Lordship of Septfontain, etc.
92. That the Lords of the Castle and Lordship of Septfontain, consisting in
ten Villages and Hamlets, have been ancient Vassals of the Earls of Luxemburgh,
is evident by the record of Homage done for it in 1233: Since which, Thomas de
Septfontain, Chamberlain to the Earl of Luxemburgh, and his Successors,
received by the Earls Grant, the Right and Privilege of High Justice to be
exercised throughout the Liberty of Septfontain, for inlargment of his Fee.

The Lordship of Wiltingen and Cantzem.
93. In the year 1230, Ernest de Pictipas acknowledged the Lordship of
Wiltingen and Cantzem to be Capital places, held in Fee of the Earldom of
Luxemburgh; and John de Sirk did Homage for them accordingly in 1450.

The Land and Lordship of St. Hubert.
94. The Land and Lordship of St. Hubert consists in six Mayordoms or Manors,
with several Villages depending thereon: and, as to Situation, is enclosed on
all sides by the Lands of the Duchy of Luxemburgh, and consequently by the
Laws and Maxims of State, cannot be a particular Sovereignty, distinct or
separate from that which incloses it: The intention of the Duke (in granting
away the Lands of St. Hubert) being grounded on a Presumption in Law, That Land
enclosed within other greater and more considerable, is to be reputed of the
same Quality, Jurisdiction, and Sovereignty, with that which incloses it, till
the contrary be made appear.

95. This will be thought more reasonable in this Case, when it shall be
considered, that till the age before the last it was never disputed, but that
the Dukes and Earls of Luxemburgh had not only the Possession, but the Right of
Sovereignty of the Land and Lordship of St. Hubert. On the contrary it appears
by Letters Dated at Arlon, June 5, 1343, that John King of Bohemia, and Earl of
Luxemburgh, calls the Abbot and Covent of St. Hubert, his Faithful and well
Beloved, (importing Fealty due from them to him). And grants them the
privilege of Mast in the Woods. And by the Act of Inauguration of Philip Duke
of Burgundy, Dated at the Castle of Luxemburgh, October 25, 1415, the Abbot of
St. Hubert, as a Prelate of the Duchy of Luxemburgh, with other Prelates,
Earls, Barons, Gentlemen, and Estates of the Province, did Swear Fealty and
Homage to the Duke, as his Predecessors the Abbots of St. Hubert had
constantly done before to the Sovereigns of the said Province.

95. The same Duke Philip soon after granted those of St. Hubert a Charter for
a Weekly Market, which is an evident Mark of Sovereignty.

96. The 12 of December, 1648, at the Inauguration of Charles the Hardy, Duke
of Burgundy, and Son the said Duke Philip, the said Prelate of St. Hubert,
without scruple, took again the like Oath of Fealty and Homage, as Prelate,
Vassal, and Subject of the Province.

97. The like was done by the Prelate of St. Hubert, at the Inauguration of
Maximilian King of the Romans, who Married the only Daughter and Heir of
Charles the Hardy, with whom the Provinces of the Low Countries came to the
House of Anstrin; as also at the Inauguration of Charles the Prince of Spain,
afterward Emperor of the Romans.

99. The Prelates of St. Hubert have ever since appeared at the States of
Luxemburgh, as other Prelates of the Province, and submitted, as the rest of
the Prelates, to the Penalty imposed for absence from the Session of the
States; till the Prince, Bishop of Liege, undertook to dispute the Sovereignty
of St. Hubert with the Duke of Luxemburgh; when Remacle de March Abbot of St.
Hubert, inclining to favor the Bishops Pretentions, refused to appear at the
Session of the States, held at the Inauguration of Phillip the Second Prince of
Spain, and Son of the Emporour Charles the Fifth: By reason whereof the
Attorney General of the Council of the Province, cause all his Temporalties in
that Province to be seized. The Prelate of St. Hubert appealed to the Great
Council at Malines, and brought his Action for restitution of his Temporalties:
Sentence was given upon hearing both Parties, that the Prelate had no right of
Action.

100. The Prelate thereupon had Recourse to the Queen of Hungary, Governess of
the Low Countries, and Petitioned he might be admitted and received to agree
to, ratify, and approve what had been Enacted at the said Sessions of the
States at Luxemburgh, as if he had been personally present; adding an offer and
promise to appear for the future at the Assembly of the States of the Province
of Luxemburgh, as his Predecessors, the Abbots and Lords of St. Hubert had
done, and that in the mean time he might be restored to his Temporalties.

101. His Petition was granted upon his Signing Deeds of Acknowledgment and
Promise, as the Case required, which Deeds were Executed in the year 1551. And
in the Assembly of the States held at Luxemburgh the 28th of December, the same
year, the Prelate by another Act reiterated the same Acknowledgment and
Promise: The Prelates of St. Hubert have ever since appeared at the States of
Luxemburgh, till the immediate Predecessor of the present Abbot desired to be
excused from appearing there, by reason of the War.

102. In the mean time his Catholic Majesty, as Duke of Luxemburgh, and his
August Predecessors, have not only had the Title of Sovereigns of St. Hubert,
but continued in possession of Sovereignty, and exercised there all Acts of
Jurisdiction, Judgment of Appeals, and absolute Command in quartering Soldiers
there, and charging the place with their subsistence and maintenance, and other
Acts of Supreme Jurisdiction, notwithstanding the Action of Right brought by
the Bishop of Liege, as appears by the Articles exhibited by the Attorney
General of the province of Luxemburgh.

The Castle and Lordship of Schleiden.
103. By the Records of Homage done in the years 1270,1344, 1549, 1551, 1676,
1680, and others, and the Translation of the 19 of November, 1546, it is clear
the Castle, Town, and Lordship of Schleiden, consisting in thirty six or thirty
seven Villages, is a Fee held immediately of the Duke of Luxemburgh.

The Castle and Lordship of Cronenburg:
104. It appears by like Records of Homage done to the Earls and Dukes of
Luxemburgh, in the years 1293, 1306, 1318, 1549, 1551, 1599, and several
others, and by the transaction above mentioned in 1546, that the Castle,
Borough and Signiory of Cronenburg, consisting in thirteen Villages, is a Fee
held (from all Antiquity) of the Earldom of Luxemburgh.

The Castle and Lordship of Manderscheidt
105. By the same transaction and the Records of Homage done in the years 1343,
1419, 1551, 1624, and many others, it is evident the Castle and Lordship of
Manderscheidt, with the Villages, its Dependents, is an ancient Fee of
Luxemburgh: and that John of Manderscheidt did Fealty and Homage to Wenceslaus,
in the year 1398.

106. It Is evident, all the Towns, Lands, Signiories, and L'ordships before
mentioned, are Capital places, reputed for many Ages part of the Duchy of
Luxemburgh, and held of it: And that the Earls and Dukes of Luxemburgh, have
for between three and four hundred years, or more, enjoyed them as the ancient
Patrimony and Demesns of the Duchy, and exercised therein all Acts of
Sovereignty and Jurisdiction, in Assessing the Subjects, Levying of Aids, and
other Taxes, quartering Soldiers, exclusive to all others; and without trouble
or hinderance, they have in like manner enjoyed the Lands and Lordships
following, that is to say, The Castle and Lordship of Schonfelts, consisting in
two Villages and Hamlets: The Court of Thommen, consisting in twenty two.
Hacheville, in three: The Castle and Lordship of Morstorff, consisting in
three: The Castle and Lordship of Heltzembourgh, consisting in two: Sterpigny:
The Castle and Lordship of Aspourg, consisting in thirty four Villages and
Hamlets: The Castle and Lordship of Sinsfelt, consisting in six:
Scharssbillich, consisting in twelve: The Castle and Lordship of Daun and
Dens-bem, consisting in four: Mehret Bettenfelt: The Castle and Lordship of
Solver: The Manor of Esclassni, consisting in three: Redu, Esclaye: The Castle
and Lordship of Beauram, consisting in three: Hansurlesse, consisting in three:
The Castle and Lordship of Houstalize, consisting in twenty two: Human: The
Castle and Lordship of Waha, consisting in two: The Castle and Lordship of
Daverdis: The Castle and Lordship of Dessy, consisting in six: The Castle and
Lordship of Jemeppe: The Castle and Lordship of Docham, consisting in six
Villages and Hamlets: The Castle and Lordship of Rollet, consisting in six: The
Castle and Lordship of Montjardin: The Castle and Lordship of Travigny,
consisting in six: The Castle and Lordship of de la Val, in two: Vilers la
Loupe, Chesnoy: The Castle and Lordship of Rutte la Grande: The Castle and
Lordship of Signeul St. Remy: The Castle and Lordship of Villers, before Orval:
The Castle and Lordship of Porcheresse: Vance, consisting in two Villages: The
Castle and Lordship of Boulogne, in five: The Castle and Lordship of
Horbeumont, in seven: The Castle and Lordship of Everlange, consisting in nine
Villages and Hamlets: The Lordship of Nasseigne: The Castle and Lordship of
Grune.

All which last mentioned Lordships are also Capital places, and Fees held of
the Marquisat of Arlon, the Earldom of la Roche, Durbuy, and other places, and
some of them of the Duchy of Luxemburgh, whereof the Catholic King is
Sovereign. And the said Lordships have not only been for many Ages reputed
parcel of the Duchy of Luxemburgh, but the Dukes thereof have in the face of
all the World peaceably enjoyed them, and exercised therein all Powers and Acts
of Sovereign Jurisdiction; Without that, that they or any other the places
before mentioned have had any dependence on the County of Chiny, or any other
Capital place belonging to France.

These (men would think) are Reasons sufficient to make out the Right of his
Catholic Majesty to these places, and that he ought to continue in possession
of them; the rather, for that France has not any color of pretense to them,
since the Act of the 25th of November, 1462, of the Grant and Conveyance of the
Duchy of Luxemburgh, and the Counties of Chiny and la Roche, by Lewis King of
France, to Philip Duke of Burgundy, whereby the said King of his special Grace,
full Power, and Royal Authority, has given, granted, conveyed, and released
all Right, Title, Interest, Claim, and Demand he had or could have to the
Duchy of Luxemburgh, and the Counties of Chiny and la Roche, their
Appurtenances and Appendences, Quit-rents, Rents, Jurisdictions, Property, Fee,
and other Rights thereto belonging, as well by means of the purchase thereof by
his late Father, as otherwise howsoever, To have and to hold to the said Duke
of Burgundy, and his Heirs forever; without that, that the said King Lewis, his
Heirs and Successors, shall or may Claim or Demand the same for any cause
whatever. Yet France, as has been made appear, has possessed it self of all
the Towns, Lands and Lordships before mentioned, and generally of all the
places of the Province of Luxemburgh, except the Capital City, and the 25
Villages of the Provostship of Luxemburgh, though without Reason or Ground.

A PARTICULAR DEDUCTION OF THE EVIDENCES and PROOFS OF The Right and Possession
of His Catholic Majesty IN AND TO All the Places France has taken actual
Possession of in the Province of Namur, since the Publication of the Peace of
Nimmighen.
Agimont in the possession of France.
CHarlemont having, in pursuance of the Peace made at Nimmighen, been yielded
up to France, the French Ministers thought fit to take Possessiof Agimont, with
its Appurtenance and Dependences, notwithstanding the Claims and Protestations
of the Officers of his Catholic Majesty, against the Proceedings of the
French: And under pretense that the Villages of Maisnil St. Blaise, Hargnies,
and the two Bourseignes, are Dependents of Agimont, Faultrier, the French
Commissioner and Intendant, sent Order of the 30th of March, 1680, to those of
the Village of Maisnil St. Blaise, to repair to Charlemont, to swear Allegiance
to the most Christian King, which they, and those of Hargnies, and the two
Bourseignes were forced to do.

The Right of Spain to Agimont.
True it is, that Agimont being neither part, nor within the limits of the
Province of Namur, there in not in the Records of the Castle of Namur, any
Evidence to justify the Right of his Catholic Majesty to it, and to prove it
Independent of Charlemont. But let it be observed, that the Castle of Agimont
is of a Structure far more ancient than the Fortress of Charlemont, which was
built by the Emperor Charles the Fifth, about and Age since; so that we cannot
see how Agimont can be a Dependent of Charlemont. And by two Copies, the one
Dated the 6th of April, 1555, it appears, the said Emperor Charles the Fifth
bought the Castle and Strong-house, Town, Land, and Lordship of Agimont, with
its Rights and Dependences: And by the other Dated the 7th of March, 1574, That
his Majesty engaged the said Castle, Land and Lordship to the use of Lancelot
de Berlemont, Earl of Meghe. As to the Villages of Maisnil St. Blaise, Hargnies
and Bourseignes, it appears by an Act of the 7th of March, 1431, that Homage
was done for them by the Lord of Agimont, to the Earl of Namur, as Lord of
Poilvache: Since which they were united to the Provostship of Poilvache, and
have been accordingly Charged in the account of the Aids of the Province of
Namur, granted his Majesty the 10the of October, 1493, as by the Close Rolls in
the Chamber of Accounts at Lille: Since which time they have to this day paid
the said Aids, and Contributed to public Charges, as well as other places of
the Province.

Waulsors, Hastiers, and Ermeton.
The same Intendant, Faultrier, sent Order, Dated the 5th of April, 1680, to
the Mayors of Waulsors and Hastiers, signifying, that his Christian Majesty had
Ordered him to take Possession, in his Name, of the Land and Bank of Waulsers,
Hastiers, and Ermeton, and to receive in his Name an Oath of Fidelity to his
Majesty, which the Mayors and Inhabitants of those places were obliged to take.
He Commanded them to give notice to the Inhabitants of those Villages and their
Dependences, to repair for that purpose on the morrow to Waulsors, where they
were effectually obliged to take the said Oath: And having omitted the
Administering the like Oath to those of the Village of Ermeton, he Ordered the
Officers and principal Inhabitants of that place, to attend him at Charlemont
the twelfth day of the then next Month, to take the said Oath; and in the mean
time, in the Name of the most Christian King, expressly prohibited them to
receive or execute any Order from his Catholic Majesty, or his Ministers, or
to pay him any Aid or Duty whatever, upon pain of being punished as Rebels: And
not only disturbed the Spanish Receiver at Ermeton, in the exercise of his
Office, but caused him to be taken and carried away by a Company of Foot.

Some days after the said Intendant went to the Abbey of Waulsors, to cause the
Abbot and Monks there to swear Allegiance to the King his Master, and upon
their refusal, sent thither in August following thirty Soldiers, whom the
Abbots and Monks were forced to maintain, at great Charges, for six Weeks;
which one of the Monks having represented to the Marquess of Louvois, he
answered, that if the Prelate would not within fifteen days be at the
Monastery, he would cause it to be raised: The 2d or 3d of September, 1680,
Faultrier, full of Indignation that the Monks of that place refused still the
taking the said Oath, sent to the said Abbey a hundred and sixteen men to live
there at discretion, with Order to the Monks, that they should not any longer
acknowledge their Prelate, and to the Farmers their Tenants, that they should
not pay them any thing, on pain of being made pay twice, and having the Bailiff
of Waulsors Arrested and put into a Dungeon, which was accordingly done: These
Soldiers continued at Waulsors till the Monks promised they would not do any
thing against the Service of the most Christian King, whereupon the French
Erected a Custom-house at Waulsors, and took Toll, and levied other Duties for
the use of their King.

The Right of the Spaniards to Waulsors, Hastiers, and Ermeton.
It appears by the Register remaining in the Compting-house of the General
Receipt at Namur, entitled the Register of the Demesnes of Namur, in the year
1265, that Waulsors, Hastiers, and Ermeton on the Meuse, are of the ancient
Demesns and Lands of the County of Namur: The Earls of Namur having granted out
in Fee, the Wineage of Hastiers, and several Duties the Inhabitants of
Waulsors, Hastiers, and Ermeton were obliged to pay, and also the Manor and
Dependences of Ermeton on the Bierre. Besides, in the Record of a solemn Oath
taken by William Earl of Namur, in the year 1360, with four Knights of his
Council, nominated by Enghelbert de la Marcq, Bishop of Liege, pursuant to an
Agreement between them, it is contained, that the Banks of Waulsors, and
Hastiers, on either side the Meuse, are entirely within the County of Namur,
and that in all Cases the Law of Namur is to be observed there, no less than in
the Broigne and its Appurtenances, Members of that County: And that the
Inhabitants of Waulsors, and Hastiers, and the Territories thereof, are no less
subject than the Citizens of Namur to the Earls of that Country: The said Earl
William, and four Knights, having affirmed that Waulsors, Hastiers, and the
Broigne, had been as long as could well be remembered, the Inheritance of the
said Earl and his Predecessors, as by the Record of that Oath more at large
appears.

And in Act of the year 1420, Copied out of an ancient Register of the Churches
of Waulsors and Hastiers, it is declared, That the said Churches are situate in
the County of Namur, and the Jurisdiction of the those places had been granted
to the use of the said Churches, saving to the Earl of Namur the Sovereignty
thereof: And in the year 1466, the Inhabitants of the same places petitioned
and obtained from Philip Duke of Burgundy, as Earl of Namur, an Act of Pardon
and Oblivion, for their having retired with their Effects into the City of
Dinant then in Hostility with him.

Broigne, otherwise called St. Gerard.
The third of April, 1680, the said Intendant sent fifty Horse to the Village
of St. Gerard, with Order to the Mayor of the place to receive them, and Summon
the Officers of Justice, and principal Inhabitants to be in readiness to take
an Oath of Allegiance to the most Christian King of fourth day after; when the
Intendant, being arrived with a Guard of two Troops of Horse, told the said
Officers of Justice, and greater part of the Inhabitants, that he was come to
take possession of the place, and to administer the said Oath, which he forced
them with Menaces to take, without allowing them time to advertise their
Superiors: And the Mayor having in the Name of the Commonalty of the place,
Read and Signed the Oath, as drawn by Faultrier, he obliged the Pastor of the
Church there to Sing Te Deum, with Oremus pro Ludovico decimo quarto. Having in
his Harangue made to induce the People to take the Oath, told them, That King
Pepin, to whom the Low Countries belonged, being dead, a King of France
succeeded him: And that the Emperor, Charles the fifth, being a Powerful
Prince, had appropriated to himself what he thought convenient; that they, the
Inhabitants, ought not to scruple the Oath he required of them, for that it did
not belong to them to dispute it, being a matter to be decided between the two
Kings, and that the more powerful would carry it; since which to this day there
has been a French Garrison in the place: And the Intendant, in pursuance of
the Usurpation, gave Order to the Officers of Justice there to make new
Assessments: And by his Ordinance of the 17th of February, 1681, moderated the
Tax that place and its Dependences had usually been assess'd at to pay his
Catholic Majesty, reducing it from a thousand Florins to three hundred.

The Right of Spain to the Broigne, alias St. Gerard.
That the Village of Broigne is of the ancient Demesne Lands of the Earldom of
Namur, appears by the Register above mentioned, remaining in the Compting-house
of the general Receipt of Namur, in the year 1265, wherein the said Village of
Broigne is contained and called St. Gerard: And in the Close Rolls of the
Accounts of Ayds in the Chamber of Accounts of Lille, the 10th of October,
1493, it is mentioned under the Title of the Mayory of Rovignes: And in the Act
of the Solemn Oath taken by William Earl of Namur, in 1360, with four Knights
of his Council, nominated by Enghelbert de la Marcq Bishop of Liege, pursuant
to the Agreement between them, it is expressed, that Broigne and its
Appurtenances are part of the said County, and that the Inhabitants of that
Territory, as well as the Citizens, of Namur, are Subjects to the Earl. Broigne
having, as long as could well be remembered, been he Inheritance of the said
Earl William and his Predecessors, as appears at large by the Record of the
said Oath.

The Woods of Biert.
Upon pretense that the Woods of Biert, and others belonging to his Catholic
Majesty, are Dependents of St. Gerard, a French Captain of Dragoons was
quartered there, who not only interrupted the ordinary Sale of Woods, begun by
his Catholic Majesty's Counselor, and Receiver General in the Woods of Biert,
but forbad the Chapmen (who had bargained) to fall a Tree without leave under
the Hand of the said Intendant; who by an Edict of the 4th of November, 1680,
prohibited all Persons to fall any Tree in the Woods of Biert and Foy, or to
put in any Hogs or other Beasts there, on any pretense whatever, on pain of
Confiscation of the Beasts, and a hundred Crowns Fine; with like prohibition
from Hunting in those Woods, or Fishing in the Rivers Dependents of St. Gerard.
And he that had by Grant from the Officers of his Catholic Majesty, obtained
the Mast of the Woods of Biert, was obliged to give Security at St. Gerard to
pay the Rent there. Besides which, the Intendant not only made several Bargains
for Wood to be fallen there, but caused a great quantity of the fairest Oaks to
be fallen and squared, and carried to Phillippeville, Charlemont, and Dinant.
And by his Order a Chapman was Arrested and carried to St. Gerard to pay the
French the price he had agreed for a bargain of Woods in 1680, made with the
Officers of his Catholic Majesty, for his Majesty's use. Several other Chapmen
were forced to do the like, and some to quit their Bargains, and restore the
Woods sold them by the Officers of his Catholic Majesty: finally, the
Woodwards appointed by his Catholic Majesty, were forced to take an Oath to
serve the most Christian King in the same Function: And the Chapmen of Falaen
were forbidden to carry out of the Woods of Foy, any Wood Sold there.

The Right of Spain to the Woods of Biert.
By a Transaction and Agreement in the year 1266, between Thomas Abbot of
Broigne, and his Covent of the one part, and Guy Earl of Flanders, and Marquess
of Namur of the other part, upon a Controversy happened about the Woods of
Biert, It was agreed, that among several other Woods, those of Biert should
remain to the said Guy, who in consideration thereof, granted to the said Abbot
and Covent a piece of Wood Ground, descended to him from his Ancestors, as
appears at large by the Agreement. In pursuance whereof, the said Guy, Marquess
of Namur, and his Successors, have to this day peaceably enjoyed the said
Woods, without any Interruption by the said Abbot and Covent, or their
Successors, who have likewise enjoyed the Woods past to them by the said Guy.
And if there had not been any such Transaction or Agreement, yet a Possession
of four hundred years and upwards is by the Common Law of the Country
sufficient to create a Right, which is presumed upon continual and peaceable
possession: the rather for that by the 35th Article of the Customs of Namur,
there is no more required than a possession of Forty years to prescribe against
the Church.

The Bailiage of Bouvignes.
The Sixth of July, 1681, the Intendant Faultrier, with the Sieur Madelan, and
Charles Boron his Deputy, being come to the place of residence of the Baily of
Bouvignes, caused the Officers of Justice, and some principal Inhabitants of
that place to be summoned to swear Allegiance to France, which they did, and
were the same time prohibited on pain of Chastisement to own any other
Superior.

The same Intendant sent Orders to the Officers of Justice at Gerpines, to
repair to Biesme, and take the like Oath, without any Dispute, otherwise it
should go ill with them, and they should be punished as disobedient.

The like was done to those of the Villages of Acos, Joncret, Villers la
Potterie, Sart a la Stache, Orez, Gougines, Bois de Villers, Romree, and
Turnault, Dependents of the said Bailiage. And to the Farmer of the Rents of
the Manor belonging to his Catholic Majesty, in the Forest of Marlaigne, who
were all obliged to take the said Oath; the Intendant alleging for the ground
of his proceedings the Authority of Prophecies, and some sayings of Wizards.

The Intendant having sent Orders to the Mayor and principal Inhabitants of
Lesues and Arbre, Dependents of the same Bailiage, to come to St. Gerard for
the purpose abovementioned; they not coming accordingly, Charles Boron, his
Deputy, caused them to be taken in the Night by Soldiers, and carried to St.
Gerard the 7th of June, 1681; where, upon their Arrival, the Commander
prohibited them to receive any Orders from those of Namur, or to pay them any
thing on pain of being severely punished. Orders being afterward sent them by
four French Dragoons, to come again to St. Gerard, they obeyed, and found there
the Intendant, the Sieur Madelain, and other French Officers: And the Intendant
having declared to them it was convenient they should take an Oath of
Allegiance to France; the said Mayor and Inhabitants excused themselves; the
Intendant hearing them, Ordered the Commander of St. Gerard to have his Men in
readiness to go punish those who would not obey his Orders: this so frightened
the Mayor and Inhabitants, they took the Oath as required.

The Right of Spain to the Bailiage of Bouvignes.
That the Bailiage of Bouvignes belongs to his Catholic Majesty, is
sufficiently made out by a Deed in 1262, remaining among the Records of the
Castle of Namur, whereby it appears, that the same year Baldwyn, Emperor of
Constantinople, and Philip his Son, then Earls of Namur, by Succession after
several Ancestors, had sold the Town and Castle of Namur, Bouvignes, Golsines,
Vies ville, and the whole County of Namur, to Guy Earl of Flanders, whom his
Catholic Majesty represents. And pursuant to this Sale, this said Emperor and
his Son Ordered and Commanded the Inhabitants of the Town and County of Namur,
to acknowledge the abovenamed Earl of Flanders their Lord, and to pay him in
all things the obedience faithful Subjects ought to pay their Sovereign, which
has to this time been successively done. The Earls of Namur having constantly
possessed and enjoyed with all Sovereignty the Town of Bouvignes, and the
places its Dependents, particularly Enumerated in the Register beforementioned
of the Demesnes of the County of Namur, in 1265; called Le livre aux aisselles.

Rosee, Flavion and Serville.
The said Intendant possessed himself also of the Villages of Rosee, Flavion,
and Serville, Dependents of the said Bailiage. And the Receiver General of
Namur, having caused two beasts belonging to some Inhabitants of the Village of
Bois de Villers to be seized for a Debt due for some Wood sold by his Catholic
Majesty's Officers of the Woods. The Intendant by way of Reprisal, caused a
Forge-Master to be taken and carried to St. Gerard, and thence to
Philippe-ville, to be kept Prisoner there till restitution of the Beasts; the
Commander of St. Gerard being informed that the Mayors of Arbre and Lesues had
been with the Attorney General of Namur, to acquaint him with the Prohibition
they lay under to pay any Taxes to his Catholic Majesty, sent a Party of
Dragoons to take them, and forbad them to go any more on any such Errands
without his Orders, on pain of being Chastised, adding, they ought not to own
any Superior but France.

Ontraye.
The third of August 1681, the said Intendant accompanied with St. Madelain,
Governor of Philippe-ville, and other Officers, came to Ontraye; and having
caused Dieu-donne Petit Jean (his Catholic Majesty's Commissioner there for
the Customs and Duties of Exportation and Importation) to come before him, he
declared he was come to take possession of that Village, and therefore forbad
him to Levy there any more Duties for his Catholic Majesty, which prohibition
the Commissioner was forced to comply with: And the Officers of Justice, and
several Inhabitants of Ontraye, were Commanded to meet and take an Oath of
Allegiance to France, and to give in their Names to be Registered; all which was
accordingly Executed. And in the Woods of Biesme, and of Halloy, and Vieux
Fourneau its Dependents; the French Officers have marked a great quantity of
the fairest Trees to be fallen, and used in Buildings at Philippeville.

The Provostship of Poilvache.
The same Intendant, Faultrier, sent Order, Dated the 10th of April, 1680, to
the Lieutenant Provost of Poilvache, importing, That as his most Christian
Majesty had ordered him to take possession of the said Provostship, for his
Majesty's use, he required the Lieutenant and other Officers of the
Provostship, to appear without delay at Charlemont, to swear Allegiance to the
most Christian King; and to bring with them an account of the Impositions
Levied on their Parishes, that they might be moderated according to the Orders
he had received: All this to be done on pain of being declared Disobedient, and
punished accordingly.

The same Month of April, the Mayors and several Inhabitants of the Village of
Houxsoubs Poilvache, were sent for by the Intendant to the Town of Dinant, to
swear Allegiance to the King his Master; and upon their refusal, he forced them
to it by threatening to send Soldiers into their Mayoralty: After which he
placed an Officer there, to show he had taken possession of the place, and put
up on a Tree and the Old Tower of Poilvache the Arms of the French King, and
settled a Compting-house there, and Levied five per Cent. Duty on Oats and
other Corn.

And by Order of the 8th of March, 1680. sent to them of Spontin, the 10th of
the following Month, the said Intendant, Faultrier, signified to them, that not
only the Provost, Lieutenant, and Officers of the Jurisdiction and Provostship
of Poilvache, but of all the Jurisdictions, its Dependents, were to appear the
10th of May following, in the Forenoon, at the House of the Burgo-Master
Taboulet, in the Town of Dinant, to receive his most Christian Majesty's
Orders, and not to fail on pain of being proceeded against as disobedient:
Pursuant to which, they of Spontin having sent to know his Intentions; he let
them know he had Order from his Master to take possession of the Provostship of
Poilvache: and that having been upon the place for that purpose, he had found
there only old Walls, without any Inhabitant, and was therefore obliged to
require all those who dwelt within the Jurisdiction of that Provostship, to
swear Allegiance to his most Christian Majesty, and the Messenger from Spontin
should first do it, which he did, and was then told by the Intendant, they
should thenceforward pay only a moiety of the Taxes and Impositions they paid
his Catholic Majesty, from whom he forbad them to receive any more Orders.

The Mayor of Sorinnes also received Order, Dated the 8th of April, 1680:
wherein the Intendant required him to swear Allegiance to France, prohibiting
him to acknowledge for the future the Sovereignty of his Catholic Majesty, or
pay him any Taxes or Duties, and promising to protect him and the Inhabitants
in case of Molestastion.

The Right of Spain to the Provostship of Poilvache.
The Provostship of Poilvache comprehends several Mayoralties, every of which
is composed of many Villages. And by an Act of the Month of March, 1280, it
appears, that Henry Earl of Luxemburgh, and Marquess of Erlon, received out of
the Hands of Guy Earl of Flanders, Marquess of Namur, the Castle and Town of
Poilvache, with the Village of Oire sur Meuse, and others specified in that
Act, to be held in Fee of the Marquess of Namur, and his Heirs the Lords and
Earls of Namur, by perpetual Homage.

Pursuant to which, it is mentioned in an ancient Register of Surveys, written
in Paper of Lombardy, in the year 1343, that the Sire de Poilvache is a Peer of
the Castle of Namur, and holds of the said Castle in Fee, the Castle and Town
of Poilvache, and all the Mayories belonging to it, the Mayory of Falize, the
Mayories of Sorinnes above Dinant, of Ascech. of Diwaing, of Schaltin, of
Leignon and Falmaigne, and all the Towns and Houses depending thereon, and
ought in all Cases to use the Law of the County of Namur.

But in the year 1344, John, King of Bohemia, and Earl of Luxemburgh, for him,
his Heirs and Successors, sold to Madam Mary d'Artois, Countess of Namur, her
Heirs and Successors, the said Town, Castle, and Provostship of Poilvache, with
the Appurtenances; namely, the Mayories of Poilvache, Falize, Sorinnes above
Dinant, Ascesse, Diwaing, Ohey, Schaltin, Leignon, Falmaigne, and all Towns and
Houses their Appendents, with all other things appertaining to the said
Provostship, held of the Earldom of Namur; (without Exception or Reservation)
as also the Bann de Soy, for the sum of twenty seven thousand and four hundred
Florins. And by a particular Act of the fifth of September, 1344, the same King
of Bohemia Commanded all his Subjects of the Provostship of Poilvache, to do
Fealty and Homage to the said Countess of Namur, having released and absolved
them from the Fealty and Homage due to him.

The Sale was agreed too, and ratified by Charles, Eldest Son of the said King
of Bohemia, and Earl of Luxemburgh, the 24th of August, 1344. And by an Act of
the 12th of December, 1346, he discharged all the Burgesses and Subjects of the
Territory of Poilvache from all Fealty and Homage, that might any way be due to
him his Heirs and Successors.

This done, the Lady Mary, Countess of Namur, by Act of the 11th of September,
1353, gave her Son William Earl of Namur, and his Heirs, the said Castle, Town
and Territory of Poilvache, and the Bann de Soy, with all their Appendences and
Appurtenances, High and Low Signiories, Homage and Rights whatsover.

After which, John of Flanders, Earl of Namur, sold to Philip Duke of Burgundy
(whom his Catholic Majesty represents) the County of Namur, with the Territory
and Provostship of Poilvache, in the year 1421: In which Territory is comprised
the Village of Houx on the Meuse, in the Record of Fealty done for the Fee, in
the year 1280, mentioned before: And in the Close Rolls of the Accounts of
Ayds, in the Chamber of Accounts at Lille, the 10th of October, 1493: It is
charged as a parcel of that Provostship.

Pondrosme.
The Intendant not satisfied with having done as much in the Village of
Pondrosme, as in other the Dependents of the Provostship of Poilvache, Ordered
the Mayor of that place to suppress the Compting-house established there, for
Levying the sixtieth penny.

The Right of Spain to Pondrosme.
The Village of Pondrosme, situate very near a Branch of the River Less, is a
Dependent of Poilvache, and as such, has always paid Aids to his Catholic
Majesty, Contributed with the County of Namur to public Charges and Expenses,
and the furnishing Pioneers, Carriages, and other things of that Nature;
received his Majesty's Orders and Placarts by the Provost of Poilvache, and, as
other Members of that Provostship, made Appeals to the Council of Namur: so
that there is little reason appears why France should have suppressed the
Compting house settled there from all Antiquity, and Governed by the
Underfarmers of the said sixtieth penny.

Haibes.
The same Intendant, Faultrier, sent an Order, Dated the 20th of April, 1680,
and Letters of the 27th following, to the Inhabitants of the Village of Haibes,
requiring them to swear Allegiance to France; though by an Extract sent by the
Counsel of Namur, Number 12, in their Letter of the 24th of November, 1680,
it is evident the Sieur de Haibes holds the said Village in Fee, as a Dependent
of Poilvache.

The Mayory of Bouvignes.
From Onhaye the Intendant with his Company and Guards went to the Bann, or
Jurisdicton of Anthee, consisting in the Villages of Anthee, Mavoye, Morville,
and Fontaine, and took possession of it the third of August, 1681, and made the
Inhabitants take the Oath required. The like was done as to the Hamlets of
Chestrevin, Melin, Wespin and Metz, Dependents of that Mayory; after they
having in July 1681, compelled those of the Villages of Soumiers and Rivere,
Dependents of the same Mayory to take the like Oath, and made Laurence Licos,
an Inhabitant of Soumiers, Mayor of the place, and given the People some Money
to Drink: though the Right of his Catholic Majesty to the Mayory of Bouvignes,
may be clearly made out by the evidences abovementioned, as to the Bailiage of
Bouvignes.

The Bailiage of Montaigle, Falaen.
About October, 1680, the Intendant, Faultrier, having sent three several
Orders to those of the Village of Falaen (a Dependent of the Bailiage of
Montaigle) to be all in readiness, came thither accompanied by Madellain, and a
good number of Soldiers; and in an Harangue to the People, told them, that the
Village of Falaen was a Dependent of St. Gerard; that it was an Estate of the
Church usurped by Charles the Fifth; that those who had exacted Taxes and
Gabels from them, had Committed Sacrilege; that he would restore them to their
ancient Liberty; that they should pay no more Taxes or Gabels, but only some
small acknowledgment to his most Christian Majesty.

Madellain the same time told an Officer of the Bailiage, that what he then
said to him, he said not as a Frenchman, or Governor of Phillippeville, but
as an honest Leigois as he was; that he had written to them out of kindness,
and the Affection he had for the Inhabitants of Falaen: With that he presented
them a Paper to Sign, containing in substance a Promise not do to any thing
against the Service of the most Christian King.

The Inhabitants refusing to Sign it, he threatened to send four hundred
Dragoons to their Village; adding, they need not be afraid; and that they
should never fall again under the Dominion of Spain; and that France had a High
and Powerful Arm to protect them.

By these means and inducements the Inhabitants were prevailed with to Sign the
Paper, protesting nevertheless they were forced to it by violence: This done
Madellain offered them Money to Drink, which they refused, and he thereupon
threw them four Patacoons, and retired.

Anvoye and Rouillon.
The 9th of October, 1680, the Villages of Anvoye, Rouillon, and Hun were
prohibited to pay his Catholic Majesty any Tax, Impost, or Duty whatever, or
to permit any Usher, or Sergeant of Namur to Execute any Process in the said
Villages; and in case any such Officer should come within their Precincts, the
Inhabitants were Commanded to take, and carry him bound and pinioned to
Phillippeville, to be sent thence to the Galleys: That they should try their
Suits in the Courts of their Precincts, and appeal, (when there should be
Cause) to the Court of Tournay.

Salez, Corbay, and Henemont.
In November 1680, pursuant to an Order from the Intendant Faultrier, the
Farmers of Corbay, Salez, and Henemont, Dependents of the Bailiage of
Montaigle, went to St. Gerard, where the Intendant, after some Remonstrances
like those abovementioned, made them take the like Oath of Allegiance to
France.

The Abbey of Moulin.
The Abbot and Covent of our Lady at Moulin, having after many Solicitations,
refused to swear Allegiance to France, had, in July 1681, between fifty and
threescore Horse and Foot Quartered upon them, by Faultrier's Order, where they
lived at Discretion a considerable time.

The Tithes of Bioulx.
Charles Boron, the Intendants Deputy, having given notice of his Intentions,
by Papers publicly posted, granted to him that gave most, the Great and Small
Tithes of Bioulx, and the Villages adjacent, belonging to his Catholic
Majesty, and Dependents of the Bailiage of Montaigle.

In November 1680, Madellain having sent to Falaen a Captain of Dragoons, with
ten Horsemen to bring thence to St. Gerard a Woodward who resided there, with
the Farmers of the Fishery of the Brook of Floyon, forbad them to pay his
Catholic Majesty any Rent till the Difference should be decided at Courtray.

By an Ordinance of the 17th of February, issued out by Faultrier, the Tax
assessed on the Bailiage of Montaigle, for the use of his Catholic Majesty,
being a thousand Florins, was reduced to six hundred Florins, with intimation
it was done for the ease of the new Subjects of the King his Master.

In March, 1681, the Farmer of the Fishery of the Meuse before Goddinnes, along
Rouillon, was disturbed in his Fishing, till the Sieur de Goddinnes, who set it
to Farm, promised Faultrier to let him see the Evidences he had of his Right in
that Fishery.

The Right of Spain to the Tithes of Bioulx.
By the Records remaining in the Castle of Namur, it appears, that William Earl
of Namur, bought the said Tithes the 28th of July, 1362, of Sir John Marbais,
Knight, Lord of Marbais, and paid him the Consideration Money, as appears by an
acquittance of the last of that Month.

The Woods of Marlaigne, Libinnes, and others, and the violences used against
the Woodwards of his Catholic Majesty.
By Order of the 19th of March, 1680, the said Intendant prohibited all Persons
to out, fall, square, or take away any Tree within the Compass of the Vi-County
of Libinnes, being part of the Forest of Marlaigne, on pain of Corporal
punishment: And enjoined the said Boron to see this Order Executed, and in case
of resistance, or force, to have recourse to Arms.

The Right of Spain to the Woods of Libinnes.
The Land of Libinnes is a Fee held of the Earl of Namur, William of Libinnes
having in a Survey of that Land, acknowledged himself a Feoffee of the said
Earl, and that he held of him, by Homage, his Manor and Tower of Libinnes,
with all Lands therein contained and enclosed, and eight Bonniers of Land and
Meadow, more or less, with Pasture in Marlaigne, for 25 yearlings in the Woods,
above seven years Growth, and Pasture for six Horses of his Team, and dead Wood
to burn in his House, feeding for Hogs of his Breed: With which Fee the said
William endowed his Sister; and after his Death, William his Son did Homage for
the same Fee; and having granted it in Fee-Farm to John de Celles, Knight, he
did Homage for it to the Sovereign Baily of Namur, as appears by the Surveys of
Fees held of the Castle of Namur.

By a Deed of the 28th of December, 1412. William of Flanders, Earl of Namur,
for the good and acceptable Service done him by John de Celles, then his
Sovereign Baily of the County of Namur, and which he expected should be done
him by the said John, did for himself his Heirs and Successors grant to the
said John the Royalty, Seigniory, and High, Mean, and Low Jurisdiction of the
Mayory of Libinnes, with Power to Constitute a Mayor and seven Eschevins, with
a Sergeant for the Exercise and Execution of Justice there: He gave him also
all the Rents he had in Libinnes, and whereof the Court there had Cognizance.

The said John de Celles having enlarged his Fee, by an addition of about sixty
Bormiers of Land and Meadow, which with the ancient Fee made up a hundred and
thirteen Bormiers: The said Earl of Namur granted him Pasture for his Horned
Beasts, and the Horses of his Team, within the Woods of Marlaigne, of above
seven years growth.

And that the Limits and Bounds of the Land and Royalty of Libinnes might be
known, the said Earl sent several of his Council and Officers to view it; who
reported that the Royalty and Mayory of Libinnes, begins at the Ditch of
Rochealroux, which divides the Country of Liege from the County of Namur, and
reaches from thence to the High way that leads into the Great Plain of
Libinnes; the said High way being the Boundary that parts the Moyory of
Floreffe, and the Land of Libinnes, till you come to the Choir Oak, from which
Oak it extends to the way that leads through the bottom of Wastieux to a
Maple-Tree, which parts the Mayory of Broigne, and the Land of Libinnes, and
from thence it goes to the Land of the Abbot of Broigne, as well toward
Broigne as toward his House.

This Land and Lordship the Earl of Namur granted to John de Celles, and his
Successors, to be held as an entire Fee of the Earl of Namur: Saving to the
said Earl, his Heirs and Successors, Earls of Namur, the Sovereignty and
Judgment of Apeals: Saving also, that if the Mayory of Libinnes, extended into
the Woods of Marlaigne, within the Limits and Bounds above-declared, the
Receiver of the Earldom of Namur, and the Woodwards, Chapmen, and Workmen,
might and should exercise and enjoy their usual Powers and Privileges in the
said Woods, without any disturbance or impeachment by the said Sieur de
Libinnes, his Heirs and Successors, or any other: And that the said Sieur de
Libinnes, his Heirs and Successors, or any of them, should not any way
intermeddle with the Debts, Fines, or Forfeitures concerning the said Woods.

Whereby it appears clearly, that the Earl of Namur has the Sovereignty and
Supreme Jurisdiction over the said Land and Signiory of Libinnes, and that the
Sieur de Libinnes is his Vassal.

It appears also, that the Woods of Marlaigne, within the Limits and Bounds
abovementioned, belong to the Earl of Namur; and that the Sieur de Libinnes
has not any Jurisidiction there, at least as to any Fine or Forfeiture
incurred by the Chapmen, or their Workmen, employed in the Sales made by the
said Earl: Nor can the Sieur de Libinnes claim any thing in the said Woods, but
the Pasture and Fuel he holds in Fee of the Earl.

This is so clear, it needs not illustration, and is confirmed by an Extract of
the old Repertory of Services done for the Fees held of the Castle of Namur;
wherein we find, that after the said John de Celles, Gerard his Brother did
Homage for the said Seigniory, and Land of Libinnes, in 1427. And after him
Godfrey de Celles, in 1430. And in the same year John Burquin de Supplea, who
succeeded Godfrey, by virtue of a Devise by the last Will of John de Celles.

The 10th of March, 1445, John de Lonchamps, Lord of Fernelmont, as next Heir,
recovered it out of the Hands of John de Warissoul, who had taken possession of
it.

The 2d of August 1461, Don William de Graux, Abbot of Broigne, did Homage for
the same Land and Lordship; which came to him by Virtue of an exchange made
between him and the said John de Lonchamps, for fourscore measures of Corn.

The Second of August, 1462, the same Don William de Graux settled the said
Land and Lordship to the use of Pierart Alart, Valet de Chamber, to the Duke of
Burgundy, and his Heirs, paying a rent of fourscore measures of Corn to the
Church of Broigne.

In 1469, the said Pierart Alard, Sieur de Seiron, conveyed to the use of Henry
d'Outremont, Receiver General of the Court, all the Land of Libinnes, with its
Appendances and Appurtenances.

In 1488, Gyles d'Outremont did Homage for the said Land, its Appendances and
Appurtenances, descended to him by the death of Nicholas his brother.

The 2d June 1495, Gyles d'Outremont the Son of Henry, sold to the Reverend Don
James le Hourier, Abbot of the Church of St. Peter at Broigne, for the use of
his Church, the House, Town, and Land of Libennes, its Appurtenances and
Dependences, without Exception or Reservation; and the Abbot did Homage for the
Fee.

The last of September, 1503, Don William de Beyn, Abbot of Broigne, did Homage
for the House, Town, and Land of Libinnes, its Appurtenances and Dependences,
as James le Hourier, his Predecessor, had enjoyed them.

The 11th of May, 1507, Don Thomas Baudery, Abbot of Broigne, did the like: The
28 July, 1513, Don William Cauliere, Abbot of Broigne, by the Resignation of
the said Thomas, did the like: And the 3d of July, 1551, Don Benedict de
Mailey, Abbot of Broigne, did the like.

The 6th of September, 1584, Francis de Walon Capelle, Bishop of Namur, Prelate
of Broigne, and Sieur de Libinnes, did Homage for the same Land and Lordship of
Libinnes: The like was done the 13 of July, 1598, by the Right Reverend Father
in God James Blaseus, Bishop of Namur, and Prelate of Broigne; and afterward,
by John Davin, Bishop of Namur, and Prelate of Broigne; and since by Enghelbert
de Bois, Bishop of Namur: And in 1664, by John de Wactendoncq, Bishop of Namur,
and Prelate of St. Gerard. And lastly, the 14 September, 1675, by Ignatius
Austin de Grobendoncy, Bishop of Namur, and Prelate of St. Gerard, last
deceased.

By which it appears, the Homage, successively done, and continued several
Ages, for the Land and Lordship of Libinnes, was pursuant to the Survey made by
William de Libinnes, and the Feoffment from the Earl of Namur to John de Celles.

This being so, the Prelate of the Abbey of St. Gerard, annexed to the
Bishopric of Namur, can pretend to no more, than what is contained in the said
Survey of the Fee of Libinnes, being only Pasture and Fuel in Marlaigne,
belonging to the Earl of Namur, and some kind of Jurisdiction on Marlaigne, as
enclosed within the limits of the Lordship of Libinnes, with an Express
Exception and Reservation of Competent Jurisdiction to the said Earl, and his
Officers, in all matters of Fines and Forfeitures in the Woods, which, by the
Feofment or act of Donation, the Count has expressly reserved to himself.

So that the Seizure of the Woods of Libbinnes, and of Marlaigne, lately made
by the French, is a manifest and notorious Usurpation, considering the
Evidences above mentioned, and his Catholic Majesty's possession of the said
Woods several Ages.

True it is, That under the Jurisdiction of Libinnes, there are two little
parcels of Wood, containing about sixteen Bonniers more or less, called the
Sarts or Sauts, and belonging to the Abbot of St. Gerard, as Sieur de Libinnes:
But they are distinct and separate from those of Marlaigne, and we grant the
Propriety, as the Possession of them belongs to the Prelate of St. Gerard.

By this it appears, His Catholic Majesty has a clear and unquestionable
right to the Woods of High Marlaigne, within the Mayory of Libinnes; though we
should allow the bounds of that Lordship to extend as far, and comprehend as
much, as the French have unjustly, according to their Custom, lately
pretended, taking from his Catholic Majesty, what lawfully belongs to him.

Marlaigne.
His Catholic Majesty's Officers of the Woods, being gone to the Woods of
High- Marlaigne, to mark the Fuel due to the Abbot and Covent of St. Gerard,
found there the Receiver of the Abbey; who told them, he had Order from the
Abbot, and the French Captain of Dragoons quartered, and St. Gerard, not to
receive the said Fuel within the Limits of Libinnes: And if they marked any
there, the Captain would come in search of them, and take them Prisoners, by
Order given him to that effect, by the Intendant Faultrier.

The French Officers have marked abundance of Trees, to the quantity of 400 or
500 Bonniers of Timber, pretending them to be Dependents of Libinnes, and
Confiscated Woods, fallen by some Chapmen, pursuant to their Bargains with the
Officers of his Catholic Majesty, and driven away the Workmen they employed.

The 13th of April, 1681, Boron, and the Captain of Dragoons having, by Posted
Billets, summoned several Timber Merchants to appear at Libinnes, and declared
to them, That if they made appear by Acquittance, they had paid for their
Bargains at three several Sales, and would pay them in eight days, the value
agreed at the last Sale in October, 1680: They would permit them to enjoy their
Bargains, and go on with their business, otherwise they would Confiscate the
Wood, they had fallen.

Yet one of them, having produced his Acquittances, was nevertheless carried to
St. Gerard, upon pretense, he had not paid Boron the value, he had agreed for,
at the Sale made by the Officers of his Catholic Majesty, in the year 1680, in
the Woods of Biert.

The 4th of November, 1680, the said Captain of Dragoons, having caused
Benedict Noel, Stephen Copee, and John Melez, his Majesty's Woodwards in the
Quarter of Biert, to be called before him, Ordered them to go presently to the
said Intendant, to declare, whether they would serve him in their Offices, and
make report to him of the Trespasses and Offenses, committed in the Woods, for
four Months past, and that should be committed there for the future: Otherwise
he would employ others in their places; And endeavored to make them show him
all the Trees marked at the extraordinary Sale, the 3d of June, 1680, saying,
they belonged all to France.

The 13th of November, 1680, the said Captain, with four Dragoons, found out
the said Noel, and asked him, why he went not to receive Orders, and make his
Reports? who answering, he was forbidden by his Superiors; the Captain replied,
he must do it, or be carried away by the Soldiers, and put into a Dungeon: To
which he added Invectives and Threats against many of the Woodwards, who had
reported to his Catholic Majesty's Officers at Namur, what the French did in
the Woods of Marlaigne.

The 16th of November, 1680, Madellain, being at St. Gerard, and having sent
for Stephen Copee, and Benedict Noel thither, partly by Promises, and partly by
Menaces, and detaining their Parsons, made them sign a Declaration, whereby
they approved the Oath taken by them of Falaen and Ermeton Sur-Biert. Madellain
telling them further, that if they of Namur should trouble them on that
account, or any person authorized or employed by the French, they would Arrest
some Officer of his Catholic Majesty, or some Rich Farmer, till they were
indemnified. And that they ought to make Report to him, or the Captain
quartering at St. Gerard, of Trespasses done in the Woods, and give them notice
of all Orders and Billets posted up by the Officers of Namur.

Paul Philibert Gobert, a Subject of his Catholic Majesty's, and Partner with
Jerome Bonchat, having obtained a Grant of the Master of Weillen-woods, received
a Letter, Dated the 9th of Decenber, 1680, requiring him to put in Security at
Dinant, or some other place of the French Conquests, to answer for the Profits
of his Grant. Boron having, by Letter of the same Date, ordered Bouchat to
detain Goberts Hoggs, till he had paid the Charge of their running there. And
Gobert having not put in Security, as required; Boron, with a great number of
Soldiers, drove away his Hoggs, and kept them at Falaen, till Gobert gave
Security.

The 11th of March, 1681, his Catholic Majesty's Officers of the Woods, being
at High- Marlaign, to Mark and sell Timber there; the Captain of the Dragoons
came upon them with ten or twelve Soldiers, to hinder their Marking, telling
the Chapmen he would not permit a stick to be carried away without order from
Faultrier.

The Spanish Officers, protesting against this Violence, the Captain answered,
he had express Order from the King his Master, to watch and observe whatever
was done in the Woods, and to give him notice.

And when some of the Chapmen would have fallen the Woods bought at the Sale in
November 1680, of his Catholic Majesty's Officers, the Captain hindered them.

Bills were put up on the Church doors of Floreffe, Arbre, Lesves,
Profondeville, and St. Heribert, to signify, that the 15 of July, 1681, a Sale
of Timber should be made in Marlaigne Woods, for the use of the most Christian
King, by Deputy Boron; which was accordingly done, the 16 and 17 of that Month,
at Geraumont in High Marlaign, and afterward at Brocteaux, and elsewhere.

The like had been done by the French, the 21 of March, 1681, near the Parkfall
toward the bottom of Beaury, when they sold to new Chapmen, the Wood sold by
his Catholic Majesty's Officers, at the extraordinary Markage, on Condition
they would put in Security for the value to France at St. Gerard or Dinant.

Besides, Boron marked a number of Trees unsold, and said, it was for repairing
the Abbey of St. Gerard.

From the Parkfal and Beaury bottom, he went to Spittechamps, where he made
Sale of all the Wood standing or fallen, which had been marked and sold by the
Officers of his Catholic Majesty.

From thence he went near the Woods called Sartes, or Sautes, belonging to the
Abbey of St. Gerard, and made Sale to him, that offered most, of the Wood his
Catholic Majesty's Officers had marked and sold.

So that the French, in the Limits, themselves have set to the Woods they
pretend to have usurped in High Marlaigne, six or seven hundred Bonniers of
Wood, belonging to his Catholic Majesty: In a word, the whole Forest of
Marlaigne within an hour and a halfs journey of the Castle of Namur.

In June 1681, Faultrier took the Liberty to tell Jews Moreau, his Catholic
Majesty's Receiver of the Duty for Importation and Exportation, that he would
set up the Arms of France, close to the Castle of Namur, and perhaps would make
it appear, the said Castle is situate upon the same Territory with the Woods of
Marlaigne. And that in a short time, he would forbid any stick to be taken for
the use of the King of Spain, out of the Woods of Marlaigne.

To Conclude, the French have caused the Woods of Wellein, Delhee, and Faulx
being Dependents of Biert, to be measured in order to a Sale of them (as the
other Woods) for their proper use.

A CONTINUATION Of the PROOFS of His Catholic Majesty's Possession and Right,
TO ALL The Places, and other Hereditaments, seized by France, in the Provinces
of Namur and Brabant, since September 15, 1681.
THE Intendant Faultrier, pretending his Catholic Majesty's Officers were
about sending Orders to the Villages of the Province of Namur, to pay the
Taxes, Subsidies, and other Rights, due to his Majesty; caused an Order of the
29th of September, 1681, to be delivered to the Mayors, Sheriffs, Officers at
Law, and Inhabitants of the Village of Anhee, and its Dependences, with
Prohibition to all Ushers, Sergeants, and others, of what Quality soever, to
use any Force or Compulsion, or make any Seizure or Execution against the said
Inhabitants, with express Order to them, to Swear Allegiance to France, and not
receive any Order or Command to pay any Taxes, Loans, Rents, or other Duties
whatever, in Money, Grain, or otherwise, upon pain of paying twice.

The Right of Spain to Anhee.
That the Territory of Anhee, with its Appendences, consisting in the places
following, viz. Anhee, Mets, Grainge, Rostenne, Haux le Wasteau, Ohey, Hontoir,
Riviere, Chestrevin, Melin, Mestprin, Flun, and Welin, Onhaye, Marine, and
Soumiers, are Dependents of the Province of Namur, appears, First, By the
Register, remaining in the Office of the General Receipt, Entitled on the
Cover, The Register of the Demesnes of the Country of Namur, Ann. 1265, where,
among others, in the Chapter of Bovignes, all the places abovementioned, are
particularly enumerated in so many several Chapters, in every of which, it is
expressly Declared, That the Earl of Namur has, in every of those places, Right
of Subsidies and Tallies, and several other Rights, there particularly set
forth.

It appears, Secondly, by the first Volume of the Old Repertory, in the
Enumeration of the Fiefes of the Sovereign Bayliage of this Province, that
several of the said places; to wit, Wespin, Hontoir, Flun, Chestrevin, and
others, are Fieses held of the Castle of Namur, where the Homage of the
Tenants, done two or three Ages since, remain of Record, as also in the
Register of the Fiefes of the Bayliage of Bovignes.

Thirdly, It appears by an old account, Heard and Decreed in the Chamber of
Accounts at Lille, the 10th of October, 1493, for the Aids granted in the year
1491, by the Members of the three Estates of this Province; That Anhee is
comprised in the Bayliage of Bovignes.

It appears further, by the Accounts of the years 1559 and 1562, of the Aids of
the Spirituality of the Province, that Soumiers, Ohey, and Outr^y, have, as
Dependents of the Mayory of Anhee, been Assess'd toward payment of the said
Aids, granted by the said States.

Lastly, It appears by the Register of Surveys, made by the Deputies of the
Governor of this Province, that the Mayoralty of Anhee, and all the places
abovementioned, are integral parts of the same Province.

Profondeville.
The like Order was sent to Profondeville.

The right of Spain to Profondeville.

It appears by a Record of the year 1212, in the Castle of Namur, that by the
Mediation of Arbitrators, there named, an Agreement was made between the
Chapter of Hay, and Philip, Marquess of Namur, containing, among other things,
That all that Wood, called Profondeville, with all Right Property, and Dominion
therein, shall remain to the Lord of Namur and his Heirs, saving to the
Inhabitants of the place, their Right and Custom of Fuel, Pales, Rods,
Buildings, etc. in the same Wood.

By another Record of the year 1341, in the Castle of Namur, it appears that
Profondeville, is part of the County of Namur; and that Philip de Juppleu did
Homage to the Earl of Namur, for a House and Garden he had in Profondeville.

It appears also by the Register of the year 1265, that the Earl of Namur has
right of Taxing the Tenants of Profondeville, and receiving other Duties, there
particularly mentioned.

Moreover, Profondeville is returned within the Bayliage of Bovignes, and
accordingly assess'd at a certain sum, in the said account of Aids of this
Province, granted at Lille, in 1493. As also in the Accounts of the years 1559
and 1562, of the Aids of the Clergy of Namur: And in the Register of Surveys,
made in the year 1602, in the Survey of the Bayliage of Bovignes, Profondeville
is mentioned as an integral part of the Province of Namur.

Aveloy.
Faultrier sent an Order, the same in effect with that abovementioned, to
Aveloy.

The Right of Spain to Aveloy.
By the Register abovementioned, of the year 1265, it appears, that the Earl of
Namur, has Right of Tallage, Mortmain, Escheats, and many other Rights
(particularly expressed there) in Aveloy.

And by the Register of Fiefes, Aveloy is a Peerdom, holding of the Castle of
Namur, a moiety of which Peerdom belongs to the Abbot of Floresce, and the
other Moiety to the Lord of Ham, on the Sambre. And the Abbot, as well as the
Lord of Ham, have ever since the year 1361 to this day, done Homage for it to
the Earls of Namur, from time to time.

It appears also by the said Account of Aids of the year 1493, That Aveloy is
Returned and Assess'd within the Bayliage of Bovignes; as also by the Accounts
abovementioned, of the Aids of the Clergy, in 1559 and 1562: And in the
Register of Surveys of the year 1602, it is returned, as Part of the County of
Namur.

Wepion.
The said Intendant sent like Orders to Wepion.

The Right of Spain to Wepion.
It appears by the Register of a Survey of the Banlieu, or Capital place of the
Town of Namur, in 1601, by William Rancet, Lieutenant Mayor, in pursuance of an
Order of the Mayor and Sheriffs of Namur, That Wepion is a Member of the said
Capital place, and appeartains to it with all the Houses and Heritages thereof.

The Le Chasteau, and its Dependents.
The Inhabitants of Thy Le Chasteau, and its Dependences, received an Order to
the like effect, and Dated, as That before mentioned.

The Right of Spain to Thy Le Chasteau.
It appears by two Letters remaining among the Records in the Castle of Namur,
of the years 1289 and 1290, that Gerard Lord of Their erected a Fiefe in the
Burgessship of Their, and made a Gift of it to the use of Simon de Neuville,
and had the License of the Earl of Namur for so doing.

By another Record of the year 1322, it appears, that the Steward of Haynalt
holds the Land of Thy of the Earl of Namur.

And by the Register of the year 1265, that the Earl of Namur has right to
Command all the Inhabitants of Their, to attend him in the Army, and to provide
Horses and Carriages for his Progresses and Journeys, or to pay him Composition
for the same.

By the old Repertory of the Fiefes, it appears, that John Lord of Werchin,
Seneschal of Hamault, is Liegeman to the Earl of Namur, and did him Homage for
all his Territory of Their; to wit, the Castle-house and Towns of Their, Castle
Feroul, Line, Tarsinne, The Jurisdiction of Rabusee, Somzee, Gourdins, with all
and every their Appurtenances. And that from the year 1367, James Lord Werchin,
Steward of Hamault, and his Successors from time to time to this day, did
Homage to the Earl of Namur for the said Territory.

The same Territory of Thy Le Chasteau, is Charged and Assess'd at a certain
sum, both in the said Accounts of Aids, in the year 1493, and of the Aids of
the Clergy, in 1562.

And by the Register of Surveys in 1602, it is clear, that Thy Le Chasteau is
part of the Province of Namur, and Bayliage of Bovignes.

Ayseaux, le Reux, and the Abbey of Ognyes.
The like Order of the 29th of September, 1681, was sent by Faultrier to the
Mayor, Sheriffs, Officers at Law, and Inhabitants of the Village of Ayseaux, le
Reux, and Ognyes, with their Appendents and Appurtenances.

The Title of Spain to the places last abovementioned.
As to Ayseaux, there is in the Castle of Namur, a Record of the year 1334,
concerning the difference between the Duke of Brabant, and Earl of Namur, about
Aysiaux, which was referred to the Arbitration of the French King, and other
Lords there named, wherein it is awarded, that the Earl of Namur shall use
Sovereign Jurisdiction in Ayseaux.

By another Record of the year 1343, in the same Castle, mention is made of an
Agreement concerning the Land of Ayseaux, whereby John, Duke of Brabant,
released the Right, he claimed to the said Territory to the use of William,
Earl of Namur.

By another Record of the year 1350, the French King being chosen Arbitrator
between the Duke of Brabant, and the Earl of Namur, about Ayseaux, Awarded,
that the Prior of Ognyes should receive and keep the Rents and Profits of the
Territory of Ayseaux, till Determination of the matter in Controversy between
the Parties.

By another Record of the year 1357. Wencestaus, Duke of Brabant, and William,
Earl of Namur, surrendered their right to Ayseaux into the Emperors hands, with
Power to dispose thereof, as he should think fit. Since which, Ayseaux was
granted to the Duke of Brabant; and John, the first of that name, gave it to
his Son John, the Bastard of Braban, surnamed Brant, whose Mother was a
Daughter of that House, the Land and Lordship of Ayseaux, with the
Appurtenances, to be held in Fee of the Duke. The present Marquess d' Ayseaux
is a Descendent of the said Brant, and in Right thereof, sits in the States of
Brabant, as appears by the Feodal Registers of Brabant, and by Christopher
Berken's Trophies of Brabant: Printed in 1641, fol. 448, etc. 653, etc.

N. The beginning of October, 1681, the French posted themselves at Wepion,
close by Namur, and hindered the Importation of any Grain into Namur, by Land
or by Water; and for that purpose, seized several Sacks of Corn, and Horses
that came from Villers; and searched all the Boats that came down the Meuse.

The Fishery in the Meuse at Wepion.
The French have prohibited his Catholic Majesty's Farmers of the said Fishery
at Wepion, and thereabouts, and taken away the Fish; they had taken,
pretending, that the said Fishery belonged to the most Christian King.

Besides, Faultrier made an Ordinance, Dated the 10th of September, 1681, to
all Persons any way accomptable for the Demesnes of his Catholic Majesty,
between the Sombre and the Meuse, to make Payment of what is in their hands, to
N. Boron, and his Order. And sent a Billet without Date, whereby he gave
notice, he would at nine in the morning at Falaen, sell to him, that bid most,
the most of the Forests of Biere, of High and Low Marlaigne, of the Forest of
Marly, the Forests of Biesne, old Tournan, Halloy, the under-Woods of Wellan,
Hez, Bruaire, Feroniar, and Ford, all situate between the Sambre, and the
Meuse, and belonging to his Catholic Majesty.

The Right of Spain to the Fishery and Forests.
By a Placart of His Majesty, Decreed and Published in the year, 1591,
concerning the Isles in the Meuse, and grounded upon an ancient Record of that
Country, it appears, his Majesty, as Earl of Namur, has the whole Course of
the River from beyond Saulx a Revin toward France, to the Poplars of Ardem,
and Rieu d'Alim, near the Town of Huy, with full Seigniory and Jurisdiction.

As to the Forests of Biere, etc. it appears by a Record of the year 1324,
remaining in the Castle of Namur, that a certain Lady granted and transferred
to the Earl of Namur, the Wood of Marliar: As for those of Biert, Bresne,
Marlaigne, and others; see, what has been said before, concerning them.

Floreffe.
An Ordinance, Dated the 28th of September, 1681, was posted up by night in
Floresse, whereby, the said Intendant Prohibits the Transportation of Grain out
of the Territories, under the Dominion of France, Commanding the Guards, and
others, to stop their passage; to seize the Horses and Carriages, and the
Boats, if any pass laden with Grain; and to Confiscate them to the use of the
Farmers of his most Christian Majesty; though the Village of Floreffe is
notoriously known to be within the Dominions of Spain; and the French have not
yet possessed themselves of it; so that it is superfluous to add any more on
that Subect.

Spontin.
An Ordinance to the like effect, was sent by Faultrier, to Spontin, and diverse
other Villages of this County, with a Prohibition to the Mayor, Sheriffs, and
Inhabitants of Spontin, to pay any Tallage or Aids to his Catholic Majesty, on
pain of Disobedeince.

The Title of Spain to Spontin.
By a Record of the year 1377, in the Castle of Namur, it appears, that the
Lord of Spontin owns the Earl of Namur to be his Lord, and confesses, he bought
of him the Mill of Spontin for some Bushels of Corn, to be delivered into the
Granaries of the Castle of Polvache.

Besides, in an old Register of in the Offiec the Sovereign Bayliage;
Entitled, The Register in Parchment; it appears in the Chapter of Poilvache,
that William Lardienoy, held of the Earl, and did him Homage, for his Castle,
Lordship, and Territory of Spontin; to wit, the Town of Spontin, and its
Dependences, there set forth at large.

In the said Account of Aids, of the years 1491 and 1562, Spontin is Assess'd
among the Villages of this Province.

And in the Register of Surveys, of the year 1602, it is mentioned to be part
of the Provostship of Polvache, and being a Member thereof, the Title of his
Majesty of Spain is further cleared to Spontin, by what is before said of his
right to that Provostship.

Gerpinnes.
Faultrier sent to Gerpinnes, situate between the Sambre and the Meuse, an
Order, Dated the 4th of November, 1681, Prohibiting the Inhabitants to receive
any Orders from his Catholic Majesty, or pay any Toll, Taxes, or Duties to any
Person whatever, but such as should be Commissioned by him the said Faultrier,
with further Order to all Gentlemen and others, having right to sit in the
Assembly of the States of this Province, and all other Lords and Inhabitants in
the Lands and Villages in the possession of France, that for the future, they
forbear Sitting in the said States, on pain of being proceeded against as
Disobenient.

The Title of Spain to Gerpinnes.
It appears by Register abovementioned, of the year 1265, that the Men of
Gerpinnes are not only obliged to follow the said Count of Namur into the Wars,
and to provide Horses and Carriages for his Progresses and Journeys, but he
has also right of Mortmain, Escheat, High Justice, and other Rights there
specified, over them.

Besides, Gerpinnes is one of the Seventeen Villages, heretofore in
Controversy between the Bishop and Chapter of Liege, and the Earl of Namur;
touching which it was agteed between the Parties in the year 1360, that the
Earl and four of his Knights, there named and chosen, on the part of Bishop and
Chapter, should swear, that the said Villages did belong to the said Earl; that
they descended to him from his Predecessors, who had enjoyed them time out of
mind: And that the said Bishop and Chapter had not possessed or enjoyed them:
And that they did not any way belong to them; that in case of such Oath made,
the said Bishop and Chapter would restore to the said Earl, the possession of
the said Seventeen Villages. The Earl accepted the Condition; and he and his
four Knights, one after another, took solemn Oaths upon the Holy Evangelists,
to the effectaforesaid: the Form of the Oath being entered at the bottom of a
Parchment Roll, wherein the Rights and Dependences of every of the 17 Villages
were set forth at large. All this being done, in presence of the said Chapter,
and four Commissioners appointed by them, who administered, received, and
accepted the said Oath; notwithstanding all this, the said Bishop and Chapter
refused to restore the Count to his possession of the 17 Villages, according to
the agreement, whereupon the Count obtained, in the Court of Rome, four Decrees
for possession, by which the Bishop and Chapter were Condemned, to restore to
the Count the possession of the Villages, and to account to him for the mean
Profits, they had received.

Pursuant to these Decrees, Execution was awarded by the Cardinals, deputed by
the Pope, and a Commission given by the Bishop of Liege, for restoring to the
Count, the possession of the 17 Villages, which was accordingly done.

Moreover, By the Paper List of the Fiefes of the Bayliage of Bovignes, holding
of the Castle of Namur, it appears, that John le Rouleux was a Liegeman and
Homager to the Earl of Namur, for the Vi-county of Gerpinnes, and all its
Appurtenances; and John de Graux did Homage for it in 1426.

In the Accounts of the Aids of the years 1493, 1559, 1560, 1562, Gerpinnes is
Assessed as a Member of the Province of Namur, and is accordingly returned in
the Survey of 1602.

Sorinnes sur Dinant, Ayseaux, Viley la Poterie, and Wepion.
The Intendant Faultrier caused an Order to be delivered to the Mayor,
Sheriffs, and Inhabitants of Sorinnes, to oblige them to swear Aliegiance to
France; which they accordingly did, as appears by Certificat from J. de
V^^^nsaigne, Lord of that place, to the Attorney General Cuvelier.

In October, 1681, the French Ministers sold, to him who bid most, the Woods of
Marlaigne, Biert, and other places.

The Officers of his Catholic Majesty, having thought fit to demolish the
Hermitage of St. George, situate upon a Hill, over against the Fortifications
of Sorinnes, and within Musket Shot of them; the Governor of Chilipville made
great Complaints of it to the Prince of Barbanson, Governor of this Province;
and threatened, by a Letter on that Subject, to proceed by way of reprisal, for
the Demolishing the Hermitage; pretending, that the Hermitage being between the
Sambre and the Meuse, it was a Dependent of the Villages and Places, France was
in Possession of, and subject to the Pretensions France, has upon that Country.

The Mayoralty of Anhee.
Faultrier sent an Order, Dated the 4th of November, 1681, to the Inhabitants
of this Mayoralty, expressly commanding all Gentlemen, and others, having right
to Sit in the States of this Province; or being Lords or Inhabitants of any
Villages within the French Conquests, that they forbear Sitting in the said
States, for the future, on pain of being punished, as Disobedient: And that the
Mayor, Sheriffs, and Officers at Law, of the Lands, owing Fealty to France, and
summoned to do it, should not receive any Order, or pay any Tolls, Taxes, or
Duties to any, but such, as should produce Commission from Faultrier.

The like Order was sent by him to the Inhabitants of Ayseaux, and its
Dependents, and other Villages of this Province.

And by Order of the 14th of November, 1681, sent to Vilers la Poterie, between
the Sambre and the Meuse, and a Dependent of the County of Namur, he Commanded
the Inhabitants there, to deliver at Philipville a quantity of Forage, several
Measures of Oats, and Trusses of Straw.

The like Order was sent to Wepion, for the Inhabitants, there to furnish
Dinant with three thousand Trusses of Hay, 4 Measures of Oats, and a hundred
Trusses of Straw, with Threats in case of Disobedience, to send thither
Horsemen and Dragoons, to fetch away that Forage.

The 17th of November, 1681, the Inhabitants of the same place had Order to go
to Philipville, to swear Allegiance to France, and because they obeyed not
those Orders, some French Soldiers, carried away to Di: nant two of the
Inhabitants of Wepion, whom Faultrier threatened with Plunder and Fire, unless
the Inhabitants of Wepion would swear Allegiance to France, before the end of
November.

The Titlh of Spain to the places last ementioned.
Sorinnes is one of the Villages mentioned before, and belongs to Spain by the
same right, that Gerpinnes does; besides which, it appears, by a Grant of the
Provostship of Poilvache, made by an Earl of Luxemburgh, to an Earl of Namur;
and by the Accounts of Aids, granted in the years 1493, 1560, and 1562; and by
the Register of Surveys, in 1602, that Sorinnes, is a Member of this Province.

His Catholic Majesty's Right to the Mayoralty of Anhee, Ayseaux, and Wepion,
has been made out before: And as for Villers la Poterie, it appears by the
Register of 1562, that the Earl of Namur is Lord of Villers; and that the
Inhabitants there owe him suit to the Wars, provision of Horses and Carriages
for his Journeys; and that he has right of Mortmain, and all other rights of
Seigniory there.

The Provostship of Poilvach, and Bann of Leignon.
In November, 1681, the Mayor, Sheriffs, Officers at Law, and Inhabitants of
the Liberty of Liegnon, depending on the said, Provostship, received Order from
Faultrier, to appear the 15th of that Month at Dinant to swear Allegiance to
France, with Probition to receive, for the future, any Order, but what came
from him.

Ivoir.
The same Faultrier, by his Order, Dated the 15th of the same Month, Prohibited
the Inhabitants of Ivoir, as a Member of the Provostship of Polvach, to own own
any Sovereign, but the most Christian King, on pain of being punished, as
Rebels.

The Sieur de Liseigne, having by Petition to Faultrier, complained of two
Decrees the Council of Namur had pronounced, in favor of his Sister, and the
Executions served, pursuant to the Decrees, upon his Estate in Ivoir:
Faultrier, by his Answer to the Petition, Reversed the Decrees, and Prohibited,
on pain of Reprisal, all Executions there of, in the Villages in the Possession
of France.

Chaltin, Emptines, Spontin, Ohey, Halliot, Goesne, Hodomont, Walay, Wauremont,
Asses, Corier, and the Mayoralty of Rendarch.
The same Intendant sent two Orders, Dated the 14th and 26th of November, 1681,
to the Mayor, Sheriffs, and Inhabitants of the Villages of Chaltin, Emptines,
Spontin, Ohey, Halliot, Goesne, Hodomont, Walay, Wauremont, and Asses, situate
beyond the Meuse, and Dependents of the Provostship of Poilvache, and to the
Inhabitants of Colier; and the Mayor and Sheriffs of the Mayoralty of Rendarch,
which comprehends several Villages: By the First, they were to deliver to
Courbiet, at Dinant, a quantity of Hey, Oats, and Straw. By the Second, they
were prohibited to receive any Order from his Catholic Majesty, or his
Ministers, or to carry any Money into the Receipt of his Demesne, for Impost,
Tallage, Subsidies, or on any other pretense whatsoyver.

By Billet, Dated the 25th of November, 1681, the same Intendant Commanded
Philip Houyoux, Deputy Provost of Poiluache, to appear immediately in the Town
of Dinant, to receive such Orders, as should be given him, on the behalf of
France.

Falmaigne.
An Order of the same Intendant, Dated the 26th of November, 1681, was
delivered to the Mayor, Sheriffs, and Inhabitants of Falmaigne, a Dependent of
the Provostship of Poilvach, forbidding them to receive any Order from his
Catholic Majesty, or his Ministers, or to pay any money into his Exchequer, on
any pretense whatsoever.

Ash in Rendarch, Eurehailles, Godines, Gesnes, Ivoir, and Champall.
The said Villages, all Dependents of the Provostship of Poilvach, received
several Orders from Faultrier, forbidding them to pay any Duties, in Obedience
to any Order of the States of this Province; and commanding them not to receive
any Order, but what came from him.

The 30th of November, 1681, thirty or forty Dragoons, under the Command of N.
Boron, Faultriers Deputy, came to Ivoir, and, by ringing a Bell, summoned all
the Inhabitants together, and by word of Mouth, repeated to them the Orders
abovementioned: Having past thence to Godines, Boron asked John Charlett, one
of his Catholic Majesty's Woodwards in Hanwez, by what Authority he had on the
28th and 29th of November, measured the Woods of Hanwez? the Woodward replying,
he had done it by Order of his Catholic Majesty's Officers, his Masters: Boron
forbad him to do so again, on pain of being Hanged, or sent to the Galleys.

The Mayoralty of Houx, and its Dependents.
Faultrier sent Orders to the Inhabitants of the Mayoralty of Houx, a Dependent
of Bovignes, to the same effect as the Orders sent to the Provostship of
Poilvache; which Mayoralty consists in the following Villages, Lisoigne,
Avaigne, Purnode, Eurehailles, Ivoir, and Godines, with the Hamlets of Lois,
Faiginoule, Champal, Venate, Futvoye, Frappeul, Fresne, and Talfier, all
situate beyond the Meuse, and Dependents of the Province of Namur.

In December, 1681, the French quartered Dragoons in the strong places and
Castles of the Provostship of Poilvach, where they continue at the charge of
the Country.

The Right of Spain to all the Places last mentioned, within the Provostship of
Poilvach, and Bann of Leignon.
The Bann or Liberty of Leignon, and the Villages abovementioned, are
Dependents of the Provostship of Poilvach, which by the Register of Surveys of
the year 1602, consists in the following Villages, the Mayoralty of Rendarch,
which comprehends Loustin, Ronchines, Ivoy, Ash, Mallien, Corier, Corioule,
Long Sorinne, Porin d'Asses, Miltier, Jassoigne, the Fields of Jassoigne,
Wauremont, Ohey, and Walbet, with other Appendences, Halliot, Sey, Mohiville,
the Appendents of Sey, Chaltin, Maibe, a Dependent of Chaltin, Fusee, Waulin,
the Liberty of Leignon, Leignon, Chapoy, Ouechippe, Rouvaux, Corbion, Falmaign,
and Barsinalle, Sorinne snr Dinant, Borsell, Gesnes, Emptines, Emptinal,
Natoye, Fontam, Campilion, le sart, Spontin, Goesne, Fille, Hodomont, House en
Famerme, Harynies, the two Bourseignes, old Bourseigne, Mesinil, St. Blaise,
Hailes, Prondrosme, the Mayoralty of Houx, consisting in the Land of
Eurehailles, Broche, and Gayolle, incorporate into the Town of Bovignes, Ivoir,
and Furvye, Venate, Hour, Champal, Hugomont, Rbockmont, Godines, Monts, and
Chavaux, Frappeul, Fresne, and Talfier, Awaign, Lisoigne, Teroul, Loyers, and
Purmode, of which France has taken possession.

That the Provostship and Villages abovementioned, belong to his Catholic
Majesty, has been already made out, and may further appear by unquestionable
Evidences, and Records of the years 1280, 1343, 1344, 1346, and 1353,
containing the Sale made of that Provostship, and the Mayoralties, depending of
it, by the Earl of Luxembourgh, to the Lady Mary d' Artoy, Countess of Namur:
The Confirmation of the same Sale, by Charles, eldest Son of the said Earl; and
the said Earl and his Sons discharging their Subjects of the said Provostship
of the Homage due to them; with Order to acknowledge the Countess of Namur
their Lady, as they had done the Earls of Luxemburgh their Lords, and pay her
for the future the like Duties they had formerly paid the said Earls, to which
the said Earls, to which may be added the Gift the said Lady, made of the said
then Provostship to William her Son Earl of Namur.

Besides which, we find an Agreement made by the Mediation of the Emperor,
Between Wenceslaus, Duke of Luxemburgh, and Brabant, and the said William, Earl
of Namur, whereby the said Duke releases all Right, he or his Heirs might any
way claim to the Castle, Town, and Provostship of Poilvach, with its
Dependences, and to the Liberty of Sey; and agrees that the said Earl shall
enjoy the same, by virtue of the said Sale, made by his Predecessors to the
Lady Mary d' Artoy; in consideration whereof, the said Earl of Namur, released
on his part, all Right to Mirwart, Longpreit, and some other Villages of the
Country of Luxemburgh.

Add hereto the said Accounts of Aids of the years 1493, 1559, 1560, and 1562,
where the Villages of the said Provostship have been all Assessed as Members of
the Province of Namur.

To come to particulars, Emptines, Natoye, and Sorinnes sur Dinant, are part of
the seventeen Villages abovementioned, as appears in the Chapter of Gerpinnes.

Spontin we have already spoken of particularly.

As to Halliot and Menceau, we find an Award between the Earl of Namur, and the
Chapter of Ardenne, Decreed in 1384, and remaining of Record in the Castle of
Namur, whereby it is declared, that the Seigniory of Halliot and Manceau
belongs to the Earl of Namur.

As to Loustin and Mallien, there is an Agreement made between the said Earl
and the Chapter of Huy, in 1400, whereby aamong other things it appears that
the Earl of Namur, is Lord Paramount of Loustin, and Mallien.

As to Awaigne, it appears by a Record of 1384, that Chabot, as a Descendent of
the House of Awaigne, acknowledged he owed the Earl of Namur, in Right of his
Castle and Lordship of Poilvach, the Service of Person and Teem, and other
Duties there particulary set forth.

As to the Ban or Liberty of Leignon, there is in the said Castle a Record of
the year 1400, of the Rights and Seigniory of the Earl of Namur, over the
Liberty of Leignon, and that in Right of his Territory of Poilvach, he is
Sovereign Lord of Leignon.

As to Ivoir and Champal, it appears by a Record of the year 1385, in the
Castle of Namur, that N. Mancor granted away the great Tithes of Ivoir and
Champal to the Earl of Namur.

And by a Register made by a Receiver General of Namur. beginning in 1345, it is
plain that James de Marchie, Receiver General of Namur, having given notice by
Proclamation, he would Farm out the Rents and Profits of Champal, with the
Meadows, Lands, and Tithes thereto belonging, in the year 1497, did the 27th of
May, the same year, let them to Farm to Matthew Dauchet, under the Rent there
specified, for the term of Twelve years; in the Name, and for the use of the
Archduke of Austria, Duke of Burgoigne and Earl of Namur.

As for Hodomont, it appears by the second Volume of the Repertory in the List
of Fiefes of the County of Namur, that Libert, Son of Jacqmin of Hodomont, is a
Liegeman to the Earl of Namur, and did Homage for the Lands and Lordship of
Hodomont, with all its Members and Appurtenances, in the year 1372; and that
from 1372 to 1545: the Lords of Hodomont have successively done like Homage to
the Earls of Namur.

By the Register, called The Parchment List, in the Chapter of Poilvach, fol.
34; it appears, as to Lisoigne, That Baldwyn de Mostier holds all his Territory
of Lisoigne with the Chief and Annual Rents, Capons, Lands, Meadows, Woods, and
Pasture of the Earl of the Earl of Namur, as Lord of Poilvach.

By the same Register, in the same Chapter, it appears that Monsieur Arnold,
Lord of Cowaren, holds of the Earl of Namur, in Frank Fee, the Liberty of
Natoye.

By the Register of the Fiefes of Aloux, beginning in the year 1486, it appears
that John de Ramelot, in 1507, holds of the Earl of Namur, as of his Castle of
Namur, all the Lands and Lordships of Goesne, with its Appurtenances and
Dependents.

As to the Land of Hour en Fancen, it appears by the second Volume of the old
Repertory, that Walter, the Son of Oliver Centfontain, did Homage to the Earl
of Namur, for his Mesmage and Lands of Hour and Fancenn: And that John Small,
Heir of the said Walter, did the like in 1408, and the owners of the said Lands
and Lordship of Hour en Fancenne, have from time to time, done Homage for the
same to the Earls of Namur.

The Woods of Hanwez and Loche, Dependents of the Provostship of Poilvache.
N. Boron, Faultrier's Deputy, in November, 1681, Caused John Grosseaux, his
Catholic Majesty's Woodward of Hanwez, to come to Dinant; and having informed
himself by him, of the Growth of those Woods, and the regular Course of Falling
them yearly: He forbad Grosseaux to come any more into Namur, to make any
report concerning the said Woods, to his Majesty's Officers, but to repair to
him Personally at Dinant: After which he caused above two hundred of the best
Timber Trees, in the Woods of Loche, to be cut down.

The Right of Spain to these Woods.
It appears by the Sale of the Provostship of Poilvache, and its Dependences,
in 1344, by John Earl of Luxemburgh, to Dame Mary d' Artoy, that all Woods
Dependents of that Provostship, are mentioned and comprised in the Sale.

Achin and Soliers.
Faultrier sent Orders to the Abbey of Soliers, and Inhabitants of Ahin, the
same in effect with those sent to the Provostship of Poilvache, prohibiting
payment of any Duty to his Catholic Majesty, notwithstanding any Order from
the States of the Province, and Commanding them not to obey any Orders, but
what should be sent them, on the behalf of his Majesty; upon pretense the said
places are Dependents of the said Provostship, though in truth they are not,
but within the Jurisdiction of the Province of Namur: And at Ahin there is a
Custom-house settled by his Catholic Majesty, for Duties of Exportation and
Importation, Ingress and Egress.

The Right of Spain to Soliers and Ahin.
Soliers and Ahin are Dependents of the Province of Namur, within the Bayliage
of Enter Meuse and Arche, as appears by the said account of Aids of 1493, and
the Register of Surveys of 1602.

As to Ahin in particular, it is a Fee held of the Castle of Namur; Libert de
Foux did Homage for it in 1404; and so have the other Owners successively done,
as appears by the second Volume of the List of Fiefes.

The Records concerning Soliers, are in the Custody of the Nuns of Illec; and
endeavors shall be used to have them produced, if there be Cause.

High and Low Arche.
Boron sent an Order, Dated the 8th of December, 1681, to Francis de Page,
Woodward of High and Low Arche, a Dependent of the Bayliage of Enter Meuse and
Arche, to repair to Dinant to take the Oath of Allegiance to France; but
because we are not certain, France has taken possession of those Woods, we
forbear to set forth his Catholic Majesty's Title thereto.

Wepion, Godines, and Leswes.
Because the Council of this Province had sent into the Villages between the
Sambre and the Meuse, and into the Provostship of Poilvach the Placarts last
Published by his Highness: Count Montbron, sent Order to the Mayors and
Inhabitants of the same places, prohibiting them to receive such Placarts, on
pain of being punished as Rebels, and threatening to send to the Galleys, the
Bearers of such Placarts, whom he calls Vagabonds.

The beginning of the year 1682, Boron accompanied with Sergeant Benedict, came
to the Village of Biesme la Colonness, situate between the Sambre and the
Meuse, and a Dependent of the Bayliage of Bovignes, where he levied and
received all the Chiefrents belonging to his Catholic Majesty, and caused them
to be left at the House of Hubert Baviot at Biesme.

On Twelf-day last, John de Gozee, Lord of Biesme, as the People came from Mass
in the Parish Church, caused it to be Published aloud before all the Commonalty
of Biesme, that he had received Order from France, to lay an Assessment on the
said Commonalty to be presently paid: And that the Order was, they should be
Taxed at 600 Florins for Biesme, instead of 1945, they formerly paid his
Catholic Majesty.

The like Order, Dated the second of January, 1683, was sent to Wepion, and to
Hontoir, a Dependent of the Baliage of Bovignes, whereby it appears, that
Hontoir is Assessed at Forty Florins to be forthwith paid into the hands of the
Lord of Biesme appointed by France to collect the said Assessments. Besides
which, all the Inhabitants of the places, in the possession of France, were
commanded upon hearing a Bell rung, to assemble together, and Seize those who
should bring Placarts, or other orders in his Catholic Majesty's names, with
threats of Reprizal on his Majesty's Subjects, if any on behalf of his Majesty,
or his Officers should Levy any Duties from the said Inhabitants or their
Estates, as appears at Large by Faultriers Order.

The 11 of January, 1682. By two other Orders, delivered at Hontoir, and Dated
the one the 12 of September, the other the 22 of November, 1682, he Prohibited
the inhabitants between the Sambre and the Meuse, to appear for any Cause, or
pretense whatsoever, before the Officers and Courts of his Catholic Majesty,
and Commanded them to withdraw their Suits, if any, depending there, under
diverse penalties expressed in the Order. With Prohibition to all Mayors,
Provosts, Bailiffs and other Officers of the said Villages, to receive or admit
into their Jurisdiction any Advocates, Proctors, or other pleaders, but such
only as are Subjects of France.

By Billet of the first of January, Faultrier forbad those who get Stone out of
the Quarries in the fields of Houx (close adjoining to the Town of Bovignes) to
pay for them to any but Boron, pretending the said Quarryes are dependents of
the Provostship of Poilvache, though they are in truth within the Liberty and
Jurisdiction of Bovignes.

As to his Catholic Majestys right to all the places above mentioned, besides
what has already been said on that Subject, his Majesty and Predecessors have
been in possession of them time out of mind, for several Ages, and till now
have continually exercised all acts of Sovereignty over them without
contradiction of any Person whatever.

January 15. 1682.
FINIS.

