THE SMOKE OF THE Temple Cleared, through the LIGHT OF THE SCRIPTURE. By the
unworthiest of all the Ministers of Christ Jo. Brain.

JAMES 4.5. Do ye think the Scripture says in vain, the Spirit that dwells
in us, lusts enviously? CHAP. 1.21. Wherefore lay aside all filthiness and
superfluity of naughtiness, and receive with meekness the ingraffed word,
which is able to save your souls. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Vere, at the upper
end of the Old Bayley. MDCXLVIII.

The Epistle Dedicatory.
TO the Saints of God in all the world, especially the Godly Magistrates and
Ministers of this Land, and the Kingdom of Scotland: To you do I earnestly
desire of God grace and Peace may be daily multiplied; beseeching each of you
in your several places, to have especially care of preserving the peace of the
people of God, knowing how easy a matter it is to occasion a War, Religion
being made the ground thereof: How were the Heathens stirred up to fight for
their Idol-gods; how did Papists fight for Popery? And its not long since we
had a War for Episcopacie; the Lord grant our War end not in a War for
Presbytery or Independencie. I have written this ensuing Tract without leaning
to any partee, desiring a friendly acceptance of al; desiring, if possibly, to
have here by the truth discovered, which is only able to unite us in
Judgment, and make us one, which War can never do, but rather bring us all to
nothing; and remember Christ dyed to prevent the death and destruction of
Saints, and God is styled the preserver of men, whom we ought in this to
imitate: let us lay aside all affectedness to any way of our own, and
diligently search after truth, though never so much contrary to our selves, our
way and practice submitting to the way of God in the Scriptures, as that only
is to be walked in, though never so difficult to be erected, in which only is
peace and Righteousness to be found; and if there be any thing contained in the
ensuing Tract, that may farther the ends proposed in the Church of God, I shall
greatly rejoice, for which I shall earnestly seek the Lord night and day, as in
duty I am bound to do, and rest,

A most unworthy servant, yet glad to do any service in the Church for Jesus
sake and the Gospel. J. Brain.

To the Reader.
BEloved Friend, the desire of the Saints Peace and Love to the truth,
especially moved me to write of that Subject that follows, which as John's
Doctrine seems to be new to the world, which I suppose on trial thou will
find to be that truth, which was from the beginning, which though not so clear
at present, yet by this, God may be pleased to raise up some more learned godly
and Judicious man to write more fully and clearly, of the Comfort and
consolation of all Saints: I desire thee not to carp at the imperfectness of
the Coppie, it is very rude and indigested; having other affairs I could not
attend the reading of the Copy after written, being written in much haste, nor
was there any at the press able to correct the faults committed in the
writing, most of which shall be in some kind amended in the Errata; thus
desiring thy favor, thy increase of grace, and knowledge, with thy prayer for
me and the whole Church of God, I rest,

Thy Friend and Servant in the Gospel of Christ to do thee all service always,
J. Brain.

The Principal things Contained in the ensuing Treatise are,
1 THat there is a Church Ministry pertaining thereunto only. 2. This Ministry
consists of Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and Teachers. 3. Three of
these only are to be a continuing standing Ministry in the Church, to the end
of the World. 4. There is a Ministry which is to be officiated out of the
Church, and prepares for the Church Ministry. 5. This is proved by the practice
of the Church of Corinth, by the Epistles written to Rome, Galatia, Ephesus,
Colosse. 6. By the Church at Jerusalem, which was the mother Church, and
pattern of Churches, the rest for the most part being imperfect, and, as the
Apostle says, wanting things to be put in Order. 7. Of the complete Government
left by Christ to be exercised in the Church, representing Monarchy, which
Bishops took up; Aristocracie, which Presbyterians took up; Democracie, which
Independents took up. 8. The opening of several Scriptures, as the Parables of
the Tares, and of the Fish, usually applied to maintain mixed Congregations,
which rightly applied make much against them, and that of Acts 15. usually
brought to prove and maintain the Dependency of Churches. 9. That there is to
be a combination of teaching and Ruling Elders, but these to consist only of
the Evangelist, Pastor, and Teacher, with their other helps in Government. 10.
That these only are sufficient for the whole work of the Church-Ministry, the
edifying of the body, and the perfecting of the Saints, is proved. 11. This is
illustrated by the Vision of Ezechiel, concerning the Temple, which is not yet
fulfilled, but now near to be erected, in a spiritual way. 12. Something is
spoken concerning the places of administrating the public administrations in
the distinct societies of the Saints, as spoken of in the Gospel.
ERRATA.
PAge 2. line 2. subjecting one. P. 3. l. 21. officiated. P. 5. l. 3. for
these, r. their ministry. P. 6. l. 2. r. (...), l. 31. (...). P. 8. l. 18.
(...), l. 22; (...). P. 9. l. 10. I shall leave. l. 30. immediate. P. 10. l. 6.
private. P. 12. l. 1. as Evangelist. P. 19. l. 24. (...) l. 6. the manner. P.
22. l. 14. how they ought to be diversely. P. 23. l. 24. and in. P. 25. l. 13.
the work l, 27. but pulled. l. 37. three admininistrations. P. 28, l, 6.
baptism l. 14. Apostle, l, 29, though he. P, 32, l, 2, if he, l, 14, thy
ministry. P, 33, l, 7, (public) is to be left out, l, 33, are not exercised.
P, 35, l, 8, by all means. P, 36, l, 36, priority. P, 37, l, 15, many scores.
P, 41, l, 9, a threefold cord. P, 43, l, 35, confirm as some say P, 44, l, 8,
rent, l, 37, on Christ as on. P, 46, l, 16, things which may be done
successively may easily be granted. P, 47, l, 3, (of and in) are not to be read.

THE Smoke of the Temple EXPELLED By the Light of the Scriptures.
GOD above all blessings blessed the World in the Gospel, to which was added
the Ministry of it, the exercise whereof the chief Founder of the Gentile
Churches has written unto us, Ephesians. 3.9. saying, That to him grace was given,
to make all men see, what is the fellowship of the mystery, which has been hid
in God from the beginning of the world: In which are intimated;

1. That the fellowship of the mystery was a hidden thing, and not the mystery
only, which is the Salvation it self, but the means of it; and the manner how
the fellowship of this mystery is to be enjoyed by the Saints in the Church, is
a great mystery.

2. That the discovery of this mystery was, and is, only from, and by, the
Apostles.

3. That none can see, until they are made to see.

4. That it is so discovered in the Word, when God shall reveal it, it shall be
plain for all to see that have eyes to see, or shall be made to see.

5. The truth of this is clearly manifested in respect of the irreconcilablenes
that at the present is between men of differing judgments, which evidence, that
the light is not so clear nor convincing of either party, as to prevail with
the spirits even of spiritual men to a subjection to the other; which here the
Apostle shows, in the light revealed by him in the Scriptures, shall be such,
that all men shall see it, yea and though they do not see it, they shall be made
to see; so that there is a very commanding power, in the light to be revealed,
to reveal the way of Jesus Christ to the Church.

An Objection hence may be made, that it is true indeed it was hid from the
world in the Ages past, but revealed now.

Answer. It was indeed revealed by the Apostles, and practiced by them in the
then Churches; but when God hid the Church in the wilderness, then the
fellowship of the mystery came to be hid with it; for in the hiding of the one
the other came to be hid, which is to continue so hid 1260 years.

Now, as God hid Moses body, no man could possibly find it ever after: And as
God himself is said to dwell in inapproachable light, so the way of God, in the
Church, is in the Scriptures hid as in inapproachable light which cannot be
approached unto until God give a man the sight thereof.

First, it was said to be hid in God before revelation; now it may be said to
be hid in the Word, to which we are to apply our selves for direction and
discovery.

Now the chief way, as I apprehend, for the discovery of the fellowship of this
mystery by us, will be by a finding out of the clearest and most apparent means
of public communion in Church-dispensations, which is that I shall, by Gods
assistance, endevor to manifest in the ensuing tract.

The ground whereof I take from Ephesians 4.11, 12. where it is written, Christ
ascended up on high, and gave some, Apostles; some, Prophets; some,
Evangelists; some, Pastors, and Teachers.

1. This clearly shows, that to the right constituting of every true Church
there ought to be set up these several Administrations therein.

2. The words of the 12. verse prove the necessity and end of it.

1. They are for the perfecting of the Saints, without which the Saints cannot
be perfected, but are left to continue in imperfection.

2. They are for the work of the Ministry, so that the Ministry cannot be
performed by any in the Church, but by these.

3. They only, without any other added to them, serve sufficiently for the work
which Christ left to be done in the Church by the Ministry.

4. Without all these the work of the Ministry cannot be done, but will be
imperfectly administered in the Church.

5. The failing of these Administrations prove to become failings in the
Church, among whom these Administrations ought to be exercised; so that the
Church cannot be without them, no more then a ship without a Pilot, or a Child
without a Nurse to feed it; now that we may see how the Church has been, or
ought to be provided for, is to be judged hence.

1. As under Episcopacy, it is well known to all, there ere abundance of
supernumerary Officers and Offices pertaining to Ecclesiastical affairs, whose
names were not written in the Gospel-Calender, which gave just occasion to the
adversary to except against them.

2. I suppose Presbytery to be as far too short; the whole frame of the
Ministerial Government being swallowed up in one office, and officiated by one
person: Here I desire my Brethren, the Ministers, that differ in judgment from
me, and occasioned the writing of this rude and indigested thing, to consider
of;

1. Where one man may lawfully exercise the several Administrations, before
specified, to be in the Church by an ordinary Call.

2. How necessary it is the Church should enjoy her differing Administrations
and Administrators, and what enemies they were who took them down in the Church.

3. How unwarrantable a thing it is, to set up that in the Church for a
Church-Ministry, which God has not set up to rule by Authority, not derived
from Jesus Christ over the family of God.

I know many of you may say to me, as the Pharisees to the blind man, Will thou
teach us? Brethren, I gladly acknowledge my unworthiness, weakness, wickedness,
and will be yet more and more vile, then man can make me, for the Gospels sake
and Church of Christ, whose servant I have made my self to be in the Ministry
of the Gospel, though every way unworthy, and thence account my self engaged to
witness to the truth, and plead her cause, though my sufferings abound thereby,
Jesus Christ witnessing with my own conscience, my purposes are not but for the
discovery of the truth, and the knowledge of the way of Christ in the Churches.

3. In the true Church are found all these and no other Administrations then
are mentioned by the Apostle in the Scripture beforesaid.

Quest. What, shall we have no Church nor Church-Ministry, until we have new
Apostles?

Ans. New Apostles there are never to be.

Quest. How shall these then be in our Churches?

Resp. These being ordained by Jesus Christ to be in the Church, for the ends
and purposes before proposed, must be in it some way to do this, though not
personally, either ordinarily or extraordinarily.

2. That way which Moses and the Prophets were in the Jews Church under the
Law, that way are the Apostles and Prophets in the Gospel Church under the
Administrations thereof, Luke 16.29. They have Moses and the Prophets, let them
hear them; so it is plainly proved, though the Jews had them not with them
personally, yet they had them with them ministerially.

3. Hence is it said, Moses was preached in their Synagogues every Sabbath; so
is Paul's doctrine taught by faithful Teachers, as if Paul taught it in the
Church.

4. Things being fully considered, we may conceive the Apostles to be more
fully with us then any before, in some kind.

1. The Epistles not being written to any one Church, nor all written until
after Paul's time.

2. After they were written, they were not suddenly collected for the public
use of the Church.

The second Church-Administration is that of Prophets.
1. By Prophets, here I understand not those that wrote before Christ's time
only, but those since also, as the Revelations written by John, and Paul's
Prophesies and Peter's; these all were for the edifying of the Church, and
without whom the Church could not be: Now as Christ said to the Church, before
the Gospel Ministry, concerning Moses and the Prophets, so the Apostle says of
Apostles and Prophets, Ephesians 2.20. We are, says the Apostle, builded on
the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets; so that these are in and to the
Church as a foundation to a house.

2. If the Apostles and Prophets were not in the Church, what means of Ministry
were there left unto the Church to edify it in the world by?

3. Is there not their work in our Ministry working with us now still as
heretofore?

4. Are not these the ground of all other public Church-Administrations? so
that this being pulled down all the rest comes down after.

Hence I may say of these as the Spirit of God on another occasion said, They
being dead, yet speak; they are not silent now they are dead.

The third Administration is an Evangelist.
1. Some think this office ceased in those that wrote the Gospels; but that is
clearly evinced by the Scriptures before mentioned, Ephesians. 2.20. We are builded
on the Apostles and Prophets, but not on the Evangelists: Now were those to be
builded on, would the Apostle not have set them out unto us to be so, or should
those be left out in the building?

2. Mark and Luke are no where called Evangelists in Scripture, which did write
the Gospels, and those which wrote them not are called Evangelists, as Philip,
Acts 21.8. Titus and Timothy.

3. The work of an Evangelist is a preaching work, 2 Timothy 4.5. Do the work of
an Evangelist, make full proof of thy Ministry; and differs from that which
Mark and Luke did, as is thought, concerning the Gospels, who only wrote them
as dictated by the Apostles.

Now this work being not extraordinarily in the Church, as can be made to
appear by any work remaining in the Church, for its public edification; it
remains that it ought to be in the Church ordinarily for the Churches
edification.

2. That it is an ordinary work pertaining to an ordinary standing office in
the Church to remain to the worlds end, appears;

1. From Romans 10.5. How beautiful are the feet of (...) those that Evangelize
peace, that Evangelize good things, which without question is no other but the
ordinary office of that part of Ministry in the Church, thus in 1 Pet. 1.12.
those things are now reported to you, by them which have Evangelized; which
Evangelizing was no other then what is proper to the ordinary Ministry; for it
was no other then the applying of the grace prophesied of, to be under the
Gospel Ministry, to the then times in which it was administered.

Object. Were not Timothy and Titus Evangelists, and have we not their Epistles?

Resp. The Epistles written to them were the Apostle Paul's Epistles, not
theirs; so that they left nothing thereby to the Church as theirs.

2. They left in their name of Evangelist this unto the Church, that there was
such on office pertaining to the Church-Ministry in the primitive times, and
that that office ought to be still in the Church for edification.

Chrysostom, on the words aforesaid, Ephesians. 4.11. tells us of walking
Evangelists, and after of others; Qui occupabantur circa unum duntaxat locum,
ut Timoth. and Titus; alias, ex hoc loco subiectio and praelatura colligi non
potest; which is, that other Evangelists were employed about one only place, as
Timothy and Titus; or hence subjection and prelature cannot be gathered.

For the walking Evangelist, I suppose, there were none in the Church
Authoritatively, but as Acts 14.7. some men Evangelized, being by persecution
dispersed, did where ever they came, out of the gracious apprehensions they had
in their hearts of the excellency of Christ, exalt him to others, by which they
may be said to Evangelize, Mat. 11.5. (...), the poor are Evangelized. So that,
I suppose, there is much difference between one speaking, as Evangelized, or
taught by an Evangelist, and an Evangelist teaching one to be Evangelized.

The Conclusion hence concerning the Evangelists Ministry may be this:

1. That that Church which is without the ordinary administration of an
Evangelist, is an imperfect Church, and imperfect Church-Ministry.

2. That if Moses were careful to do all things according to the pattern in the
Mount, concerning the shadows of the Gospelgrace, then there ought to be much
more respect had by us now concering the dispensation of the word contained in
the Gospel: Moses left not out a ring or an ouch, but made all according to the
pattern; for which faithfulness of his God left him commendations in the word,
to be preached in the Church to the end of the world; and why? but that his
fidelity may make us faithful, and show how God accepts it in whomsoever he
finds it; now of what concernment this is to Magistrate and Minister, may
appear to all, in these times especially.

3. I cannot but conceive, that when the way of God comes clearly to be
revealed, God will gather up the Spirits of his Saints into a gracious union
again, though now divided: When the controversy about a right Ministry, about
making Members, and separation, and combination in the Ministry, will be taken
all up and ended.

The fourth Officer in the Church is the Pastor.
1. That this Office ought to be in the Church, is confessed; but what it is,
and how to be employed in the Church, that is not agreed on.

2. If this be not known to us, no wonder then if not the Evangelists, which
was an office tending more fully to perfection. Some say the Pastors Office is
to expound Scriptures, others to exhort; this is no distinct Office in our
meetings, every one doing the same in his daily Ministry; so that this part of
Ministry we have not in the Church, or at least, not distinctly, as in the
Ministry in the Apostles times used in the Church.

3. I suppose, that both Evangelists and Pastors lost their place with the
Churches losing her visibility, and ever since have been in that lost estate.
Cant. 5.7. it is said, the watchmen beat her and wounded her, and those that
kept the walls took away her vayl, which signified, as some conceive, that
persecution the Church should undergo under the Gospel by persecutors, and then
how Antichrist should take away her vail, depriving her of her Ornaments, which
Christ had left her to be adorned with in the world; then the restoring of
which there cannot be a work more admirable to be done by Angels or men, by the
godly Magistrate or Minister.

The fifth Officer, is the Doctor or Teacher, which office is not now so
executed amongst us, as under the first Institution, it being not done in a
Church way.
Object. Then it may seem hence we have no Ministry.

Resp. I say not, we have no Ministry, but no Church-Ministry; for besides
these, there was a Ministry which prepared for the Church, but was not of the
Church-Ministry.

1. It went before the Collection of Churches; as John the Baptist, who went
before to prepare for Christ's Ministry, and to this it is Christ alludes;
saying, that the least in the Kingdom of Heaven, that is, the least ministerial
Officer in the Kingdom of Heaven, was greater then he; which implies John's
Ministry was not of the Kingdoms Ministry.

2. Christ himself, before the calling of his Disciples, and the constituting
of his Church, did officiate this Ministry, Mat. 4.17. He is said (...), to
preach or to commend the Kingdom of God to men, which was to prepare for a
Church, and after that was gathered, then he Teaches and Evangelizeth, Acts
ult. 31. Paul was said to be (...) preaching, sc. to prepare the people, and
then being prepared, he is said also (...) to teach them; these two are
distinct things, and are to be performed by diverse administrations.

3. Christ did, as I may so say, this part of Ministry in reference to his
Disciples Ministry, which was to succeed him, who were indeed to erect the
Kingdom State to the world, which before Christ's death was not to be set up;
his death putting an end to the other administration: hence our Savior speaks,
as unto a people out of Church-Society, Mat, 12. the whole Chapter.

4. In the Scripture, the order observed by the Holy Ghost in the expression is
to be observed, the Lord placing preaching before teaching, the one being a
Ministry to be communicated to all, the other only to those that are in
Church Fellowship, and of the communion of Saints, and always follows the
other.

Now for this Ministry, as well as the other, ought to be contained in the
world still, for though the Apostle tells us, that the other of Evangelists,
Pastors and Teachers belong only to the Church for the edifying of the Church;
yet he says not, this ought not to be exercised for the preparing men for that
other Ministry of the Saints, as the Temple stones squared before brought to
the Temple to be laid on the building.

Quest. If our Ministry established amongst us at present be a Church-Ministry?

Resp. I shall speak this to all that are godly and wise to judge of by what
has been said: I do not deny God has a Church by this Ministry, that now is
in this Kingdom, but is an invisible one only.

Quest. What our Ministry has done then amongst us?

Resp. It has only prepared for a Church.

Object. It may be, some will say, the Ministers now do all these in their
places.

Resp. But by what warrant we do these things, were very good for us all to
consider of.

2. How, or to whom to apply the words of James, I know not, unless in this
kind, that some men, then as we now did undertake the dispensations of diverse
administrations among the Jews, James 3.1. be ye not (...) many teachers,
(consider the Reason rendered that seems to clear it) knowing we shall receive
the greater condemnation, and ye know Timothy a man highly commended for gifts
and grace, yet undertakes it not until he be called thereto by Paul; he bidding
him do the work of an Evangelist, 2 Timothy 4.

Object. But it may be said, Paul executes all these.

Resp. 1. That which the Apostle did by Inardiat call and warrant from Christ
is one thing, we of the contrary are forbidden it.

2. The Apostles were to do all, to teach others to do it when others were fit
to do it, then they put them to do it also.

That Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers are three distinct public offices, and
are executed in every Church, is proved by the Epistles written to the Churches.

1. Rome, a Church constituted according to the Gospel frame, Chap. 12. ver. 6,
7, 8. Having then gifts differing according to the grace that is given to us;
where prophecy, let us prophecy, or Ministry, let us wait on Ministry, or
exhortation, let us wait on exortation, or he that teaches, on teaching: It is
without all question, the Apostle speaks here of public Ministry, and of
private Christian duty, and only of Church-Ministry.

1. They are joined subordinately to prophecy a public duty.

2. They are commanded to wait on them.

3. Each man is enjoined a waiting on his own work only, and not others.

4. The Apostle says they are differing gifts.

5. Ruling, a public office follows them, and then private duties after that
again; and whereas the Apostle says, they are diverse gifts: I cannot but
think, that if ever there were a Church rightly constituted in this Kingdom,
greater gifts would be bestowed on men, then any have been since the Apostles
time, whence once they came to be employed to that end which the Lord ordained
them.

I grant indeed, that in the Scripture all the Church-Ministry is set out often
times by one word in Scripture, as (...) and the like, but the Scriptures are
not then wanting to prove the truth of this doctrine, for these are in the
plural number, signifying, God had respect to more then one Teacher in a Church.

2. That the three are but one complete Ministry.

3. That they all belong but to one Church.

4. That what the one does the other does, but in a different kind.

5. That superiority, was not to be sought for of them, nor to be amongst them.

Object. This is a way never to be errected; in these times we have not one
Minister for a Church, you say we should have three.

Resp. What may the world have said, when there were but twelve Apostles only,
yet they set up many Churches in a little time against many enemies, and in the
time of Heathenish darkness.

1. God will not be wanting to his own Ordinance.

2. Five men, in this way, may do more in a City, then fifteen now do.

3. Though this was scarce done in the Country villages, in the Apostles time,
yet now in many places, the Ministry having prevailed so with the people, they
are far more meet hereto now, then otherwise they could have been, or the
villagers were, in Paul's time; for the Apostles at first erected the Churches
in the chief Cities of the world, as appears by their Epistles, being places in
which the greatest confluence of people were; and hence the villagers were
called Pagani quasi ex pagis, the villages of many Continents being a long time
ignorant of the Gospel after it had been preached in the Cities thereof.

The third Church I shall now speak of is that of Corinth.

1 Cor. 12.4. The Apostle tells us that there are diversities of gifts; and
after tells what these gifts are, in these words, To one is given the word of
knowledge, to another the word of wisdom.

2. Lest any should appropriate these to one individual person, ordinarily he
distinguished them, and says, to one, and to another, and therefore not to the
same man.

3. Lest any should think these were meant of gifts given to private men only,
he says, That these diverse gifts have also diverse administrations added to
them, which is properly applied to places of office and trust.

4. In Verse. 7. the Apostle says, The Spirits manifestation is given to every
man to profit withal: showing that the Church by the help of the Spirit, had
the benefit of all these gifts in the several Administrations of the Gospel.

4. To these several Churches add the course of our Savior, who gave us an
example herein, Mark 6.7. When he did send forth his Disciples he sends them
forth two by two to preach the Gospel, which proves the work of the Ministry
not to be a single work.

Object, Christ sends forth two only, you say there should be three.

Resp. 1. None was fit to officiate the Evangelists while that Christ was
alive, and this he was (...), I remember not that ever the Apostles, during
Christ's being on earth, were ever said to Evangelize: Christ was that to them
they are now to us; they teaching what they received from him, as we teach what
we received from them.

2. The time of gathering Churches was not yet come; they, during Christ's being
on earth, said only as John, The Kingdom of Heaven is at hand.

3. They were but to prepare for the Kingdom, until, upon the Lords Ascension,
they should have sent down on them the Spirit of grace to enable them thereunto.

4. The complete Church was not to be, until the world, or time to come, so
called among the Jews, which was that time which was to succeed Moses Ministry,
and therefore as the Church was not to be complete so was not the Ministry.

And here I cannot pass by the common acceptance of the word Church; it was
gross when only taken for the places of Assembly, and indeed it is but little
better as taken for our mixed assemblies. Again others they prove their Church
to be a true Church from the right Administration of Sacraments, and true
preaching of the Word: but where, or in what society, this is done, as yet I am
altogether ignorant of.

But that the Scripture holds out is clear.

1. Three distinct persons to be teachers in the Church.

2. Distinguished by distinct Appellations, as Evangelist, Pastors and Teacher.

3. Qualified with differing gifts.

4. Have several Administrations committed to them to exercise their gifts in.

5. That all these are but one complete Ministry, belonging to one Church only.

Question is, How all these can be exercised in one Church?

Resol. The Church of the Jews, being the Mother Church, and above all most
excellently constituted; I shall propose that for a further example to clear up
this mystery, to help us whereunto, it is necessary we make use of those words
in Galat. 2.9. where it is agreed amongst the Apostles that James, Cephas and
John be Ministers to the Jews, set out by the Circumcision, and Paul and
Baritabas for the Gentiles.

James is here placed for Evangelist, Peter for Pastor, John for the Teacher of
the Jews Church.

James, who was the Evangelist, whose work it was to lay the foundation of the
Church among the Jews, as Paul among the Gentiles, writes his Epistles to such
as were without the Church to prepare for it in the first place.

1. As appears by the word Synagogue, where the Gospel was not preached but as
to a mixed multitude, as appears in all the teachings of the Apostles mentioned
in the Acts, and is spoken of in Scripture in opposition to Church-society,
Acts 13.43. (...) the Congregation be dismissed.

2. As by the nature of the doctrine appears, he calls upon some to wash their
hands and cleanse their hearts, to put away outward and inward corruptions with
which they were defiled: In the 5. Chap. he threats woe against them for
oppressing the laborers: James 5.19, 20. he writes to unconverted persons.

3. As appears by the dedicating his Epistie, he writes it not to any by the
name of a Church, as men called out of the world, in communion with Christ; not
to such as were Saints, nor to such as were called of God, nor to those that
were apprehended to pertain to Gods Election; only he adds the word Brother to
it, a word of common relation, when used singly, and without other expression
thereto.

Que. Why James had not rather written as an Evangelist to his own Charge?

1. This was part of his own Ministry, he being to begin the work among the
Jews as well as to perfect; and to this I conceive our Savior may allude, when
he says, That he that would be greatest should be their servant; which in this
work he did, as it were, serve in his Ministry to the Doctor and Pastor, though
after they did again, as it were, serve to him in the other part of his
Ministry.

The second part of Ministry, that attended next the preparatory Ministry, was
that of the Doctor; for though the Apostle, in descending, begins with the
Apostles, the most eminent in the Church, and ends with the lowest; so, if we
ascend, we must begin at the lowest and end in the chiefest, and this was John's
work.

1. How clearly this appears in the Epistle from the difference of the matter
and manner of teaching of that that is written in the Epistle of James, That the
one was of the Church Ministry, the other to mixed Societies; this of John's is
full of sweetness, the other of terror; to one he tells them You are beloved,
you are sanctified, you are called the sons of God, you have passed from death
to life: James calls those he writes unto Adulterers and Adulteresses, and tells
them their tongues are set on fire of hell.

2. How clearly it appears that John was Doctor or Teacher of the babes in the
Church of Jerusalem, is evident;

1. In that he directs it to the little children, 1 John 2.1. and these he
names before either fathers or young men.

2. He calls them My little children; he does not appropriate any such interest
to himself, either in the young men, when he speaks of them, or the fathers.

3. 1 John 2.18, 19. He comforts the whole Congregation of children against the
apostasy of some, saying, They went out from us; mark the emphasis of the
expression in the Apostles style joining him to the society of the Infants.

4. The whole doctrine is doctrine for babes; speaking of the new birth, of
passing from death to life, of being anointed, and being called the sons of
God; and many other signs only to set forth and to discover the state of
regeneracy from unregeneracy.

The third part of Ministry, or second of the Church-Ministry, and that is the
Pastors office, and this was done by Peter: Now that his Ministry was to the
young men, which John had before mentioned in his Epistle, appears from his
second Epistle, which, it is like, was written to his particular charge in
Jerusalem, he being, as it should seem by the postscript, absent from thence.

2. In the Introduction he calls them Elect, and looks on them as such as had
received like precious faith, which in the other Epistle he writes to the
dispersed only.

3. The doctrine proves it, in that the whole Epistle does concern such only as
are exercised in the understanding of the Scriptures, Chap. 1. he calls on them
to add virtue to virtue; and tells them ver. 11. so an entrance shall be
ministered to them abundantly into the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ; its not to be questioned but they were entered; but the Apostle speaks
of a more further degree obtainable, which they were to strive to enter into in
this life.

2 Pet. 2.20, 21. If, after they have escaped the pollutions of the world, by
the knowledge of our Lord, they are again entangled, the latter end of them is
worse then the beginning: And again, It had been better they had not known the
way of righteousness, then after they have known it to turn away. It is clear
hence, the Apostle here speaks only to such as had their senses exercised in
the knowledge of the Gospel, as in the last words of the Epistle, Grow in grace,
and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior.

3. This agrees to the name given to him that exercises this part of the
Ministry, which is Exhorter, he exhorting to perfection.

The fourth part of Church-Ministry, which is the Evangelists part, that the
Church of the Jews may be a perfect pattern to all others, the supply hereof
was done by the Apostle Paul in his Epistle to the Hebrews.

1. That this was written to the strong Christians, is clear from Heb. 6.1. Not
laying again the beginnings of Christ, repentance from dead works, but let us
go on to perfection.

2. He says of those he wrote to, they might have been teachers of others, who
have now need to be taught again the first principles.

3. Peter, in his second Epistle, Chap. 3. ver. 15. gives it this style, that
it was written according to the wisdom given to beloved Paul: It is very
observable, that it was said to be done according to his wisdom, that is,
according to the excellency and depth of that that was given to him.

Hence, I suppose, may be given the true and only Reason of the Apostle Paul's
not prefixing his name to the Epistle of the Hebrews.

1. Because he was not the Apostle of the Jews, therefore he writes not himself
Apostle, and then because, if he had write himself otherways to the Church, it
had been, as it were, a diminishing his Authority, in which he was not inferior
to any of the Apostles.

2. Hence James writes not himself Apostle in the Epistle written by him,
because written to strangers, and such as were not in the fellowship of Saints.

3. It is clear, the Apostle conceals not his name in the Epistle of the
Hebrews, because of the Jews, being offended at his writing or doctrine for his
sake, as some suppose.

1. Peter, in his Epistle to the Church, shows that Paul had written an Epistle
to them which, could be no other then that we had, unless any other be writ ten
or lost.

2. Peter calls him there, beloved Brother Paul.

3. In the last Chapter of the Hebrews, the Auther says, that if Timothy came
shortly, he would come with him: Now Timothy was Paul's companion, and
fellow-labouror in the Gospel, and he was known to the Church, and acceptable
to them, or he had not said he would come to them.

4. He had been at Jerusalem many times, as appears in the Scriptures, and was
received of the Church, and had the right hand of fellowship from the Apostles
and Elders of the Church given him.

5. An example of this is also to be seen in the Church of Colloss, Chap. 3.10.
Put off the old man, and put on the new man, which is the first work of
Christianity, containing the doctrine of repentance.

2. ver. 12. Put on as the elect of God, bowels of mercies; here is another
putting on for the exercise of Christianity.

3. To all these they were to put on charity, the bond of perfection; And
after, Verse 15. he speak of peace which is the doctrine of the Evangelical
preacher, which holds out a three-sold estate to be aimed at by the Apostle to
be in the Church of Coloss.

First, Hence note that the Apostles never did the work of the Ministry alone
by themselves, Phil. 2.22. Timothy was said to serve with Paul in the Gospel,
as being done conjunctively by them in the same Church, to the same end, and
the same Ministry, and the same times, though in a differing way of
Administration.

Secondly, Hence in no Church, unless on extraordinary occasions, were there
more then three teaching Ministers; a clear evidence that three were a complete
Ministry at the divisions of the Church of Antioch, Acts 15. It is true, there
were many teachers, but they were such as came from Jerusalem to establish the
brethren, who when they saw the Church established left them and departed: And
again, they were not there as Pastors to the Church.

Thirdly, They went no where to the work, but two or three went together, Acts
15.36, 37. Acts 19.22. He sent two of them that ministered to him: Here it may
seem the Apostle had more then two helpers: It is true, he may have three, as
Apostle, to minister to him, his office being to prepare for the Church as well
as to edify those that were in society, which he may for a time commit to some
faithful man.

Fourthly, In all the Epistles the Apostle never writes to any Church in which
he acknowledges not others to have joined with him, in the work of the
Ministry to the constituting of the Church he wrote unto, 1 These. 2.1. Ye know
our: entrance to you, which shows Paul came not alone, when he came to do the
work of the Gospel at Thessalonica: thus 2 Timothy 4.11. Only Luke is with me,
take Mark and bring himwith thee, for he is profitable to me in the Ministry.

First, Paul had not need of Mark to instruct him in any thing concerning the
Ministry, nor was he a lazy Pastor to sit still while Mark preached.

Secondly, He had Luke with him, yet he must have Mark brought also, seeing
there was work for more then two, where Paul was ministering.

Thirdly, He says all were gone from him, which shows that he had helps with
him before, and this was for the dispensations of the Word, and not as any
helps in government of the Church by lay Elders, as we say.

Application: Hence may we not conclude, that there is a threefold
Administration of the Ministry in the Church to be used, which the Apostles
themselves did not exercise alone in the Church without the help of others.

Secondly, If any could do it, or should have done it, the Apostles should.

Thirdly, If they did it not, then we ought not to do it; for who is sufficient
for these things? If the Apostles were not, how shall we think our selves to be?

Fourthly, Hence it is clear, the work of the Ministry is not now rightly done
amongst us, and the greatest Reformation that ever was made in Ecclesiastical
things, is to be made, we being all as yet without Church and Church-Ministry,
and yet also confident of their way and judgment, as that theywil fight to
uphold it, and dye for it; O what comfort will proceed from hence to us! Let us
first know the truth, and then stand and strive together for it.

Quest. Whether these differing Administrations differ not in degrees?

Resp. Yea, more is required in the Ministry of the Apostle and Prophet, then
in the Evangelist, more in the Pastor then in the Teacher; so the Apostle 1
Cor. 12.5. There are differing Administrations.

First, The Administration is according to those to whom it is administered
unto: Now the Doctors administered to babes only, the Evangelists to men, the
Apostles to Evangelists, Christ to the Apostles; thus John writ to his
children, young men and fathers.

Secondly, The Church of God is called the house of God, and a great house in
the Scripture, n which are infants, young men, fathers, and yet all but one
Family, so these divided Congregations make but one Church.

Consider but the Agreement of these:

1. In their number; an Evangelist, Pastor, Teacher, for men, young men and
babes.

2. In the constitution; one Ministry, one Church, all three one, both in the
Ministry, and in those that are to be ministered unto, it is but to perfect the
same man.

3. The Constitutors only are differed in their gifts by a majus and a minus;
so the constituted are the same, only differenced by the degrees of stature and
perfection, that is obtained under the dispensations of the Ministry.

4. The ones Ministry ends in the other, the Doctors in the Pastors, the
Pastors in the Evangelists; to those it is ministered unto; the childhood is
swallowed up in youth, the youth in manhood, as the lesser is swallowed up in
the greater light.

David Evangelically spoke hereof, Psalm. 84.7. They shall go from strength to
strength, until they appear perfect before God in Sion: The Apostle alludes
here to the Gospel state, as in 1 Pet. 1.12. They did minister these things to
us, not to themselves, that are reported to us: they not having the grace we
have in the fellowship of the Gospel under their Mosaical Ministry; the words
in the Original seem more fully and clearly to aim at such a thing, (...),
which, as in the ordinary marginal notes is read, they shall go from company to
company; and so Kerkeras of the word (...), saepissime collective pro cietu
usurpatur; often times the word is used collectively for accompany. Again a
Gospel testimony seems to be of this thing, in 2 Cor. 3.18. We all with open
face, beholding, as in a glass, the glory of the Lord, are changed into the
same image, from glory to glory, as of the Lord the Spirit.

1. Generally, the Apostle shows the work is the Spirits that is here spoken of.

2. The first part of it is an unvailing the face, which must be done and is
done in all, which is the first degree of grace, having in it the discovery of
Jesus Christ.

3. Upon this discovery he is by sanctification of the Spirit said to be
changed in his life and in himself to a glorious estate.

4. This glory has yet another change to glory, that is to a greater measure
of sanctification and grace.

Some understand these words, from glory to glory, to have respect to grace
here and glory hereafter, but the words before make it plain, that here is
understood none else but the work of the Gospel Ministry officiated in the
Church by the appointment of Christ

2. If we look on the words themselves, they prove as much unto us, for this is
to be done by looking on Christ in the word as in a glass, a clear distinction
used by the Apostle to distinguish the estate of Saints here, and that in
heaven hereafter, 1 Cor. 13.12. Now we see darkly through a glass, then face to
face; hear now, and then distinguish the times present and that to come, the
glass and the face distinguish, the manner of the discovery of God here, and
that which is to be hereafter.

The Lord speaks not of the first change, because in that the soul is not come
to be made like to the Lord, nor to have put on his glory; but when he is come
to be made like Christ, and put on his image, then he is said to be carried
from glory to glory, which shows that the work of the Ministry is to be a work
which works these things by degrees in the Saints, and show forth to us the
footsteps of God, having on it the image and superscription of God, commending
to us his wisdom and prudence, who far herein exceeds the principles of humane
policy and wisdom.

To this also sweetly agrees the charge of Christ to Peter, John ult.
15.16.17. in which Christ commands Peter to feed his lambs, his sheep, his
sheep. There are in these words of Christ closely and mysteriously meant three
sorts persons, though but two at first seem to be only named lambs and sheep;
but he manner of feeding them clearly distiugnisheth them.

First, The Lord says (...) feed my lambs.

Secondly, The other two are indeed (...) sheep, which seems to make them the
same, but not without some eminent cause; the Lord has clearly distinguished
them, so as that they may be, and are to be understood of two sorts, and this
distinction is not in themselves, but the feeding them.

First, He gives the younger sheep the name of the elder, and makes them one
with them in that.

Secondly, in their feeding, distinguishing them, signified to Peter, that in
the Ministry there was to be exercised a differing administration, even unto
sheep and sheep, and not to be taught the same doctrines; this appears; to the
first sheep, it is said (...) the word here for feeding, is the same before for
the feeding of the lambs, though they are sheep. Now, of the other sheep, which
were sheep indeed, he says, (...) these are sheep; and fed as sheep; the
others are sheep, and fed as lambs, and may be considered as of a differing
growth, nor lambs, nor sheep, but between both.

Object. Peter grieved, it is said, to hear Christ speak thus three times to
him; he understood no such thing, and therefore sure there is no such thing
intended in the word.

Resp. Many things were hid as yet from the Disciples, and likely this, not any
Churches being as yet gathered, nor had they yet instruction to gather them,
Acts 1.30. Christ was with his Disciples 40 days, instructing them in the
things pertaining to the Kingdom of God, which were especially, doubtless,
concerning the way God would have taken in the Church for the edification of it.

Secondly, Nor were the gifts given thereunto, until after Christ's
Resurrection, as appears by the words of the Apostle mentioned in the
Ephesians, where it is said, Christ ascended, and gave gifts unto men.

Thirdly, This clearly proves the Apostles had a call to officiate this
threefold office in the Church from Christ immediately, and not only Peter, but
all the other Apostles.

Fourthly, That first the Saints are to be sed as lambs, then as younger sheep,
then as elder sheep; a clearer proof, I think, there needs none, to show the
diversity of gifts and administrations in the Church ought thus to these to be
diversely administered.

Thus the Apostle (from 2 Cor. 6.1. where it is written, we then as workers
together with God,) Ministers these conclusions to be deduced thence.

First, That the Ministry of the Gospel is not one single work, or the work of
one only man, as now amongst us it is done.

Secondly, That in the primitive times, there were in every Church, that was
constituting, two at the least, and in every Church that was constituted three.

These Ministers do not teach distinctively, but are co ordinate in the work
one to the other, and are one for the other, and cannot be one without the
other in a constituted Church.

Tourthly, This Ministry in the Church is but one Ministry, 1 Cor. 3.8. He that
plants, and he that waters, are one; that is, they are one Ministry, not one
man, which was spoken of the Doctors and the Pastors work in the Ministry.

Fifthly, In no constituted Church we read of more then three in fellowship for
the ordinary work of the Ministry, 2 Cor. 1.15. Paul, Sylvanus and Timothy are
these before spoken of, and said to work together.

Sixthly, Hence it was, I suppose, the Apostle condemns the practice of the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1.12. for saying, one was of Paul, another of Apollo,
another of Cephas; These did, or others by these intended, did work together in
the Ministry. Now it seems the infants boasted themselves against those that
were not in Church-Society; the young men boasted themselves against the
children, etc. Now compare the 4 Chap. ver. 6.7. the Scriptures clear it, they
were puffed up one against another; and after says to them, who made thee to
differ? which shows, that there was not only a difference in the Teacher, but
also there was a difference made amongst those that were taught in themselves
within, in their condition without.

We of the Ministry now that bear the whole burden of the work alone, without
question do that that never Apostle did, or ought not to be done in the Church:
It may be said to us, we take too much upon us, what wisdom were it if we did
submit to the Gospel rule, and think of a means how in Cities to join together
to the Work of the Lord, as it is commanded.

Object. The 1 Cor. 4.15, Though you have ten thousand instructors, yet have ye
not many fathers. Hence it should seem the Church of Corinth had many more
Teachers then three in it.

Secondly, Compare 1 Cor. 3.12. with it, there are several builders brought in
by the Apostles, as some building gold, silver, and precious stones, others are
said to build of hay, wood, and stubble.

Resp. 1. That the true Church then must have successively more true Teachers
then three, because the Apostle could not stay long with them, but having
planted the Church here, goes to some other place, but before his departure he
ordained others to supply his place in his absence; and of those that went with
him to the work elsewhere, and in this kind they must have many Teachers, Acts
14.23. When they had oadained Elders in every City, they departed, which shows,
they departed not until they had ordained Elders.

Secondly, The words are a Hyperbolical expression, and prove nothing in
particular; only they had many, and that if they had never so many more, he was
he that begat them in Christ.

Now for the second part of the objection taken out of 1 Cor 3.12.

1 Note here are two sorts of teachers distingished, the one true, the other
false, the faithful teachers are three, the corrupt are the same number.

The true are distingisht in the difference of the materials set down; all are
precious, but not all alike precious; it clearly shows there was to be a
difference in the ministry, a difference in gifts, and difference in doctrine;
the one inricheth men with silver of the Gospel, the other with the gold of
the Gospel, the other with the precious stones of it.

2 Now the false ministry counterfeits the true.

1 They will have three in their work of their ministry, as the Apostle had in
his:

2 They differ in the doctrine also among themselves, as hay, wood and stubble
do.

3 Becaue the Apostle was he which laid the foundation of the Church of
Corinth, and was the glory of the ministry; they will also themselves take on
themselves to be Apostles also.

4 The Apostles build immediately on Christ, we on the Apostles, they build on
Christ immediately not on the Apostles; they of say Paul his speech is
contemtible 1 Cor. 3.10. And here I suppose was the first corruption or
counterfeiting of the Church and Church despensations, which was not like that
mad of Rome, in which not only things were counterfeied to pull down, and
other set up in their steed, that for twelve hundred yeeers it has not been
known what the Church was governed by nor how.

1 This confirms there were many teachers in Corinth indeed.

2 But no more but three only in Church fellowship together.

3 In that there were but three in the corrupt society no more nor less then
in the true Church, it much consirmes the truth of the doctrine that in the
true Church, which these did counterfeit, there were onley threefold
administrations in the Church then in use at Coriuth.

4 It shows that the corrupt teachers did retain the same form of government
in their Ghurch, as the Apostles had set up in the true: for otherwise they head
not been able to draw men away so easily from the truth.

5 Paul says, that he transferred the things he spoke of the false teachers to
the true, who were only three, Paul, Apollo, Cephas: it is like if they
differed in the outward form, the Apostle would have reproved it in them. 1
Cor. 1.12. compared with 1 Cor. 4.6. 2 Cor. 11.13. he calls them false
Apostles. Secondly, he calls them deceitful workers: now in that what they did
against the truth was done by deceit, it shows that they did as much as
possibly they could to counterfeit the truth, and the true way practiced by the
Apostles in the Churches.

A shadow of these things are also set out on the Mosaicall service: Aaron and
his sons signify Christ and his two disciples, or rather in the Priests and
the Levites which were added to them as helpers in the same work. First, the
one was to help kill, the other to help wash, and then then the Priest offered
up the sacrifice; so the Apostle desired to offer up the -- a chaste Virgin to
Jesus Christ.

Ezekiel. 47.3. the Prophet prophetically shows what was to be after the
Gospell-institution took place, signified in the waters run out of the temple.

1 The Lord measures the waters, and brings him through thrice, which signified
as he was a Prophet, and did signify public ministry to be under the
Gospel, that there was, to be a threefold administration of the Gospel: the
first is but to his Anckles, the beginnings of Christ; the next higher, the
next higher then that, and these are not in the same place, but one thousand
reeds from the other; which shows that this ministry is not to be executed by
one, nor preached at once to the same people.

2 This directs us in ordaining ministers; they are to proceed by degrees,
first preaching without for trial, then admitted within to the Doctors
ministry, then the Pastors, and lastly the Evangelists; this way Timotheus
proceeded in the ministry.

Now that we may more clearly see that it was the Teachers Office to teach
Babes, Romans 2.20. and art, says the Apostle there (...), a Teacher of Babes,
which shows, who are Teachers, Congregation, and what is to be taught in that
Congregation, they being to be taught according to their capacity.

1. The Scriptures clearly show what the Babe is, and who, and when to be
admitted to Church-societie.

2. The Scriptures show abundantly concerning that estate, and God has therein
provided abundantly for it.

1. The Scriptures show who the Babe is, John 3.3.

2. Of what he is to be borne and where, verse 5.

3. The necessity of this new Birth, without which a man cannot enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven.

4. What is required of Babes, 1 Peter 2.1. to lay aside malice, hypocrisy,
evil-speaking, and to desire the sincere milk of the Word that we may grow
thereby.

5. The Doctrine is set down, Hebr. 6.1. to be laying the foundation of
repentance from dead Works faith toward God, the Resurrection of the dead.

Shall God have Angels, heavenly Spirits, to attend the least of Saints, and
shall he not allow many a Church-minister by whom her portion in the Word may
be divided rightly to them?

2. The Evangelists Office is distinguished from the Teachers by the Apostle in
the 1 Cor. 1.17. where the Apostle tells us that he was not sent (...), to
baptize, which was the work and the Doctrine of the Doctor, as must clearly
appears, Hebr. 6.1. but (...), which was to do the work of an Evangelist, as
cocerning a man called to a distinct work from that of Baptizing, which if so
spoken of in the person of the Apostle, who had an extraordinary calling, to
all; How then of those that have but an ordinary call, to one? And the words of
Christ in Matthew to his Apostles, show that Baptizing is joined to the first
work of the Ministry following the making of Disciples, now if those God
has joined together are not to be separated by man, How shall we dare to
feparate them, and as it were bestow them on others.

2. The Apostle implies, in saying he was not sent to baptize, that some are
sent to baptize, and that men not sent are not to baptize, it being a part of
the public ministerial Duty.

3. He shows that they differ in the call to what they are to do, and that
they have not baptized in commission equally, and so consequently for other of
the Gospel Administrations, that that is proper to one is not to be done by
another.

4. He was sent to euangelize, which shows that the Apostle did prove his
calling to do what he did do.

Object. What is that to us? the Apostle was an extraordinary person.

Resp. We are to consider him as in his ordinary and extra-ordinary capacity;
in his extraordinary as a Prophet, and then he says: that on him lies the
care of all the Churches; but if in his ordinary capacity, then we consider
him as one using the Evangelists Office, to perform the which he took helpers
with him, for the work of the Ministry joining himself to them,

It is granted indeed that he did take on him the whole work of the Ministry.

1. Being extraordinarily called.

2. Extraordinarily gifted.

3. Others being at that time not to be had to supply it for him; but in this
case he is no president for us to do the like, especially seeing he was sent to
do the Evangelists Office, though in the absence of other, or in the first
laying the foundation of the Church, he may begin the works, as in Corinth, he
is sent to euangelize.

1. It being next in place to his extraordinary Offices.

2. As being more fully instructed to that Duty than any other.

3. The Evangelists place requiring greatest abilities in him that does
administer the same both in regard of the Ministry it self and those to whom
it is to be ministered unto.

3. The Evangelists Office is of the most sublime administration, it dispencing
the highest things of God in its Ministry, that are communicated to the
Saints by ordinary means in this World.

1. Christ teaching Nicodemus the Doctrine of Repentance and New Birth, calls
these things (...), earthly things, things taught to men of the World.

2. He calls the more spiritual part of Doctrine to be ministered (...), heavenly
things, which shows that there is a wide difference between the subject,
matter, or way of dispensing the Doctrines pertaining to these two
Administrations.

3. To this agrees that of the Apostle, Romans 10.15. How beautiful are the
feet of those that euangelize good things and that euangelize peace, which
shows that the subject, matter of the Evangelists Ministry, to those under
his charge, is generally contained under those two Heads of peace and good
things, holding out the glory follows the revelation of Jesus Christ to the
Soul, and the good that belongs unto him; yea, this requires the greatest
experience, the most heavenly sense, and nearest enjoyment of communion with
God; for he must come first to know these things in himself before he can
teach them to others.

4. The Evangelists Office is the chief in the work of the Ministry, as
appears in that after Timothy had made use of the public Ministry, Paul
in his 2 Timothy 4 5, bids Timothy do the work of an Evangelist, and make full
proof in the Ministry.

1. Signifying that in other administrations, there is not a perfect work of
the Ministry.

2. That the Evangelists Office is that that perfects the Ministry, both in
respect of the Minister and People.

Not that the Evangelists Office is a full Ministry without the other, or the
other without that, but that the Ministry ends in this and tends thereunto.

Again a Congregation under the Ministry of a Doctor called out from the
World and united to Christ, having the administration of Gods Ordinance among
them, are a Church, though in its infacie and childhood lying under
imperfections.

1. As not perfected in themselves.

2. Not in their Ministry.

3. Not in their society, the strong being commanded to bear with the weak.

5. The Apostle proves 6. Hebr. 1. both that the Evangelists Office is the
highest and a distinct Office from the Doctors; where he shows, that under
that administration the Doctrine of Repentance fromidead Works, is to be left,
and of the beginnings of Christ under this administration; and in saying Let us
go to perfection, he shows that under the former administration these
Doctrines which he was now about to teach them, had not been taught.

1. If their Congregations were according to the Papal congregational ways,
and not divided, there were no leaving the first Principles, because daily some
being to be added to the Church, and in infancy, would then be left to perish
for the lack of means, of means of grace.

And here fitly may I speak a word of this lack of this dividing the Ministry
to the work, How it is savoured by godly men in the Land.

1. A man preaching that Doctrine is preparatory to fit for the Church, is not
so acceptable to men called and sanctified, and this is cried out as a Legal
Ministry; others they preach the Gospel grace to men in a natural estate, and
do apply it in a general way; they are hardened by it, and these are called
Antinomists, though not approving the error; but how to remedy this that is not
apprehended, nor indeed can it be but by dividing People, and then dividing the
Ministry, before which it is nothing but confusion in all that we do.

Object. It is very strange that men in the Euangelical Ministry must not
preach the Doctrine of repentance, but leave that. Must not repentance be
preached to the higher and the lower congregations?

Resp. The Apostles Answer is not suitable for any estate, but that of
euangelized Christians, which live under the highest dispensations of Gospel
mercy, as appears verse 4. chap. 6. where he shows what these are that are
thus to be lead to perfection, they must be men illightened, men that have
tasted the heavenly gift, and are made partakers of the holy Ghost and have
tasted the good Word of God, and the powers of the World to come; if these fall
away there is no preaching repentance to them, it is impossible to renew them
again thereby, and on this ground the Doctrine preached in the first
congregation is left in the last.

1. Hence see what degrees of common gifts is required of men before they be
admitted to be of this fellowship.

2. See to what perfection the Saints were brought who lived under this
government; it is not the governments that are erected by men can have that in
it, nor that from God which he communicates to his own Church.

3. It shows that there may be hypocrites, men that fall away in the chiefest
Societies.

4. See the ground of this Gospel dispensation.

1. It is to carry men onwards to perfection, What a lack do all the Saints of
God lack of this help from the Ministry here and in all the World?

2. How are the Saints gifts left to wither in them by reason that means which
should stir up their affections, and enlarge their hearts, is wanting to them;
they are only shut up to lesser and lower things, below that measure of
manifestation the Spirit has given to them to apprehend God in and by; as the
Jews were under Pedagogues, so these are straightened in the present Ministry.

3. Those that fail under this dispensation cannot be restored, and therefore
no need of the Doctrine of Repentance, they being as the Salt which has lost
its savor and cannot be seasoned.

I know this Doctrine will be mightily distasted of us Ministers, we having
desires naturally in us, as we have heard to be in the Apostles, every one
desiring to be chief, and few content to deny himself, so as to serve with
others in the Gospel.

1. Brethren, let us consider, Do we Christ's work or do we our own? if
Christ's, let us take a care and do it as he will have it done.

2. As it is said of Christ when he washed his Disciples feet, he said, he did
this for example; so Christ's Ministry, being at first but preparatory,
shows us that he was content to do any thing for his Church, and shows how we
should follow his example herein, and he presses Peter, yet he loved him, he
should feed his lambs as well as his sheep.

3 Consider our parts, they are not sufficient for the dispencing of the lowest
administration; for says the Apostle, we are the savor of life to life in
those that are saved, and of death to death in those that perish, and who is
sufficient for these things? here he says, we joining as fellow workers; in
their other part of work with himself and for all or any, he implies none is
worthy, no not man nor Angel; the lowest place will take up all thy gifts,
knowledge wisdom, love, mercy, heavenly mindedness, and find thy heart much
wanting to God in the execution of it both to thy self, this ministry, God and
his flock.

4 We had rather teach in a confused way to the multitude, in an unprofitable
way, then in Gods way to do good among them; our very natural opposition to
this work and way proves the divinenesse and excellency of it.

5 God says, 1 Timothy 3.14. if a man have obtained the office of a Deacon, he
has obtained a good degree in the house of God, and David he esteems highly of
a door keepers place in the house of God.

6 If God has gifted us for the more eminent places, he will in his time call
us thereunto; before which it is not good for us to seek any or exercise any.

1 By this means men in the ministry, that is without the Church ministry, will
come to have their gifts known and parts exercised.

2 The Church ministry to be sound and incorrupt, that the Chuch come not to be
corrup by false teachers.

3 Men's gifts for teaching highly improved.

4 Men's abilities to the uttermost manifested.

Apl. Let us take heed of that of James 4.5. the spirit that dwells in us
lusts to envy; mark your own spirit how it is with God when God requires
thee to part with any thing for the Gospel, how apt it is to swell against it,
and argue against it, deny it, condemn it, and also speak hardly of it; as
you know the Scribes and Pharisees did to Paul concerning the way of God. I can
the more freely speak of this, because mine own heart abundanly abounds with
these daily in me, being indeed a fruit more bitter then death.

2 Cor. 1.5. We have made our selves your servants for Christ's sake; remember
this, and we cannot refuse any place we shall be employed in the Church at all,
unless publik; we say so Complementally only to God and the Church.

Again has not Christ said, he that will be greatest let him be your servant?
yea and did not the Evangelist in the Church, lay the foundation of the Church,
in which he served to the rest of the ministry, preparing for them in this, as
they prepared for him after: the greatest office is for service in the Church,
in which to place any is the work of the Lord Jesus Christ, who tries the
spirits, and knows the gifts of all better then they that have them, and from
whom they have them.

The last office we are to speak of, is the Pastors distinguished in the
Gospel.

1 His ministry is contained in those parts of Scripture in which the Saints
are stirred up to duty.

2 In those that invite to perfection.

3 In those that exercise the Saints Judgment in the knowledge of the word and
the work of righteousness; hence is he called the exhorter, and doctrine
exhortation: Noting unto us what Judgment, wisdom, experience and
Understanding is required to be in the man that officiats this part of ministry
in the Church.

Heb. 5.12. All their Doctrine is spoken of together distinctly; 1 milk for
babes. 2. Ver. 13. the skilfulnesse in the word of Righteousness was for the
young man, in which he differs from the babe; and the Apostle shows it, that he
that uses milk is unskilful in the word of Righteousness; this is for the
Pastor. 3. Ver. 14. the Apostle says, concerning the grown Christians, he
should have strong meat.

Now I come to show how all these Ministers are but one complete ministry in
the Church of God.

1 They preach the same Gospel, doing the same work.

2 Its the same faith in the believer, as a child, and a strong-man, only it
is to be perfected in him by degrees, according to that way God has ordained
in his word therefore.

3 They are all for the same end, which is for edification of the whole body.

4 They respect the same persons only, consisting in government, Liberty,
peace, and purity. Heb. 13.17. submit your selves to your leaders; that is
meant of the ministering officers mentioned before; and not governing Elders, as
appears from verse. 7. which words will hardly be applied rightly to the
Episcopal, Presbyterian, or Independent way, they having but one Minister in a
Church as they call it; here are many, and in their relation so they are said
to be joined to the flock, as no Pastor can be more nearly joined.

1 They watch for their souls.

2 They must give an account for them.

Now I suppose under these two words are comprehended the whole of the
ministerial duty, together with that in ver. 7. where it is said that they have
spoken to them the word of God: here is both ministry and government, but no
government is here allowed to any other, but those that ministed, nor
subjection required of the Church to any other; which proves that the Church
ministry, was not a single ministry, nor were they governed by an external
power.

Now where any of these are wanting in a Church.

1 There is a deficiency in officers.

2 Thence a deficiency in the office.

3 Thence a deficiency in the end for which this office was ordained in the
Church, which is the edifying of the Church, and constituting of it.

4 A deficiency in the Church it self.

1 Where the Church ministry and ordinances are exercised, there cannot
properly be said to be a Church visible; nor can I conceive but that as yet the
Church remains hid in respect of outward government and order to the world;
and has not put on its ornaments as yet.

2 I commend it to all my brethren the Ministers to judge whether our ministry,
as now exercised, be any other then that which is without the Church, and
prepares only for a Church ministry.

3 I do not say but a Church constitution may be without any other ministry
then the teachers; until that men are become capable of the other parts of
ministry, when that is come to pass, the Church ought not to continue in its
deficiency; but by all men to have Gods ordinances exalted among them.

Again not only people, Ministers, and ordinary ministry, in some kind
resembling the Trinity, and are three, and yet but one; but we shall see the
whole Scripture is divided among five; two for the giving, the other ordinary
three, for the exercise of the word. 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.

1 All Scripture is given by divine inspiration; here the Apostles, and
Prophets work is set forth.

2 The use of it is for the Doctrine, which is the Doctors part for a babe in
Christ.

3 For instruction to righteousness, this is proper to the ministry of the
Pastor, in the Congregation of the youngmen.

4 That the man of God may be perfect, this is proper to the Evangelists office.

1 That the whole Scriptures are employed by this ministry.

2 That by these they are rightly exercised for Edification.

3 That there is nothing wanting in the Scripture to exercise them, is a most
strong and undeniable ground, that this is the Scripture ministry; and that
ministry that has more officers or less then this, is not the true Scripture,
or Church ministry; and this will more clearly appear if you consider,

1 That this ministry is bounded and directed in the Gospel, which other
ministry is not, by and in the word which proves it Evangelicall.

1 The Doctrine for the teacher, which is the ground work.

2 Exhortation to the Pastor which succeeds rightly Dotrine.

3. Evangelicall peace to the evangelized christian man.

2. Their ministry is bounded in respect of the people to whom it is to be
ministered.

1. Doctrine is not for all, but babes only 2. Exhortation for young men
only. And 3. Evangelicall ministry for the perfect men only.

3. Their ministry is bounded for the place of it, which is the Church of God;
these offices are not to be at all exercised but in the Church: The Apostle in
1 Cor. 4.1. says, Let a man account of us as of the ministers of Christ, and
stewards of the mysteryes of God. Note here the combination employed in the word
us, us ministers, us stewards.

1. Showing, in the ministry is to be more then one.

2. That as they are ministers, so they are stewards also.

3. Of what they are ministers they are also stewards: the doctor is minister
and steward of the doctrinall part of Scriture, the Evangelist of the
evangelicall part.

From hence I desire it may be conscienciously considered of; 1. Whether any
Sacraments be to be administered until we are in a Church Way.

2. To whose ministry and stewardship they do belong.

3. Whether the doctrine of baptism belonging to the doctor, baptism belong
not to him alone, of which he is both minister and steward.

4. The ministry of the sacrament of the Lords Supper, to whose stewardship
that pertains in the Church.

5. Whether any of these may be exercised ordinarily in the Church by any but
those to whom they are of God recommended in particular.

6. Whether the Apostle did not aim at this, in saying, the Lord has not sent
me to baptize, (...), but to evangelize. The disjunctive seems to divide the
work to proper persons according to their call.

This seems to be the way of God in the Churches, because the most perfect way,
and most like God.

1. It has unity answering in some kind to Episcopacy.

2. Joint fellowship in Government by Eldership with Presbytery.

3. Community in Privileges with Independency. Without all question these all
have somewhat of the way of God in it; Gods way takes up all.

1. Episcopacy could not have deceived the world else in its first institution,
succeeding the primitive times, and the hiding of the Church.

2. Presbytery could not plead so strongly for a combination in Government from
the word else.

3. Independency could not else refuse an external power of command to reside
in any out of the Church.

1 For Episcopacy; How it is likely it arose out of the Churches first
institution.

1. The ministry of the Gospel being one, and ending in the evangelist, the
other two ministers ministering to him, whether hence Episcopacy took not an
occasion to visit over mascores of divided congregations.

2. Whether the Lord writing to the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, wrote not
to the Evangelist as first in order, and hence that Bishops pleaded their
ground for Government.

3. Whether that corrupt and exorbitant way of lording it over many
congregations may not be a light to us? that succeeding the Primitive times, to
show us that in the true Church there was a conjunction of ministers in the
Church-ministry: more then one served together therein.

4. This appears in that Episcopacy did counterfeit the way of the true
churches, but in a corrupted way, grossly.

1. Setting up their Bishoprics in Cities, as Paul the churches, which I
suppose is necessary to be done now.

2. In these places are a combination of ministers; but far more then they
find in the text, and for a quite contrary end.

3. Whether in union of churches, the mother church represent not the
Evangelists meeting; the chapels the meeting places of the Pastor and Teacher;
and then that the Sacrament of the Lords Supper was to be administered only in
the mother church. Whether this has not in it a discovery of the evangelicall
practice, I leave to all the Saints to judge.

I shall grant to Bishops;

1. That there are by the Gospel government more then one assembly or
congregation do belong unto one complete church.

2. One was to be the mother church or chief assembly, in which some things
were to be done that were not to be done in the other meeting-places.

3. That the members of the other two congregations were to come there and do
them.

4. That the Evangelist had a priority in the church before all other officers,
as Pastors, Teachers, Elders, Deacons.

5. That cities were the usual places in which the church-ministry and
ordinances usually were erected.

For the ground of Prebytery's rise and growth:
1. It is clear, the ministry is in the Gospel one only ministry.

2. All had their institution from Jesus Christ.

3. Government is common to the whole ministry and elders in the Scriptures.

4. All are comprehended under the same names in the Scriptures.

5. All are to teach the same Gospel.

6. God has in Scripture condemned lordlike authority in any, and that the
greatest was to be minister to the rest: by which and many other things,
whether or no that the ministers came not to see the unjust domineering power
of Episcopacy, and how that the Scriptures held out no such authority to be
left of Christ in the church.

1. Whether this occasioned not the ministers to break off the yoke of that
bondage, and every one dividedly in his own place, without reference to other,
as condemning episcopal Jurisdiction for tyrannical, and therefore saw a
necessity of breaking off from that union that should not be. And now I suppose
they break also from that union which should be.

2. They finding the many inconveniences by standing singly without advice and
mutual help, together with the Scriptures which speak of the Presbyters as of
many persons, they were necessitated to join in a way of Community for
Government again.

3. Now from the joining together of Ministers and Elders in the Primitive
Church of one Church only, I suppose arose the Classical or National
combination of Ministers in the Presbytery.

4. All these have somewhat of truth in them; which, when God shall reveal it
fully, will help to set up the Church; which, until then, will but keep it down.

I agree with Presbytery,
1. That in things which generally concern the Church, nothing ought to be done
without consultation first had with the Ministry and the Presbytery of the
Church.

2. That there were Meetings of the Presbytery for the debate of doubtful
things.

3. That several Ministers are joined together for this work.

4. That one Minister ought not to Lord it over another in the Church, they
being coordinate in the Ministry.

5. That every Minister in the Church is (...), a Bishop over his flock, and
nothing to be done therein without his being first acquainted with it by the
other Ministers of the same consociation.

6. That helps in Government are to be used in the Church, as that of ruling
Elders, Deacons, Widows.

7. That the ruling Elders are to be chosen by the Church, and to be joined to
the ministering Elders, for the removing of scandals and scandalous persons out
of the Church; the Church being not possibly all on every occasion of meeting
to be present, nor in many things are they able to determine, and therefore
appoint chosen men hereunto, to do for them so as if done by themselves.

And here I cannot but observe how all Ways deduce the strength of their way
from the Way of God; and in what it fails of that, it lies naked to be wounded
by the adversaries.

Episcopacie pleaded unity of Ministry: but taking the whole Authority to it
self, from those who were to be joined with it, proved its subversion. It
pleaded community of Churches: but when from three to three hundred, and from
these, to those which he was to have no relation to, did show it to be an
Antichristian power.

2. Presbytery pleads a community or combination in the Church of Ministry,
and so shakes Independency, which has not any combination in Government of
Ministry.

3. Independency again shakes Presbytery in its combination, it being a
combination of men that are not set over the flock, nor feed it, and yet
exercise authority over them.

4. Hence see the Way of God is that which holds up and casts down the ways of
Worship or Government in the Church.

Applic. 1. Of what strength will the Way of God be when it is in perfection
revealed unto us, without mixture of humane inventions, to cast down all other
Ways of Worship?

Illustrat. As Christ coming into the Temple whipped out of the Temple the buyers
and sellers, and none durst to stand against him; so will Truth be in power
when its clearly revealed; men will not be able so to dispute against it as now
they do; there will not be that ground for Reason to object against it; the
Word agrees with it, it will condemn every tongue shall speak against it.

For Independency,
I agree with it, that Corinth, Jerusalem and Ephesus is said to be but one
Church, though it consisted of three several congregations.

2. That this Church was ruled by Officers of its own, and not by any other
Officers of another Church; but that all Officers and Offices ought to be
complete in her, by which all things ought to be done by her alone.

3. I agree with it, that people ought to be congregated in a Church Fellowship
from the world.

Applic. is, That I verily suppose that Independency comes nearest the mind of
Christ of any. Yet lest I should be thought to be engaged to them more then
others, I shall next show in what I disagree.

1 She has not her full ministry.

2 Not the right use of her ministry.

3 Not the right way of making her members.

4 Not the right way to increase the gifts of God in her members, as ordained
of the Lord in the word.

5 Not the consultations ought to be had and held with the other Ministers, to
be had in, and to be of its own consociation; of whom it may be said, as
Solomon said of others, that a threefold is not easily broken.

In the government of the Church, clearly appears according to the wisdom of
God, that all Government is comprehended in it. Monarchy, in that there was one
chief Pastor. Aristocracy, in the consociation of Ministers and Elders.
Democracy, in that many things which concerned the whole Church, were to be
done by, and with consent of the Church.

1 Bishops, they with the help of Elders, they together oppress the people,
depriving them of all power.

2 The Bishops they grew too great for the Elders, and oppressed them.

3 The Pope he grew too great for the Bishops: now it was all their work, to
adulterate the way of Christ in the Churches, only to feed their own
greatness, and further their own vile ends. But the grand corruption of all
was in that resemblance of Monarchy set up in the Church against Christ,
against his Law, to the casting down of Christ and his worship.

Now, in the revolution of the Churches estate, it comes again by degrees to
its restoration.

1 The Bishops they cast off the Popes yoke.

2 By the same argument Bishops cast off the Popes yoke, the Presbytery cast
off the Bishops.

3 The people with a ministry, join together against Presbytery for
Independency.

4 In the end, when God shall restore the Church to its former estate, all
these several ways of government shall be reestated in the Church again,
without clashing one with another, which now, as divided, are in some kind
used as it were to the destruction one of another, yea of all; we are willing
to have one alone without the other, and so strive to destroy the way God has
constituted in his Church, making one form to serve all, when all are to be
exercised jointly in the house of God for the more excellent, perfect, and
exact government of it, which by no means can be done by any of those powers
alone dividedly: which what we do in seeking one, or setting up one above
another, or against another, to the destruction one of other, is not easily
apprehended; especially if we consider, 1. That the priority of the Evangelist
was but in one Church-ministry, not such as to have it to be as the Papacy or
Episcopacy, over whole countries and counties. 2. That the consociation or
combination of the Presbytery was not over a Nation to exalt it over all, but
of the ministry joined in fellowship for the edification of one only Church,
consisting of only an Evangelist, Pastor and Teacher ordinarily. 3. The
Independency was not such as was of one only minister and members joined to
him, with helping governors, in whom only all Church Power should reside; but
was to be joined in a combination with other ministers of the same church, who
were to have their helpers added to them: for as Solomon says, In the
multitude of Counselors there is safety.

1. The priority of the Evangelist is kept in its limits by the joining of the
Pastor and Teacher with him.

2. The power of the Presbytery is moderated by the Elders, exceeding them in
number.

3. The whole Presbytery, if they are wanting to the church in things wherein
peace and purity do consist, are to be subject to the church, to give an
account thereof unto it. Acts 11.2, 3. Peter having been with Cornelius a
Gentile, was questioned by some of those that were of the Church at Jerusalem,
for going in to the uncircumcised, and eating with them: to which charge of the
members Peter gives an account, rehearsing the matter from the beginning, and
expounding it unto them. 1 Cor. 5.7. the Apostle writes to the whole church to
purge out the old leaven. Now this was the work of all, not of some, as appears
by the means ordained hereunto, which was excommunication, not practiced then
as done by Episcopacy, in which the whole power of the Church was clean taken
from them.

4. Without all question, the saying of Christ, Go and tell the Church, (who
had no respect to the then Jewish Church, but the constitution of Christian
Church to be) does imply, that in the Church did reside authority and power to
punish offenders with ecclesiastical censures, and without them it cannot be
done; which was the gracious provision God was pleased to make for the Church
and the members thereof. That this was not meant the Jewish Church, appears,
because there was but little good to be done by telling them of any thing, who
had cast out all of their congregations that did confess the name of Jesus
Christ.

2 He begins in the beginning of the chapter with the Kingdom of heaven, which
was the Gospel-government, Matthew. 19.1. and was the cause of what sayings
ensued concerning dealing with an offending brother.

3. Christ, to clear up his meaning in these words to his disciples
understandings, fetches another parable taken from the likeness of the
Kingdom of heaven, which was the estate of the Church to be under
Gospel-government, ver. 23.

Object. Christ meant here the Church of the Jews: there was no other, nor
could the Disciples understand of what he spoke, if not of the Jews Church.

Respon. They then understood nothing whatever he taught, for he only taught
the mystery of the Kingdom.

Obj. How should they understand it?

Reso. The holy Spirit tells us, that it was given to them to know the mysteryes
of the kingdom; so that the mysteries and hidden things of the Gospel and
Government were in some measure revealed to them, though not as after the
descending of the holy Spirit on them.

And here it will not be amiss to speak a word more of this Scripture; which
is, that Christ did herein at least confirm the dependency of Church upon
Church now, from the then dependency which was in the then Jewish
administrations to which Christ alludes.

1. The ministry of Christ was evangelicall. Mark 1.14, Christ is said to
preach the Gospel of the kingdom.

2 This being part of his ministry, proves that Christ had respect herein to
the Gospel administration.

3 Christ intended this only without mixture or relation to the other, Matthew.
9.16. No man puts a piece of new cloth to an old garment. Mark it well,
there is not a piece to be put to it, for that which is to fill it up, will
make the ren the worse: see then what it is to patch old with new, or new with
old; it is clear Christ used it not in his ministry.

Obj. Matthew. 13.52. Every wise Scribe brings forth of his treasury new things
and old, that is, Law and Gospel.

Resp. It is true; but then he distinguishes them, in that they come to be
clearly discerned, as in the Parables of the tares and fish follow to be spoken
of.

The last general that we now come to speak of for further discovery of the
exercise of these several administrations in the church, may be (for that it
is employed in the Scripture) of church-meetings, though one entire church, yet
usually not to be assembled in one place.

1 Cor. 14.23. If therefore the whole Church meet together in one place. The
conditional expression shows, they usually met not in one place: it would
have been confused for all the several Ministers to have taught their several
doctrines at the same time in the same place; the Apostle does adjudge it so,
saying, One had a doctrine, another a Psalm, which he says ought not to be:
And this was in their general meetings.

2. Their meeting together (...), was for those things which were generally of
common concernment to all the members, 1 Cor. 11.20. When ye meet together in
the fame place, is this to eat the Lords Supper?

Note, the doctrine which they were to be taught differing, and the Ministers
they were to meet in several places, for to avoid confusion, and be a help to
edification: But in the administration of the Sacraments, in which every child
had his interest, as well as the man Christian, in this all were to meet
together, feasting on him as in a feast upon a Sacrifice.

This Scripture 1 Cor. 14.23. of the gathering of the whole church together, I
suppose to be occasioned for the trial of the members gifts, to see whether
those under the teachers administration were fitted for to partake with the
Pastors charge, and those under the Pastor to be admitted to society with the
Evangelists congregation.

1. Hence in this meeting the Apostle says, All may prophecy, ver. 24 and 31.

2. This prophecy was to be according to the measure of faith, either as a
child, or a man; according to the several degrees of knowledge he had in him
of the Gospel, and of God, so was he to propesie in this meeting.

3. Nor do I think that this was ordinary with them to prophecy, but on trial
of members: In this kind 1 Cor. 12.29. Are all prophets? Are all teachers?
which shows the office of teaching in ordinary meetings was proper work of some
particular persons. When none but the Pastor or Teacher did teach only, the
rest were only to sit still and judge.

1. Some there are that take these words [all] all may prophecy, collectively
for all the Prophets or Teachers, which cannot be; because the Apostle says,
Two or three may speak, the rest judge: now sure the Church had not so many
faithful teachers pertaining to their church.

2 Others understand it of some of their choyest Christians only. 1 They cannot
agree with the word all; for if some only, then not all. 2 The holy Ghost
says, they may prophecy according to the proportion of faith; which shows
that it did belong to those of the Children congregation, as well as those of
the men; and whereunto should this serve if not for trial of gifts, and the
bringing of the Christian from company to company for his furtherance in
knowledge and grace?

3 By this trial the Church came to know the proof of men, who among them were
fitted to send forth for the propagation of the Gospel in other places.

4 It is employed, that the admitting of members to be the first society, (and
then doubtless it was so in the other also) it was a public work of the
Church, in which great care is to be had; that neglected, proved the ill
calamities and trouble of the Church; and so again for the casting them forth.

2 Gal. 4. The Apostles reproves the underhand dealings there used; which was
as it is to be thought a practice of the officers in the Church, who brought in
false brethren privily without public trial, and not at the Churches public
meetings against the course of the Church: Jude says the like, That false
brethren are crept in unawares, Jude 4.

Obj. How could the Church meet in one place?

Res. 1 They had exceeding large rooms in Jerusalem, as appears in the
multitude met in one place, Act. 21. in which three thousand were converted at
one sermon.

2 The word implies they did do it.

3 They being to do it, not to hear, but to receive the Sacrament and the
like, that may be done successively, it may easily be granted.

4 It may be the Church increasing, they may increase the room.

5 As the Atheists of old questioned the Scriptures by questioning the
possiblity of Noah's ark, carrying the creatures in it, and the provision for
them: So now men question the Scriptures, by questioning how these could come
to meet all in one place, being so great a multitude as the Scripture affirms
them to be.

In the Applycation, I came to show that there is no Church, nor Church way
that is according to God, but this of Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastor,
and teacher.

1 These must be to the constitution of a true Church, or it cannot be a true
Church.

2 In the lack of one of these, there can be no complete and perfect
Church-administration exercised.

3 These in combination only, need no other to be joined to them for the
ordering of Church affairs, as appears, Christ having given the ministry
above said. Ephesians. 4.12, he tells us they are for the perfecting of the Saints,
the work of the ministry, and the edifying of the body.

1 It is for the perfecting of the saints.

1 Show, The Saints are not to be perfected by any one of they must have all to
perfect them; which shows how it it should be the desire of the Christians to
see this way of God set up among them, as the true and only means of their
perfection.

2 If these serve for the perfecting of the Saints, what need we any more, yea
who shall add more?

3 There is all that power and authority given to these that Christ has given
to his Church, for the Saints to have exercised in the Church among them.

1 For removing scandalous things and persons.

2 For advice and counsel.

3 For exhortation, reproof and.

2 It is for the work of the ministry.

1 These all only can do but the work of the ministry that is to be done in the
Church: I speak not here of that part of ministry exercised to those without
the Church.

2 Without all these (as I have formerly showed, they are and ought to be in
the Church) the work of the ministry cannot be done according to Gospel rules.

3 There is no other work to be done by the ministry, either in teaching or
ruling, then what is to be done by these only.

4 The Church is not, nor cannot be sufficiently provided for without all
these, but it must be imperfect, and must be straightned in the work of the
ministry; which is the only work we ought to strive to have wrought amongst
us.

5 Ordination being a Presbyterial or ministerial act, is in every right
constituted Church, virtually as other ordinances of the Church are.

6 Hence the Church has all power in it self that is or can be for its good,
communicated of Christ unto it, and needs not to go out of it self to any other
for help.

1 Conclusion, Hence is this, that there is no other way to be found out more
mighty to convince gainesayers, to order Assem Ites, to build up the Saints,
maintain unity and peace, to restore the humbled, to cast out the profane, or
to do whatsoever else is to be done ministerially in or for the Church, then
what these, and none but these are to do.

2 Nor has God left to his Church any other way or means to do it: and
especial care is to be had what authority is exercised, what way is erected in
the Church of Christ over his people, that it prove not Antichristian, and turn
not unto tyranny over the Saints. God complains, those that ruled over his
people made them to cry; and shows, Gods people can bear no yoke as Christ's
that is gentle, nor no yoke but Christ's: the other yoke is an unequal yoke,
they can never draw easy in it.

3 The third thing this ministry is to do, is to edify the body; more then
these three things remains not to be done by the ministry for the church on
earth.

1 The Apostles and Prophets gave the Scriptures as that by which it may be
edifyed.

2 The Prophets forwarned her of her sad times, and told her again of her glad
times to come.

3 The Doctor he drew the milk out of the word for the children.

4 The Pastor brought forth thence the young man's meat.

5 The Evangelist he furnish from thence the strong man's table with strong meat
fit to feed him.

Now judge and tell me without which of these the church can be, and how
sufficiently God has provided for his church and people in these.

1 Who can preach without the Apostles?

2 Who can comfort without the Prophets?

3 How can the child live without milk?

4 How shall the other christians live without meat?

Obj. This were not provision sufficient against Heresies?

Resp. Let us take heed of questioning the Lords wisdom in the order taken for
the subsistence of the church: as if the Lord knew not there would be heresies,
because he provided not sufficiently against them; or that he knew not best
how, or by whom, or by what means to preserve the church against it.

2 God doubtless will not be wanting to his own Way; and whenever his way
shall be erected amongst us, there will be other manner of gifts communicated
by him to the church, to do this and all other things for its good

3. See how little good Counsels have done in this kind, since that the frame
of Gospel government has been subverted.

4. The Apostle shows ver. 14. that this is the only means to preserve men from
being carried away by every wind of doctrine, or by the cunning craft of men
that lie in wait to deceive.

1. More then this, what is to be done?

2. Shall we now Idolize our own wisdom, or submit to Gods way in this matter?
If we oppose here against God, shall we not kick against the pricks?

1 Timothy 3.15. The Church is called the pillar and ground of truth, as rightly
constituted until the Church was driven away, the enemy could never set up
their heresies so as after.

Conclusion, 1. Let us set up Gods way, and that will pull down heresy,
dissentions will fall quickly and quietly, Gods weapons hereunto are full of
all might, ours full of weakness.

2. No Authority is to be made use of in a right constituted Church, but that
God has errected only.

Illustration: 1. Gal. 1. The Apostle writes to the Churches of Galatia.

1. In Galatia were more Churches then one, and so no national Church.

2. These Churches are written all unto to amend their corruptions they had
within them, each one distinctly without any command of acting one, with, or
over, another, as perfect bodies furnished with complete Authority thereunto,
without any extrinsecal power joined unto it for assistance.

The main ground in Scripture brought to prove the Combination of a Ministry in
Classes, and in provincial and national Assembly, I suppose, is taken from Acts
15.2. where it is said, the Church of Antioch did send to the Apostles and
Elders of the Church of Jerusalem about the question.

Resp. 1. This, in sending to the Apostles, was not to send to Members of
another Church, but of their own Church; the Apostles being Members of all the
Churches in the world.

2. In the Apostles times the word was not written, nor the mind of God fully
known; therefore no doubtful thing was to be resolved, but by their advice, as
the Epistles of Corinth show, in which it appears, the Corinthians had sought
to advice of the Apostles in very many cases.

Object. They had Apostolical Authority before, they need not to send to
Jerusalem, for that Paul himself being with them.

Resp. The Church was not builded on one Apostle, but the Apostles, Ephesians. 2.20.

2. God required that every truth should be confirmed by the Testimony of two
or three; so that to Apostolical Testimony it was necessary there should be two
or three for to confirm it; yea, God says, there are three that do bear
witness in Heaven it self; so that it was in this case for confirmation of the
Church in the truth, that there should be the Testimony of two or three
Apostles to witness to it.

Object. They write to the Apostles; that indeed was no extrinsecal Authority:
but here they write to the Elders also that were at Jerusalem, and this was
extrinsecal.

Resp. The Apostles and Elders were but one and the same men, they were not
several persons; and here, as I suppose, is the great mistake in the
controversy.

1. I have showed before how James, Peter and John were in the ordinary way of
Ministry designed to officiate, as other Ministers in the Church of Jerusalem.

2, Those that held Episcopacy, held James to be Bishop of Jerusalem; those for
Presbytery, that he was President of the Counsel, which was fulfilled in his
Evangelical office, by which he had a kind of priority in the Church.

3. In 2 Pet. 5.1. Peter, who was an Apostle, as James was also (...) not only
an Elder, but an Elder with others in the Church of Jerusalem, which were James
and John.

4. None do speak to the question, but Peter and James, in the Counsel. John,
it is like, was not present; and if others had been required to answer to the
question; it is like they would have been put on to speak to it; if they had
spoken to it, it had been doubtless written of.

5. It being a question of doctrine, it is likely here the Church did not send
to these Elders who were ordained for helps in government only.

6. I suppose none could join with the Apostles that were ordinary men, to say
as the Apostles did, ver. 28. saying, it seemed good to us, and the Holy Ghost.

7. If I should grant that there were other Elders, and not the Apostles, I
suppose we should not have sufficient ground from hence to practice it.

1. These had extraordinary gifts; the Holy Ghost having visibly before
descended on them.

2. That there was some more then ordinary cause in it, appears, because they
pass by other Churches, and send to that, though they were nearer to them, and
that not only because she was the Mother Church.

Quest. Why did they send to the Apostles under both Titles, and not use one of
them only, if there be meant the same persons in this place only?

1 As Elders, they wrote concerning their Members, and their sending forth to
the Churches, in which they had relation to them as Pastors.

2. As Apostles, so they wrote concerning the doctrine; for the Answer is made
from them distinctly, and divided into these two heads.

Acts 15.24. It pleased the Apostles and Elders, with the whole Church, to
write; For as much as we have heard, that certain which went out from us have
troubled you with words, subverting your souls, saying, ye must be circumcised,
and keep the Law, to whom we gave no such Commandment.

1. This was done of them as Elders jointly with the Church, where they
officiated their ministerial calling.

Verse 28. It seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us, to lay no greater
burden on you.

Now this the Apostles did as Apostles, not as Elders; for it was not in the
power of any Church to impose a burden on another Church which Christ had not
imposed. I may, in this kind, speak much more in Answer to this Objection, but
I am diversely at present straightned.

One of the most usual Scriptures brought to confirm mixed Congregations, is
that of the Tares, Mat. 13. then which I think none more fully condemns it.

I shall show you the wrong application of the words, and the right using
together for brevity sake, the Parable and Exposition made by Christ in the
Chapter together.

1. The man is Christ, which sowed the word in his field, that is, (...) the
world.

2. The tares, who are the children of the wicked and ungodly men, they appear
among the good seed, which is the godly.

3. The Ministers ver. 28. would gather forth the wicked from the good, but
Christ says, let them alone, lest, they root up good men with the bad.

4. They must both grow together verse. 30. until the harvest, which is the end
of the world, being the day of judgment; and then God sends forth the Angels,
the reapers to gather them, and burn them.

Others hence say, this was not to continue mixed societies with ungodlymen,
that were openly profane, but that the tares were so like the wheat, as that
the Apostles may be deceived in the likeness of them, and pull up one for
another.

But briefly, to speak to the point, the falacie lies in these words, (...),
these being rightly understood, show the truth, and it is thus.

Christ, he preaching the word to the people of Church-Commuon, calls it the
world, his Ministry works on some that they were born again by the immortal
seed of the word; others, they hearing show their hate against it; the Apostles
see a necessity for the good of the wheat, that the tares be pulled away, which
they desire: but, are forbid, until the accomplishment of this time, which is
the time of continuance of Moses Ministry, in which Christ then was, and
endured until Christ's Resurrection, when the harvest was to begin, ver. 39.
(...) not (...) as we understand it generally; when the Angels, the Ministers
of the Gospel were to be sent out, and when the tares were to be gathered out,
as Mat. 28. the Apostles were sent out by Christ heretofore, Mat. 9.37, 38. The
harvest is great, the laborers are few; Pray the Lord of the harvest, that he
send forth laborers into his harvest: Now whether the harvest in this
acceptance be not to succeed the end of Moses Ministry, in which Believers
were only added to the Church, or such as did outwardly profess the Gospel, and
others excluded, I leave to be judged; and then what is to be gathered out? all
that does offend, Ceremonies, and all things offensive, and then the persons
offending, both persons, and things are to be taken thence; to which if we add
the place to which the corn in harvest is brought; It will yet more plainly
appear, ver. 30. it is to be carried into Christ's barn, which is the Church,
and the estate of grace here: ver. 41. after all things, offenses and offenders
are gathered out, which is not to be until the end of the world, and the
wicked are cast into hell, then the righteous shine in the Kingdom of their
Father: Now this has respect to the state of glory in the Heavens; the Fathers
Kingdom being now under administration then, before they were; this Parable, I
suppose, was chiefly directed to the Jews, the Parable of the fish to the
Gentiles, which is used in the same nature, to prove the same thing, as this,
that is mentioned before.

1. Mat. 13.47. The net is the Gospel, the Sea the Heathen world, in
opposittion to the Jew, set out by the field, and in respect of the
troublesomness of the people under the Gospel Ministry; as it was prophesied by
the Psalmist, Psalm. 2.1. Why do the Gentiles rage?

2. In that it is said, they took of every kind, signified, the many Nations,
tongues and people should be brought in, and converted by the Gospel to God.

3. The Gospel under this Metaphorical expression, a net is said to gatherthem,
to bring men to hear it, to gain on men's affections, and then to draw them,
signifying, the power of the Gospel in the heart of man.

4. The net is full before he draws, which shows; 1. He observes the time in
drawing: 2. He draws not for nothing: 3. He must not neglect to draw: 4. I
suppose the net then full, when there are sufficient for numbe rand fitness, to
enjoy communion withal in public Ordinances.

5. He draws to shore, away from communion with the rest of the ungodly world,
2 Cor. 6.17. Come out from among them, and be ye separate; Now this was that
part of Ministry done without the Church, the second part begins.

1. They sat down, which shows, 1. Their sedulity and care in doing what they
did: 2. That they were to attend on this same: 3. That this work was a
conjunctive work, not of any single person: 4 That they must be drawn out of
the Sea, before any putting them into the vessels.

Now, by putting them that were (...) fair into vessels, may be understood of
the Nations, severally gathered into several Churches; but I rather understand
the Lord here speaking of a particular Church, in which there are to be (...)
vessels, and the fish to be put in its own proper vessel, which is either to
his company of youth, children or men.

2. They sat down, shows, the disposing of the Saints in their several places,
for Communion is a Conjunctive work of the Ministry.

3. The casting out of the bad, is a word used in the Scriptures, usually for
casting out men by Church Censures out of Church Communion.

Obj. That the casting into the Sea, the sitting down, and putting into the
vessels, are not said to be done by any other then the same persons.

Answer, 1. The work is one and the same.

2. As in the former Parable, the son of man did sow the seed, but the Angels
gathered out the tares. So ver. 49. the Angels Ministry is to separate the good
from the bad, they are not said to cast the net into the Sea.

3. This work was to begin (...) at the end of Moses Ministry.

4. This work of Separation among the Gentiles, is to be continued in the
Church, until all offenses and offenders are gathered out of Christ's Kingdom,
which is unto the end of the world.

Verse. 52. of this Chapter, is indeed the key of this Scripture, without which
it cannot be rightly understood, in which it is said, a householder brings
forth of his treasury new things and old.

1. Hence it is clear, Christ mainly intended, in these Parables, the
Gospel-estate.

2. He that would understand them rightly, must apprehend somewhat of that
estate which went before the Gospel.

3. It is employed, that unless all things were understood rightly, both of the
old and new; if but any thing of them all were misunderstood, it would bring a
misunderstanding of all, as experementally the end of the world misunderstood,
begat generally a misunderstanding of the whole Scripture.

Ezekiel's Vision, Chap. 40.41. which is of a new Temple, and seems to allude
unto that which we have formerly written of, which I shall write in a few
words; That the vision is apprehended to set out the Church under the Gospel
estate; and its several conditions unto the end of the world is assented unto
of some.

1. Then, by the wall, in the gate whereof stood the man who had line and the
rod in his hand; I understand the primitive times, in which Christ was, and
wherein the measure was given unto the Apostles to measure the Church by, which
was the Gospel.

2. In the outer Court, I suppose, was intended Luthers time, which had but
little measuring in it, which was further off from the Temple-estate, and next
insued the ending of the Church after the primitive times.

3. He is brought to the inward Court, which I suppose to have reference to the
Reformation made by Calvin, which was farther from the wall, signifying the
primitive times, and nearer to the Temple-state, of which much is spoken in the
Epistle to Philadelphia, Rev. 3.12. which, if it be understood to typifie, with
the 6 other Churches, the estate of the Church to the end of the world, as many
suppose, will then fall out to be accomplished in these times, and that are now
to succeed; and also in Rev. 11.1. and Chap. 15.8. which estate did succeed the
Sardin estate, in which was but a name of life, and is rightly understood by
some to represent Luthers time, as Bernard in his Introduction to the Revel.

1. In the former Courts, were only 30 single Chambers on a row, one by
another; in the Temple-estate there are 3 Chambers one over another, so in
order, and the wideness of the house still upward, from the lower to the
middle, and so to the upper, as having an allusion to the threefold
Congregation belonging to the Church, the last having most enlargements in it.

2. In this estate, before the doors of the Chamber was a separate place, but
none in the Courts.

3. In this estate, Rev. 11.1. the Temple is measured, and the worshippers, but
not in the other.

4. In this estate, the Courts are left out, and not to be measured by command,
which John would have done else, as is to be thought, having been before
measured.

Object. Why may not Episcopacy be looked on as the first Court?

Resp. They were brought off from it by King Henry the eight; but Christ was to
bring these from Court to Court, and not man, as I verily suppose both Calvin
and Luther were, as appeared by the work the Lord wrought by them; the last
great work which the Lord brings the Church to, is the Temple-estate which will
greatly differ from the other estates, in which the world will be more blessed
then ever. For which is reserved the greatest mercy, in which will be amends
made to the Saints for their many miseries, abundantly, through the grace that
is to be revealed of Jesus Christ.

To end al, one word more of places of Assembly spoken in the Scripture.

1. The Synagogue was a place the Apostles often preached in, but never as to the
Church, but disputing or persuading the things of the Kingdom, as having to do
with men, arguing against the way of God there, and not persuaded of it, being
a mixed people.

2. When men were brought to believe the Gospel, then they were separated
thence to some private house, where they had set up the Gospel. Ordinances
among them, Acts 18.4, 7, 8. We read not, that in the Synagogues any public
Church-work was done, as baptizing, administering the Lords Supper, and the like.

3. Because that one house, it is like, could not contain all for number, and
to avoid confusion in the execution of the Ministry in public meetings; it was
necessary, that they should be distributed according to the several
administrations of the Gospel, dispensed among them into several places. Hence
Paul, writing to the whole Church of Rome, writes in particular to the Church
in the house of Priscilla, Romans 16.3.5. here called a Church Synec dochically,
for a part of the Church of Rome, as the Pastors part, or Teachers for the
whole.

4. The place where the whole Church met, as is observed by Master Mead, was
called by the name of Church, figuratively calling so the thing containing for
the people contained in it, 2 Cor. 11.22. Have ye not houses to eat in, or
despise ye the Church of God? where he notes, That the Church here set in
opposition to their houses, is to be taken for a material house separated to
public meetings among them.

Obj. May be made, That there was no particular place for general meetings, or
for receiving Sacraments: The Scripture says, they went from house to house
breaking of bread.

Resp. As Mr. Mead has well observed, that (...) may be understood for (...)
in the house; which some understand to be the house in which the Disciples
were, at the descending of the Holy Ghost.

5. I suppose, that whereas in several places of Scripture, we have mention
made of certain Churches in particular houses; I suppose it serves to
illustrate the truth of the doctrine proposed; and this one thing I dare
affirm, that the way of God, when ever brought out to the world, will be as
strange, though contained in the word, as if it had been never written in it,
as appears in Ezekiel's writing of the Government to be under the Temple-state,
Ezekiel. 43.10, 11. which is yet to be.

Thou son of man, show the house to the house of Israel, that they may be
ashamed of their iniquities, and let them measure the pattern; And if they be
ashamed of all that they have done, show them the form of the house, and the
fashion thereof, the goings out thereof, and the commings in thereof, and all
the forms thereof, and all the Laws thereof, and all the Ordinances thereof
write it in their sight; which shows, that all these things were to be hid
for the sins of the people, and when revealed, it should be as a thing now
written, and new to the world, which the Lord will not reveal until the putting
away of our abominations out of his sight, and have pulled down the posts we
have set up by his posts, and the thresholds placed by his thresholds, which
keeps the Lord and his way from us, and may occasion, being hid, through
dissentions, destruction to us, from which God and his truth can only rescue
and save us, which is to be diligently sought for of al, as that, in which our
lives and peace are bound up in, and of our posterity, by which we shall become
one in God, in Christ, in the Faith, in way and worship of the Lord, and become
all of one mind and one spirit, as becomes the Saints and the Servants of the
Lord Jesus Christ; all which the good Lord, for the glory of his grace, works
in all the Saints, according to his mighty working, which he works in those
that believe to peace and righteousness here, and eternal life hereafter. Amen.

depiction of a man or minister preaching from the pulpit in a church full of
people The Orthodox true Minister,

depiction of a man or minister preaching from the window of a house or inn,
with a sign featuring a bell, to a crowd of people outside, including three in
a tree the Seducer and false Prophet.




