A DEFENSE OF TRUE LIBERTY FROM ANTE-CEDENT AND Extrinsecall Necessity, Being
an answer to a late Book of Mr. Thomas Hobbs of Malmsbury, entitled, A
Treatise of Liberty and Necessity.

Written by the Right Reverend John Bramhall D. D. and Lord Bishop of Derry.

LONDON, Printed for John Crook, and are to be sold at his Shop at the sign of
the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1655.

To the Right Honorable the Marquis of Newcastle, etc.
SIR,
If I pretended to compose a complete treatise upon this subject, I should not
refuse those large recruites of reasons and authorities, which offer themselves
to serve in this cause, for God and man, Religion and Policy, Church and
Commonwealth, against the blasphemous, desperate, and destructive opinion of
fatal destiny. But as mine aim, in the first discourse, was only to press
home those things in writing, which had been agitated between us by word of
mouth, (a course much to be preferred before verbal conferences, as being
freer from passions and tergiversations, less subject to mistakes and
misrelations, wherein paralogismes are more quickly detected, impertinencies
discovered, and confusion avoided.) So my present intention is only to
vindicate that discourse, and together with it, those lights of the Schools,
who were never slighted, but where they were not understood. How far I have
performed it, I leave to the judicious and unpartiall Reader, resting for mine
own part well contented with this, that I have satisfied my self.

Your Lorships most obliged to love and serve you I. D.

TO THE READER. CHristian Reader, this ensuing treatise was neither penned nor
intended for the Press, but privately undertaken, that by the ventilation of
the question, truth might be cleared from mistakes. The same was Mr. Hobbs his
desire at that time, as appears by four passages in his Book, P. 18. 26. 35.
and 80.
wherein he requesteth and beseeches, that it may be kept private. But either
through forgetfulness or change of judgment, he has now caused, or permitted
it to be printed in England, without either adjoining my first discourse, to
which he wrote that answer, or so much as mentioning this Reply, which he has
had in his hands now these eight years. So wide is the date of his letter, in
the year 1652. from the truth, and his manner of dealing with me in this
particular from ingenuity, (if the edition were with his own consent.)
Howsoever here is all that passed between us upon this subject, without any
addition, or the least variation from the original.

Concerning the nameless Author of the preface, who takes upon him to hang out
an Ivy bush before this rare piece of sublimated Stoacisme, to invite
passengers to purchase it. As I know not who he is, so I do not much heed it,
nor regard, either his ignorant censures, or hyperbolicall expressions. The
Church of England is as much above his detraction, as he is beneath this
question. Let him lick up the spittle of Dionysius by himself, as his servile
flatterers did, and protest, that it is more sweet than Nectar; we envy him
not, much good may it do him. His very frontispiece is a sufficient confutation
of his whole preface, wherein he tells the world as falsely and ignorantly, as
confidently, that all controversy, concerning Predestination, Election,
Free Will, Grace, Merits, Reprobation, etc. is fully decided and cleared. Thus
he accustometh his pen to run over, beyond all lilimits of truth and
discretion, to let us see that his knowledge in Theological Controversies is
none at all, and into what miserable times we are fallen, when blind men will
be the only judges of colors. Quid tanto dignum feret hic promissor hiatu?

There is yet one thing more, whereof I desire to advertise the Reader. Whereas
Mr. Hobbs mentions my objections to his Book De Cive; P. 1.
It is true, that ten years since I gave him about 60. exceptions, the one
half of them Political, the other half Theological, to that Book, and every
exception justified by a number of reasons, to which he never yet vouchsafed
any answer. Nor do I now desire it, for since that, he has published his
Leviathan: Monstrum horrendum, inform, ingens, cuilumen ademptum, which
affords much more matter of exception. And I am informed that there are already
two, the one of our own Church, the other a stranger, who have shaken in pieces
the whole Fabric of his City, that was but builded in the air, and resolved
that huge mass of his seeming Leviathan into a new nothing, and that their
labors will speedily be published. But if this information should not prove
true, I will not grudge upon his desire, God willing, to demonstrate, that his
principles are pernicious, both to Piety and Policy, and destructive to all
relations of mankind, between Prince and Subject, Father and Child, Master and
Servant, Husband and Wife; And that they, who maintain them obstinately, are
fitter to live in hollow-trees among wild beasts, than in any Christian or
Political Society, so God bless us.

A VINDICATION OF TRUE LIBERTY FROM Antecedent and Extrinsecal Necessity.
Numb. 1.
J. D. EIther I am free to write this discourse for Liberty against Necessity,
or I am not free. If I have obtained the cause, and ought not to suffer for the
truth. If I be not free, yet I ought not to be blamed, since I do it not out of
any voluntary election, but out of an inevitable necessity.

T. H. RIght Honorable, I had once resolved to answer J. D's. objections to my
Book De Cive in the first place, as that which concerns me most, and afterward
to examine this discourse of Liberty and Necessity, which (because I never had
uttered my opinion of it) concerned me the less. But seeing it was both your
Lordships, and J. D.'s. desire, that I should begin with the latter, I was
contented so to do. And here I present and submit it to your Lordships
judgment.

J. D. THe first day that I did read over T. H. his defense of the necessity of
all things, was April 20. 1646. which proceeded not out of any disrespect to
him; for if all his discourses had been Geometrical demonstrations, able not
only to persuade, but also to compel assent, all had been one to me, first my
journey, and afterward some other trifles (which we call business) having
diverted me until then. And then my occasions permitting me, and an
advertisement from a friend awakening me, I set my self to a serious
examination of it. We commonly see those who delight in Paradoxes, if they have
line enough, confute themselves, and their speculatives, and their practicks
familiarly enterferre one with another. The very first words of T. H. his
defense trip up the heels of his whole cause; I had ones resolved; To resolve
praesupposeth deliberation, but what deliberation can there be of that which is
inevitably determined by causes, without our selves, before we do deliberate?
can a condemned man deliberate whether he should be executed, or not? It is
even to as much purpose, as for a man to consult and ponder with himself
whether he should draw in his Breath, or whether he should increase in stature.
Secondly, to resolve implies a man's dominion over his own actions, and his
actual determination of himself; but he who holds an absolute necessity of all
things, has quitted this dominion over himself, and (which is worse) has
quitted it to the second extrinsecal causes, in which he makes all his actions
to be determined; one may as well call again Yesterday, as resolve, or newly
determine that which is determined to his hand already. I have perused this
treatise, weighed T. H. his answers, considered his reasons, and conclude that
he has missed and misled the question, that the answers are evasions, that his
Arguments are parologisms, that the opinion of absolute and universal
necessity is but a result of some groundless and ill chosen principles, and
that the defect is not in himself, but that his cause will admit no better
defense; and therefore by his favor I am resolved to adhere to my first
opinion, perhaps another man reading this discourse with other eyes, judges it
to be pertinent and well founded; How comes this to pass? the treatise is the
same, the exterior causes are the same, yet the resolution is contrary. Do the
second causes play fast and loose? do they necessitate me to condemn, and
necessitate him to maintain? what is it then? the difference must be in our
selves, either in our intellectuals, because the one sees clearer then the
other, or in our affections, which betray our understandings, and produce an
implicit adhaerence in the one more than in the other. Howsoever it be, the
difference is in our selves. The outward causes alone do not chain me to the
one resolution, nor him to the other resolution. But T. H. may say, that our
several and respective deliberations and affections, are in part the causes of
our contrary resolutions, and do concur with the outward causes, to make up one
total and adaequate cause, to the necessary production of this effect. If it
be so, he has spun a fair thread, to make all this stir for such a necessity as
no man ever denied or doubted of; when all the causes have actually determined
themselves, then the effect is in being; for though there be a priority in
nature between the cause and the effect, yet they are together in time. And the
old rule is, whatsoever is, when it is, is necessarily so as it is. This is no
absolute necessity, but only upon supposition, that a man has determined his
own liberty. When we question whether all occurrences be necessary, we do not
question, whether they be necessary when they are, nor whether they be
necessary in sensu composito, after we have resolved, and finally determined
what to do, but whether they were necessary before they were determined by our
selves, by or in the praecedent causes before our selves, or in the exterior
causes without ourselves. It is not inconsistent with true liberty to determine
it self, but it is inconsistent with true liberty to be determined by another
without it self.

T. H. says further, that upon your Lordships desire and mine, he was
contented to begin with this discourse of liberty and necessity, that is, to
change his former resolution. If the chain of necessity be no stronger, but
that it may be snapped so easily in sunder, if his will was no otherwise
determined from without himself, but only by the signification of your
Lordships desire, and my modest entreaty, then we may safely conclude, that
humane affairs are not always governed by absolute necessity, that a man is
Lord of his own actions, if not in chief, yet in mean, subordinate to the Lord
Paramount of Heaven and Earth, and that all things are not so absolutely
determined in the outward and precedent causes, but that fair entreaties, and
moral persuasions may work upon a good nature so far, as to prevent that which
otherwise had been, and to produce that which otherwise had not been. He that
can reconcile this with an Antecedent Necessity of all things, and a Physical
or natural determination of all causes, shall be great Apollo to me.

Whereas T. H. says that he had never uttered his opinion of this question, I
suppose he intends in writing; my conversation with him has not been frequent,
yet I remember well, that when this question was agitated between us two in
your Lordships Chamber by your command, he did then declare himself in words,
both for the absolute necessity of all events, and for the ground of this
necessity, the Flux or concatenation of the second causes.

Numb. 2.
T. H. ANd first I assure your Lordship, I find in it no new Argument, neither
from Scripture nor from reason, that I have not often heard before, which is as
much as to say, that I am not surprised.

J. D. THough I be so unhappy, that I can present no novelty to T. H. yet I
have this comfort, that if he be not surprised, then in reason I may expect a
more mature answer from him, and where he fails, I may ascribe it to the
weakness of his cause, not to want of preparation. But in this case I like
Epictetus his Counsel well, that the Sheep should not brag how much they have
eaten, or what an excellent pasture they do go in, but show it in their Lamb
and Wool. Apposite answers and down right Arguments advantage a cause. To tell
what we have heard or seen is to no purpose, when a respondent leaves many
things untouched, as if they were too hot for his Fingers, and declines the
weight of other things, and alters the true state of the question, it is a
shrewd sign either that he has not weighed all things maturely, or else that
he maintains a desperate cause.

Numb. 3.
T. H. THe Praeface is an handsome one, but it appears even in that, that he
has mistaken the question; for whereas he says thus, If I be free to write
this discourse, I have obtained the cause, I deny that to be true, for it is not
enough to his freedom of writing, that he had not written it, unless he would
himself; if he will obtein the cause, he must prove that before he writ it, it
was not necessary he should write it afterward. It may be he thinks it all one
to say I was free to write it, and it was not necessary I should write it. But
I think otherwise; for he is free to do a thing, that may do it if he have the
will to do it, and may forbear if he have the will to forbear, And yet if there
be a necessity that he shall have the will to do it, the action is necessarily
to follow. And if there be a necessity, that he shall have the will to forbear,
the forbearing also will be necessary. The question therefore is not, whether a
man be a free agent, that is to say, whether he can write or forbear, speak or
be silent, according to his will, but whether the will to write, and the will
to forbear, come upon him according to his will, or according to any thing else
in his own power. I acknowledge this liberty, that I can do if I will, but to
say I can will if I will, I take it to be an absurd speech. Wherefore I cannot
grant him the cause upon this Preface.

J. D. TAcitus speaks of a close kind of adversaries, which evermore begin with
a man's praise. The Crisis or the Catastrophe of their discourse is when they
come to their, but, As he is a good natured man, but he has a naughty quality;
or he is a wise man, but he has committed one of the greatest follies, So here
the Praeface is an handsome one, but it appears even in this, that he has
mistaken the question. This is to give an Inch, that one may take away an Ell
without suspicion, to praise the handsomness of the Porch, that he may gain
credit to the vilifying of the House. Whether of us has mistaken the question,
I refer to the judicious Reader. Thus much I will maintain, that, that is no
true necessity, which he calls necessity, nor that liberty which he calls
liberty, nor that the question which he makes the question.

First for liberty, that which he calls liberty is no true liberty.

For the clearing whereof it behooveth us to know the difference between these
three, Necessity. Spontaneity, and Liberty.

Necessity and Spontaneity may sometimes meet together, so may spontaneity and
liberty, but real necessity and true liberty can never meet together,
somethings are necessary and not voluntary or spontaneous, somethings are both
necessary and voluntary, somethings are voluntary and not free, somethings are
both voluntary and free; But those things which are truly necessary can never
be free, and those things which are truly free can never be necessary.
Necessity consists in an Antecedent determination to one, Spontaneity consists
in a conformity of the Appetite, either intellectual or sensitive to the
object; True liberty consists in the elective power of the rational will; That
which is determined without my concurrence, may nevertheless agree well enough
with my fancy or desires, and obtein my subsequent consent; But that which is
determined without my concurrence or consent, cannot be the object of mine
election. I may like that which is inevitably imposed upon me by another, but
if it be inevitably imposed upon me by extrinsecall causes, it is both folly
for me to deliberate, and impossible for me to choose, whether I shall undergo
it or not. Reason is the root, the fountain, the original of true liberty,
which judges and represents to the will, whether this or that be convenient,
whether this or that be more convenient. Judge then what a pretty kind of
liberty it is which is maintained by T. H. such a liberty as is in little
Children before they have the use of reason, before they can consult or
deliberate of any thing. Is not this a Childish liberty? and such a liberty as
is in brute Beasts, as Bees and Spiders, which do not learn their faculties as
we do our trades, by experience and consideration; This is a brutish liberty,
such a liberty as a Bird has to fly, when her wings are clipped, or to use
his own comparison, such a liberty as a lame man who has lost the use of his
lims has to walk; Is not this a ridiculous liberty? Lastly (which is worse
then all these) such a liberty as a River has to descend down the Channel;
what will he ascribe liberty to inanimate Creatures also, which have neither
reason, nor spontaneity, nor so much as sensitive appetite? Such is T. H. his
liberty.

His necessity is just such another, a necessity upon supposition, arising from
the concourse of all the causes, including the last dictate of the
understanding in reasonable creatures. The adaequate cause and the effect are
together in time, and when all the concurrent causes are determined, the effect
is determined also, and is become so necessary, that it is actually in being;
But there is a great difference between determining, and being determined; if
all the collateral causes concurring to the production of an effect, were
antecedently determined, what they must of necessity produce, and when they
must produce it, then there is no doubt but the effect is necessary. But if
these causes did operate freely, or contingently, if they might have suspended
or denied their concurrence, or have concurred after another manner, then the
effect was not truly and Antecedently necessary, but either free or contingent.
This will be yet clearer by considering his own instance of casting Ambs-Ace,
though it partake more of contingency then of freedom. Supposing the positure
of the parties hand who did throw the Dice, supposing the figure of the Table
and of the Dice themselves, supposing the measure of force applied, and
supposing all other things which did concur to the production of that cast, to
be the very same they were, there is no doubt but in this case the cast is
necessary. But still this is but a necessity of supposition; for if all these
concurrent causes or some of them were contingent or free, then the cast was
not absolutely necessary. To begin with the Caster, He might have denied his
concurrence and not have cast at all; He might have suspended his concurrence,
and not have cast so soon; He might have doubled or diminished his force in
casting, if it had pleased him; He might have thrown the dice into the other
table. In all these cases what becomes of his ambs-ace? The like uncertainties
offer themselves for the maker of the tables, and for the maker of the dice,
and for the keeper of the tables, and for the kind of wood, and I know not how
many other circumstances. In such a mass of contingencies, it is impossible
that the effect should be antecedently necessary. T. H. appeals to every man's
experience. I am contented. Let every one reflect upon himself, and he shall
find no convincing, much less constreining reason, to necessitate him to any
one of these particular acts more than another, but only his own will or
arbitrary determination. So T. H. his necessity is no absolute, no antecedent,
extrinsecall necessity, but merely a necessity upon supposition.

Thirdly, that which T. H. makes the question, is not the question. The
question is not, says he, Whether a man may write if he will, and forbear if
he will, but whether the will to write or the will to forbear come upon him
according to his will, or according to any thing else in his own power. Here is
a distinction without a difference. If his will do not come upon him according
to his will, then he is not a free, nor yet so much as a voluntary agent, which
is T. H. his liberty. Certainly all the freedom of the agent is from the
freedom of the will. If the will have no power over it self, the agent is no
more free than a staff in a man's hand. Secondly, he makes but an empty show of
a power in the will, either to write or not to write. If it be precisely and
inevitably determined in all occurrences whatsoever, what a man shall will, and
what he shall not will, what he shall write, and what he shall not write, to
what purpose is this power? God and Nature never made any thing in vain, but
vain and frustraneous is that power which never was and never shall be deduced
into Act. Either the agent is determined before he acts, what he shall will,
and what he shall not will, what he shall act, and what he shall not act, and
then he is no more free to act than he is to will. Or else he is not determined,
and then there is no necessity. No effect can exceed the virtue of its cause;
if the action be free to write or to forbear, the power or faculty to will, or
nill, must of necessity be more free. Quod efficit tale illud magis est tale.
If the will be determined, the writing or not writing is likewise determined,
and then he should not say, he may write or he may forbear, but he must write,
or he must forbear. Thirdly, this answer contradicts the sense of all the
world, that the will of man is determined without his will, or without any
thing in his power; Why do we ask men whether they will do such a thing or not?
Why do we represent reasons to them? Why do we pray them? Why do we entreat
them? Why do we blame them if their will come not upon them according to their
will. Will thou be made clean? said our Savior to the Paralitike person, John
5.6. to what purpose if his will was extrinsecally determined? Christ
complains, We have piped unto you, and ye have not danced, Matthew. 11.17. How
could they help it, if their wills were determined without their wills to
forbear? And Matthew. 23.37. I would have gathered your children together as the
Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings, but ye would not. How easily might
they answer according to T. H. his doctrine, Alas blame not us, Our wills are
not in our own power or disposition, if they were, we would thankfully embrace
so great a favor. Most truly said St. Austin, De lib. Au. l. 3. c. 30.
Our will should not be a will at all, if it were not in our power. This is the
belief of all mankind, which we have not learned from our Tutors, but is
imprinted in our hearts by nature; We need not turn over any obscure books to
find out this truth. The Poets chant it in the Theaters, the Shepherds in the
mountains, The Pastors teach it in their Churches, the Doctors in the
Universities. The common people in the marketts, and all mankind in the whole
world do assent unto it, except an handful of men, who have poisoned their
intellectualls with paradoxicall principles. Fourthly, this necessity which T.
H. has devised, which is grounded upon the necessitation of a man's will
without his will, is the worst of all others, and is so far from lessening
those difficulties and absurdities which flow from the fatal destiny of the
Stoics, that it increases them, and renders them unanswerable. No man
blames fire for burning whole Cities, No man taxes poison for destroying men,
but those persons who apply them to such wicked ends. If the will of man be not
in his own disposition, he is no more a free agent than the fire or the poison.
Three things are required to make an act or omission culpable; First, that it
be in our power to perform it, or forbear it, Secondly, that we be obliged to
perform it, or forbear it respectively. Thirdly, that we omit that which we
ought to have done, or do that which we ought to have omitted. No man sins in
doing those things which he could not shun, or forbearing those things which
never were in his power. T. H. may say, that besides the power, men have also
an appetite to evil objects, which renders them culpable. It is true, but if
this appetite be determined by another, not by themselves, Or if they have not
the use of reason to curb or restrain their appetites, they sin no more than a
stone descending downward, according to its natural appetite, or the brute
beasts who commit voluntary errors in following their sensitive appetites, yet
sin not.

The question then is not whether a man be necessitated to will or nill, yet
free to act or forebear. But having the ambiguous acceptions of the word, free,
the question is plainly this, whether all agents, and all events natural,
civil, moral (for we speak not now of the conversion of a sinner, that
concerns not this question,) be predetermined extrinsecally and inevitably
without their own concurrence in the determination; so as all actions and
events which either are or shall be, cannot but be, nor can be otherwise, after
any other manner, or in any other place, time, number, measure, order, nor to
any other end, than they are. And all this in respect of the supreme cause, or
a concourse of extrinsecall causes determining them to one.

So my preface remains yet unanswered. Either I was extrinsecally and
inevitably predetermined to write this discourse, without any concurrence of
mine in the determination, and without any power in me to change or oppose it,
or I was not so predetermined; If I was, then I ought not to be blamed, for no
man is justly blamed for doing that which never was in his power to shun. If I
was not so predetermined, then mine actions and my will to act, are neither
compelled nor necessitated by any extrinsecall causes, but I elect and choose,
either to write or to forbear, according to mine own will, and by mine own
power. And when I have resolved, and elected, it is but a necessity of
supposition, which may and does consist with true liberty, not a real
anteeedent necessity. The two horns of this Dilemma are so strait, that no
mean can be given, nor room to pass between them. And the two consequences are
so evident, that in stead of answering, he is forced to decline them.

Numb. 4.
J. D. AND so to fall in hand with the question, without any further proems or
prefaces. By liberty, I do understand neither a liberty from sin, nor a liberty
from misery, nor a liberty from servitude, nor a liberty from violence, but I
understand a liberty from necessity or rather from necessitation, that is, an
universal immunity from all inevitability and determination to one, whether it
be of the exercise only which the Schools call a liberty of contradiction, and
is found in God, and in the good and bad Angels, that is not a liberty to do
both good and evil, but a liberty to do or not to do this or that good, this
or that evil respectively; or whether it be a liberty of specification and
exercise also, which the Schools call liberty of contrariety, and is found in
men endowed with reason and understanding, that is a liberty to do and not to
do, good and evil, this or that. Thus the coast being cleared, etc.

T. H. IN the next place he makes certain distinctions of liberty, and says,
he means not liberty from sin, nor from servitude, nor from violence, but from
necessity, necessitation, inevitability, and determination to one; It had been
better to define liberty than thus to distinguish, for I understand never the
more what he means by liberty. And though he says, he means liberty from
necessitation, yet I understand not how such a liberty can be, and it is a
taking of the question without proof, for what else is the question between us
but whether such a liberty be possible or not. There are in the same place
other distinctions, as a liberty of exercise only, which he calls a liberty of
contradiction, (namely, of doing not good or evil simply, but of doing this or
that good, or this or that evil respectively.) And a liberty of specification
and exercise also, which he calls a liberty of contrariety, namely, a liberty
not only to do or not do, good or evil, but also to do or not do, this or that
good or evil. And with these distinctions he says, he cleares the coast,
whereas in truth he darkeneth his medning, not only with the Jargon of
exercise only, specification also, contradiction, contrariety, but also with
pretending distinction where none is, for how is it possible for the liberty of
doing or not doing this or that good or evil, to consist (as he says it does
in God and Angels) without a liberty of doing or not doing good or evil.

J. D. IT is a rule in art, that words which are homonymous, of various and
ambiguous significations, ought ever in the first place to be distinguished. No
men delight in confused generalities, but either Sophisters or Bunglers. Vir
dolosus versatur in generalibus, deceitful men do not love to descend to
particulars; and when bad Archers shoot, the safest way is to run to the mark.
Liberty is sometimes opposed to the slavery of sin and vicious habits, as Romans
6.22. Now being made free from sin. Sometimes to misery and oppression, Isay
58.6. To let the oppressed go free. Sometimes to servitude, as Levit. 25.10. In
the year of Jubilee ye shall proclaim liberty throughout the land. Sometimes to
violence, as Psalm. 105.20. The prince of his people let him go free. Yet none
of all these are the liberty now in question, but a liberty from necessity,
that is a determination to one, or rather from necessitation that is a
necessity imposed by another, or an extrinsecall determination. These
distinctions, do virtually imply a description of true liberty, which comes
nearer the essence of it, then T. H. his roving definition as we shall see in
due place. And though he say that he understands never the more what I mean by
liberty, yet it is plain by his own ingenuous confession, both that he does
understand it, and that this is the very question where the water sticks
between us, whether there be such a liberty free from all necessitation and
extrinsecall determination to one. Which being but the stating of the question,
he calls it amiss the taking of the question. It were too much weakness to beg
this question, which is so copious and demonstrable. It is strange to see with
what confidence now adays particular men slight all the Schoolmen, and
Philosophers, and Classick Authors of former ages, as if they were not worthy
to unloose the shoe-strings of some modern Author, or did sit in darkness, and
in the shadow of death, until some third Cato dropped down from heaven, to
whom all men must repair, as to the Altar of Promotheus, to light their
torches. I did never wonder to hear a raw Divine out of the Pulpit declare
against School Divinity to his equally ignorant Auditors; It is but as the Fox
in the Fable, who having lost his own tail by a mischance, would have
persuaded all his fellows to cut off theirs, and throw them away as
unprofitable burdens. But it troubles me to see a Scholar, one who has been
long admitted into the innermost closet of nature, and seen the hidden secrets
of more subtle learning, so far to forget himself, as to style Schoole-learning
no better than a plain Jargon, that is a senseless gibrish, or a fustian
language, like the clattering noise of Sabots, suppose they did sometimes too
much cut truth into shreds, or delight in abstruse expressions, yet certainly,
this distinction of liberty, into liberty of contrariety and liberty of
contradiction, or which is all one, of exercise only, or exercise and
specification jointly, which T. H. rejects with so much scorn, is so true, so
necessary, so generally received, that there is scarce that writer of note,
either Divine or Philosopher, who did ever treat upon this subject, but he
uses it.

Good and evil are contraries, or opposite kinds of things, therefore to be
able to choose both good and evil, is a liberty of contrariety or of
specification; To choose this, and not to choose this, are contradictory, or
which is all one, an exercise or suspension of power; Therefore to be able to
do or forbear to do the same action, to choose or not choose the same object,
without varying of the kind, is a liberty of contradiction, or of exercise
only. Now man is not only able to do or forbear to do good only, or evil
only, but he is able both to do and to forbear to do, both good and evil; so
he has not only a liberty of the action, but also a liberty of contrary
objects; not only a liberty of exercise, but also of specification; not only
a liberty of contradiction, but also of contrariety. On the other side, God and
the good Angels, can do or not do this or that good, but they cannot do and not
do, both good and evil. So they have only a liberty of exerercise or
contradiction, but not a liberty of specification or contrariety. It appears
then plainly, that the liberty of man is more large in the extension of the
object, which is both good and evil, then the liberty of God and the good
Angels, whose object is only good. But withal, the liberty of man comes short
in the intension of the power. Man is not so free in respect of good only, as
God, or the good Angels, because (not to speak of God whose liberty is quite of
another nature) the understandings of the Angels are clearer, their power and
domion over their actions is greater, they have no sensitive appetites to
distract them, no Organs to be disturbed; we see then this distinction is
cleared from all darkness.

And where T. H. demands how it is possible for the liberty of doing, or not
doing this or that good or evil, to consist in God and Angels, without a
liberty of doing or not doing good or evil. The answer is obvious and easy,
referendo singula singulis, rendering every act to its right object
respectively. God and good Angels have a power to do or not to do this or that
good, bad Angels have a power to do or not to do this or that evil, so both
jointly considered, have power respectively to do good or evil. And yet
according to the words of my discourse, God, and good, and bad Angels being
singly considered, have no power to do good or evil, that is, indifferently,
as man has.

Numb. 5.
J. D. THus the coast being cleared, the next thing to be done, is to draw out
our forces against the enemy; And because they are divided into two Squadrons,
the one of Christians, the other of Heathen Philosophers, it will be best to
dispose ours also into two Bodies, the former drawn from Scripture, the latter
from Reason.

T. H. THe next thing he does after the clearing of the coast, is the dividing
of his forces, as he calls them into two Squadrons, one of places of Scripture,
the other of reasons, which Allegory he uses, I suppose because he adresseth
the discourse to your Lordship, who is a Military Man. All that I have to say,
touching this is, that I observe a great part of those his forces, do look and
march another way, and some of them do fight among themselves.

J. D. IF T. H. could divide my forces, and commit them together among
themselves, it were his only way to conquer them. But he will find that those
imaginary contradictions, which he thinks he has espied in my discourse, are
but fancies, And my supposed impertinencies will prove his own real mistakings.

Numb. 6.
J. D. Proofs of liberty out of Scripture.

FIrst, whosoever have power of election have true liberty, for the proper act
of liberty is election. A Spontaneity may consist with determination to one, as
we see in Children, Fools, mad Men, bruit Beasts, whose fancies are determined
to those things which they act spontaneously, as the Bees makes Honey, the
Spiders Webs. But none of these have a liberty of election, which is an act of
judgment and understanding, and cannot possibly consist with a determination
to one. He that is determined by something before himself or without himself,
cannot be said to choose or elect, unless it be as the Junior of the Mess
chooses in Cambridge, whether he will have the least Paul or nothing. And
scarcely so much.

But men have liberty of election. This is plain Numb. 30.14. If a Wife make a
vow its left to her Husbands choice, either to establish it or to make it void.
And Josh. 24.15. Choose you this day whom ye will serve, etc. But I and my
house will serve the Lord. He makes his own choice, and leaves them to the
liberty of of their election. And 2 Samuel 24.12. I offer thee three things,
choose thee which of them I shall do. If one of these three things was
necessarily determined, and the other two impossible, how was it left to him to
choose what should be done? Therefore we have true liberty.

T. H. ANd the first place of Scripture taken from Numb. 30.14. is one of them
that look another way; The words are, If a Wife make a vow, it is left to her
Husbands choice, either to establish it or make it void, for it poooves no more
but that the Husband is a free or voluntary Agent, but not that his choice
therein is not necessitated or not determined, to what he shall choose by
praecedent necessary causes.

J. D.

But Men have liberty of election.

The assumtion or minor proposition is prooved by three places of Scripture,
Numb. 30.14. Josh. 24.15. 2 Samuel 24, 12. I need not insist upon these, because
T. H. acknowledges, that it is clearly prooved that there is election in Man.

But he denies the major Proposition, because (says he) man is necessitated
or determined to what he shall choose by praecedent necessary causes; I take
away this answer three ways.

First, by reason; election is evermore either of things possible, or at least
of things conceived to be possible, That is efficacious election, when a man
hops or thinks of obteining the object. Whatsoever the will chooses, it
chooses under the notion of good, either honest or delightful or profitable,
but there can be no real goodness apprehended in that which is known to be
impossible: It is true, there may be some wandering perdulous wishes of known
impossibilities, as a man also has committed an offense, may wish he had not
committed it, But to choose effiaciously and impossibly, is as impossible as an
impossibility it self. No man can think to obtein that which he knows
impossible to be obtained, But he who knows that all things are antecedently
determined by necessary causes, knows that it is impossible for any thing to be
otherwise then it is; Therefore to ascribe unto him a power of election, to
choose this or that indifferently, is to make the same thing to be determined
to one, and to be not determined to one, which are contradictories. Again,
whosoever has an elective power or a liberty to choose, has also a liberty or
power to refuse, Isa. 7.10. Before the Child shall know to refuse the evil and
choose the good. He who chooses this rather then that, refuses that rather
then this. As Moses choosing to suffer affliction with the people of God, did
thereby refuse the pleasures of sin. Heb. 11.24. But no man has any power to
refuse, that which is necessarily praedetermined to be, unless it be as the Fox
refused the Grapes which were beyond his reach. When one thing of two or three
is absolutely determined, the other are made thereby simply impossible.

Secondly, I prove it by instances, and by that universal notion, which the
world has of election; what is the difference between an elective and
hereditary Kingdom? but that in an elective Kingdom they have power or liberty
to choose this or that Man indifferently, But in an haereditary Kingdom they
have no such power nor liberty. Where the Law makes a certain Heir, there is a
necessitation to one; where the Law does not name a certain Heir, there is no
necessitation to one, and there they have power or liberty to choose. An
haereditary Prince may be as grateful and acceptable to his subjects, and as
willingly received by them (according to that liberty which is opposed to
compulsion or violence) as he who is chosen, yet he is not therefore an
elective Prince. In Germany all the Nobility and Commons may assent to the
choice of the Emperor, or be well pleased with it when it is concluded, yet
none of them elect or choose the Emperor, but only those six Princes who have
a consultative, deliberative, and determinative power in his Election. And if
their votes or suffrages be equally divided, three to three, then the King of
Bohemia has the casting voice. So likewise in Corporations or Commonwealths,
sometimes the people, sometimes the Common Council, have power to name so many
persons for such an office, and the Supreme Magistrate, or Senate, or lesser
Council respectively, to choose one of those. And all this is done with that
caution and secrecy, by billetts or other means, that no man knows which way
any man gave his vote, or with whom to be offended. If it were necessarily and
inevitably predetermined, that this individual person and no other shall and
must be chosen, what needed all this circuit and caution, to do that which is
not possible to be done otherwise, which one may do as well as a thousand, and
for doing of which no rational man can be offended, if the Electors were
necessarily predetermined to elect this man and no other. And though T. H. was
pleased to pass by my University instance, yet I may not, until I see what he
is able to say unto it. The Junior of the Mess in Cambridge divides the meat
into four parts, The Senior chooses first, then the second and third in their
order. The Junior is determined to one, and has no choice left, unless it be
to choose whether he will take that part which the rest have refused, or none
at all. It may be this part is more agreeable to his mind than any of the others
would have been, but for all that he cannot be said to choose it, because he is
determined to this one. Even such a liberty of election is that which is
established by T. H. Or rather much worse in two respects. The Junior has yet
a liberty of contradiction left to choose whether he will take that part or not
take any part, but he who is precisely predetermined to the choice of this
object, has no liberty to refuse it. Secondly, the Junior by dividing
carefully may preserve to himself an equal share, but he who is wholly
determined by extrinsecall causes, is left altogether to the mercy and
disposition of another.

Thirdly, I prove it by the texts alleged, Numb. 30.13. If a wife make a vow,
it is left to her husbands choice, either to establish it or make it void. But
if it be predetermined, that he shall establish it, it is not in his power to
make it void. If it be predetermined, that he shall make it void, it is not in
his power to establish it. And howsoever it be determined, yet being
determined, it is not in his power indifferently, either to establish it, or to
make it void at his pleasure. So Joshua 24.15. Choose you this day whom ye will
serve: But I and my house will serve the Lord. It is too late to choose that
this day, which was determined otherwise yesterday, whom ye will serve, whether
the gods whom your fathers served, or the gods of the Amorites. Where there is
an election of this or that, these gods, or those gods, there must needs be
either an indifferency to both objects, or at least a possibility of either. I
and my house will serve the Lord. If he were extrinsecally predetermined, he
should not say I will serve, but I must serve. And 2 Samuel 24.12. I offer thee
three things, choose thee which of them I shall do. How does God offer three
things to David's choice, if he had predetermined him to one of the three by a
concourse of necessary extrinsecall causes? If a sovereign Prince should
descend so far as to offer a delinquent his choice, whether he would be fined,
or imprisoned, or banished, and had under hand signed the sentence of his
banishment, what were it else but plain drollery, or mockery? This is the
argument which in T. H. his opinion looks another way. If it do, it is as the
Parthians used to fight, flying. His reason follows next to be considered.

Numb. 7.
T. H. FOr if there come into the husbands mind greater good by establishing
than abrogating such a vow, the establishing will follow necessarily. And if
the evil that will follow thereon in the husbands opinion outweigh the good,
the contrary must needs follow. And yet in this following of ones hopes and
fears consists the nature of election. So that a man may both choose this,
and cannot but choose this. And consequently choosing and necessity are joined
together.

J. D. THere is nothing said with more show of reason in this cause by the
patrons of necessity, and adversaries of true liberty than this, That the will
does perpetually and infallibly follow the last dictate of the understanding,
or the last judgment of right reason. And in this, and this only, I confess T.
H. has good seconds. Yet the common and approved opinion is contrary. And
justly: For,

First, this very act of the understanding is an effect of the will, and a
testimony of its power and liberty. It is the will, which affecting some
particular good does, engage and command the understanding to consult and
deliberate what means are convenient for atteining that end. And though the
will it self be blind, yet its object is good in general, which is the end of
all human actions. Therefore it belongs to the will as to the General of an
Army to moove the other powers of the soul to their acts, and among the rest
the understanding also, by applying it and reducing its power into act. So as
whatsoever obligation the understanding does put upon the will, is by the
consent of the will, and derived from the power of the will, which was not
necessitated to moove the understanding to consult. So the will is the Lady and
Mistress of human actions, the understanding is her trusty counselor, which
gives no advise, but when it is required by the will. And if the first
consultation or deliberation be not sufficient, the will may moove a review,
and require the understanding to inform it self better, and take advise of
others, from whence many times the judgment of the understanding does receive
alteration.

Secondly, for the manner how the understanding does determine the will, it is
not naturally but morally. The will is moved by the understanding, not as by
an efficient, having a causall influence into the effect, but only by proposing
and representing the object. And therefore as it were ridiculous to say, that
the object of the sight is the cause of seeing, so it is to say, that the
proposing of the object by the understanding to the will, is the cause of
willing; and therefore the understanding has no place in that concourse of
causes which according to T. H. do necessitate the will.

Thirdly, the judgment of the understanding is not always practice practicum,
nor of such a nature in it self, as to oblige and determine the will to one.
Sometimes the understanding proposes two or three means equally available to
the altering of one and the same end. Sometimes it dictateth, that this or that
particular good is eligible or fit to be chosen, but not that it is necessarily
eligible, or that it must be chosen. It may judge this or that to be a fit
means, but not the only means to atteine the desired end. In these cases no
man can doubt, but that the will may choose, or not choose, this or that
indifferently. Yea, though the understanding shall judge one of these means to
be more expedient than another, yet for as much as in the less expedient there
is found the reason of good, the will in respect of that dominion which it has
over it self, may accept that which the understanding judges to be less
expedient, and refuse that which it judges to be more expedient.

Fourthly, sometimes the will does not will the end so efficaciously, but that
it may be, and often is deterred from the prosecution of it by the difficulty
of the means; and notwithstanding the judgment of the understanding, the will
may still suspend its own act.

Fifthly, supposing but not granting, that the will did necessarily follow the
last dictate of the understanding, yet this prooves no antecedent necessity,
but coexistent with the act, no extrinsecall necessity, the will and
understanding being but two faculties of the same soul, no absolute necessity,
but merely upon supposition. And therefore the same Authors who maintain that
the judgment of the understanding does necessarily determine the will, do yet
much more earnestly oppugn T. H. his absolute necessity of all occurrences.
Suppose the will shall apply the understanding to deliberate and not require a
review. Suppose the dictate of the understanding shall be absolute, not this or
that indifferently, nor this rather than that comparatively, but this
positively, not this freely, but this necessarily. And suppose the will do well
efficaciously, and do not suspend its own act. Then here is a necessity indeed,
but neither absolute, nor extrinsecall, nor antecedent, flowing from a
concourse of causes without our selves, but a necessity upon supposition, which
we do readily grant. So far T. H. is wide from the truth, whilst he
mainteines, either that the apprehension of a greater good does necessitate the
will, or that this is an absolute necessity.

Lastly, whereas he says, that the nature of election does consist in
following our hopes and fears, I cannot but observe that there is not one word
of Art in this whole Treatise, which he uses in the right sense; I hope it
does not proceed out of an affectation of singularity, nor out of a contempt of
former Writers, nor out of a desire to take in sunder the whole frame of
Learning, and new mould it after his own mind. It were to be wished that at
least he would give us a new Dictionary, that we might understand his sense.
But because this is but touched here sparingly and upon the by, I will forbear
it, until I meet with it again in its proper place. And for the present it
shall suffice to say, that hopes and fears are common to brute beasts, but
election is a rational act, and is proper only to man, who is Sanctius his
animal mentisque capacius altae.

T. H. THE second place of Scripture is Josh. 24.15. The third is 2 Samuel 24.12.
whereby it is clearly prooved, that there is election in man, but not prooved
that such election was not necessitated by the hopes, and fears, and
considerations of good and bad to follow, which depend not on the will, nor are
subject to election. And therefore one answer serves all such places, if they
were a thousand.

J. D. THis answer being the very same with the former, word for word, which
has already been sufficiently shaken in pieces, does require no new reply.

Numb. 8.
T. H. SUpposing, it seems, I might answer as I have done, that necessity and
election might stand together, and instance in the actions of Children, fools,
and brute beasts, whose fancies I might say, are necessitated and determined to
one: before these his proofs out of Scripture he desires to prevent that
instance, and therefore says, that the actions of children, fools, madmen and
beasts are indeed determined, but that they proceed not from election, nor from
free, but from spontaneous Agents. As for example, that the Be when it makes
honey does it spontaneously; And when the Spider makes his webb, he does it
spontaneously, and not by election. Though I never meant to ground any answer
upon the experience of what Children, foools, madmen and beasts do, yet that
your Lordship may understand what can be meant by spontaneous, and how it
differs from voluntary, I will answer that distinction and show, that it
fights against its fellow Arguments. Your Lordship is therefore to consider,
that all voluntary actions, where the thing that induces the will is not fear,
are called also spontaneous, and said to be done by a man's own accord. As when
a man gives money voluntarily to another for merchandise, or out of affection,
he is said to do it of his own accord, which in Latin is Sponte, and therefore
the action is spontaneous. Though to give ones money willingly to a thief to
avoid killing, or throw it into the Sea to avoid drowning, where the motive is
fear, be not called spontaneous. But every spontaneous action is not therefore
voluntary, for voluntary presupposes some precedent deliberation, that is to
say, some consideration and meditation of what is likely to follow, both upon
the doing and abstaining from the action deliberated of, whereas many actions
are done of our own accord, and be therefore spontaneous; of which nevertheless
as he thinks we never consulted, nor deliberated of in our selves, as when
making no question, nor any the least doubt in the world, but that the thing we
are about is good, we eat, or walk, or in anger strike or revile, which he
thinks spontaneous, but not voluntary nor elective actions. And with such kind
of actions he says necessitation may stand, but not from such as are
voluntary, and proceed upon election and deliberation. Now if I make it appear
to you, that even these actions which he says proceed from spontaneity, and
which he ascribes only to fools, Children, madmen, and beasts, proceed from
deliberation and election, and that actions inconsiderate, rash and spontaneous
are ordinarily found in those that are by themselves, and many more thought as
wise or wiser than ordinary men are. Then his Argument concludes, that
necessity and election may stand together, which is contrary to that which he
intends by all the rest of his Arguments to prove. And first your Lordships
own experience furnishes you with proof enough, that horses, dogs, and other
brute beasts do demurre oftentimes upon the way they are to take. The horse
retiring from some strange figure he sees, and coming on again to avoid the
spur. And what else does man that deliberateth, but one while proceed toward
action, another while retire from it, as the hope of greater good draws him,
or the fear of greater evil drives him? A Child may be so young as to do all
which it does without all deliberation, but that is but till it chance to be
hurt by doing somewhat, or till it be of age to understand the rod; for the
actions wherein he has once a check, shall be deliberated on the second time.
Fools and madmen manifestly deliberate no less then the wisest men, though they
make not so good a choice, the images of things, being by diseases altered. For
Bees and Spiders, if be had so little to do as to be a spectator of their
actions, he would have confessed not only Election, but also Art, Prudence,
and Policy in them, very near equal to that of mankind. Of Bees, Aristotle
says, their life is civil. He is deceived, if he think any spontaneous action
after once being checked in it, differs from an action voluntary and elective,
for even the setting of a man's foot in the posture of walking, and the action
of ordinary eating, was once deliberated, how and when it should be done; And
though it afterward become easy and habitual, so as to be done without
forethought, yet that does not hinder, but that the act is voluntary, and
proceeds from election. So also are the rashest actions of choleric persons
voluntary and upon deliberation; for who is there but very young Children, that
has not considered, when and how far he ought or safely may, strike or revile,
seeing then he agrees with me that such actions are necessitated, and the fancy
of those that do them is determined to the actions they do, it follows out of
his own doctrine, that the liberty of election does not take away the necessity
of electing, this or that individual thing. And thus one of his Arguments
fights against another.

J. D. WE have partly seen before how T. H. has coined a new kind of liberty,
a new kind of necessity, a new kind of election, and now in this section a new
kind of spontaneity, and a new kind of voluntary actions. Although he say, that
here is nothing new to him, yet I begin to suspect, that either here are many
things new to him, or otherwise his election is not the result of a serious
mature deliberation. The first thing that I offer, is, how often he mistakes my
meaning in this one section; first, I make voluntary and spontaneous actions to
be one and the same, he says I distinguish them, so as spontaneous actions may
be necessary, but voluntary actions cannot. Secondly, I distinguish between
free acts and voluntary acts. The former are always deliberate, the latter may
be indeliberate; all free acts are voluntary, but all voluntary acts are not
free, but he says I confound them and make them the same. Thirdly, he says I
ascribe spontaneity only to Fools, Children, Madmen and Beasts, But I
acknowledge spontaneity has place in rational men, both as it is comprehended
in liberty, and as it is distinguished from liberty.

Yet I have no reason to be offended at it; for he deals no otherwise with me
then he does with himself. Here he tells us, that voluntary, praesupposeth
deliberation. But Numb. 25. he tells us contrary, that whatsoever follows the
last appetite is voluntary, and where there is but one appetite, that is the
last. And that no action of a man can be said to be without deliberation,
though never so sudden. So Numb. 33. he tells us, that by spontaneity is
meant, inconsiderate proceeding, or else nothing is meant by it, yet here he
tells us, that all voluntary actions which proceed not from fear, are
spontaneous, whereof many are deliberate, as that wherein he instanceth
himself, to give money for merchandise. Thirdly, when I said that Children
before they have the use of reason, act spontaneously, as when they suck the
Breast, but do not act freely because they have not judgment to deliberate or
elect, Here T. H. undertakes to prove, that they do deliberate and elect. And
yet presently after confesses again, that a Child may be so young, as to do
what it does without all deliberation.

Besides these mistakes and contradictions he has other errors also in this
section. As this, that no actions proceeding from fear are spontaneous. He who
throws his goods into the Sea, to avoid drowning does it not only
spontaneously but even freely, He that wills the end, wills the means conducing
to that end. It is true that if the action be considered nakedly without all
circumstances, no man willingly or spontaneously casts his goods into the Sea.
But if we take the action as in this particular case invested with all the
circumstances, and in order to the end, that is, the saving of his own life, it
is not only voluntary and spontaneous, but elective and chosen by him, as the
most probable means for his own preservation. As there is an Antecedent and a
subsequent will, so there is an Antecedent and a subsequent spontaneity: His
Grammatical argument, grounded upon the derivation of spontaneous from sponte,
weighs nothing; we have learned in the rudiments of Logic that conjugates are
sometimes in name only, and not indeed. He who casts his goods in the Sea, may
do it of his own accord in order to the end. Secondly, he erres in this also,
that nothing is opposed to spontaneity but only fear. Invincible and
Antecedent ignorance does destroy the nature of spontaneity or voluntariness,
by removing that knowledge which should and would have prohibited the action.
As a man thinking to shoot a wild Beast in a Bush, shoots his friend, which if
he had known, he would not have shot. This man did not kill his friend of his
own accord.

For the clearer understanding of these things, and to know what spontaneity
is, let us consult a while with the Schools about the distinct order of
voluntary or involuntary actions. Some acts proceed wholly from an extrinsecall
cause; as the throwing of a stone upwards, a rape, or the drawing of a
Christian by plain force to the Idols Temple, these are called violent acts.
Secondly, some proceed from an intrinsecall cause, but without any manner of
knowledge of the end, as the falling of a stone downwards, these are called
natural acts. Thirdly, some proceed from an internal principle, with an
imperfect knowledge of the end, where there is an appetite to the object, but
no deliberation nor election, as the acts of Fools, Children, Beasts, and the
inconsiderate acts of men of judgment. These are called voluntary or
spontaneous acts. Fourthly, some proceed from an intrinsecal cause, with a more
perfect knowledge of the end, which are elected upon deliberation. These are
called free acts. So then the formal reason of liberty is election. The
necessary requisite to election is deliberation. Deliberation implies the
actual use of reason. But deliberation and election cannot possibly subsist,
with an extrinsecall praedetermination to one. How should a man deliberate or
choose which way to go, who knows that all ways are shut against him, and made
impossible to him, but only one? This is the genuine sense of these words
voluntary and spontaneous in this question. Though they were taken twenty other
ways vulgarly or metaphorically, as we say spontaneous ulcers, where there is
no appetite at all, yet it were nothing to this controversy, which is not about
Words, but about Things; not what the words Voluntary or Free do or may
signify, but whether all things be extrinsecally praedetermined to one.

These grounds being laid for clearing the true sense of the words, the next
thing to be examined is, that contradiction which he has espied in my
discourse, or how this Argument fights against its fellows. If I (says T. H.)
make it appear, that the spontaneous actions of Fools, Children, Madmen and
Beasts, do proceed from election and deliberation, and that inconsiderate and
indeliberate actions are found in the wisest men, then his argument concludes,
that necessity and election may stand together, which is contrary to his
assertion. If this could be made appear as easily as it is spoken, it would
concern himself much, who when he should prove, that rational men are not
free from necessity, goes about to prove that brute Beasts do deliberate and
elect, that is as much as to say, are free from necessity. But it concerns not
me at all, It is neither my assertion, nor my opinion, that necessity and
election may not meet together in the same subject, violent, natural,
spontaneous, and deliliberate or elective acts may all meet together in the
same subject. But this I say, that necessity and election cannot consist
together in the same act. He who is determined to one, is not free to choose
out of more then one. To begin with his latter supposition, that wise men may
do inconsiderate and indeliberate actions, I do readily admit it. But where did
he learn to infer a general conclusion from particular premises? as thus,
because wise men do some indeliberate acts, therefore no act they do is free or
elective. Secondly, for his former supposition, That fools, children, madmen,
and beasts do deliberate and elect, if he could make it good, it is not I who
contradict my self, nor fight against mine own assertion, but it is he who
endeavors to prove that which I altogether deny. He may well find a
contradiction between him and me, otherwise to what end is this dispute? But he
shall not be able to find a difference between me and my self: But the truth
is, he is not able to prove any such thing; and that brings me to my sixth
Consideration.

That neither Horses, nor Bees, nor Spiders, nor Children, nor Fools, nor
Madmen do deliberate or elect. His first instance is in the Horse or Dog, but
more especially the Horse. He told me, that I divided my argument into
squadrons, to apply my self to your Lordship, being a Military man; And I
apprehend, that for the same reason he gives his first instance of the Horse,
with a submission to your own experience. So far well, but otherwise very
disadvantagiously to his cause. Men use to say of a dull fellow, that he has
no more brains than an horse. And the Prophet David says, Be not like the
Horse and Mule which have no understanding. Psalm. 32.9. How do they deliberate
without understanding? And Psalm. 49.20. he says the same of all brute beasts.
Man being in honor had no understanding, but became like unto the beasts that
perish. The horse demurres upon his way, Why not? Outward objects, or inward
fancies may produce a stay in his course, though he have no judgment, either to
deliberate or elect. He retires from some strange figure which he sees, and
comes on again to avoid the spur. So he may, and yet be far enough from
deliberation. All this proceeds from the sensitive passion of fear, which is a
perturbation arising from the expectation of some imminent evil. But he
urges, what else does man that deliberateth? Yes very much. The horse fears
some outward object, but deliberation is a comparing of several means
conducing to the same end. Fear is commonly of one, deliberation of more than
one; fear is of those things which are not in our power, deliberation of those
things which are in our power; fear arises many times out of natural
antipathies, but in these disconveniences of nature, deliberation has no place
at all. In a word, fear is an enemy to deliberation, and betrayeth the succors
of the Soul. If the horse did deliberate, he should consult with reason,
whether it were more expedient for him to go that way or not; He should
represent to himself, all the dangers both of going, and staying, and compare
the one with the other, and elect that which is less evil; He should consider
whether it were not better to endure a little hazard, than ungratefully and
dishonestly to fail in his duty to his master, who did breed him, and does feed
him. This the horse does not; Neither is it possible for him to do it.
Secondly, for Children, T. H. confesses that they may be so young, that they
do not deliberate at all; Afterward, as they attein to the use of reason by
degrees, so by degrees they become free agents. Then they do deliberate, before
they do not deliberate. The rod may be a means to make them use their reason,
when they have power to exercise it, but the rod cannot produce the power
before they have it. Thirdly, for fools and madmen. It is not to be understood
of such madmen as have their lucida intervalla, who are mad and discreet by
fitts; when they have the use of reason, they are no madmen, but may
deliberate as well as others. Nor yet of such fools as are only comparative
fools, that is, less wise than others. Such may deliberate, though not so
clearly, nor so judiciously as others, but of mere madmen, and mere natural
fools, to say that they, who have not the use of reason, do deliberate or use
reason, implies a contradiction. But his chiefest confidence is in his Bees and
Spiders, of whose actions (he says) if I had been a spectator, I would have
confessed, not only Election, but also Art, Prudence, Policy, very near equal
to that of mankind, whose life, as Aristotle says, is civil. Truly I have
contemplated their actions many times, and have been much taken with their
curious works, yet my thoughts did not reflect so much upon them, as upon their
maker, who is sic magnus in magnis, that he is not, minor in parvis. So great
in great things, that he is not less in small things. Yes, I have seen those
silliest of creatures, and seeing their rare works, I have seen enough to
confute all the bold-faced Atheists of this age, and their hellish blasphemies.
I see them, but I praised the marveillous works of God, and admired that great
and first intellect, who had both adapted their organs, and determined their
fancies to these particular works. I was not so simple to ascribe those
Rarities to their own invention, which I knew to proceed from a mere instinct
of Nature. In all other things they are the dullest of creatures. Naturalists
write of Bees, that their fancy is imperfect, not distinct from their common
sense, spread over their whole body, and only perceiving things present. When
Aristotls calls them Political or Sociable Creatures, he did not intend it
really that they lived a civil life, but according to an Analogy, because they
do such things by instinct, as truly Political Creatures do out of judgment.
Nor when I read in Sr. Ambrose, of their Hexagonies or Sexangular celler, did I
therefore conclude, that they were Mathematicians. Nor when I read in Crespet,
that they invoke God to their aid, when they go out of their Hives, bending
their thighs in form of a cross, and bowing themselves; did I therefore think,
that this was an act of religious piety, or that they were capable of
Theological virtues, whom I see in all other things in which their fancies are
not determined, to be the silliest of creatures, strangers not only to right
reason, but to all resemblances of it.

Seventhly, concerning those actions which are done upon precedent and passed
deliberations; They are not only spontaneous, but free acts. Habits contracted
by use and experience do help the will to act with more facility, and more
determinately, as the hand of the Artificer is helped by his tools. And
precedent deliberations, if they were sad and serious, and prooved by
experience to be profitable, do save the labor of subsequent consultations,
frustra fit per plura, quod fieri potest per pauciora, yet nevertheless the
actions which are done by virtue of these formerly acquired habits are no less
free, then if the deliberation were coexistent with this particular action. He
that has gained an habit and skill to play such a lesson, needs not a new
deliberation how to play every time that he plays it over and over; yet I am
far from giving credit to him in this, that walking or eating universally
considered are free actions, or proceed from true liberty, not so much because
they want a particular deliberation before every individual act, as because
they are animal motions, and need no deliberation of reason, as we see in
brute beasts. And nevertheless the same actions, as they are considered
individually, and invested with their due circumstances, may be and often are
free actions subverted to the liberty of the Agent.

Lastly, whereas T. H. compares the first motions or rash attempts of
choleric persons with such acquired habits, it is a great mistake, Those rash
attempts are voluntary actions, and may be facilitated sometimes by acquired
habits; But yet for as much as actions are often altered and varied by the
circumstances of Time, Place and Person, so as that act which at one time is
morally good, at another time may be morally evil. And for as much as a
general precedent deliberation how to do this kind of action is not sufficient
to make this or that particular action good or expedient, which being in it
self good, yet particular circumstances may render inconvenient or
unprofitable, to some persons, at some times, in some places. Therefore a
precedent general deliberation how to do any act, as for instance, how to
write, is not sufficient to make a particular act, as my writing this
individual reply to be freely done, without a particular and subsequent
deliberation. A man learnes French advisedly, that is a free act: The same man
in his choler and passion reviles his friend in French, without any
deliberation, This is a spontaneous act, but it is not a free act; If he had
taken time to advise, he would not have reviled his friend. Yet as it is not
free, so neither is it so necessary, as the Bees making honey, whose fancy is
not only inclined but determined by nature to that act. So every way he fails.
And his conclusion, that the liberty of Election, does not take away the
necessity of electing this or that individual thing, is no consequent from my
doctrine, but from his own. Neither do my arguments fight one against another,
but his private opinions fight both against me and against an undoubted truth.
A free agent endowed with liberty of election, or with an elective power, may
nevertheless be necessitated in some individual acts, but those acts wherein
he is necessitated, do not flow from his elective power, neither are those acts
which flow from his elective power necessitated.

Numb. 9.
J. D. Because thou have asked this thing, and have not asked for thy self long
life, neither have asked riches for thy self, nor have asked the life of thine
enemies, etc. God gave Solomon his choice. He might have asked riches, but then
he had not asked wisdom, which he did ask. He did ask wisdom, but he might
have asked riches, which yet he did not ask. And Act. 5.4. After it was sold,
was it not in thine own power? It was in his own power to give it, and it was
in his own power to retein it. Yet if he did give it he could not retein it;
And if he did retein it, he could not give it. Therefore we may do, what we do
not. And we do not, what we might do. That is, we have true liberty from
necessity.

T. H. THE second argument from Scripture consists in Histories of men, that
did one thing, when if they would they might have done another. The places are
two, one is in the 1 Kings 3.11. Where the history says, God was pleased that
Solomon, who might, if he would, have asked riches or revenge, did nevertheless
ask wisdom at Gods hands. The other is the words of St. Peter to Ananias, Act.
5.4. After it was sold, was it not in thine own power?

To which the answer is the same, with that I answered to the former places.
That they prove there is election, but do not disproove the necessity which I
maintain of what they so elect.

J. D. WE have had the very same answer twice before. It seems that he is
well pleased with it, or else he would not draw it in again so suddenly by head
and shoulders, to no purpose, if he did not conceive it to be a Panchreston, a
salve for all sores, or Dictamnum, sovereign Dittany, to make all his
adversaries weapons drop out of the wounds of his cause, only by chewing it,
without any application to the sore. I will not wast the time to show any
further, how the members of his distinction do cross one another, and one take
away another. To make every election to be of one thing imposed by necessity,
and of another thing which is absolutely impossible, is to make election to be
no election at all. But I forbear to press that in present. If I may be bold to
use his own phrase; His answer looks quite another way from mine Argument. My
second reason was this, They who may do, and might have done many things which
they leave undone, and who leave undone many things which they might do, are
not necessitated, nor precisely, and antecently determined to do what they do.

But we might do many things which we do not, and we do many things which we
might leave undone, as appears evidently by the texts alleged. Therefore we
are not antecedently and precisely determined, nor necessitated to do all
things which he do. What is here of election in this Argument? To what
proposition, to what term does T. H. apply his answer? He neither affirms,
nor denies, nor distinguishes of any thing contained in my argument. Here I
must be bold to call upon him for a more pertinent answer.

Numb. 10.
J. D. Have thou eaten of the tree whereof I commanded that thou should not
eat? Genesis 3.11. And ver. 13. he says to Eve, Why have thou done this? And to
Cain, Why art thou wroth, and why is thy countenance cast down? And why will ye
die, O house of Israel? Does God command openly not to eat, and yet secretly by
himself or by the second causes necessitate him to eat? Does he reprehend him
for doing that, which he has antecedently determined that he must do? Does he
propose things under impossible conditions? Or were not this plain mockery and
derision? Does a loving Master chide his servant, because he does not come at
his call, and yet knows that the poor servant is chained and fettered, so as
he cannot moove, by the Masters own order, without the servants default or
consent? They who talk here of a twofold will of God, secret and revealed, and
the one opposite to the other, understand not what they say. These two wills
concern several persons. The secret will of God is what he will do himself;
The revealed will of God is what he would have us to do; It may be the secret
will of God to take away the life of the Father, yet it is Gods revealed will
that his Son should wish his life, and pray for his life. Here is no
contradiction where the Agents are distinct. But for the same person to command
one thing, and yet to necessitate him that is commanded to do another thing; To
chide a man for doing that, which he has determined inevitably and
irresistibly that he must do; This were (I am afraid to utter what they are not
afraid to assert) the highest dissimulation. Gods chiding prooves man's liberty.

T. H. TO the third and fifth arguments, I shall make but one answer.

J. D. CErtainly distinct Arguments, as the third and fifth are, the one drawn
from the truth of God, the other drawn from the Justice of God, the one from
his objurgations and reprehensions, the other from his Judgments after life,
did require distinct answers. But the plain truth is, that neither here, nor in
his answer to the fifth Argument, nor in this whole Treatise, is there one word
of solution or satisfaction to this Argument, or to any part of it. All that
looks like an answer is contained, Numb. 12. That which he does, is made just
by his doing, Just I say, in him, not always just in us by the example; for a
man that shall command a thing openly, and plot secretly the hinderance of the
same, if he punish him whom he commanded so, for not doing it, is unjust: I
dare no insist upon it, I hope his meaning is not so bad as the words intimate,
and as I apprehend, That is to impute falsehood to him that is Truth it self,
and to justify feining and dissimulation in God, as he does tyranny, by the
infiniteness of his power, and the absoluteness of his dominion. And therefort
by his leave, I must once again tender him a new summons for a full and clear
Answer to this Argument also. He tells us, that he was not surprised. Whether
he were or not, is more than I know. But this I see plainly, that either he is
not provided, or that his cause admits no choice of answers. The Jews dealt
ingenuously when they met with a difficult knot, which they could not untie, to
put it upon Elias. Elias will answer it when he comes.

Numb. 11.
J. D. Adam before his fall had no true liberty. For he was subjected to the
same decrees, the same praescience, the same constellations, the same causes,
the same objects, the same dictates of the understanding, But, quicquid
ostendes mihi sic incredulus odi, The greatest opposers of our liberty, are as
earnest maintainers of the liberty of Adam. Therefore none of these supposed
impediments take away true liberty.

T. H. THe fourth Argument is to this effect, If the decree of God, or his
foreknowledge, or the influence of the Stars, or the concatenation of causes,
or the physical, or moral efficacy of causes, or the last dictate of the
understanding, or whatsoever it be, do take away true liberty, then Adam before
his fall had no true liberty, Quicquid ostendes mihi sic incredulus odi. That
which I say necessitateth and determinateth every action, that be may no longer
doubt of my meaning, is the sum of all those things, which being now existent,
conduce and concur to the production of that action hereafter, whereof if any
one thing now were wanting, the effect could not be produced. This concourse of
causes, whereof every one is determined to be such, as it is by a like
concourse of former causes, may well be called (in respect they were all set
and ordered by the eternal cause of all things God Almighty) the decree of
God.

But that the foreknowledge of God, should be a cause of any thing, cannot be
truly said, seeing foreknowledge is knowledge, and knowledge depends on the
existence of the things known, and not they on it.

The influence of the Stars is but a small part of the whole cause, consisting
of the concourse of all Agents.

Nor does the concourse of all causes make one simple chain, or concatenation,
but an innumerable number of chains joined together, not in all parts, but in
the first link, God Almighty; and consequently the whole cause of an event,
does not always depend upon one single chain, but on many together.

Natural efficacy of objects does determine voluntary Agents, and necessitates
the will, and consequently the action; but for moral efficacy, I understand
not what he means by it. The last dictate of the judgment concerning the good
or bad that may follow on any action, is not properly the whole cause, but the
last part of it. And yet may be said to produce the effect necessarily, in such
manner as the last feather may be said to break an Horses back, when there were
so many laid on before, as there wanted but that to do it.

Now for his Argument, That if the concourse of all the causes necessitate the
effect, that then it follows, Adam had no true liberty. I deny the consequence,
for I make not only the effect, but also the election of that particular
effect to be necessary, in as much as the will it self, and each propension of
a man during his deliberation is as much necessitated, and depends on a
sufficient cause, as any thing else whatsoever. As for example, it is no more
necessary that fire should burn, then that a man, or other creature, whose
limbs be moved by fancy, should have election, that is, liberty to do what he
has a fancy to, though it be not in his will or power to choose his fancy, or
choose his election or will.

This Doctrine, because he says he hates, I doubt had better been suppressed,
as it should have been, if both your Lordship; and he had not pressed me to an
answer.

J. D. THis Argument was sent forth only as an epsy to make a more full
discovery, what were the true grounds of T. H. his supposed necessity; which
errand being done, and the foundation whereupon he builds being found out,
which is as I called it a concatenation of causes, and as he calls it a
concourse of necessary causes; It would now be a superfluous, and impertinent
work in me to undertake the refutation of all those other opinions, which he
does not undertake to defend. And therefore I shall wave them for the present,
with these short animadversions.

Concerning the eternal decree of God, he confounds the decree it self with
the execution of his decree. And concerning the foreknowledge of God, he
confounds that speculative knowledge, which is called the knowledge of vision,
which does not produce the intellective objects, no more then the sensitive
vision does produce the sensible objects, with that other knowledge of God,
which is called the knowledge of approbation, or a practical knowledge, that
is, knowledge joined with an act of the will, of which Divines do truly say,
that it is the cause of things, as the knowledge of the Artist is the cause of
his work. God made all things by his word, Joh. 1. that is, by his wisdom.
Concerning the influences of the Stars, I wish he had expressed himself more
clearly; For as I do willingly grant, that those Heavenly Bodies do act upon
these sublunary things, not only by their motion and light, but also by an
occult virtue, which we call influence, as we see by manifold experience in the
Loadstone, and Shellfish, etc. So if he intend, that by these influences they
do naturally or physically determine the will, or have any direct dominion over
humane Counsels, either in whole or in part, either more or less, he is in an
error. Concerning the concatenation of causes, whereas he makes not one chain,
but an innumerable number of chains, (I hope he speaks hyperbolically, and does
not intend that they are actually infinite,) the difference is not material
whether one or many, so long as they are all joined together, both in the first
linck, and likewise in the effect. It serves to no end, but to show what a
shadow of liberty T. H. does fancy, or rather what a dream of a shadow. As if
one chain were not sufficient to load poor man, but he must be clogged with
innumerable chains. This is just such another freedom, as the Turkish
Galli-slaves do enjoy. But I admire that T. H. who is so versed in this
question, should here confess, that he understands not the difference between
physical, or natural, and moral efficacy. And much more, that he should
affirm, that outward objects do determine voluntary agents by a natural
efficacy. No object, no second agent, Angel or Devil, can determine the will
of man naturally, but God alone, in respect of his supreme dominion over all
things. Then the will is determined naturally, when God Almighty, besides his
general influence, whereupon all second causes do depend, as well for their
being as for their acting, does moreover at sometimes, when it pleases him in
cases extraordinary, concur by a special influence, and infuse something
into the will, in the nature of an act, or an habit, whereby the will is moved,
and excited, and applied to will or choose this or that. Then the will is
determined morally, when some object is proposed to it with persuasive reasons
and arguments to induce it to will. Where the determination is natural, the
liberty to suspend its act is taken away from the will, but not so where the
determination is moral. In the former case, the will is determined
extrinsecally, in the latter case intrinsecally; The former produces an
absolute necessity, the latter only a necessity of supposition. If the will do
not suspend, but assent, then the act is necessary; but because the will may
suspend and not assent, therefore it is not absolutely necessary. In the former
case the will is moved necessarily and determinately, In the latter freely and
indeterminately. The former excitation is immediate, the latter is mediate
mediante intellectu, and requires the help of the understanding. In a word, so
great a difference there is between natural and moral efficacy, as there is
between his opinion and mine in this question.

There remains only the last dictate of the understanding, which he makes to
be the last cause that concerns to the determination of the will, and to the
necessary production of the act, as the last feather may be said to break an
Horses back, when there were so many laid on before, that there wanted but that
to do it. I have showed Numb. 7. that the last dictate of the understanding, is
not always absolute in it self, nor conclusive to the will, and when it is
conclusive, yet it produces no Antecedent nor Extrinsecall necessity; I shall
only add one thing more in present, That by making the last judgment of
right reason to be of no more weight then a single feather, he wrongs the
understanding as well as he does the will, the endeavors to deprive the will
of its supreme power of application, and to deprive the understanding of its
supreme power of judicature and definition. Neither corporeal agents and
objects, nor yet the sensitive appetite it self, being an inferior faculty,
and affixed to the Organ of the Body, have any direct or immediate dominion or
command over the rational will. It is without the sphere of their activity.
All the access which they have unto the will, is by the means of the
understanding, sometimes clear, and sometimes disturbed, and of reason either
right or misinformed. Without the help of the understanding, all his second
causes were not able of themselves to load the Horses back with so much weight
as the least of all his feathers does amount unto. But we shall meet with his
Horse load of feathers again Number. 23.

These things being thus briefly touched, he proceeds to his answer. My
argument was this, If any of these, or all of these causes formerly recited, do
take away true liberty, (that is, still intended from necessity) then Adam
before his fall had no true liberty.

But Adam before his fall had true liberty.

He mis-recites the argument, and denies the consequence, which is so clearly
proved, that no man living can doubt of it. Because Adam was subjected to all
the same causes as well as we, the same decree, the same praescience, the same
influences, the same concourse of causes, the same efficacy of objects, the
same dictates of reason. But it is only a mistake, for it appears plainly by
his following discourse, that he intended to deny, not the consequence, but the
Assumption; For he makes Adam to have had no liberty from necessity before his
fall, yea he proceeds so far, as to affirm, that all humane wills, his and
ours, and each propension of our wills, even during our deliberation, are as
much necessitated as any thing else whatsoever; that we have no more power to
forbear those actions which we do, then the fire has power not to burn. Though
I honor T. H. for his person, and for his learning, yet I must confess
ingenuously, I hate this Doctrine from my heart. And I believe both I have
reason so to do, and all others who shall seriously ponder the horrid
consequences which flow from it. It destroys liberty, and dishonours the
nature of man. It makes the second causes and outward objects to be the
Rackets, and Men to be but the Tennis-Balls of destiny. It makes the first
cause, that is, God Almighty, to be the introducer of all evil, and sin into
the world, as much as Man, yea more then Man, by as much as the motion of the
Watch is more from the Artificer, who did make it and wind it up, then either
from the spring, or the wheels, or the thread, if God by his special influence
into the second causes, did necessitate them to operate as they did. And if
they being thus determined, did necessitate Adam inevitably, irresistibly, not
by an accidental, but by an essential subordination of causes to whatsoever
he did, Then one of these two absurdities must needs follow, either that Adam
did not sin, and that there is no such thing as sin in the world, because it
proceeds naturally, necessarily, and essentially from God. Or that God is more
guilty of it, and more the cause of evil than man, because man is
extrinsecally, inevitably determined, but so is not God. And in causes
essentially subordinate, the cause of the cause is always the cause of the
effect. What Tyrant did ever impose Laws that were impossible for those to
keep upon whom they were imposed, and punish them for breaking those Laws
which he himself had necessitated them to break, which it was no more in their
power not to break, then it is in the power of the fire not to burn? Excuse me
if I hate this doctrine with a perfect hatred, which is so dishonorable both to
God and man, which makes men to blaspheme of necessity, to steal of necessity,
to be hanged of necessity, and to be damned of necessity. And therefore I must
say and say again; Quicquid ostendes mihi sic incredulis odi. It were better to
be an Atheist, to believe no God; or to be a Manichee, to believe two Gods, a
God of good, and a God of evil; or with the Heathens, to believe thirty
thousand Gods, than thus to charge the true God to be the proper cause and the
true Author of all the sins and evils which are in the world.

Numb. 12.
J. D.

T. H. THE Arguments of greatest consequence are the third and fifth, and fall
both into one. Namely, If there be a necessity of all events, that it will
follow, that praise and reprehension, reward and punishment, are all vain and
unjust. And that if God should openly forbid, and secretly necessitate the same
action, punishing men for what they could not avoid, there would be no belief
among them of heaven or hell.

To oppose hereunto, I must borrow an answer from St. Paul, Romans 9. ver. 11.
from the 11. verse of the Chapter to the 18. is laid down the very same
objection in these words. When they (meaning Esau and Jacob) were yet unborn,
and had done neither good nor evil, That the purpose of God according to
election, not by works, but by him that calls, might remain firm, it was said
to her ( viz. to Rebekah) that the elder shall serve the younger. And what then
shall we say, is there injustice with God? God forbid. It is not therefore in
him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy. For
the Scripture says to Pharaoh, I have stirred thee up, that I I may show my
power in thee, and that my Name may be set forth in all the earth. Therefore
whom God wills, he has mercy or, and whom he wills he hardens. Thus you
see the case put by St. Paul is the same with that of J. D. and the same
objection in these words following, Thou will ask me then, why will God yet
complain, for who has resisted his will? To this therefore the Apostle
answers, not by denying it was Gods will, or that the decree of God concerning
Esau was not before he had sinned, or that Esau was not necessitated to do what
he did, but thus, Who art thou, O Man, that interrogatest God? shall the work
say to the workman, why have thou made me thus? Has not the Potter power over
the clay of the same stuff, to make one vessel to honor, another to
dishonor? According therefore to this answer of St. Paul, I answer J.D's
objection, and say, The power of God alone, without other help, is sufficient
Justification of any action he does. That which men make among themselves here
by pacts and Covenants, and call by the name of Justice, and according
whereunto men are counted and termed rightly just and unjust, is not that by
which God Almighties actions are to be measured or called just, no more than
his counsels are to be measured by human wisdom. That which he does is made
just by his doing; Just I say in him, not always just in us by the Examples;
for a man that shall command a thing openly, and plot secretly the hinderance
of the same, if he punish him, he so commanded for not doing it is unjust. So
also his counsels, they be therefore not in vain, because they be his,
whether we see the use of them or not. When God afflicted Job, he did object no
sin to him, but justified that afflicting him by telling him of his power. Have
thou (says God) an arm like mine? Where wast thou when I laid the foundations
of the earth? and the like. So our Savior concerning the man that was born
blind, said, it was not for his sin, nor his parents sin, but that the power of
God might be shown in him. Beasts are subject to death and torment, yet they
cannot sin. It was Gods will it should be so. Power irresistible justifies all
actions really and properly in whomsoever it be found. Less power does not. And
because such power is in God only, he must needs be just in all his actions.
And we, that not comprehending his Counsels, call him to the Bar, commit
injustice in it.

I am not ignorant of the usual reply to this answer by distinguishing between
will and permission. As, that God Almighty does indeed permit sin sometimes,
And that he also foreknoweth that the sin he permits shall be committed, but
does not will it, nor necessitate it. I know also they distinguish the action
from the sin of the action, saying, God Almighty does indeed cause the action,
whatsoever action it be, but not the sinfulness or irregularity of it, that is,
the discordance between the Action and the Law. Such distinctions as these
dazell my understanding. I find no difference between the will to have a thing
done, and the permission to do it, when he that permits it can hinder it,
and knows it will be done unless he hinder it. Nor find I any difference
between an action that is against the Law, and the sin of that action. As for
example, between the killing of Uriah, and the sin of David in killing Uriah.
Nor when one is cause both of the action and of the Law, how another can be
cause of the disagreement between them, no more than how one man making a
longer and shorter garment, another can make the inequallity that is between
them. This I know, God cannot sin, because his doing a thing makes it just, and
consequenly no sin. And because whatsoever can sin, is subject to another Law,
which God is not. And therefore it is blasphemy to say, God can sin. But to say,
that God can so order the world as a sin may be necessarily caused thereby in a
man, I do not see how it is any dishonor to him. Howsoever, if such or other
distinctions can make it clear that St. Paul did not think Esaus or Pharaohs
actions proceed from the will and purpose of God, or that proceeding from his
will could not therefore without injustice be blamed or punished, I will as
soon as I understand them turn unto J. D's opinion. For I now hold nothing in
all this question between us, but what seems to me not obscurely, but most
expressly said in this place by Saint Paul. And thus much in answer to his
places of Scripture.

J. D. T. H. thinks to kill two birds with one stone, and satisfies two
Arguments with one answer, whereas in truth he satisfies neither. First, for
my third reason. Though all he say here, were as true as an Oracle. Though
punishment were an act of dominion, not of Justice in God; yet this is no
sufficient cause why God should deny his own Act, or why he should chide or
expostulate with men, why they did that which he himself did necessitate them
to do, and whereof he was the actor more than they, they being but as the
stone, but he the hand that threw it. Notwithstanding any thing which is
pleaded here, this Stoicall opinion does stick hypocrisy and dissimulation
close to God, who is the Truth it self.

And to my fifth Argument, which he charge and relates amiss, as by comparing
mine with his, may appear. His chiefest answer is to oppose a difficult place
of St. Paul, Romans 9.11. Has he never heard, that to propose a doubt is not to
answer an Argument, Nec been respondet qui litem lite resolvit. But I will not
pay him in his own coin. Wherefore to this place alleged by him, I answer, The
case is not the same. The question moved there, is, how God did keep his
promise made to Abraham to be the God of him and of his seed, if the Jews who
were the legitimate progeny of Abraham were deserted. To which the Apostle
answers ver. 6. 7, 8. That that promise was not made to the carnal seed of
Abraham, that is, the Jews, but to his spiritual Sons which were the Heirs of
his Faith, that is to the believing Christians; which answer he explicateth,
first by the Allegory of Isaac and Ishmael, and after in the place cited of
Esau and of Jacob. Yet neither does he speak there so much of their persons as
of their posterities. And though some words may be accommodated to Gods
praedestination, which are there uttered, yet it is not the scope of that text,
to treat of the reprobation of any man to hellfire. All the posterity of Esau
were not eternally reprobated, as holy Job and many others. But this question
which is now agitated between us, is quite of another nature, how a man can be
a criminal who does nothing but that which he is extrinsecally necessitated to
do, or how God in Justice can punish a man with aeternall torments, for doing
that, which it was never in his power to leave undone. That he who did
impresite the motion in the heart of man, should punish man, who did only
receive the impression from him. So his answer looks another way.

But because he grounds so much upon this text, that if it can be cleared he is
ready to change his opinion, I will examine all those passages which may seem to
favor his cause. First, these words ver. 11. being not yet borne, neither
having done any good or evil, upon which the whole weight of his argument does
depend, have no reference at all to those words ver. 13. Jacob have I loved,
and Esau have I hated, for those words were first uttered by the Prophet
Malachy, many ages after Jacob and Esau were dead, Mal. 1.2. and intended of
the posterity of Esau, who were not redeemed from captivity, as the Israelites
were. But they are referred to those other words, ver. 12. The elder shall
serve the younger, which indeed were spoken before Jacob or Esau were Born,
Genesis 5.23. And though those words of Malachy had been used of Jacob and Esau
before they were Born, yet it had advantaged his cause nothing, for hatred in
that text does not signify any reprobation to the flames of hell, much less the
execution of that decree, or the actual imposition of punishment, nor any act
contrary to love. God saw all that he made, and it was very good. Goodness it
self cannot hate that which is good. But hatred there signifies Comparative
hatred, or a less degree of love, or at the most a negation of love. As Genesis
29.31. When the Lord saw that Leah was hated, we may not conclude thence that
Jacob hated his Wife, The precedent verse does fully expound the sense, ver.
30. Jacob loved Rachel more then Leah. So Mat. 6.24. No man can serve two
Masters, for either he will hate the one and love the other. So Luke 14.26. If
any Man hate not his Father and Mother, etc. he cannot be my Disciple. St.
Matthew tells us the sense of it Math. 10.37. He that loves Father or Mother
more then me, is not worthy of me.

Secondly, those words ver. 15. I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, do
prove no more but this, that the preferring of Jacob before Esau, and of the
Christians before the Jews, was not a debt from God, either to the one or to
the other, but a work of mercy. And what of this? All men confess that Gods
mercies do exceed man's deserts, but Gods punishments do never exceed man's
misdeeds. As we see in the Parable of the Laborers, Matthew. 20. Friend, I do
thee no wrong, did not I agree with thee for a penny, Is it not lawful for me
to do with mine own as I will? Is thy eye evil because I am good? Acts of
Mercy are free, but acts of Justice are due.

That which follows ver. 17. comes something nearer the cause, The Scripture
says unto Pharaoh, for this same purpose I have raised thee up, (that is, I
have made thee a King, or I have preserved thee) that I might show my power in
thee. But this particle (that) does not always signify the main end of an
action, but sometimes only a consequent of it. As Matthew. 2.15. He departed
into Egypt, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet, out of
Egypt have I called my Son; without doubt Joseph's aim or end of his journey was
not to fulfill prophesies, but to save the life of the Child. Yet because the
fulfilling of the prophecy was a consequent of Joseph's journey, he says, That
it might be fulfilled. So here, I have raised thee up that I might show my
power. Again, though it should be granted that this particle, that, did denote
the intention of God to destroy Pharaoh in the Red Sea, yet it was not the
Antecedent intention of God, which evermore respects the good and benefit of
the creature, but Gods consequent intention upon the praevision of Pharaohs
obstinacy, that since he would not glorify God in obeying his word, he should
glorify God undergoing his judgments, Hitherto we find no aeternal
punishments nor no temporal punishment without just deserts.

It follows ver. 18. whom he will he hardneth: Indeed hardness of heart is the
greatest judgment that Gods lays upon a sinner in this use, worse then all the
Plagues of Egypt. But how does God harden the heart? not by a natural
influence of any evil act or habit into the will, nor by inducing the will
with persuasive motives to obstinacy and rebellion, for God tempts no man,
but every man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own lust and intised.
Jam. 1.13. Then God is said to harden the heart three ways, First, negatively,
and not positively, not by imparting wickedness, but by not imparting grace, as
the Sun descending to the tropic of Capricorn, it is said with us to be the
cause of Winter, that is, not by imparting cold, but by not imparting heat. It
is an act of mercy in God to give his grace freely, but to detein it is no act
of injustice. So the Apostle opposes hardening to showing of mercy, To harden
is as much as not to show mercy.

Secondly, God is said to harden the heart occasionally and not causally, by
doing good, which incorrigible sinners make an occasion of growing worse and
worse, and doing evil; as a Master by often correcting of an untoward Scholar,
does accidentally and occasionally harden his heart, and render him more
obdurate, insomuch as he grows even to despise the Rod. Or as an indulgent
parent by his patience and gentleness does encourage an obstinate son to become
more rebellious. So, whether we look upon Gods frequent judgments upon Pharaoh,
or Gods iterated favors in removing and withdrawing those judgments upon
Pharaohs request, both of them in their several kinds, were occasions of
hardening Pharaohs heart, the one making him more presumptuous, the other more
desperately rebellious. So that which was good, in it was Gods; that which was
evil was Pharaohs. God gave the occasion, but Pharaoh was the true cause of
his own obduration. This is clearly confirmed Genesis 8.15. When Pharaoh saw that
there was respite, he hardened his heart. And Genesis 9.34. When Pharaoh saw, that
the Rain and the Hail, and the Thunders were ceased, he sinned yet more, and
hardened his heart, he and his servants. So Psalm. 105.25. He turned their
hearts, so that they hated his people, and dealt subtly with them: That is,
God blessed the Children of Israel, whereupon the Egyptians did take occasion
to hate them, as is plain Exodus 1. ver. 7, 8, 9, 10. So God hardened Pharaohs
heart, and Pharaoh hardened his own heart. God hardened it by not showing mercy
to Pharaoh, as he did to Nebuchadnezzar, who was as great a sinner as he, or
God hardened it occasionally, but still Pharaoh was the true cause of his own
obduration, by determining his own will to evil, and confirming himself in his
obstinacy. So are all presumptuous sinners Psalm. 95.8. Harden not your hearts
as in the provocation, as in the day of temptation in the wilderness.

Thirdly, God is said to harden the heart permissively, but not operatively,
nor effectively, as he who only lets loose a Greyhound out of the slip, is said
to hound him at the Hare. Will you see plainly what St. Paul intends by
hardening? Read ver. 22. What if God willing to show his wrath and to make his
power known (that is, by a consequent will, which in order of nature follows
the provision of sin,) endured with much long suffering the vessels of wrath
fitted to destruction. And that he might make known the riches of his glory on
the vessels of mercy, etc. There is much difference between enduring and
impelling, or inciting the vessels of wrath. He says of the vessels of
mercy, that God prepared them unto glory. But of the vessels of wrath, he
says only, that they were fitted to destruction, that is, not by God, but by
themselves. St. Paul says, that God does endure the vessels of wrath with
much long suffering, T. H. says, that God wills and effects by the second
causes all their actions good and bad, that he necessitateth them, and
determines them irresistibly to do those acts which he condemns as evil,
and for which he punishes them. If doing willingly, and enduring, If much long
suffering, and necessitating, imply not a contrariety one to another, reddat
mihi minam Diogenes, Let him that taught me Logic, give me my money again.

But T. H. says, that this distinction between the operative and permissive
Will of God; And that other between the action and the irregularity do dazell
his understanding. Though he can find no difference between these two, yet
others do, St. Paul himself did, Act. 13.18. About the time of 40. years
suffered he their manners in the Wilderness. And Act. 14.16. Who intimes past
suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways. T. H. would make suffering to
be inciting, their manners to be Gods manners, their ways to be Gods ways.
And Act. 17.30. The times of this ignorance God winked at. It was never heard
that one was said to wink or connive at that which was his own act. And 1 Cor.
10.13. God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you
are able. To tempt is the Devils act, therefore he is called the Tempter, God
tempts no man to sin, but he suffers them to be tempted. And so suffers, that
he could hinder Satan, if he would. But by T. H. his doctrine, To tempt to
sin, and to suffer one to be tempted to sin, when it is in his power to hinder
it, is all one. And so he transforms God (I write it with horror) into the
Devil, and makes tempting to be Gods own work, and the Devil to be but his
instrument. And in that noted place, Romans 2.4. Despisest thou the riches of his
goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of
God leads thee to repentance, but after thy hardness and impenitent heart
treasurest up unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath, and revealation of
the righteous judgment of God. Here are as many convincing Arguments in this
one text against the opinion of T. H. almost as there are words. Here we learn
that God is rich in goodness, and will not punish his creatures for that which
is his own act; Secondly, that he suffers and forbeares sinners long, and does
not snatch them away by sudden death as they deserve. Thirdly, that the reason
of Gods forbearance is to bring men to repentance. Fourthly, that hardness of
heart and impenitency is not casually from God, but from our selves. Fifthly,
that it is not the insufficient proposal of the means of their conversion on
Gods part, which is the cause of men's perdition, but their own contempt and
despising of these means. Sixthly, that punishment is not an act of absolute
dominion, but an act of righteous Judgment, whereby God renders to every man
according to his own deeds, wrath to them and only to them who treasure up
wrath unto themselves, and eternal life to those who continue patiently in
well-doing. If they deserve such punishment who only neglect the goodness and
long suffering of God, what do they who utterly deny it, and make Gods doing
and his suffering to be all one? I do beseech T. H. to consider what a degree
of wilfulness it is, out of one obscure text wholly misunderstood, to
contradict the clear current of the whole Scripture. Of the same mind with St.
Paul was St. Peter, 1 Pet. 3.22. The long suffering of God waited once in the
days of Noah. And 2 Pet. 3.15. Account that the long suffering of the Lord is
salvation. This is the name God gives himself. Exodus 34.6. The Lord, the Lord
God, merciful and gracious, long suffering, etc.

Yet I do acknowledge that which T. H. says to be commonly true, That he who
does permit any thing to be done, which it is in his power to hinder, knowing
that if he do not hinder it, it will be done, does in some sort will it. I say
in some sort, that is, either by an antecedent will, or by a consequent will,
either by an operative will, or by a permissive will, or he is willing to let
it be done, but not willing to do it. Sometimes an antecedent engagement does
cause a man to suffer that to be done, which otherwise he would not suffer. So
Darius suffered Daniel to be cast into the Lions den, to make good his rash
decree; So Herod suffered John Baptist to be beheaded, to make good his rash
oath; How much more may the immutable rule of justice in God, and his fidelity
in keeping his word, draw from him the punishment of obstinate sinners, though
antecedently he wills their conversion? He loves all his Creatures well, but
his own Justice better. Again, sometimes a man suffers that to be done, which
he does not will directly in it self, but indirectly for some other end, or for
the producing of some great good; As a man wills that a putrid member be cut
off from his body, to save the life of the whole. Or as a Judge being desirous
to save a malefactors life, and having power to repreive him, does yet condemn
him for example sake, that by the death of one, he may save the lives of many.
Marvel not then if God suffer some creatures to take such courses as tend to
their own ruin, so long as their sufferings do make for the greater
manifestation of his glory, and for the greater benefit of his faithful
servants. This is a most certain truth, that God would not suffer evil to be
in the world, unless he knew how to draw good out of evil. Yet this ought not
to be so understood, as if we made any priority or posteriority of time in the
acts of God, but only of nature. Nor do we make the antecedent and consequent
will to be contrary one to another, because the one respects man pure and
uncorrupted, the other respects him as he is lapsed. The objects are the same,
but considered after a diverse manner. Nor yet do we make these wills to be
distinct in God, for they are the same with the divine essence, which is one.
But the distinction is in order to the objects or things willed. Nor, lastly,
do we make this permission to be a naked or a mere permission, God causes all
good, permits all evil, disposes all things, both good and evil.

T. H. demands how God should be the cause of the action and yet not be the
cause of the irregularity of the action. I answer, because he concurres to the
doing of evil by a general, but not by a special influence. As the Earth
gives nourishment to all kinds of plants, as well to Hemlock as to Wheat, but
the reason why the one yields food to our sustenance, the other poison to our
destruction, is not from the general nourishment of the earth, but from the
special quality of the root. Even so the general power to act is from God, In
him we live, and move, and have our being. This is good. But the specification,
and determination, of this general power, to the doing of any evil, is from
our selves, and proceeds from the free will of man; This is bad. And to speak
properly, the free will of man is not the efficient cause of sin, as the root
of the Hemlock is of poison, sin having no fruentity or being in it, as poison
has. But rather the deficient cause. Now no defect can flow from him who is
the highest perfection. Wherefore T. H. is mightily mistaken, to make the
particular and determinate act of killing Uriah to be from God. The general
power to act is from God, but the specification of this general and good power
to murder, or to any particular evil, is not from God, but from the free will
of man. So T. H. may see clearly if he will, how one may be the cause of the
Law, and likewise of the action in some sort, that is, by general influence;
and yet another cause concurring by special influence and determining this
general and good power may make it self the true cause of the anomy or the
irregularity. And therefore he may keep his longer and shorter garments for
some other occasion. Certainly, they will not fit this subject, unless he could
make general and special influence to be all one.

But T. H. presses yet further, that the case is the same, and the objection
used by the Jews, ver. 19. Why does he yet find fault? who has resisted his
will? is the very same with my argument; And St. Paul's answer ver. 20. O man
who art thou that reply against God? shall the thing formed say to him that
formed it, why have thou made me thus? Has not the Potter power over his clay,
etc? is the very same with his answer in this place, drawn from the
irresistible power, and absolute dominion of God, which justifies all his
actions. And that the Apostle in his answer does not deny, that it was Gods
will, nor that Gods decree was before Esaus sin. To which I reply.

First, that the case is not at all the same, but quite different, as may
appear by these particulars; first, those words, before they had done either
good or evil, are not, cannot be referred to those other words, Esau have I
hated; Secondly, If they could, yet it is less than nothing, because before
Esau had actually sinned, his future sins were known to God; Thirdly, by the
Potters clay, here is not to be understood the pure mass, but the corrupted
mass of mankind. Fourthly, the hating here mentioned is only a comparative
hatred, that is, a less degree of love. Fifthly, the hardening which St. Paul
speaks of, is not a positive, but a negative obduration, or a not imparting of
grace. Sixthly, St. Paul speaks not of any positive reprobation to eternal
punishment, much less does he speak of the actual inflicting of punishment
without sin, which is the question between us, and wherein T. H. differs from
all that I remember to have read, who do all acknowledge that punishment is
never actually inflicted but for sin. If the question be put, why God does good
to one more than to another, or why God imparteth more grace to one than to
another, as it is there, the answer is just and fit, because it is his
pleasure, and it is sawciness in a creature in this case to reply, May not God
do what he will with his own, Matthew. 20.15. No man doubts but God imparteth
grace beyond man's desert; But if the case be put, why God does punish one more
than another, or why he throws one into hellfire, and not another, which is
the present case agitated between us; To say with T. H. that it is because God
is Omnipotent, or because his power is irresistible, or merely because it is
his pleasure, is not only not warranted, but is plainly condemned by St. Paul
in this place. So many differences there are between those two cases. It is not
therefore against God, that I reply, but against T. H. I do not call my Creator
to the Bar, but my fellow creature; I ask no account of Gods counsails, but of
man's presumptions. It is the mode of these times to father their own fancies
upon God, and when they cannot justify them by reason, to plead his
Omnipotence, or to cry. O altitudo, that the ways of God are unsearchable. If
they may justify their drowsy dreams, because Gods power and dominion is
absolute; much more may we reject such fantastical devises which are
inconsistent with the truth, and goodness and, Justice of God, and make him to
be a Tyrant, who is the Father of Mercies, and the God of all consolation. The
unsearchableness of Gods ways should be a bridle to restrain presumption, and
not a sanctuary for spirits of error.

Secondly, this objection contained ver. 19. to which the Apostle answers ver.
20. is not made in the person of Esau or Pharaoh, as T. H. supposes, but of
the unbelieving Jews, who thought much at that grace and favor which God was
pleased to vouchsafe unto the Gentiles, to acknowledge them for his people,
which honor they would have appropriated to the posterity of Abraham. And the
Apostles answer is not only drawn from the Sovereign Dominion of God, to impart
his grace to whom he pleases, as has been showed already, but also from the
obstinacy and proper fault of the Jews, as appears ver. 22. What if God
willing (that is, by a consequent will) to show his wrath, and to make his
power known, endured with much long suffering the vessels of wrath fitted to
destruction. They acted, God endured; They were tolerated by God, but fitted to
destruction by themselves, for their much wrong doing, here is Gods much long
suffering; And more plainly ver. 31. Israel has not atteined to the Law of
righteousness, wherefore? because they sought it not by faith, but as it were
by the works of the Law. This reason is set down yet more emphatically in the
next Chapter ver. 3. They (that is, the Israelites) being ignorant of Gods
righteousness (that is, by faith in Christ,) and going about to establish their
own righteousness, (that is, by the works of the Law) have not submitted
themselves to the righteousness of God. And yet most expressly Chap. 11. v. 20.
Because of unbelief they were broken off, but thou stand by faith, Neither
was there any precedent binding decree of God, to necessitate them to unbelief,
and consequently to punishment, It was in their own power by their concurrence
with Gods grace to prevent these judgments, and to recover their former estate,
ver. 23. If they (that is, the unbelieving Jews) abide not still in unbelief,
they shall be grafted in. The Crown and the Sword are immovable, (to use St.
Anselmes comparison) but it is we that move and change places. Sometimes the
Jews were under the Crown, and the Gentiles under the Sword, sometimes the Jews
under the Sword, and the Gentiles under the Crown.

Thirdly, though I confess, that human Pacts are not the measure of Gods
Justice, but his justice is his own immutable will, whereby he is ready to give
every man that which is his own: as rewards to the good, punishments to the
bad, so nevertheless God may oblige himself freely to his creature. He made the
Covenant of works with mankind in Adam, and therefore he punishes not man
contrary to his own Covenant, but for the transgression of his duty. And Divine
Justice is not measured by Omnipotence, or by irresistible power, but by Gods
will; God can do many things according to his absolute power which he does not;
He could raise up children to Abraham of stones, but he never did so. It is a
rule in Theology, that God cannot do any thing which argues any wickedness or
imperfection, as God cannot deny himself, 2 Timothy 2.13. He cannot lie, Tit. 1.2.
These and the like are fruits of impotence, not of power. So God cannot destroy
the righteous with the wicked, Genesis 18.25. He could not destroy Sodom whilst
Lot was in it, Genesis 19.22. not for want of dominion or power, but because it
was not agreeable to his Justice, nor to that Law which himself had
constituted. The Apostle says Heb. 6.10. God is not unrighteous to forget your
work. As it is a good consequence to say, this is from God, therefore it is
righteous, so is this also; This thing is unrighteous, therefore it cannot
proceed from God. We see how all Creatures by instinct of nature do love their
young, as the Hen her Chickens, how they will expose themselves to death for
them; And yet all these are but shadows of that love which is in God toward
his Creatures. How impious is it then to conceive, that God did creat so many
millions of souls to be tormented eternally in hell, without any fault of
theirs, except such as he himself did necessitate them unto, merely to show his
dominion, and because his power is irresistible? The same privilege which T. H.
appropriates here to power absolutely irresistible, a friend of his in his book
de Cive cap. 6. page 70. ascribes to power respectively irresistible, or to
Sovereign Magistrates, whose power he makes to be as absolute as a man's power
is over himself, not to be limited by any thing, but only by their strength.
The greatest propugners of Sovereign power think it enough for Princes to
challenge an immunity from coercive power, but acknowledge, that the Law has a
directive power over them. But T. H. will have no limits but their strength.
Whatsoever they do by power, they do justly.

But, says he, God objected no sin to Job, but justified his afflicting him by
his power. First, this is an Argument from authority negatively, that is to
say, worth nothing. Secondly, the afflictions of Job were no vindicatory
punishments to take vengeance of his sins, (whereof we dispute,) but probatory
chastisements to make trial of his graces. Thirdly, Job was not so pure, but
that God might justly have laid greater punishments upon him, then those
afflictions which he suffered. Witness his impatience, even to the cursing of
the day of his nativity, Job 3.3. Indeed God said to Job, where wast thou when
I laid the foundations of the earth? Job 38.4. that is, how can thou judge of
the things that were done before thou wast born? or comprehend the secret
causes of my judgments? And Job 42.9. Have thou an arm like God? As if he
should say, why art thou impatient? do thou think thy self able to strive
with God? But that God should punish Job without desert, here is not a word.

Concerning the blind man, mentioned John 9. his blindness was rather a
blessing to him than a punishment, being the means to raise his Soul
illuminated, and to bring him to see the face of God in Jesus Christ. The sight
of the body is common to us with Ants and Flies, but the sight of the soul with
the blessed Angels. We read of some, who have put out their bodily eyes
because they thought they were an impediment to the eye of the Soul. Again,
neither he nor his parents were innocent, being conceived and born in sin and
iniquity, Psalm. 51.5. And in many things we offend all, Jam. 3.2. But our
Saviors meaning is evident by the Disciples question, ver. 2. They had not so
sinned, that he should be born blind. Or they were not more grievous sinners
than other men, to deserve an exemplary judgment more than they; but this
corporal blindness befell him principally by the extraordinary providence of
God, for the manifestation of his own glory, in restoring him to his sight. So
his instance halts on both sides; neither was this a punishment, nor the blind
man free from sin. His third instance of the death and torments of beasts, is
of no more weight then the two former. The death of brute beasts is not a
punishment of sin, but a debt of nature. And though they be often slaughtered
for the use of man, yet there is a vast difference between those light and
momentary pangs, and the unsufferable and endless pains of hell; between the
mere depriving of a creature of temporal life, and the subjecting of it to
eternal death; I know the Philosophical speculations of some who affirm,
that entity is better than nonentity, that it is better to be miserable, and
suffer the torments of the damned, than to be annihilated, and cease to be
altogether. This entity which they speak of, is a Metaphysicall entity
abstracted from the matter, which is better than nonentity, in respect of some
goodness, not moral nor natural, but transcendentall, which accompanies every
being. But in the concrete it is far otherwise, where that of our Savior often
takes place, Matthew. 26.24. Woe unto that man by whom the Son of Man is
betrayed, It had been good for that man, that he had not been born. I add, that
there is an Analogicall Justice and Mercy due, even to the brute beasts. Thou
shall not mussle the mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn. And, a just
man is merciful to his beast.

But his greatest error is that which I touched before, to make Justice to be
the proper result of Power. Power does not measure and regulate Justice, but
Justice measures and regulates Power. The will of God, and the Eternal Law
which is in God himself, is properly the rule and measure of Justice. As all
goodness whether Natural or Moral, is a participation of divine goodness, and
all created Rectitude is but a participation of divine rectitude, so all Laws
are but participations of the eternal Law, from whence they derive their
power. The rule of Justice then is the same both in God and us, but it is in
God, as in him that does regulate and measure; in us, as in those who are
regulated and measured. As the will of God is immutable, always willing what
is just and right and good; So his justice likewise is immutable. And that
individual action which is justly punished as sinful in us, cannot possibly
proceed from the special influence and determinative power of a just cause.
See then how grossly T. H. does understand that old and true principle, that
the Will of God is the rule of Justice, as if by willing things in themselves
unjust, he did render them just, by reason of his absolute dominion and
irresistible power. As fire does assimilate other things to it self, and
convert them into the nature of fire. This were to make the eternal Law a
Lesbian rule. Sin is defined to be that which is done, or said, or thought
contrary to the eternal Law. But by this doctrine nothing is done, nor said,
nor thought contrary to the will of God. St. Anselm said most truly, then the
will of man is good and just and right, when he wills that which God would have
him to will: but according to this doctrine every man always wills that which
God would have him to will. If this be true, we need not pray, Thy will be done
in earth as it is in heaven, T. H. has devised a new kind of heaven upon
earth. The worst is, it is an heaven without Justice. Justice is a constant and
perpetual act of the will, to give every one his own; But to inflict
punishment for those things which the Judge himself did determine and
necessitate to be done, is not to give every one his own; right punitive
Justice is a relation of equallity and proportion, between the demerit and the
punishment; But supposing this opinion of absolute and universal necessity,
there is no demerit in the world, we use to say, that right springs from Law
and fact, as in this Syllogism, Every thief ought to be punished, there is the
Law; But such an one is a thief, there is the fact, therefore he ought to be
punished, there is the right. But this opinion of T. H. grounds the right to be
punished, neither upon Law, nor upon Fact, but upon the irresistible power of
God. Yea, it overturneth as much, as in it lies all Law; First, the eternal
Law, which is the ordination of divine Wisdom, by which all Creatures are
directed to that end which is convenient for them. That is, not to necessitate
them to eternal flames. Then, the Law, participated, which is the ordination
of right reason, instituted for the common good, to show unto man, what he
ought to do, and what he ought not to do. To what purpose is it to show the
right way to him who is drawn and haled a contrary way by Adamantine bonds of
inevitable necessity?

Lastly, howsoever T. H. cries out, that God cannot sin, yet in truth he makes
him to be the principal and most proper cause of all sin. For, he makes him to
be the cause not only of the Law, and of the action, but even of the
irregularity it self, and the difference between the action and the Law,
wherein the very essence of sin does consist. He makes God to determine David's
will, and necessitate him to kill Uriah. In causes physically, and essentially
subordinate, the cause of the cause is evermore the cause of the effect. These
are those deadly fruits which spring from the poisonous root of the absolute
necessity of all things, which T. H. seeing, and that neither the sins of Esau,
nor Pharaoh, nor any wicked person do proceed from the operative, but from the
permissive will of God; And that punishment is an act of justice, not of
dominion only, I hope that according to his promise he will change his opinion.

Numb. 13.
J. D. Proofs of Liberty drawn from reason.

Herculeum or Baculinum, drawn from that pleasant passage between Zeno and his
man; The servant had committed some pettilarceny, and the master was cudgelling
him well for it; The servant thinks to creep under his masters blind-side, and
pleades for himself; That the necessity of destiny did compel him to steal.
The master answers, the same necessity of destiny compells me to beat thee. He
that denies liberty is fitter to be refuted with rodds, than with arguments,
until he confess that it is free for him that beats him either to continue
striking, or to give over, that is, to have true liberty.

T. H. OF the Arguments from reason, the first is, that which he says, is
drawn from Zenos beating of his man which is therefore called Argumentum
baculinum, that is to say, a wooden Argument. The story is this, Zeno held that
all actions were necessary, His man therefore being for some fault beaten,
excused himself upon the necessity of it. To avoid this excuse, his master
pleaded likewise the necessity of beating him. So that not he that maintained,
but he that derided the necessity of things was beaten, contrary to that he
would infer; And the argument was rather withdrawn than drawn from the story.

J. D. WHether the argument be withdrawn from the story, or the answer
withdrawn from the argument, let the Reader judge. T. H. mistakes the scope of
the reason, the strength whereof does not lie, neither in the authority of
Zeno, a rigid Stoic, which is not worth a button in this cause; Nor in the
servants being an adversary to Stoicall necessity, for it appears not out of
the story, that the servant did deride necessity, but rather that he pleaded it
in good earnest for his own justification. Now in the success of the fray, we
were told even now, that no power does justify an action, but only that which
is irresistible. Such was not Zenos. And therefore it advantageth neither of
their causes, neither that of Zeno, nor this of T. H. What if the servant had
taken the staff out of his masters hand and beaten him soundly, would not the
same argument have served the man as well as it did the master? that the
necessity of destiny did compel him to strike again. Had not Zeno smarted
justly for his Paradox? And might not the spectators well have taken up the
Judges Apothegm, concerning the dispute between Corax and his Scholar, An ill
egg of an ill bird? But the strength of this argument lies partly in the
ignorance of Zeno, that great Champion of necessity, and the beggarliness of
his cause, which admitted no defense but with a cudgel. No man (says the
servant) ought to be beaten for doing that which he is compelled inevitably to
do, but I am compelled inevitably to steal. The major is so evident, that it
cannot be denied. If a strong man shall take a weak man's hand perforce, and do
violence with it to a third person, he whose hand is forced, is innocent, and
he only culpable who compelled him. The minor was Zenos own doctrine; what
answer made the great patron of destiny to his servant? very learnedly he
denied the conclusion, and cudgelled his servant, telling him in effect, that
though there was no reason why he should be beaten, yet there was a necessity
why he must be beaten. And partly, in the evident absurdity of such an opinion
which deserves not to be confuted with reasons, but with rods. There are four
things, said the Philosoher, which ought not to be called into question, First,
such things whereof it is wickedness to doubt; as whether the soul be
immortal, whether there be a God, such an one should not be confuted with
reasons, but cast into the sea, with a millstone about his neck, as unworthy to
breath the air, or to behold the light. Secondly, such things as are above the
capacity of reason; as among Christians, the mystery of the holy Trinity.
Thirdly, such principles as are evidently true; as that two and two are four
in Arithmetic, that the whole is greater than the part in Logic. Fourthly,
such things as are obvious to the senses; as whether the snow be white. He who
denied the heat of the fire, was justly sentenced to be scorched with fire; and
he that denied motion, to be beaten until he recanted. So he who denies all
liberty from necessitations, should be scourged until he become an humble
suppliant to him that whips him, and confess, that he has power, either to
strike, or to hold his hand.

Numb. 14.
J. D. determined, and can no more be changed by all our endeavors, than we
can stay the course of Heaven with our finger, or add a cubite to our stature?
Suppose it be unknown, yet it is certain. We cannot hope to alter the course of
things by our labors; Let the necessary causes do their work, we have no
remedy but patience, and shrug up the shoulders. Either allow liberty, or
destroy all Societies.

T. H. THE second argument is taken from certain inconveniences which he thinks
would follow such an opinion. It is true, that ill use may be made of it, and
therefore your Lordship and J. D. ought at my request to keep private, that I
say here of it. But the inconveniences are indeed none; and what use soever be
made of truth, yet truth is truth; and now the question is not what is fit to
be preached, but what is true. The first inconvenience he says, is this, that
Laws which prohibit any action are then unjust. The second, that all
consultations are vain. The third, that admonitions to men of understanding are
of no more use than to fools, children and madmen. The fourth, that praise,
dispraise, reward and punishment are in vain. The fifth, that Counsels, Arts,
Arms, Books, Instruments, Study, Tutours, Medicines are in vain. To which
argument expecting I should answer by saying, that the ignorance of the event
were enough to make us use means, he adds (as it were a reply to my answer
foreseen) these words. Alas, how should our not knowing the event be a
sufficient motive to make us use the means? Wherein he says right, but my
answer is not that which he expects. I answer.

First, that the necessity of an action does not make the Law which prohibits
it unjust. To let pass, that not the necessity, but the will to break the Law
makes the action unjust, because the Law regards the will, and no other
precedent causes of action. And to let pass, that no Law can be possibly
unjust, in as much as every man makes by his consent the Law he is bound to
keep, and which consequently must be just, unless a man can be unjust to
himself; I say, what necessary cause soever preceds an action, yet if the
action be forbidden, he that does it willingly may justly be punished. For
instance, suppose the Law on pain of death prohibit stealing, and there be a
man who by the strength of temptation is necessitated to steal, and is
thereupon put to death, does not this punishment deterr others from thest? is
it not a cause that others steal not? does it not frame and make their will to
justice? To make the Law is therefore to make a cause of Justice, and to
necessitate justice, and consequently it is no injustice to make such a Law.

The institution of the Law is not to grieve the delinquent for that which is
passed, and not to be undone, but to make him and others just, that else would
not be so. And respects not the evil act past, but the good to come. In so
much as without this good intention of future, no past Act of a delinquent
could justify his killing in the sight of God. But you will say, how is it
just to kill one man to amend another, if what were done were necessary? To
this I answer, that men are justly killed, not for that their actions are not
necessitated, but that they are spared and preserved, because they are not
noxious; for where there is no Law, there no killing, nor any thing else can be
unjust. And by the right of Nature we destroy, without being unjust, all that
is noxious, both beasts and men. And for beasts, we kill them justly, when we
do it in order to our own preservation. And yet J. D. confesses, that their
actions, as being only spontaneous and not free, are all necessitated and
determined to that one thing which they shall do. For men, when we make
Societies or Commonwealths, we lay down our right to kill, excepting in certain
cases, as murder, theft, or other offensive actions; So that the right which
the Commonwealth has to put a man to death for crimes, is not created by the
Law, but remains from the first right of nature, which every man has to
preserve himself, for that the Law does not take that right away, in case of
criminalls, who were by Law excepted. Men are not therefore put to death, or
punished for that their theft proceeds from election, but because it was
noxious and contrary to men's preservation, and the punishment conducing to the
preservation of the rest. In as much as to punish those that do voluntary hurt,
and none else, frames and makes men's wills such as men would have them. And
thus it is plain, that from necessity of a voluntary action cannot be inferred
the injustice of the Law that forbids it, or of the Magistrate that
punishes it.

Secondly, I deny that it makes consultations to be in vain; it is the
consultation that causes a man, and necessitateth him to choose to do one
thing rather than another. So that unless a man say, that cause to be in vain,
which necessitateth the effect, he cannot infer the superfluousness of
consultation out of the necessity of the election proceeding from it. But it
seems he reasons thus, If I must needs do this rather than that, then I shall
do this rather than that, though I consult not at all; which is a false
proposition, a falfe consequence, and no better than this, If I shall live till
to morrow, I shall live till to morrow, though I run my self through with a
sword to day. If there be a necessity that an action shall be done, or that any
effect shall be brought to pass, it does not therefore follow, that there is
nothing necessarily required as a means to bring it to pass. And therefore when
it is determined, that one thing shall be chosen before another, it is
determined also for what cause it shall be chosen, which cause for the most
part is deliberation or consultation. And therefore consultation is not in
vain, and indeed the less in vain, by how much the election is more
necessitated.

The same answer is to be given to the third supposed inconveniency; Namely,
that admonitions are in vain, for admonitions are parts of consultations. The
Admonitor being a Counsailer for the time, to him that is admonished.

The fourth pretended inconveniency is, that praise and dispraise, reward and
punishment will be in vain. To which I answer, that for praise and dispraise,
they depend not at all on the necessity of the action praised or dispraised.
For, what is it else to praise, but to say a thing is good? Good, I say for me,
or for some body else, or for the State and Commonwealth. And what is it to say
an action is good, but to say, it is as I would wish, or as another would have
it, or according to the will of the State, that is to say, according to Law?
Does J. D. think, that no action can please me or him, or the Commonwealth,
that should proceed from necessity?

Things may be therefore necessary, and yet prayseworthy, as also necessary,
and yet dispraised, and neither of both in vain, because praise and dispraise,
and likewise reward and punishment, do by example make and conform the will to
good or evil. It was a very great praise in my opinion, that Velleius
Paterculus gives Cato, where he says, he was good by nature, Et quia aliter
esse non potuit.

The fifth and sixth inconvenience, that Counsels, Arts, Arms, Books,
Instruments, Study, Medicines, and the like, would be superfluous, the same
answer serves that to the former; That is to say, that this consequence, if the
effect shall necessarily come to pass, then it shall come to pass without its
cause, is a false one. And those things named, Counsels, Arts, Arms, etc. are
the causes of those effects.

J. D. NOthing is more familiar with T. H. than to decline an argument. But I
will put it into form for him. The first inconvenience is thus pressed. Those
Laws are unjust and Tyrannical, which do prescribe things absolutely
impossible in themselves to be done, and punish men for not doing of them. But
supposing T. H. his opinion of the necessity of all things to be true, all
Laws do prescribe absolute impossibilities to be done, and punish men for not
doing of them. The former proposition is so clear, that it cannot be denied.
Just Laws are the Ordinances of right reason, but those Laws which prescribe
absolute impossibilities, are not the Ordinances of right reason. Just Laws
are instituted for the public good, but those Laws which prescribe absolute
impossibilities are not instituted for the public good. Just Laws do show unto
a man what is to be done, and what is to be shunned; But those Laws which
prescribe impossibilities, do not direct a man what he is to do, and what he is
to shun. The Minor is as evident; for if his opinion be true all actions, all
transgressions are determined antecedently inevitably to be done by a natural
and necessary flux of extrinsecall causes. Yea, even the will of man, and the
reason it self is thus determined. And therefore whatsoever Laws do prescribe
any thing to be done which is not done, or to be left undone which is done, do
prescribe absolute impossibilities, and punish men for not doing of
impossibilities. In all his answer there is not one word to this argument, but
only to the conclusion. He says, that not the necessity, but the will to break
the Law makes the action unjust. I ask what makes the will to break the Law, is
it not his necessity? What getts he by this? A perverse will causes injustice,
and necessity causes a perverse will. He says, the Law regards the will,
but not the precedent causes of action. To what proposition, to what term is
this answer? he neither denies, nor distinguishes. First, the question here is
not what makes actions to be injust, but what makes Laws to be unjust. So his
answer is impertinent. It is likewise untrue, for First, that will which the
Law regards, is not such a will as T. H. imagines. It is a free will, not a
determined, necessitated will; a rational will, not a brutish will. Secondly,
the Law does look upon precedent causes as well as the voluntariness of the
action. If a child before he be seven years old, or have the use of reason, in
some childish quarrel do willingly stab another, whereof we have seen
experience, yet the Law looks not upon it as an act of murder, because there
wanted a power to deliberate, and consequently true liberty. Manslaughter may
be as voluntary as murder, and commonly more voluntary, because being done in
hot blood, there is the less reluctation, yet the Law considers, that the
former is done out of some sudden passion without serious deliberation, and the
other out of prepensed malice, and desire of revenge, and therefore condemns
murder as more wilful and more punishable than manslaughter.

He says, that no Law can possibly be unjust; And I say, that this is to deny
the conclusion, which deserves no reply; But to give him satisfaction, I will
follow him in this also. If he intended no more, but that unjust Laws are not
Genuine Laws, nor bind to active obedience, because they are not the
ordinations of right reason, nor instituted for the common good, nor prescribe
that which ought to be done, he said truly, but nothing at all to his purpose.
But if he intend (as he does) that there are no Laws de facto, which are the
ordinances of reason erring, instituted for the common hurt, and prescribing
that which ought not to be done, he is much mistaken. Pharaohs Law to drown the
Male Children of the Israelites, Exodus 1.22. Nebuchadnezzars Law, that
whosoever did not fall down and worship the golden image which he had set up,
should be cast into the fiery furnace, Dan. 3.^. Darius his Law, that whosoever
should ask a Petition of any God or man, for thirty days, save of the King,
should be cast into the Den of Lions, Dan. 6.7. Ahashuerosh his Law, to destroy
the Jewish Nation, root and branch, Esther 3.13. The Pharisees Law, that
whosoever confessed Christ, should be excommunicated, John 9.22. were all
unjust Laws.

The ground of this error is as great an error it self (Such an art he has
learned of repacking Paradoxes) which is this. That every man makes by his
consent the Law which he is bound to keep; If this were true, it would preserve
them, if not from being unjust, yet from being injurious: But it is not true.
The positive Law of God, contained in the old and new Testament; The Law of
Nature, written in our hearts by the Finger of God; The Laws of Conquerors,
who come in by the power of the Sword; The Laws of our Ancestors, which were
made before we were born, do all oblige us to the observation of them, yet to
none of all these did we give our actual consent. Over and above all these
exceptions, he builds upon a wrong foundation, that all Magistrates at first,
were elective. The first Governors were Fathers of Families; And when those
petty Princes could not afford competent protection and security to their
subjects, many of them did resign their several and respective interests into
the hands of one joint Father of the Country.

And though his ground had been true, that all first Legislators were elective,
which is false, yet his superstructure fails, for it was done in hope and
trust, that they would make just Laws. If Magistrates abuse this trust, and
deceive the hopes of the people, by making Tyrranicall Laws, yet it is without
their consent. A precedent trust does not justify the subsequent errors and
abuses of a Trustee. He who is duly elected a Legislator, may exercise his
Legislative power unduely. The peoples implicit consent does not render the
Tyrannical Laws of their Legislators to be just.

But his chiefest answer is, that an action forbidden, though it proceed from
necessary causes, yet if it were done willingly, it may be justly punished,
which according to his custom he prooves by an instance; A man necessitated to
steal by the strength of temptation, yet if he steal willingly, is justly put
to death. Here are two things, and both of them untrue.

First, he fails in his assertion. Indeed we suffer justly for those
necessities which we our selves have contracted by our own fault, but not for
extrinsecall, antecedent necessities, which were imposed upon us without our
fault. If that Law do not oblige to punishment which is not intimated, because
the subject is invincibly ignorant of it; How much less that Law which
prescribes absolute impossibilities, unless perhaps invincible necessity be not
as strong a plea as invincible ignorance. That which he adds, if it were done
willingly, though it be of great moment, if it be rightly understood, yet in
his sense, that is, if a man's will be not in his own disposition, and if his
willing do not come upon him according to his will, nor according to any thing
else in his power, it weighs not half so much as the least feather in all his
horse-load. For if that Law be unjust and tyrannical which commands a man to
do that which is impossible for him to do, then that Law is likewise unjust and
tyrannical, which commands him to will that which is impossible for him to
will.

Secondly, his instance supposes an untruth, and is a plain begging of the
question. No man is extrinsecally, antecedently and irresistibly necessitated
by temptation to steal. The Devil may solicit us, but he cannot necessitate
us. He has a faculty of persuading, but not a power of compelling. Nos ignem
habemus, spiritus flammam ciet, as Nazianzen. He blows the coals, but the fire
is our own. Mordet duntaxat sese in fauces illius objicientem, as St. Austin,
he bites not until we thrust our selves into his mouth. He may propose, he may
suggest, but he cannot moove the will effectively. Resist the Devil, and he
will fly from you, Jam. 4.7. By faith we are able to quench all the fiery
darts of the wicked, Ephesians. 6.16. And if Satan, who can both propose the object,
and choose out the fittest times and places, to work upon our frailties, and
can suggest reasons, yet cannot necessitate the will (which is most certain,)
then much less can outward objects do it alone. They have no natural efficacy
to determine the will. Well may they be occasions, but they cannot be causes of
evil. The sensitive appetite may engender a proclivity to steal, but not a
necessity to steal. And if it should produce a kind of necessity, yet it is but
Moral, not Natural; Hypothetical, not Absolute; Coexistent, not Antecedent from
our selves, nor extrinsecall. This necessity, or rather proclivity, was free in
its causes, we our selves by our own negligence in not opposing our passions
when we should, and might, have freely given it a kind of dominion over us.
Admit that some sudden passions may and do extraordinarily surprise us; And
therefore we say, motus primo primi, the first motions are not always in our
power, neither are they free, yet this is but very rarely, and it is our own
fault that they do surprise us. Neither does the Law punish the first motion to
theft, but the advised act of stealing. The intention makes the thief. But of
this more largely numb. 25.

He pleades moreover, that the Law is a cause of justice, that it frames the
wills of men to justice, and that the punishment of one does conduce to the
preservation of many. All this is most true of a just Law justly executed. But
this is no god-a-mercy to T. H. his opinion of absolute necessity. If all
actions, and all events be predetermined Naturaly, Necessarily, Extrinsecally,
how should the Law frame men morally to good actions? He leaves nothing for the
Law to do, but either that which is done already, or that which is impossible
to be done. If a man be chained to every individual act which he does, and from
every act which he does not, by indissolvible bonds of inevitable necessity,
how should the Law either deter him or frame him? If a dog be chained fast to
a post, the sight of a rod cannot draw him from it. Make a thousand Laws, that
the fire shall not burn, yet it will burn. And whatsoever men do (according to
T. H.) they do it as necessarily, as the fire burns. Hang up a thousand
Thieves, and if a man be determined inevitably to steal, he must steal
notwithstanding.

He adds, that the sufferings imposed by the Law upon delinquents, respect not
the evil act past, but the good to come, and that the putting of a delinquent
to death by the Magistrate for any crime whatsoever, cannot be justified before
God, except there be a real intention to benefit others by his example. The
truth is, the punishing of delinquents by Law, respects both the evil act
past, and the good to come. The ground of it, is the evil act past, the scope
or end of it, is the good to come. The end without the ground cannot justify
the act. A bad intention may make a good action bad; but a good intention
cannot make a bad action good. It is not lawful to do evil, that good may
come of it, nor to punish an innocent person for the admonition of others; that
is to fall into a certain crime, for fear of an uncertain. Again, though there
were no other end of penalties inflicted, neither probatory, nor castigatory,
nor exemplary, but only vindicatory, to satisfy the Law, out of a zeal of
Justice, by giving to every one his own, yet the action is just and
warrantable. Killing, as it is considered in it self without all undue
circumstances, was never prohibited to the lawful Magistrate, who is the
Vicegerent or Lieutenant of God, from whom he derives his power of life and
death.

T. H. has one plea more. As a drowning man catches at every Bulrush, so he
lays hold on every pretense to save a desperate cause. But first, it is worth
our observation to see how often he changes shapes in this one particular.
First, he told us, that it was the irresistible power of God that justifies all
his actions, though he command one thing openly, and plot another thing
secretly, though he be the cause, not only of the action, but also of the
irregularity, though he both give man power to act and determine this power to
evil, as well as good; though he punish the Creatures, for doing that which he
himself did necessitate them to do. But being pressed with reason, that this is
tyrannical; first, to necessitate a man to do his will, and then to punish him
for doing of it, he leaves this pretense in the plain field, and flies to a
second. That therefore a man is justly punished, for that which he was
necessitated to do, because the act was voluntary on his part. This has more
show of reason than the former, if he did make the will of man to be in his own
disposition, but maintaining, that the will is irresistibly determined to will
whatsoever it does will, the injustice and absurdity is the same; First, to
necessitate a man to will, and then to punish him for willing. The dog only
bites the stone which is thrown at him with a strange hand, but they make the
first cause to punish the instrument, for that which is his own proper act.
Wherefore not being satisfied with this, he casts it off, and flies to his
third shift. Men are not punished (says he) therefore, because their theft
proceeded from election (that is, because it was willingly done, for to Elect
and Will, says he, are both one; Is not this to blow hot and cold with the
same breath?) but because it was noxious and contrary to men's preservation.
Thus far he says true, that every creature by the instinct of nature, seeks to
preserve it self; cast water into a dusty place, and it contracts it self into
little globes, that is, to preserve it self. And those who are noxious in the
eye of the Law, are justly punished by them to whom the execution of the Law is
committed; but the Law accounts no persons noxious, but those who are noxious
by their own fault. It punishes not a thorn for pricking, because it is the
nature of the thorn, and it can do no otherwise, nor a child before it have the
use of reason. If one should take mine hand perforce, and give another a box on
the ear with it, my hand is noxious, but the Law punishes the other who is
faulty. And therefore he has reason to propose the question, how it is just to
kill one man to amend another, if he who killed did nothing but what he was
necessitated to do. He might as well demand how it is lawful to murder a
company of innocent Infants to make a bath of their lukewarm blood, for curing
the Leprosy. It had been a more rational way; first, to have demonstrated that
it is so, and then to have questioned why it is so. His assertion it self is
but a dream, and the reason which he gives of it why it is so, is a dream of a
dream.

The sum of it is this; That where there is no Law, there no killing or any
thing else can be unjust; that before the constitution of Commonwealths every
man had power to kill another, if he conceived him to be hurtful to him; that
at the constitution of Commonwealths particular men lay down this right in
part, and in part reserve it to themselves, as in case of theft, or murder.
That the right which the Commonwealth has to put a malefactor to death is not
created by the Law, but remains from the first right of Nature, which every
man has to preserve himself, that the killing of men in this case is as the
killing of beasts in order to our own preservavation. This may well be called
stringing of Paradoxes.

But first, there never was any such time when mankind was without Governors
and Laws, and Societies. Paternall Government was in the world from the
beginning, and the Law of Nature. There might be sometimes a root of such
Barbarous Theevish Brigants, in some rocks, or deserts, or odd corners of the
world, but it was an abuse and a degeneration from the nature of man, who is a
political creature. This savage opinion reflects too much upon the honor of
mankind.

Secondly, there never was a time when it was lawful ordinarily for private
men to kill one another for their own preservation. If God would have had men
live like wild beasts, as Lions, Bears or Tigers, he would have armed them with
horns, or tusks, or talons, or pricks; but of all creatures man is born most
naked, without any weapon to defend himself, because God had provided a better
means of security for him, that is, the Magistrate.

Thirdly, that right which private men have to preserve themselves, though it
be with the killing of another, when they are set upon to be murdered or
robbed, is not a remainder or a reserve of some greater power which they have
resigned, but a privilege which God has given them, in case of extreme danger
and invincible necessity, that when they cannot possibly have recourse to the
ordinary remedy, that is, the Magistrate, every man becomes a Magistrate to
himself.

Fourthly, nothing can give that which it never had; The people, whilst they
were a dispersed rabble (which in some odd cases might happen to be) never had
juftly the power of life and death, and therefore they could not give it by
their election. All that they do is to prepare the matter, but it is God
Almighty, that infuseth the soul of power.

Fifthly and lastly, I am sorry to hear a man of reason and parts to compare the
murdering of men with the slaughtering of brute beasts. The elements are for
the Plants, the Plants for the brute beasts, the brute beasts for man. When God
enlarged his former grant to man, and gave him liberty to eat the flesh of the
creatures for his sustenance, Genesis 9.3. Yet man is expressly excepted, ver. 6.
Who so sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed. And the reason is
assigned, for in the Image of God made he man. Before sin entered into the
world, or before any creatures were hurtful, or noxious to man, he had
dominion over them, as their Lord and Master. And though the possession of this
sovereignty be lost in part, for the sin of man, which made not only the
creatures to rebel, but also the inferior faculties, to rebel against the
superior, from whence it comes, that one man is hurtful to another, yet the
dominion still remains; wherein we may observe how sweetly the providence of
God does temper this cross, that though the strongest creatures have withdrawn
their obedience, as Lions and Bears, to show that man has lost the excellency
of his dominion, and the weakest creatures, as Flies and Gnats, to show into
what a degree of contempt he is fallen, yet still the most profitable and
useful creatures, as Sheep and Oxen, do in some degree retain their obedience.

The next branch of his answer concerns consultations, which (says he) are
not superfluous, though all things come to pass necessarily, because they are
the cause which does necessitate the effect, and the means to bring it to pass.
We were told Numb. 11. that the last dictate of right reason was but as the
last feather which breaks the horses back. It is well, yet that reason has
gained some command again, and is become at least a Quartermaster. Certainly
if any thing under God have power to determine the will, it is right reason. But
I have showed sufficiently, that reason does not determine the will Physically,
nor absolutely, much less extrinsecally, and antecedently, and therefore it
makes nothing for that necessity which T. H. has undertaken to prove. He adds
further, that as the end is necessary, so are the means; And when it is
determined, that one thing shall be chosen before another, it is determined
also for what cause it shall be so chosen. All which is truth, but not the
whole truth; for as God ordaines means for all ends, so he adapts and fitts the
means to their respective ends, free means to free ends, contingent means to
contingent ends, necessary means to necessary ends. Whereas T. H. would have
all means, all ends, to be necessary. If good has so ordered the world, that a
man ought to use and may freely use those means of God, which he does neglect,
not by virtue of Gods decree, but by his own fault; If a man use those means of
evil, which he ought not to use, and which by Gods decree, he had power to
forbear; If God have left to man in part the free managery of human affairs,
and to that purpose has endowed him with understanding, then consultations are
of use, then provident care is needful, then it concerns him to use the means.
But if God have so ordered this world, that a man cannot, if he would, neglect
any means of good, which by virtue of Gods decree it is possible for him to
use, and that he cannot possibly use any means of evil, but those which are
irresistibly and inevitably imposed upon him by an antecedent decree, then not
only consultations are vain, but that noble faculty of reason it self is vain:
do we think that we can help God Almighty to do his proper work? In vain we
trouble our selves, in vain we take care to use those means, which are not in
our power to use, or not to use. And this is that which was contained in my
prolepsis or prevention of his answer, though he be pleased both to disorder
it, and to silence it. We cannot hope by our labors, to alter the course of
things set down by God; let him perform his decree, let the necessary causes do
their work. If we be those causes, yet we are not in our own disposition, we
must do what we are ordained to do, and more we cannot do. Man has no remedy
but patience, and shrug up the shoulders. This is the doctrine flows from this
opinion of absolute necessity. Let us suppose the great wheel of the clock
which setts all the little wheels a going, to be as the decree of God, and that
the motion of it were perpetual infallible from an intrinsecal principle, even
as Gods decree is Infallible, Eternal, All-sufficient. Let us suppose the
lesser wheels to be the second causes, and that they do as certainly follow the
motion of the great wheel, without missing or swerving in the least degree, as
the second causes do pursue the determination of the first cause. I desire to
know in this case what cause there is to call a Council of Smiths, to consult
and order the motion of that which was ordered and determined before their
hands. Are men wiser than God? yet all men know, that the motion of the lesser
whee is is a necessary means to make the clock strike.

But he tells me in great sadness, that my argument is just like this other; If
I shall live till to morrow, I shall live till to morrow, though I run my self
through with a sword to day, which says he, is a false consequence, and a
false propoposition. Truly, if by running through, he understands killing, it
is a false, or rather a foolish proposition, and implies a contradiction. To
live till to morrow, and to day to die, are inconsistent. But by his favor,
this is not my consequence, but this is his own opinion. He would persuade us,
that it is absolutely necessary, that a man shall live till to morrow, and yet
that it is possible that he may kill himself to day. My Argument is this. If
there be a liberty and possibility for a man to kill himself to day, then it is
not absolutely necessary, that he shall live till to morrow; but there is such
a liberty, therefore no such necessity. And the consequence which I make here
is this. If it be absolutely necessary, that a man shall live till to morrow,
then it is vain and superfluous for him to consult and deliberate, whether he
should die to day, or not. And this is a true consequence; The ground of his
mistake is this, that though it be true, that a man may kill himself to day,
yet upon the supposition of his absolute necessity it is impossible. Such
Heterogeneous arguments and instances he produces, which are half builded upon
our true grounds, and the other half upon his false grounds.

The next branch of my argument concerns Admonitions, to which he gives no new
answer, and therefore I need not make any new reply; saving only to tell him,
that he mistakes my argument; I say not only, If all things be necessary, then
admonitions are in vain, but if all things be necessary, then it is to no more
purpose to admonish men of understanding than fools, children, or madmen. That
they do admonish the one and not the other, is confessedly true; and no reason
under heaven can be given for it but this, that the former have the use of
reason, and true liberty, with a dominion over their own actions, which
children, fools and madmen have not.

Concerning praise and dispraise, he inlargeth himself. The scope of his
discourse is, that things necessary may be praiseworthy. There is no doubt of
it, but withal their praise reflects upon the free agent, as the praise of a
statue reflects upon the workman who made it. To praise a thing (says he) is
to say, it is good. True, but this goodness is not a Metaphysicall goodness, so
the worst of things, and whatsoever has a being, is good. Nor a natural
goodness; The praise of it passes wholly to the Author of Nature; God saw all
that he had made, and it was very good. But a moral goodness, or a goodness of
actions rather than of things. The moral goodness of an action is the
conformity of it with right reason. The moral evil of an action, is the
deformity of it, and the alienation of it from right reason. It is moral
praise and dispraise which we speak of here. To praise any thing morally, is to
say, it is morally good, that is, conformable to right reason. The moral
dispraise of a thing is to say, it is morally bad, or disagreeing from the rule
of right reason. So moral praise is from the good use of liberty, moral
dispraise from the bad use of liberty: but if all things be necessary, than
moral liberty is quite taken away, and with it all true praise and dispraise.
Whereas T. H. adds, that to say a thing is good, is to say, it is as I would
wish, or as another would wish, or as the State would have it, or according to
the Law of the Land, he mistakes infinitely. He and another, and the State, may
all wish, that which is not really good, but only in appearance. We do often
wish what is profitable, or delightful, without regarding so much as we ought
what is honest. And though the will of the State where we live, or the Law of
the Land do deserve great consideration, yet it is no infallible rule of moral
goodness. And therefore to his question, whether nothing that proceeds from
necessity can please me, I answer, yes. The burning of the fire pleaeth me when
I am cold; And I say, it is good fire, or a creature created by God, for my
use, and for my good: Yet I do not mean to attribute any moral goodness to the
fire, nor give any moral praise to it, as if it were in the power of the fire
it self, either to communicate its heat, or to suspend it, but I praise first
the Creator of the fire, and then him who provided it. As for the praise which
Velleius Paterculus gives Cato, that he was good by nature. Et quia aliter esse
non potuit, it has more of the Orator than either of the Theologian or
Philosopher in it. Man in the State of innocence did fall and become evil,
what privilege has Cato more than he? No, by his leave. Narratur and dij
Catonis saepe mero caluisse virtus. but the true meaning is, that he was
naturally of a good temper, not so prone to some kinds of vices as others were;
This is to praise a thing, not an action, naturally, not morally. Socrates was
not of so good a natural temper, yet prooved as good a man; the more his
praise, by how much the difficulty was the more to conform his disorderly
appetite to right reason.

Concerning reward and punishment, he says not a word, but only that they
frame and confound the will to good, which has been sufficiently answered.
They do so indeed, but if his opinion were true, they could not do so. But
because my aim is not only to answer T. H. but also to satisfy my self; Though
it be not urged by him, yet I do acknowledge, that I find some improper and
analogicall rewards and punishments used to brute beasts, as the hunter rewards
his dog, the master of the Coy-duck whipps her, when she returns without
company. And if it be true, which he affirms a little before, that I have
confessed, that the actions of brute beasts are all necessitated and determined
to that one thing which they shall do, the difficulty is increased.

But first, my saying is misalleged. I said, that some kinds of actions which
are most excellent in brute beasts, and make the greatest show of reason, as
the Bees working their Honey, and the Spiders weaving their Webbs, are yet done
without any consultation, or deliberation, by a mere instinct of nature, and by
a determination of their fancies, to these only kinds of works But I did never
say, I could not say, that all their individual actions are necessary, and
antecedently determined in their causes, as what days the Bees shall fly
abroad, and what days and hours each Be shall keep in the Hive, how often
they shall fetch in Thyme on a day, and from whence. These actions and the
like, though they be not free, because brute beasts want reason to deliberate,
yet they are contingent, and therefore not necessary.

Secondly, I do acknowledge, that as the fancies of some brute creatures are
determined by nature, to some rare and exquisite works; So in others, where it
finds a natural propension; Art which is the Imitator of Nature, may frame and
form them according to the will of the Artist, to some particular actions and
ends, as we see in Setting-doggs, and Coy-ducks, and Parrots; and the
principal means whereby they effect this, is by their backs, or by their
bellies, by the rod, or by the morsel, which have indeed a shadow, or
resemblance of rewards and punishments. But we take the word here properly, not
as it is used by vulgar people, but as it is used by Divines and Philosophers,
for that recompense which is due to honest and dishonest actions. Where there
is no moral liberty, there is neither honesty nor dishonesty, neither true
reward nor punishment.

Thirdly, when brute creatures do learn any such qualities, it is not out of
judgment, or deliberation, or discourse, by inferring or concluding one thing
from another, which they are not capable of. Neither are they able to conceive
a reason of what they do, but merely out of memory, or out of a sensitive fear,
or hope. They remember, that when they did after one manner, they were beaten;
and when they did after another manner, they were cherished, and accordingly
they apply themselves. But if their individual actions were absolutely
necessary, fear or hope could not alter them. Most certainly, if there be any
desert in it, or any praises due unto it, it is to them who did instruct them.

Lastly, concerning Arts, Arms, Books, Instruments, Study, Physic, and the
like, he answers not a word more than what is already satisfied. And
therefore I am silent.

Numb. 15.
J. D. In a word, the only reason why those persons who tread in this path of
fatal destiny do sometimes pray, or repent, or serve God, is because the light
of nature and the strength of reason, and the evidence of Scripture, do for
that present transport them from their ill chosen grounds, and expel those
Stociall fancies out of their heads; A complete Stoic can neither pray, nor
repent, nor serve God to any purpose. Either allow liberty, or destroy Church,
as well as Commonwealth, Religion as well as Policy.

T. H. HIs third Argument consists in other inconveniences which he says
will follow, namely, impiety and neglicence of Religious duties, repentance and
zeal to Gods service. To which I answer, as to the rest, that they follow not.
I must confess, if we consider far the greatest part of mankind, not as they
should be, but as they are, that is, as men whom either the study of acquiring
wealth, or preferments, or whom the appetite of sensual delights, or the
impatience of meditating, or the rash embracing of wrong principles, have made
unapt to discuss the truth of things, that the dispute of this question will
rather hurt than help their piety. And therefore, if he had not desired this
answer, I would not have written it. Nor do I write it, but in hope your
Lordship, and he will keep it in private. Nevertheless in very truth, the
necessity of events does not of it self draw with it any impiety at all. For
piety consists only in two things; One, that we honor God in our hearts,
which is, that we think of his power as highly as we can, for to honor any
thing is nothing else but to think it to be of great power. The other, that we
signify that honor and esteem by our words and actions, which is called
cultus, or worship of God. He therefore that thinks that all things proceed
from Gods Eternal Will, and consequently are necessary, does he not think God
Omnipotent? does he not esteem of his power as highly as possible? which is to
honor God as much as can be in his heart. Again, he that thinks so, is he
not more apt by external acts and words to acknowledge it, then he that
thinks otherwise? Yet is this external acknowledgement the same thing which
we call worship. So this opinion fortifieth piety in both kinds, externally,
internally, and therefore is far from destroying it. And for repentance, which
is nothing but a glad returning into the right way, after the grief of being
out of the way, though the cause that made him go astray were necessary, yet
there is no reason why he should not grieve; and again, though the cause why he
returned into the way were necessary, there remains still the causes of joy.
So that the necessity of the actions takes away neither of those parts of
repentance, grief for the error, nor joy for the returning. And for prayer,
whereas he says, that the necessity of things destroys prayer, I deny it. For
though prayer be none of the causes that moove Gods will, his will being
unchangeable, yet since we find in Gods Word, he will not give his blessings
but to those that ask them, the motive to prayer is the same. Prayer is the
gift of God, no less than the blessings. And the prayer is decreed together in
the same decree wherein the blessing is decreed. It Is manifest, that
thanksgiving is no cause of the blessing past; And that which is past is sure,
and necessary. Yet even amongst men, thanks is in use as an acknowledgment of
the benefit past, though we should expect no new benefit for our gratitude. And
prayer to God Almighty is but thanksgiving for his blessings in general; and
though it precede the particular thing we ask, yet it is not a cause or means
of it, but a signification that we expect nothing but from God, in such manner
as he, not as we will. And our Savior by word of mouth bids us pray, Thy will,
not our will be done, and by example teaches us the same, for he prayed thus,
Father, if it be thy will, let this cup pass, etc. The end of prayer, as of
thanksgiving, is not to move, but to honor God Almighty, in acknowledging that
what we ask can be effected by him only.

J. D. I Hope T. H. will be persuaded in time, that it is not the Covetousness,
or Ambition, or Sensuallity, or Sloth, or Prejudice of his Readers which
renders this doctrine of absolute necessity dangerous, but that it is in its
own nature destructive to true godliness; And though his answer consist more of
oppositions than of solutions, yet I will not willingly leave one grain of his
matter unweighed. First, he erres in making inward piety to consist merely in
the estimation of the judgment. If this were so, what hinders but that the
Devils should have as much inward piety as the best Christians, for they
esteem Gods power to be infinite, and tremble? Though inward piety do suppose
the act of the understanding, yet it consists properly in the act of the
will, being that branch of Justice which gives to God the honor which is due
unto him. Is there no Love due to God, no Faith, no Hope? Secondly, he erres in
making inward piety to ascribe no glory to God, but only the glory of his Power
or Omnipotence. What shall become of all other the divine attributes, and
particularly of his Goodness, of his Truth, of his Justice, of his mercy, which
beget a more true and sincere honor in the heart than greatness it self?
Magnos facile laudamus, bonos lubenter. Thirdly, this opinion of absolute
necessity destroys the truth of God, making him to command one thing openly,
and to necessitate another privately, to chide a man for doing that which it
has determined him to do, to profess one thing, and to intend another. It
destroys the goodness of God, making him to be an hater of mankind, and to
delight in the torments of his creatures, whereas the very dogs licked the
sores of Lazarus in pity and commiseration of him. It destroys the Justice of
God, making him to punish the creatures for that which was his own act, which
they had no more power to shun, than the fire has power not to burn. It
destroys the very power of God, making him to be the true Author of all the
defects and evils which are in the world. These are the fruits of Impotence,
not of Omnipotence. He who is the effective cause of sin either in himself, or
in the Creature, is not Almighty. There needs no other Devil in the world to
raise jealousies and suspicions between God and his creatures, or to poison
mankind with an apprehension, that God does not love them, but only this
opinion, which was the office of the Serpent Genesis 3.5. Fourthly, for the
outward worship of God. How shall a man praise God for his goodness, who
believes him to be a greater Tyrant than ever was in the world? who creates
millions to burn eternally without their fault, to express his power? How shall
a man hear the Word of God with that reverence, and devotion, and faith, which
is requisite, who believes that God causes his Gospel to be preached to the
much greater part of Christians, not with any intention that they should be
converted and saved, but merely to harden their hearts, and to make them
inexcusable? How shall a man receive the blessed Sacrament with comfort and
confidence, as a Seal of Gods love in Christ, who believes, that so many
millions are positively excluded from all fruit and benefit of the Passions of
Christ, before they had done either good or evil? How shall he prepare himself
with care and conscience, who apprehends, that Eating and Drinking unworthily
is not the cause of damnation, but because God would damn a man, therefore he
necessitates him to eat and drink unworthily? How shall a man make a free vow
to God, without gross ridiculous hypocrisy, who thinks he is able to perform
nothing, but as he is extrinsecally necessitated? Fifthly, for Repentance, how
shall a man condemn and accuse himself for his sins, who thinks himself to be
like a Watch which is wound up by God, and that he can go neither longer nor
shorter, faster nor slower, truer nor falser, than he is ordered by God? If God
sets him right, he goes right. If God set him wrong, he goes wrong. How can a
man be said to return into the right way, who never was in any other way, but
that which God himself had chalked out for him? What is his purpose to amend,
who is destitute of all power, but as if a man should purpose to fly without
wings, or a beggar who has not a groat in his purse, purpose to build
Hospitalls?

We use to say, admit one absurdity, and a thousand will follow. To maintain
this unreasonable opinion of absolute necessity he is necessitated (but it is
hypothetically, he might change his opinion, if he would) to deal with all
ancient Writers, as the Goths did with the Romans, who destroyed all their
magnificent works, that there might remain no monument of their greatness upon
the face of the earth. Therefore he will not leave so much as one of their
opinions, nor one of their definitions, nay, not one of their terms of Art
standing. Observe what a description he has given us here of Repentance. It is
a glad returning into the right way, after the grief of being out of the way.
It amazed me to find gladness to be the first word in the description of
repentance. His repentance is not that repentance, nor his piety that piety,
nor his prayer that kind of prayer which the Church of God in all Ages has
acknowledged. Fasting, and Sackcloth, and Ashes, and Tears, and
Humi-cubations, used to be companions of Repentance. Joy may be a consequent of
it, not a part of it. It is a returning, but whose act is this returning? Is it
Gods alone, or does the penitent person concur also freely with the grace of
God? If it be Gods alone, then it is his repentance, not man's repentance, what
need the penitent person trouble himself about it? God will take care of his
own work. The Scriptures teach us otherwise, that God expects our concurrence.
Revel. 3.19. Be zealous and repent, behold I stand at the door, and knock. If
any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him. It is a glad
returning into the right way. Why dare any more call that a wrong way, which
God himself has determined? He that wills, and does that which God would
have him to will and to do, is never out of his right way. It follows in his
description, after the grief, etc. It is true, a man may grieve for that which
is necessarily imposed upon him, but he cannot grieve for it as a fault of his
own, if it never was in his power to shun it; Suppose a Writing-master shall
hold his Scholars hand in his, and write with it; the Scholars part is only to
hold still his hand, whether the Master write well or ill; the Scholar has no
ground, either of joy or sorrow as for himself, no man will interpret it to be
his act, but his Masters. It is no fault to be out of the right way, if a man
had not liberty to have kept himself in the way.

And so from Repentance he skipps quite over New obedience, to come to Prayer,
which is the last Religious duty insisted upon by me here. But according to his
use, without either answering or mentioning what I say. Which would have showed
him plainly what kind of prayer I intend, not contemplative prayer in
general, as it includes thanksgiving, but that most proper kind of prayer
which we call Petition, which used to be thus defined, to be an act of Religion
by which we desire of God something which we have not, and hope that we shall
obtain it by him. Quite contrary to this T. H. tells us, that prayer is not a
cause, nor a means of Gods blessing, but only a signification that we expect
it from him. If he had told us only that prayer is not a meritorious cause of
Gods blessings, as the poor man by begging an alms does not deserve it, I
should have gone along with him. But to tell us, that it is not so much as a
means to procure Gods blessing, and yet with the same breath, that God will not
give his blessings, but to those who pray, who shall reconcile him to himself?
The Scriptures teach us otherwise, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my
Name, he will give it you, John 16.23. Ask and it shall be given you, seek and
ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you, Matthew. 7.7. St. Paul
tells the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 1.11. that he was helped by their prayers, that's
not all, that the gift was bestowed upon him by their means, So prayer is a
means; And St. James says, cap. 5.16. The effectual fervent prayer of a
righteous man avails much. If it be effectual, then it is a cause. To show
this efficacy of prayer, our Savior uses the comparison of a Father toward
his Child, of a Neighbor toward his Neighbor, yea, of an unjust Judge, to
shame those who think, that God has not more compassion than a wicked man.
This was signified by Jacobs wrestling and prevailing with God. Prayer is like
the Tradesmans tools wherewithal he gets his living for himself, and his
family. But, says he, Gods will is unchangeable. What then? He might as well
use this against study, Physic, and all second causes, as against Prayer. He
shows even in this, how little they attribute to the endeavors of men. There
is a great difference between these two, mutare voluntatem, to change the will,
which God never does, in whom there is not the least shadow of turning by
change; His will to love and hate, was the same from eternity, which it now is,
and ever shall be. His love and hatred are immovable, but we are removed, Non
tellus cymbam tellurem cymba reliquit, And velle mutationem, to will a change,
which God often does. To change the will argues a change in the Agent, but to
will a change, only argues a change in the object. It is no inconstancy in a
man to love or to hate, as the object is changed. Praesta mihi omnia eadem and
idem sum. Prayer works not upon God, but us; It renders not him more propitious
in himself, but us more capable of mercy. He says, this, That God does not
bless us, except we pray, is a motive to prayer. Why talks he of motives, who
acknowledges no liberty, nor admitts any cause, but absolutely necessary? He
says, Prayer is the gift of God, no less than the blessing which we pray for,
and contained in the same decree with the blessing. It is true, the spirit of
prayer is the gift of God, will he conclude from thence, that the good
employment of one talent, or of one gift of God, may not procure another? Our
Savior teaches us otherwise, Come thou good and faithful servant, thou have
been faithful in little, I will make thee ruler over much. Too much light is
an enemy to the light, and too much Law is an enemy to Justice. I could wish we
wrangled less about Gods Decrees, until we understood them better. But, says
he, Thanksgiving is no cause of the blessing past, and prayer is but a
thanksgiving. He might even as well tell me, that when a beggar craves an
alms, and when he gives thanks for it, it is all one. Every thanksgiving is a
kind of prayer, but every prayer, and namely Petition, is not a thanksgiving.
In the last place he urges, that in our prayers we are bound, to submit our
wills to Gods Will, who ever made any doubt of this, we must submit to the
Preceptive will of God, or his Commandments; we must submit to the effective
Will of God, when he declares his good pleasure by the event or otherwise. But
we deny, and deny again, either that God wills things, ad extra, without
himself necessarily, or that it is his pleasure that all second causes should
act necessarily at all times, which is the question, and that which he allegeth
to the contrary comes not near it.

Numb. 16.
J. D.

T. H. THE fourth Argument from reason is this, The Order, Beauty and
Perfection of the world requires, that in the Universe, should be Agents of
all sorts, some necessary, some free, some contingent. He that shall make all
things necessary, or all things free, or all things contingent, does overthrow
the beauty and perfection of the world.

In which Argument I observe, first, a contradiction. For, seeing he that
makes any thing in that he makes it, he makes it to be necessary, it
follows, that he that makes all things, makes all things necessary to be.
As if a workman make a garment, the garment must necessarily be. So if God make
every thing, every thing must necessarily be. Perhaps the beauty of the world
requires (though we know it not) that some Agents should work without
deliberation, which he calls necessary Agents. And some Agents with
deliberation, and those, both he and I, call free Agents. And that some Agents
should work, and we not know how; And them effects we both call contingent; But
this hinders not, but that he that electeth may have his election necessarily
determined to one by former causes; And that which is contingent and imputed to
Fortune, be nevertheless necessary, and depend on precedent necessary causes.
For by contingent, men do not mean that which has no cause, but which has not
for cause any thing which we perceive. As for example; when a Travailer meets
with a shower, the journey had a cause, and the rain had a cause sufficient
enough to produce it, but because the journey caused not the rain, nor the rain
the journey, we say, they were contingent one to another. And thus you see,
though there be three sorts of events, Necessary, Contingent, and Free, yet
they may be all necessary, without the destruction of the beauty or perfection
of the Univers.

J. D. THE first thing he observes in mine Argument is contradiction, as he
calls it, but in truth it is but a deception of the sight. As one candle
sometimes seems to be two, or a rod in the water shows to be two rods,
Quicquid recipitur, recipitur ad modum recipient is. But what is this
contradiction? Because I say, he who makes all things, does not make them
necessary. What a contradiction, and but one proposition? That were strange. I
say, God has not made all Agents necessary, he says, God has made all Agents
necessary. Here is a contradiction indeed, but it is between him and me, not
between me and my self. But yet though it be not a formal contradiction, yet
perhaps it may imply a contradiction in adjecto. Wherefore to clear the matter,
and dispell the mist which he has raised; It is true, that every thing when it
is made, it is necessary that it be made so as it is, that is, by a necessity
of infallibility, or supposition, supposing, that it be so made, but this is
not that absolute, antecedent necessity, whereof the question is between him
and me. As to use his own instance; Before the Garment be made, the Tailor is
free to make it, either of the Italian, Spanish, or French fashion
indifferently: But after it is made, it is necessary that it be of that fashion
whereof he has made it, that is by a necessity of supposition. But this does
neither hinder the cause from being a free cause, nor the effect from being a
free effect, but the one did produce freely, and the other was freely produced.
So the contradiction is vanished.

In the second part of his answer he grants, that there are some free Agents,
and some contingent Agents, and that perhaps the beauty of the world does
require it, but like a shrewd Cow, which after she has given her milk, casts
it down with her foot, in the conclusion he tells us, that nevertheless they
are all necessary. This part of his answer is a mere Logomachy, (as a great
part of the controversies in the world are) or a contention about words. What
is the meaning of necessary, and free, and contingent actions. I have showed
before what free and necessary, do properly signify, but he misrecites it. He
says, I make all Agents which want deliberation to be necessary, but I
acknowledge that many of them are contingent. Neither do I approove his
definition of contingents, though he say, I concur with him, that they are such
agents as work we know not how. For according to this description many
necessary actions should be contingent, and many contingent actions should be
necessary. The Loadstone draws Iron, the Jet chaff, we know not how, and yet
the effect is necessary, and so it is in all Sympathies and Antipathies or
occult qualities. Again, a man walking in the streets, a Tile falls down from
an house, and breaks his head. We know all the causes, we know how this came to
pass. The man walked that way, the pin failed, the Tile fell just when he was
under it; And yet this is a contingent effect. The man might not have walked
that way, and then the Tile had not fallen upon him. Neither yet do I
understand here in this place by contingents, such events as happen besides the
scope, or intention of the Agents; as when a man digging to make a grave, finds
a Treasure, though the word be sometimes so taken. But by contingents, I
understand all things which may be done, and may not be done, may happen or may
not happen, by reason of the in determination, or accidental concurrence of
the causes. And those same things which are absolutely Incontingent and yet
Hypothetically necessary. As supposing the Passenger did walk just that way,
just at that time, and that the pin did fail just then, and the Tile fall, it
was necessary that it should fall upon the Passengers head. The same defense
will keep out his shower of rain. But we shall meet with his shower of rain
again, Numb. 34. Whither I refer the further explication of this point.

Numb. 17.
J. D.

T. H. TO the fifth Argument from reason, which is, that if liberty be taken
away, the nature and formal reason of sin is taken away, I answer, by denying
the consequence. The nature of sin consists in this, that the action done
proceed from our will, and be against the Law. A Judge in judging whether it be
sin or not, which is done against the Law, looks at no higher cause of the
action then the will of the doer. Now when I say the action was necessary, I do
not say it was done against the will of the doer, but with his will, and so
necessarily, because man's will, that is, every act of the will, and purpose of
man had a sufficient and therefore a necessary cause, and consequently every
voluntary action was necessitated. An action therefore may be voluntary and a
sin, and nevertheless be necessary. And because God may afflict by right
derived from his Omnipotency, though sin were not. And the example of
punishment on voluntary sinners, is the cause that produces Justice, and
makes sin less frequent. For God to punish such sinners, as I have showed
before, is no injustice. And thus you have my answer to his objections, both
out of Scripture and reason.

J. D. SCis tu simulare cupressum. quid hoc? It was shrewd counsel which
Alcibiades gave to Themistocles, when he was busy about his accounts to the
State, that he should rather study how to make no accounts. So it seems T. H.
thinks it a more compendious way to baulk an argument, then to satisfy it. And
if he can produce a Rowland against an Oliver, if he can urge a reason against
a reason, he thinks he has quitted himself fairly. But it will not serve his
turn. And that he may not complain of misunderstanding it, as those who have a
politic deafness, to hear nothing but what likes them, I will first reduce
mine argument into form, and then weigh what he says in answer, or rather in
opposition to it. That opinion which takes away the formal reason of sin, and
by consequence, sin it self, is not to be approoved; this is clear, because
both Reason and Religion, Nature, and Scripture do prove, and the whole world
confesses, that there is sin. But this opinion of the necessity of all things,
by reason of a conflux of second causes, ordered and determined by the first
cause, does take away the very formal reason of sin; This is prooved thus.
That which makes sin it self to be good, and just, and lawful, takes away the
formal cause, and distroyes the essence of sin; for if sin be good, and just,
and lawful, it is no more evil, it is no sin, no anomy. But this opinion of
the necessity of all things, makes sin to be very good and just, and lawful;
for nothing can flow essentially by way of Physical determination from the
first cause, which is the Law and Rule of Goodness and Justice, but that which
is good, and just, and lawful, but this opinion makes sin to proceed
essentially by way of Physical determination from the first cause, as appears
in T. H. his whole discourse. Neither is it material at all, whether it
proceed immediately from the first cause, or mediately, so as it be by a
necessary flux of second and determinate causes which produce it inevitably. To
these proofs he answers nothing, but only by denying the first consequence, as
he calls it, and then sings over his old song, That the nature of sin
consists in this, that the action proceeds from our will, and be against the
Law, which in our sense is most true, if he understand a just Law, and a free
rational will; But supposing (as he does) that the Law injoines things
impossible in themselves to be done, then it is an unjust and Tyrannical Law,
and the transgression of it is no sin, not to do that which never was in our
power to do. And supposing likewise (as he does) that the will is inevitably
determined by special influence from the first cause, then it is not man's
will, but Gods Will, and flows essentially from the Law of Goodness.

That which he adds of a Judge, is altogether impertinent, as to his defense.
Neither is a Civil Judge the proper Judge, nor the Law of the Land the proper
Rule of Sin. But it makes strongly against him; for the Judge goes upon a good
ground, and even this which he confesses, that the Judge looks at no higher
cause, then the will of the doer, prooves, that the will of the doer did
determine it self freely, and that the malefactor had liberty to have kept the
Law, if he would: Certainly, a Judge ought to look at all material
circumstances, and much more at all essential causes. Whether every sufficient
cause be a necessary cause, will come to be examined more properly, Numb. 31.
For the present, it shall suffice to say, that liberty flows from the
sufficiency, and contingency from the debility of the cause. Nature never
intends the generation of a monster. If all the causes concur sufficiently, a
perfect creature is produced, but by reason of the insufficiency, or debility,
or contingent aberration of some of the causes, sometimes a Monster is
produced. Yet the causes of a Monster were sufficient for the production of
that which was produced, that is a Monster, otherwise a Monster had not been
produced. What is it then? A Monster is not produced by virtue of that order
which is set in Nature, but by the contingent aberration of some of the
natural causes in their concurrence. The order set in Nature, is, that every
like should beget its like. But supposing the concurrence of the causes to be
such as it is, in the generation of a Monster, the generation of a Monster is
necessary; as all the events in the world are when they are, that is, by an
hypotheticall necessity. Then he betakes himself to his old help, that God may
punish by right of omnipotence, though there were no sin. The question is not
now what God may do, but what God will do, according to that Covenant which he
has made with man, Fac hoc and vives, Do this and thou shall live, whether God
does punish any man contrary to this Covenant, Hosea. 13.9. O Israel, thy
destruction is from thy self, but in me is thy help. He that wills not the
death of a Sinner, does much less will the death of an innocent Creature. By
death or destruction in this discourse, the only separation of Soul and Body
is not intended, which is a debt of nature, and which God, as Lord of Life and
Death, may justly do, and make it not a punishment, but a blessing to the
party; but we understand the subjecting of the Creature to eternal torments.
Lastly, he tells of that benenefit which redounds to others from Exemplary
Justice, which is most true, but not according to his own grounds, for neither
is it Justice to punish a man for doing that which it was impossible always
for him not to do; Neither is it lawful to punish an innocent person, that
good may come of it; And if his opinion of absolute necessity of all things
were true, the destinies of men could not be altered, either by examples or
fear of punishment.

Numb. 18.
J. D. BUt the Patrons of necessity being driven out of the plain field with
reason, have certain retreats or distinctions, which they fly unto for refuge.
First, they distinguish between Stoicall necessity and Christian necessity,
between which they make a threefold difference.

First, say they, the Stoics did subject Jupiter to destiny, but we subject
destiny to God; I answer, that the Stoicall and Christian destiny are one, and
the same, fatum quasi effatum Jovis. Hear Seneca, Destiny is the necessity of
all things, and actions, depending upon the disposition of Jupiter, etc. I add,
that the Stoics left a greater liberty to Jupiter over destiny, than these
Stoicall Christians do to God over his decrees, either for the beginnings of
things as Euripides, or for the progress of of them as Chrysippus, or at least
of the circumstances of time and place, as all of them generally, So Virgil,
Sed trahere and moras ducere, etc. So Osyris in Apuleius, promises him to
prolong his life Ultra fato constituta tempora, beyond the times set down by
the destinies.

Next, they say, that the Stoics did hold an eternal flux and necessary
connection of causes, but they believe that God does act, praeter and contra
naturam, besides and against nature. I answer, that it is not much material,
whether they attribute necessity to God, or to the Stars, or to a connection of
causes, so as they establish necessity. The former reasons do not only condemn
the ground or foundation of necessity, but much more necessity it self upon
what ground soever. Either they must run into this absurdity, that the effect
is determined, the cause remaining undetermined, or else hold such a necessary
connection of causes, as the Stoics did.

Lastly, they say, the Stoics did take away liberty and contingence, but they
admit it; I answer, what liberty or contingence was it they admit, but a
titular liberty, and an empty shadow of contingence? who do profess stiffly,
that all actions and events which either are or shall be, cannot but be, nor
can be otherwise, after any other manner, in any other Place, Time, Number,
Order, Measure, nor to any other end than they are, and that in respect of God,
determining them to one; what a poor ridiculous liberty, or contingence is this?

Secondly, they distinguish between the first cause, and the second causes;
they say, that in respect of the second causes many things are free, but in
respect of the first cause, all things are necessary. This answer may be taken
away two ways.

First, so contraries shall be true together; The same thing at the same time
shall be determined to one, and not determined to one; the same thing at the
same time must necessarily be, and yet may not be. Perhaps they will say, not
in the same respect. But that which strikes at the root of this question is
this, If all the causes were only collateral, this exception might have some
color, but where all the causes being joined together, and subordinate one to
another, do make but one total cause, if any one cause (much more the first)
in the whole series, or subordination of causes be necessary, it determines the
rest, and without doubt, makes the effect necessary; Necessity or Liberty is
not to be esteemed from one cause, but from all the causes joined together. If
one link in a chain be fast, it fastens all the rest.

Secondly, I would have them tell me whether the second causes be predetermined
by the first cause or not; If it be determined, then the effect is necessary,
even in respect of the second causes; If the second cause be not determined,
how is the effect determined, the second cause remaining undetermined? Nothing
can give that to another which it has not it self. But say they, nevertheless
the power or faculty remains free. True, but not in order to the act, if it
be once determined. It is free, in sensu diviso, but not in sensu composito,
when a man holds a bird fast in his hand, is she therefore free to fly where
she will, because she has wings? Or a man imprisoned or fettered, is he
therefore free to walk where he will, because he has feet and a low motive
faculty? Judge without prejudice, what a miserable subterfuge is this, which
many men confide so much in.

T. H.Certain distinctions which he supposing may be brought to his arguments
are by him remooved.

HE says, a man may perhaps answer, that the necessity of things held by him,
is not a Stoicall necessity, but a Christian necessity, etc. but this
distinction I have not used, nor indeed have ever heard before. Nor do I think
any man could make Stoical and Christian two kinds of necessities, though they
may be two kinds of doctrine. Nor have I drawn my answer to his arguments from
the authority of any Sect, but from the nature of the things themselves.

But here I must take notice of certain words of his in this place, as making
against his own Tenet, where all the causes, says he, being joined together,
and subordinate one to another, do make but one total cause; If any one cause,
much more the first, in the whole series of subordination of causes be
necessary, it determines the rest, and without doubt makes the effect
necessary. For, that which I call the necessary cause of any effect, is the
joining together of all causes subordinate to the first into one total cause.
If any one of those, says he, especially the first, produce its effect
necessarily, then all the rest are determined, and the effect also necessary.
Now, it is manifest, that the first cause is a necessary cause of all the
effects that are next, and immediate to it, and therefore by his own reason, all
effects are necessary. Nor is that distinction of necessary, in respect of the
first cause, and necessary in respect of second causes mine; It does (as he
well notes) imply a contradiction.

J. D. BEcause T. H. disavowes these two distinctions, I have joined them
together in one paragraph. He likes not the distinction of necessity or
destiny, into Stoicall and Christian, no more do I. We agree in the conclusion,
but our motives are diverse. My reason is, because I acknowledge no such
necessity, either as the one or as the other, and because I conceive, that
those Christian writers, who do justly detest the naked destiny of the Stoics,
as fearing to fall into those gross absurdities and pernicious consequences
which flow from thence, do yet privily (though perhaps unwittingly) under
another form of expression, introduce it again at the backdore after they had
openly cast it out at the foredore: But T. H. rusheth boldly without
distinctions (which he accounts but Jargon) and without foresight upon the
grossest destiny of all others, that is, that of the Stoics. He confesses,
that they may be two kinds of doctrine, May be? Nay, they are without all
peradventure. And he himself is the first who bears the name of a Christian
that I have read, that has raised this sleeping Ghost out of its grave, and
set it out in its true colors. But yet he likes not the names of Stoicall and
Christian destiny, I do not blame him, though he would not willingly be
accounted a Stoic. To admit the thing, and quarrel about the name, is to make
our selves ridiculous. Why might not I first call that kind of destiny, which
is maintained by Christians, Christian destiny? and that other maintained by
Stoics, Stoicall destiny? But I am not the inventer of the term. If he had
been as careful in reading other men's opinions, as he is confident in setting
down his own, he might have found not only the thing, but the name it self
often used. But if the name of fatum Christianum, do offend him, Let him call
it with Lipsius, fatum verum, who divides destiny into four kinds; 1.
Mathematical or Astrologicall destiny, 2. Natural destiny, 3. Stoicall or
violent destiny; and 4. true destiny, which he calls ordinarily nostrum, our
destiny; that is, of Christians, and fatum pium, that is godly destiny, and
defines it just as T. H. does his destiny, to be a series or order of causes
depending upon the divine Counsel, de constable. l. 1. cap. 17.18. and 19. Though
he be more cautelous than T. H. to decline those rocks which some others have
made shipwreck upon. Yet the Divines thought he came too near them, as appears
by his Epistle to the Reader, in a later Edition. And by that note in the
margent of his twentieth Chapter, Whatsoever I dispute here, I submit to the
judgment of the wise, and being admonished, I will convert it. One may convince
me of error, but not of obstinacy. So fearful was he to overshoot himself, and
yet he maintained both true liberty, and true contingency. T. H. says, he has
not sucked his answer from any Sect; And I say so much the worse; It is better
to be the disciple of an old Sect, than the ringleader of a new.

Concerning the other destinction of liberty, in respect of the first cause,
and liberty in respect of the second causes, though he will not see that which
it concerned him to answer, like those old Damiae, which could put out their
eyes when they list; As namely, that the faculty of willing, when it is
determined in order to the act (which is all the freedom that he acknowledges)
is but like the freedom of a bird, when she is first in a man's hand, etc. Yet
he has espied another thing wherein I contradict my self, because I affirm,
that if any one cause in the whole series of causes, much more the first cause,
be necessary, it determines the rest. But, says he, it is manifest, that the
first cause is a necessary cause of all the effects that are next. I am glad,
yet it is not I who contradict my self, but it is one of his manifest truths
which I contradict. That the first cause is a necessary cause of all effects,
which I say, is a manifest falsehood. Those things which God wills without
himself, he wills freely not necessarily. Whatsoever cause acts or works
necessarily, does act or work all that it can do, or all that is in its power;
But it is evident, that God does not all things without himself, which he can
do, or which he has power to do. He could have raised up children unto Abraham
of the very stones, which were upon the banks of Jordan, Luke 3.8. but he did
not. He could have sent twelve Legions of Angels to the succor of Christ, but
he did not. Matthew. 26.53. God can make T. H. live the years of Methuselah, but
it is not necessary that he shall do so, nor probable that he will do so. The
productive power of God is infinite, but the whole created world is finite. And
therefore God might still produce more, if it pleased him. But this it is, when
men go on in a confused way, and will admit no distinctions. If T. H. had
considered the difference between a necessary being, and a necessary cause, or
between those actions of God, which are imminent within himself, and the
transient works of God, which are extrinsecall without himself, he would never
have proposed such an evident error, for a manifest truth. Qui pauca
considerat, facile pronuntiat.

Numb. 19.
J. D. THirdly, they distinguish between liberty from compulsion, and liberty
from necessitation. The Will, say they, is free from compulsion, but not free
from necessitation. And this they fortify with two reasons. First, because it
is granted by all Divines, that hypotheticall necessity, or necessity upon a
supposition, may consist with liberty; Secondly, because God and the good
Angels do good necessarily, and yet are more free than we. To the first reason
I confess, that necessity upon a supposition may sometimes consist with true
liberty, as when it signifies only an infallible certitude of the
understanding in that which it knows to be, or that it shall be; But if the
supposition be not in the Agents power; nor depend upon any thing that is in
his power; If there be an exterior antecedent cause which does necessitate the
effect, to call this free, is to be mad with reason.

To the second reason, I confess that God and the good Angels are more free
than we are, that is, intensively in the degree of freedom, but not extensively
in the latitude of the object, according to a liberty of exercise, but not of
specification. A liberty of exercise, that is, to do or not to do, may consist
well with a necessity of specification, or a determination to the doing of
good. But a liberty of exercise, and a necessity of exercise; A liberty of
specification; and a necessity of specification, are not compatible, nor can
consist together. He that is antecedently necessitated to do evil, is not free
to do good. So this instance is nothing at all to the purpose.

T. H. BUt the distinction of free, into free from compulsion, and free from
necessitation, I acknowledge; for to be free from compulsion, is to do a thing
so, as terror be not the cause of his will to do it, for a man is then only
said to be compelled, when fear makes him willing to it, as when a man
willingly throws his goods into the Sea to save himself, or submitts to his
enemy for fear of being killed. Thus all men that do any thing from love, or
revenge, or lust are free from compulsion, and yet their actions may be as
necessary as those which are done upon compulsion, for sometimes other passions
work as forcibly as fear; But free from necessitation I say nothing can be; And
it is that which he undertook to disproove. This distinction, he says, uses to
be fortified by two reasons, but they are not mine. The first, he says is,
That it is granted by all Divines, that an hypotheticall necessity, or
necessity upon supposition, may stand with liberty. That you may understand
this, I will give you an example of hypotheticall necessity. If I shall live, I
shall eat, this is an hypotheticall necessity. Indeed it is a necessary
proposition, that is to say, it is necessary that that proposition should be
true, whenever uttered, but it is not the necessity of the thing, nor is it
therefore necessary, that the man shall live, or that the man shall eat. I do
not use to fortify my distinctions with such reasons. Let him confute them as
he will, it contents me. But I would have your Lordship take notice hereby, how
an easy and plain thing, but withal false, may be with the grave usage of such
terms, as hypotheticall necessity, and necessity upon supposition and such
like terms of Schoolmen, obscured and made to seem profound learning.

The second reason that may confirm the distinction of free from compulsion,
and free from necessitation, he says is, that God, and good Angels do good
necessarily, and yet are more free than we. The reason, though I had no need
of, yet I think it so far forth good, as it is true, that God and good Angels
do good necessarily, and yet are free; but because I find not in the Articles
of our faith, nor in the Decrees of our Church set down, in what manner I am to
conceive God, and good Angels to work, by necessity, or in what sense they
work freely, I suspend my sentence in that point, and am content, that there
may be a freedom from compulsion, and yet no freedom from necessitation, as
has been prooved in that, that a man may be necessitated to some actions
without threats and without fear of danger; But how he can avoid the consisting
together of freedom and necessity, supposing God and good Angels are freer
than men, and yet do good necessarily, that we must now examine.

I confess (says he) that God and good Angels are more free than we, that is,
intensively in degree of freedom, not extensively in the latitude of the
object, according to a liberty of exercise, not of specification. Again, we
have here two distinctions, that are no distinctions, but made to seem so by
terms invented, by I know not whom, to cover ignorance, and blind the
understanding of the Reader. For it cannot be conceived that there is any
liberty greater than for a man to do what he will, and to forbear what he will.
One heat may be more intensive than another, but not one liberty than another.
He that can do what he will, has all liberty possibly, and he that cannot, has
none at all. Also liberty (as he says, the Schools call it) of exercise,
which is as I have said before, a liberty to do, or not to do, cannot be
without a liberty (which they call of specification) that is to say, a liberty
to do or not to do, this or that in particular; for how can a man conceive,
that he has liberty to do any thing, that has not liberty to do this or that,
or somewhat in particular. If a man be forbidden in Lent to eat this and that,
and every other particular kind of flesh, how can he be understood to have a
liberty to eat flesh, more than he that has no license at all?

You may by this again see the vanity of distinctions used in the Schools; And
I do not doubt but that the imposing of them by authority of Doctors in the
Church, has been a great cause that men have labored, though by sedition, and
evil courses to shake them off; for nothing is more apt to beget hatred, than
the tyrannising over man's reason and understanding, especially when it is done,
not by the Scripture, but by pretense of learning, and more judgment than that
of other men.

J. D. HE who will speak with some of our great undertakers, about the grounds
of learning, had need either to speak by an Interpreter, or to learn a new
Language, (I dare not call it Jargon or Canting) lately devised, not to set
forth the truth, but to conceal falsehood. He must learn a new Liberty, a new
Necessity, a new Contingency, a new Sufficiency, a new Spontaneity, a new kind
of Deliberation, a new kind of Election, a new Eternity, a new Compulsion, and
in conclusion, a new Nothing. This proposition, the will is free, may be
understood in two senses, Either that the will is not compelled, or that the
will is not always necessitated, for if it be ordinarily, or at any time free
from necessitation, my assertion is true, that there is freedom from necessity.
The former sense, that the will is not compelled, is acknowledged by all the
world as a truth undeniable, Voluntas non cogitur. For, if the will may be
compelled, then it may both will and not will the same thing at the same time,
under the same notion, but this implies a contradiction. Yet this Author (like
the good woman whom her husband sought up the stream when she was drowned, upon
pretense that when she was living, she used to go contrary courses to all other
people,) he holds, that true compulsion and fear, may make a man will, that
which he does not will, that is, in his sense may compel the will. As when a
man willingly throws his goods into the Sea to save himself, or submits to his
enemy for fear of being killed, I answer, that T. H. mistakes sundry ways in
this discourse.

First, he erreth in this, to think, that actions proceeding from fear, are
properly compulsory actions, which in truth are not only voluntary, but free
actions; neither compelled, nor so much as Physically necessitated. Another
man, at the same time, in the same Ship, in the same storm, may choose, and the
same individual man otherwise advised, might choose, not to throw his goods
overboard. It is the man himself, who chooses freely this means to preserve
his life. It is true, that if he were not in such a condition, or if he were
freed from the grounds of his present fears, he would not choose neither the
casting of his goods into the Sea, nor the submitting to his enemy. But
considering the present exigence of his affairs, reason dictates to him, that
of two inconveniences, the less is to be chosen, as a comparative good. Neither
does he will this course, as the end or direct object of his desires, but as
the means to attain his end. And what Fear does in these cases, Love, Hope,
Hatred, etc. may do in other cases, that is, may occasion a man to elect those
means to obtain his willed end, which otherwise he would not elect. As Jacob to
serve seven years more, rather than not to enjoy his beloved Rachel. The
Merchant to hazard himself upon the rough Seas, in hope of profit. Passions may
be so violent, that they may necessitate the will, that is, when they prevent
deliberations, but this is rarely, and then the will is not free. But they
never properly compel it. That which is compelled, is against the will, and
that which is against the will, is not willed.

Secondly, T. H. erres in this also, where he says, that a man is then only
said to be compelled when fear makes him willing to an action. As if force were
not more prevalent with a man then fear; we must know therefore, that this word
compelled is taken two ways, sometimes improperly, that is, when a man is
moved or occasioned by threats or fear, or any passion, to do that which he
would not have done, if that threats, or that passion had not been; Sometimes
it is taken properly, when we do any thing against our own inclination, moved
by an external cause, the will not consenting, nor concurring, but resisting
as much as it can. As in a Rape, or when a Christian is drawn or carried by
violence to the Idols Temple. Or as in the case of St. Peter, John 21.18.
Another shall guide thee, and carry thee whither thou would not. This is that
compulsion which is understood, when we say, the will may be let, or
changed, or necessitated, or that the imperate actions of the will (that is,
the actions of the inferior faculties which are ordinarily moved by the will)
may be compelled; but that the immanent actions of the will, that is, to will,
to choose, cannot be compelled, because it is the nature of an action properly
compelled to be done by an extrinsecall cause, without the concurrence of the
will.

Thirdly, the question is not, whether all the actions of a man be free, but
whether they be ordinarily free. Suppose some passions are so sudden and
violent, that they surprise a man, and betray the succors of the soul, and
prevent deliberation, as we see in some motus primo primi; or antipathies, how
some men will run upon the most dangerous objects, upon the first view of a
loathed creature, without any power to contain themselves. Such actions as
these, as they are not ordinary, so they are not free, because there is no
deliberation nor election. But where deliberation and election are, as when a
man throws his goods overboard, to save the Ship, or submitts to his enemy,
to save his life; there is always true liberty.

Though T. H. slight the two reasons which I produce in favor of his cause,
yet they who urged them, deserved not to be slighted, unless it were because
they were Schoolmen. The former reason is thus framed; A necessity of
supposition may consist with true liberty, but that necessity which flows from
the natural and extrinsecall determination of the will, is a necessity of
supposition; To this, my answer is in effect; That a necessity of supposition
is of two kinds, sometimes the thing supposed is in the power of the Agent to
do, or not to do; As for a Romish Priest to vow continence, upon supposition
that he be a Romish Priest, is necessary, but because it was in his power to be
a Priest, or not to be a Priest, therefore his vow is a free act. So supposing
a man to have taken Physic, it is necessary that he keep at home, yet because
it was in his power to take a Medicine or not to take it, therefore his keeping
at home is free. Again, sometimes the thing supposed is not in the power of the
Agent to do, or not to do; supposing a man to be extrem sick, it is necessary
that he keep at home, or supposing that a man has a natural antipathy against
a Cat, he runs necessarily away so soon as he sees her. Because this antipathy,
and this sickness are not in the power of the party affected, therefore these
acts are not free. Jacob blessed his Sons, Balaam blessed Israel, these two
acts being done, are both necessary upon supposition; But is was in Jacobs
power not to have blessed his Sons, So was it not in Balaams power, not to have
blessed Israel, Numb. 22.38. Jacobs will was determined by himself, Balaams
will was Phyfically determined by God. Therefore Jacobs benediction proceeded
from his own free election; And Balaams from Gods determination. So was Caiphas
his Prophesy, John 11.51. Therefore the Text says, He spoke not of himself. To
this T. H. says nothing, but only declares by an impertinent instance, what
Hypotheticall signifies. And then advises your Lordship to take notice how
Errors and Ignorance may be cloked under grave Scholastic terms. And I do
likewise entreat your Lordship to take notice, that the greatest fraud and
cheating, lurks commonly under the pretense of plain dealing; we see Juglers
commonly strip up their sleeves, and promise extraordinary fair dealing before
they begin to play their tricks.

Concerning the second argument drawn from the liberty of God, and the good
Angels. As I cannot but approove his modesty, in suspending his judgment
concerning the manner how God and the good Angels do work necessarily or
freely, because he finds it not set down in the Articles of our Faith, or the
Decrees of our Church, especially in this age, which is so full of Atheism,
and of those scoffers which St. Peter Prophesied of, 2 Pet. 3.3. Who neither
believe, that there is God or Angels, or that they have a Soul, but only as
salt, to keep their bodies from putrefaction; So I can by no means assent unto
him, in that which follows, that is to say, that he has proved, that Liberty
and Necessity of the same kind may consist together, that is, a liberty of
exercise with a necessity of exercise, or a liberty of specification, with a
necessity of specification. Those actions which he says are necessitated by
passion, are for the most part dictated by reason, either truly, or apparently
right, and resolved by the will it self. But it troubles him that I say, that
God and the good Angels are more free than men intensively in the degree of
freedom, but not extensively in the latitude of the object, according to a
liberty of exercise, but not of specification, which he says, are no
distinctions, but terms invented to cover ignorance. Good words. Does he
only see? Are all other men stark bling? By his favor, they are true and
necessary distinctions; And if he alone do not conceive them, it is because
distinctions, as all other things, have their fates, according to the
capacities or prejudices of their Readers. But he urges two reasons, One
heat, says he, may be more intensive than another, but not one liberty than
another. Why not, I wonder? Nothing is more proper to a man than reason, yet a
man is more rational than a child, and one man more rational than another,
that is, in respect of the use and exercise of reason. As there are degrees of
understanding, so there are of liberty. The good Angels have cleerer
understandings than we, and they are not hindered with passions as we, and by
consequence, they have more use of liberty than we. His second reason is, He
that can do what he will, has all liberty, and he that cannot do what he will,
has no liberty. If this be true, then there are no degrees of liberty indeed.
But this which he calls liberty, is rather an Omnipotence than a liberty, to do
whatsoever he will. A man is free to shoot, or not to shoot, although he cannot
hit the white, when soever he would. We do good freely, but with more
difficulty and reluctation than the good Spirits. The more rational, and the
less sensual the will is, the greater is the degree of liberty. His other
exception against liberty of exercise, and liberty of specification, is a mere
mistake, which grows merely from not rightly understanding what liberty of
specification, or contrariety is. A liberty of specification, says he, is a
liberty to do, or not to do, or not to do this, or that, in particular. Upon
better advice he will find, that this which he calls a liberty of
specification, is a liberty of contradiction, and not of specification, nor of
contrariety. To be free to do or not to do, this or that particular good, is a
liberty of contradiction, so likewise to be free to do or not to do this, or
that particular evil. But to be free to do both good and evil, is a liberty
of contrariety, which extends to contrary objects, or to diverse kinds of
things. So his reason to prove, that a liberty of exercise cannot be without a
liberty of specification, falls flat to the ground. And he may lay aside his
Lenten license for another occasion. I am ashamed to insist upon these things
which are so evident, that no man can question them who does understand them.

And here he falls into another invective against distinctions, and
Scholasticall expressions, and the Doctors of the Church, who by this means
tyrannized over the understandings of other men. What a presumption is this for
one private man, who will not allow human liberty to others, to assume to
himself such a license, to control so Magistrally, and to censure of gross
ignorance and tyrannising over men's judgments, yea, as causes of the troubles
and tumults which are in the world, the Doctors of the Church in general, who
have flourished in all ages and all places, only for a few necessary and
innocent distinctions. Truly said Plutarch, that a sore eye is offended with
the light of the Sun; what then must the Logicians lay aside their first and
second Intentions? their Abstracts and Conceits, their Subjects and Predicates,
their Modes and Figures, their Method Synthetick and Analytick, their Fallacies
of Composition and Division, etc? Must the moral Philosopher quitt his means
and extremes, his pricipia congenita ad acquisita, his liberty of contradiction
and contrariety, his necessity absolute and hypotheticall, etc? Must the
natural Philosopher give over his intentionall Species, his understanding
Agent and Patient, his receptive and eductive power of the matter, his
qualities, infinitae or influxae, symbolae or dissymbolae, his temperament, ad
pondus, and ad justitiam, his parts Homogeneous and Heterogeneous, his
Sympathies and Antipathies, his Antiperistasis, etc? Must the Astrologer and
the Geographer leave their Apogaeum and Perigaeum, their Arctick and Antarctick
Poles, their Equator, Zodiac, Zenith, Meridian, Horison, Zones, etc? Must the
Mathematician, the Metaphysician, and the Divine, relinquish all their terms
of Art, and proper idiotismes, because they do not relish with T. H. his
palate? But he will say, they are obscure expressions; What marvel is it, when
the things themselves are more obscure; Let him put them into as plain English
as he can, and they shall be never a whit the better understood by those who
want all grounds of learning. Nothing is clearer than Mathematical
demonstration, yet let one who is altogether ignorant in Mathematics hear it,
and he will hold it to be as T. H. terms these distinctions, plain Fustian or
Jargon. Every Art or Profession has its proper mysteries and expressions,
which are well known to the Sons of Art, not so to strangers. Let him consult
with Military men, with Physicians, with Navigators, and he shall find this
true by experience. Let him go on shipboard, and the Mariners will not leave
their Sterbord and Larbord, because they please not him, or because he accounts
it Gibrish. No, no, it is not the Schoole-Divines, but Innovators and seditious
Orators, who are the true causes causes of the present troubles of Europe. T.
H. has forgotten what he said in his book, De Cive cap. 12. That it is a
seditious opinion to teach, that the knowledge of good and evil belongs to
private persons. And cap. 17. that in questions of Faith the Civil Magistrates
ought to consult with the Ecclesiastical Doctors, to whom Gods blessing is
derived by imposition of hands, so as not to be received in necessary truths,
to whom our Savior has promised infallibility. These are the very men whom he
traduceth here. There he ascribes infallibility to them, here he accuses them
of gross superstitious ignorance. There he attributes too much to them, here he
attributes too little. Both there and here he takes too much upon him. The
Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets, 1 Cor. 14.32.

Numb. 20.
J. D. NOw, to the distinction it self I say first, that the proper act of
liberty is election, and election is opposed, not only to coaction, but also to
coarctation or determination to one. Necessitation or determination to one, may
consist with spontaneity, but not with election or liberty, as has been
showed. The very Stoics did acknowledge a spontaneity. So our adversaries are
not yet gone out of the confines of the Stoics.

Secondly, to rip up the bottom of this business. This I take to be the clear
resolution of the Schools; There is a double act of the will, the one more
remote, called Imperatus, that is, in truth the act of some inferior faculty,
subject to the command of the will, as to open or shut ones eyes, without doubt
these actions may be compelled. The other act is nearer, called actus elicitus,
an act drawn out of the will, as to will, to choose, to elect, this may be
stopped or hindered by the intervening impediment of the understanding, as a
stone lying on a table is kept from its natural motion, otherwise the will
should have a kind of Omnipotence; But the will cannot be compelled to an act
repugnant to its inclination, as when a stone is thrown upwards into the air,
for that is both to incline, and not to incline to the same object, at the same
time, which implies a contradiction. Therefore to say the will is necessitated,
is to say, the will is compelled so far as the will is capable of compulsion.
If a strong man holding the hand of a weaker, should therewith kill a third
person, haec quidem vis est, this violence, the weaker did not willingly
perpetrate the fact, because he was compelled. But now suppose this strong man
had the will of the weaker in his power as well as the hand, and should not
only incline, but determine it secretly and insensibly to commit this act, is
not the case the same? whether one ravish Lucretia by force, as Tarquine, or by
amatory potions, and Magical Incantations, not only allure her, but
necessitake her to satisfy his lust, and incline her effectually, and draw her
inevitably, and irresistibly to follow him spontaneously. Lucretia in both
these conditions is to be pitied, but the latter person is more guilty, and
deserves greater punishment, who endeavors also so much as in him lies, to make
Lucretia irresistibly partake of his crime. I dare not apply it, but thus only;
Take heed how we defend those secret and invincible necessitations to evil,
though spontaneous and free from coaction.

These are their fastnesses.

T. H. IN the next place, he brings two arguments against distinguishing
between being free from compulsion, and free from necessitation. The first is,
that election is opposite, not only to coaction or compulsion, but also to
necessitation or determination to one. This is it he was to prove from the
beginning, and therefore brings no new argument to prove it. And to those
brought formerly, I have already answered; And in this place I deny again, that
election is opposite to either, for when a man is compelled (for example, to
subject himself to an enemy or to die) he has still election left in him, and a
deliberation to bethink which of these two he can better endure; And he that is
led to prison by force, has election and may deliberate whether he will be
hailed and trained on the ground, or make use of his feet.

Likewise when there is no compulsion, but the strength of temptation to do an
evil action, being greater than the motives to abstain, necessarily determine
him to the doing of it, yet he deliberates whiles sometimes the motives to do,
sometimes the motives to forbear, are working on him, and consequently he
electeth which he will. But commonly when we see and know the strength that
moves us, we acknowledge Necessity, but when we see not, or mark not the force
that moves us, we then think there is none, and that it is not Causes but
liberty, that produces the action. Hence it is, that they think he does not
chose this, that of necessity choseth it, but they might as well say, fire does
not burn, because it burns of necessity. The second argument is not so much an
argument, as a distinction, to show in what sense it may be said, that
voluntary actions are necessitated, and in what sense not. And therefore he
alleges as from the authority of the Schools, and that which rippeth up the
bottom of the question, that there is a double act of the will; The one he
says, is actus Imperatus, an act done at the command of the will, by some
inferior faculty of the soul, as to open or shut ones eyes, and this act may
be compelled. The other he says, is actus elicitus, an act allured, or an act
drawn forth by allurement out of the will, as to will, to choose, to elect:
This he says cannot be compelled. Wherein letting pass that Metaphorical
speech of attributing command and subjection to the faculties of the Soul, as
if they made a Commonwealth or Family among themselves, and could speak one to
another, which is very improper in searching the truth of the question. You may
observe first, that to compel a voluntary act, is nothing else, but to will it,
for it is all one to say, my will commands the shutting of mine eyes, or the
doing of any other action, and to say, I have the will to shut mine eyes. So
that actus imperatus here, might as easily have been said in English, a
voluntary action, but that they that invented the term, understood not any
thing it signified. Secondly, you may observe, that actus elicitus, is
exemplified by these words, to Will, to Elect, to Choose, which are all one,
and so to will is here made an act of the will, and indeed, as the will is a
faculty, or power in a man's soul, so to will is an act of it, according to that
power. But as it is absurdly said, that to dance is an act allured or drawn by
fair means out of the ability to dance; so it is also to say, that to will, is
an act allured or drawn out of the power to will, which power is commonly
called, the Will. Howsoever it be, the sum of his distinction is, that a
voluntary act may be done on compulsion, that is to say, by foul means, but to
will that, or any act, cannot be but by allurement or fair means. Now, seeing
fair Means, Allurements, and Enticements, produce the action which they do
produce, as necessarily as threatening and foul means, it follows, that to
will, may be made as necessary as any thing that is done by compulsion. So that
the distinction of actus imperatus, and actus elicitus, are but words, and of
no effect against necessity.

J. D. IN the next place follow two reasons of mine own against the same
distinction, the one taken from the former grounds, that Election cannot
consist with determination to one. To this (he says) he has answered already.
No, Truth is founded upon a Rock. He has been so far from prevailing against
it, that he has not been able to shake it. Now again, he tells us, that
Election is not opposite to either, (Necessitation or Compulsion) He might even
as well tell us, that a stone thrown upwards mooves naturally; Or, that a woman
can be ravished with her own will. Consent takes away the Rape. This is the
strangest liberty that ever was heard of, that a man is compelled to do what he
would not, and yet is free to do what he will. And this he tells us upon the
old score, that he, who submits to his enemy for fear of death, chooses to
submit. But we have seen formerly, that this, which he calls compulsion, is not
compulsion properly, nor that natural determination of the will, to one which
is opposite to true Liberty. He who submits to an enemy for saving his life,
does either only counterfeit, and then there is no will to submit, this
disguise is no more than a stepping aside, to avoid a present blow, Or else he
does sincerely will a submission, and then the will is changed; There is a vast
difference between compelling and changing the will. Either God or man may
change the will of man, either by varying the condition of things, or by
informing the party otherwise, but compelled it cannot be, that is, it cannot
both will this, and not will this, as it is invested with the same
circumstances, though, if the act were otherwise circumstantiated, it might
nill that freely, which now it wills freely. Wherefore the kind of actions are
called mixed actions, that is partly voluntary, partly unvoluntary. That which
is compelled is a man's present condition or distress, that is not voluntary nor
chosen. That which is chosen, is the remedy of its distress, that is voluntary.
So hypothetically supposing a man were not in that distress they are
involuntary, but absolutely without any supposition at all, taking the case as
it is, they are voluntary. His other instance of a man forced to prison, that
he may choose whether he will be haled thither upon the ground, or walk upon
his feet is not true. By his leave, that is not as he pleases, but as it
pleases them who have him in their power. If they will drag him, he is not
free to walk; And if they give him leave to walk, he is not forced to be
dragged. Having laid this foundation, he begins to build upon it, that other
passions do necessitate as much as fear; But he erres doubly; first, in his
foundation, fear does not determine the rational will naturally and
necessarily; The last and greatest of the five terrible things is death, yet
the fear of death cannot necessitate a resolved mind to do a dishonest action,
which is worse than death. The fear of the fiery furnace could not compel the
three Children to worship an Idol, nor the fear of the Lions necessitate
Daniel, to omit his duty to God, It is our frailty, that we are more afraid of
empty shadows than of substantial dangers, because they are nearer our senses,
as little Children fear a Mouse or a Visard, more than fire or weather. But as
a fit of the stone takes awuy the sense of the gout for the present, so the
greater passion does extinguish the less. The fear of Gods wrath, and eternal
torments does expel corporal fear, fear not them who kill the body, but fear
him who is able to cast both body and soul into hell. Luke 7.4. Da veniam
Imperator, tu carcerem, ille gehennam minatur, Excuse me, O Emperor, thou
threatens men with prison, but he threatens me with hell. Secondly, he erres in
his superstruction also. There is a great difference, as to this case of
justifying, or not justifying an action between force and fear, and other
passions; Force does not only lessen the sin, but takes it quite away, Deuteronomy.
22.26. He who forced a betrothed Damsel was to die; but unto the Damsel
(says he) thou shall do nothing, there is in her no fault worthy of death.
Tamars beauty, or Ammons love did not render him innocent, but Ammons force
rendered Tamar innocent. But fear is not so prevalent as force, Indeed if fear
be great, and justly grounded, such as may fall upon a constant man, though it
do not dispense with the transgression of the negative Precepts of God or
Nature, because they bind to all times, yet it diminishes the offense, even
against them, and pleades for pardon. But it dispenses in many cases with the
transgression of the positive Law, either Divine or humane; Because it is not
probable, that God or the Law, would oblige man to the observation of all
positive Precepts, with so great damage as the loss of his life. The omission
of Circumcision was no sin, whilst the Israelites were traveling through the
wilderness. By T. H. his permission. I will propose a case to him. A Gentleman
sends his servant with money to buy his dinner, some Ruffians meet him by the
way, and take it from him by force, The servant cried for help, and did what he
could to defend himself, but all would not serve. The servant is innocent, if
he was to be tried before a Court of Areopagites. Or suppose the Ruffians did
not take it from him by force, but drew their swords and threatened to kill him,
except he delivered it himself; no wise man will conceive, that it was either
the Masters intention, or the servants duty, to hazard his life, or his limbs,
for saving of such a trifling sum. But on the other side suppose this servant,
passing by some Cabaret, or Tennis-court, where his Camerads were drinking or
playing, should stay with them, and drink or play away his money, and afterward
plead as T. H. does here, that he was overcome by the mere strength of
temptation, I trow, neither T. H. nor any man else would admit of this excuse,
but punish him for it, because, neither was he necessitated by the temptation,
and what strength it had, was by his own fault, in respect of that vicious
habit which he had contracted of drinking or gaming, Jam. 1, 14. Every man is
tempted when he is drawn away of his own lust and entised. Disordered passions
of anger, hatred, lust, if they be consequent (as the case is here put by T.
H.) and flow from deliberation and election, they do not only not diminish the
fault, but they aggravate it, and render it much greater.

He talks much of the motives to do, and the motives to forbear, how they work
upon and determine a man, as if a reasonable man were no more than a
Tennis-ball, to be tossed to and fro by the Racketts of the second causes; As
if the will had no power to moove it self, but were merely passive, like an
artificial Popingay remooved hither and thither by the bolts of the Archers,
who shoot on this side and on that. What are motives but reasons or discourses
framed by the understanding, and freely moved by the will? What, are the will
and the understanding but faculties of the same soul? and what is liberty but a
power resulting from them both? To say that the will is determined by these
motives, is as much as to say, that the Agent is determined by himself; If
there be no necessitation before the judgment of right reason does dictate to
the will, then there is no antecedent, no extrinsecall necessitation at all.
All the world knows, that when the Agent is determined by himself, then the
effect is determined likewise in its cause. But if he determined himself
freely, then the effect is free. Motives determine not naturally but morally,
which kind of determination may consist with true liberty. But if T. H. his
opinion were true, that the will were naturally determined by the Physical and
special influence of extrinsecall causes, not only motives were vain, but
reason it self, and deliberation were vain. No, says he, they are not vain,
because they are the means. Yes, if the means be superfluous they are vain,
what needed such a circuit of deliberation to advise what is fit to be done,
when it is already determined extrinsecally, what must be done.

He says, that the ignorance of the true causes, and their power is the
reason, why we ascribe the effect to liberty, but when we seriously consider
the causes of things, we acknowledge a necessity. No such thing, but just the
contrary. The more we consider, and the cleerer we understand, the greater is
the liberty, and the more the knowledge of our own liberty. The less we
consider, and the more incapable that the understanding is, the lesser is the
liberty, and the knowledge of it. And where there is no consideration, nor use
of reason, there is no liberty at all, there is neither moral good nor evil.
Some men, by reason that their exterior senses are not totally bound, have a
trick to walk in their sleep. Suppose such an one in that case should cast
himself down a pair of stairs, or from a bridge, and break his neck, or drown
himself, it were a mad Jury that would find this man accessory to his own
death. Why? because it was not freely done, he had not then the use of reason.

Lastly, he tells us, that the will does choose of necessity, as well as the
fire burns of necessity. If he intend no more but this, that election is the
proper and natural act of the will, as burning is of the fire, or that the
elective power is as necessarily in a man as visibility; he speaks truly, but
most impertinently; For, the question is not now of the elective power, in actu
primo, whether it be an essential faculty of the soul, but whether the act of
electing this or that particular object be free, and undetermined by any
antecedent and extrinsecall causes. But if he intend it in this other sense,
that as the fire has no power to suspend its burning, nor to distinguish
between those combustible matters which are put unto it, but burns that which
is put unto it necessarily, if it be combustible: So the will has no power to
refuse that which it wills, nor to suspend its own appetite. He erres grossly.
The will has power, either to will or nill, or to suspend, that is neither to
will nor nill the same object; Yet even the burning of the fire, if it be
considered as it is invested with all particular circumstances, is not
otherwise so necessary an action as T. H. imagines. Two things are required to
make an effect necessary. First, that it be produced by a necessary cause, such
as fire is; Secondly, that it be necessarily produced, Protagoras an Atheist,
began his Book thus. Concerning the gods, I have nothing to say, whether they
be, or they be not, for which his Book was condemned by the Athenians to be
burned. The fire was a necessary agent, but the sentence or the application of
the fire to the Book, was a free act, and therefore the burning of his Book was
free. Much more the rational will is free, which is both a voluntary agent,
and acts voluntarily.

My second reason against this distinction of Liberty from Compulsion, but not
from necessitation is new, and demonstrates clearly, that to necessitate the
will, by a Physical necessity, is to compel the will so far as the will is
capable of Compulsion, and that he, who does necessitate the will to evil,
after that manner is the true cause of evil, and ought rather to be blamed
than the will it self. But T. H. for all he says he is not surprised, can be
contented upon better advise to steal by all this in silence; And to hide this
tergiversation from the eyes of the Reader, he makes an empty show of braving
against that famous and most necessary distinction between the elicite and
imperate acts of the will; first, because the terms are improper; secondly,
because they are obscure. What Trivial and Grammatical objections are these,
to be used against the universal current of Divines and Philosophers. Verborum
ut nummorum, It is in words, as it is in money. Use makes them proper and
current, A Tyrant at first, signified a lawful and just Prince; Now, use has
quite changed the sense of it, to denote either an Usurper, or an Oppressor.
The word praemunire is now grown a good word in our English Laws by use and
tract of time; And yet at first it was merely mistaken for a praemonere. The
names of Sunday, Monday. Tuesday, were derived at first from those Heathenish
Deities, the Sun, the Moon, and the warlike God of the Germans. Now we use them
for distinction sake only, without any relation to their first original. He
is too froward that will refuse a piece of coin that is current throughout the
world, because it is not stamped after his own fancy. So is he that rejects a
good word, because he understands not the derivation of it. We see foreign
words are daily naturalized, and made free Denizons in every Country. But why
are the terms improper? Because, says he, It attributes command, and
subjection to the faculties of the soul, as if they made a Commonwealth or
family among themselves, and could speak one to another, Therefore he says,
they who invented this term of Actus Imperatus, understood not any thing what
it signified. No, why not? It seems to me they understood it better than
those who except against it. They knew, there are mental terms, which are
only conceived in the mind, as well as vocal terms, which are expressed
with the tongue, They knew that howsoever a Superior do intimate a direction
to his inferior, it is still a command. Tarquin commanded his son, by only
striking off the topps of the Poppies, and was by him both understood and
obeyed. Though there be no formal Commonwealth or family either in the body,
or in the soul of man, yet there is a subordination in the body, of the
inferior members to the head, there is a subordination in the soul of the
inferior faculties to the rational will. Far be it from a reasonable man, so
far to dishonor his own nature, as to equal fancy with understanding, or the
sensitive appetite with the reasonable will. A power of command there is
without all question, though there be some doubt in what faculty this command
does principally reside, whether in the will or in the understanding. The true
resolution is, that the directive command for counsel is in the understanding;
And the applicative command, or empire, for putting in execution of what is
directed, is in the will. The same answer serves for his second impropriety,
about the word Elicite. For, says he, as it is absurdly said, that to dance,
is an act allured, or drawn by fair means out of the ability to dance; So it is
absurdly said, that to will or choose is an act drawn out of the power to will.
His objection is yet more improper than their expression. The art of dancing
rather resembles the understanding, than the will. That drawing, which the
Schools intend, is clear of another nature, from that which he conceives; By
elicitation, he understands, a persuading or enticing with flattering words, or
sweet alluring insinuations, to choose, this or that. But that elicitation,
which the Schools intend, is a deducing of the power of the will into act, that
drawing, which they mention, is merely from the appetibility of the object, or
of the end, as a man draws a Child after him with the sight of a fair Apple,
or a Shepherd draws his sheep after him with the sight of a green bough: So
the end draws the will to it, by a Metaphorical motion. What he understands
here by an ability to dance, is more than I know, or any man else, until he
express himself in more proper terms, whether he understand the locomotive
faculty alone, or the art, or acquired habit of dancing alone, or both of these
jointly. It may be said aptly without any absurdity, that the act of dancing is
drawn out (elicitur) of the locomotive faculty helped by the acquired habit. He
who is so scrupulous about the received phrases of the Schools should not have
let so many improper expressions have dropped from his pen; as in this very
passage he confounds the compelling of a voluntary action, with the commanding
of a voluntary action, and willing with electing, which he says, are all one.
Yet to will properly respects the end, to elect the means.

His other objection against this distinction of the acts of the will into
Elicite and Imperate, is obscurity. Might it not (says he) have been as easily
said in English, a voluntary action. Yes, it might have been said as easily,
but not as truly, nor properly. Whatsoever has its original from the will,
whether immediately or mediatly, whether it be a proper act of the will it self,
as to elect, or an act of the understanding, as to deliberate, or an act of the
inferior faculties, or of the members, is a voluntary action, but neither the
act of reason nor of the senses, nor of the sensitive appetite, nor of the
members are the poper acts of the will, nor drawn immediately out of the will it
self, but the members and faculties are applied to their proper and respective
acts by the power of the will.

And so he comes to cast up the total sum of my second reason, with the same
faith, that the unjust Steward did make his accounts, Luke 16. The sum of J.
D.'s distinction is (says he) that a voluntary act may be done on compulsion
(just contrary to what I have maintained) that is to say, by foul means. But to
will that, or any act cannot be but by allurement or fair means. I confess the
distinction is mine, because I use it, as the Sun is mine, or the Air is mine,
that is common to me, with all who treat of this subject. But his mistakes are
so thick, both in relating my mind, and his own, that the Reader may conclude,
he is wandered out of his known way. I will do my duty to show him the right
way. First, no acts which are properly said to be compelled, are voluntary.
Secondly, acts of terror (which he calls foul means) which are sometimes in a
large improper sense called compulsory actions, may be, and for the most part
are consistent with true liberty. Thirdly, actions proceeding from
blandishments or sweet persuasions (which he calls fair means) if they be
indeliberated as in children, who want the use of reason, are not presently
free actions. Lastly, the strength of consequent, and deliberated desires does
neither diminish guilt, nor excuse from punishment, as just fears of extreme
and imminent dangers threatened by extrinsecall agents often do, because the
strength of the former proceeds from our own fault, and was freely elected in
the causes of it; But neither desires nor fears, which are consequent and
deliberated, do absolutely necessitate the will.

Numb. 21.
J. D. THE rest are umbrages quickly dispelled, first, the Astrologer steps up,
and subjects Liberty to the motions of Heaven, to the aspects and ascensions of
the Stars, -- Plus etenim fati valet hora benigni.
Quam si nos Veneris commendet epistola Marti.


I stand not much upon them who cannot see the fishes swimming besides them in
the rivers, yet believe they see those which are in heaven. Who promise great
treasures to others, and beg a groat for themselves. The Stars at the most, do
but incline, they cannot necessitate.

Secondly, the Physician subjects liberty to the complexion and temperature of
the body. But yet this comes not home to a necessity. Socrates, and many others
by assiduous care have corrected the pernicious propensions, which flowed from
their temperatures.

T. H. IN the rest of his discourse he reckons up the opinions of certain
professions of men, touching the causes, wherein the necessity of things, which
they maintain, consists. And first he says, the Astrologer deriveth his
necessity from the Stars. Secondly, that the Physician attributes it to the
temper of the body. For my part, I am not of their opinion, because neither the
Stars alone, nor the temperature of the Patient alone is able to produce any
effect without the concurrence of all other agents. For, there is hardly any
one action, how casual soever it seem, to the causing whereof concur not
whatsoever is in rerum natura. Which because it is a great Paradox, and depends
on many antecedent speculations I do not press in this place.

J. D. Toward the later end of my discourse I answered some specious pretenses
against liberty, The two first were of the Astrologer and the Physician. The
one subjecting liberty to the motions and influences of the heavenly bodies;
The other to the complexions of men. The sum of my answer was, that the Stars
and complexions do incline, but not at all necessitate the will. To which all
judicious Astronomers and Physicians do assent. And T. H. himself does not
dissent from it. So as to this part there needs no reply.

But whereas he mentions a great paradox of his own, that there is hardly any
one action to the causing of which concurres not whatsoever is in rerum natura,
I can but smile to see with what ambition our great undertakers do affect to be
accounted, the first founders of strange opinions, as if the devising of an ill
grounded Paradox were as great an honor as the invention of the needle, or the
discovery of the new world. And to this Paradox in Particular, I meddle not
with natural actions, because the subject of my discourse is moral liberty;
But if he intend not only the kinds of things, but every individual creature,
and not only in natural but voluntary actions, I desire to know how Prester
John, or the great Mogol, or the King of China, or any one of so many millions
of their subjects do concur to my writing of this reply. If they do not among
his other speculations, concerning this matter, I hope he will give us some
restrictions. It were hard to make all the Negroes accessory to all the
murders that are committed in Europe.

Numb. 22.
J. D. THirdly, the moral Philosopher tells us how we are haled hither and
thither with outward objects. To this I answer.

First, that the power, which outward objects have over us, is for the most
part by our own default, because of those vicious habits which we have
contracted. Therefore, though the actions seem to have a kind of violence in
them, yet they were free and voluntary in their first originalls. As a
paralitick man, to use Aristotle's comparison, shedding the liquor deserves to
be punished, for though his act be unwilling, yet his intemperance was willing,
whereby he contracted this infirmity.

Secondly, I answer, that concupiscence, and custom, and bad company, and
outward objects do indeed make a proclivity, but not a necessity. By Prayers,
Tears, Meditations, Vows, Watchings, Fastings, Humi-cubations a man may get a
contrary habit, and gain the victory, not only over outward objects, but also
over his own corruptions, and become the King of the little world of himself.

Si metuis, si prava cupis, si duceris ira,
Servitii patiere jugum, tolerabis iniquas
Interius leges. Tunc omnia jure tenebis,
Cum poteris rex esse tui.
Thirdly, a resolved mind, which weighs all things judiciously, and provides
for all occurrences, is not so easily surprised with outward objects. Only
Ulysses wept not at the meeting with his wife, and son. I would beat thee (said
the Philosopher) but that I am angry. One spoke lowest when he was most moved.
Another poured out the water when he was thirsty. Another made a Covenant with
his eyes. Neither opportunity nor entisement could prevail with Joseph. Nor the
Music, nor the fire with the three Children. It is not the strength of the
wind, but the lightness of the chaff, which causes it to be blown away.
Outward objects do not impose a moral, much less a Physical necessity, they
may be dangerous, but cannot be destructive to true liberty.

T. H. THirdly, he disputes against the opinion of them that say, external
objects presented to men of such and such temperatures, do make their actions
necessary. And says, the power that such objects have over us, proceed from
our own fault; But that is nothing to the purpose, if such fault of ours
proceeds from causes, not in our own power. And therefore that opinion may
hold true for all this answer: Further he says, Prayer, Fasting, etc. may
alter our habits. It Is true, but when they do so, they are causes of the
contrary habit, and make it necessary; As the former habit had been necessary,
if Prayer, Fasting, etc. had not been. Besides we are not moved, nor disposed
to prayer, or any other action but by outward objects, as pious company, godly
preachers, or something equivalent. Thirdly, he says, a resolved mind is not
easily surprised. As the mind of Ulysses, who when others wept, he alone wept
not. And of the Philosopher that abstained from striking, because he found
himself angry. And of him that poured out the water when he was thirsty; And
the like; Such things I confess have, or may have been done, and do prove only
that it was not necessary for Ulysses then to weep, nor for the Philosopher to
strike, nor for that other man to drink, but it does not prove that it was not
necessary for Ulysses then to abstain, as he did from weeping, nor the
Philosopher to abstain as he did from striking; Nor the other man to forbear
drinking. And yet that was the thing he ought to have proved.

Lastly, he confesses, that the disposition of objects may be dangerous to
liberty, but cannot be destructive. To which I answer it is impossible; For,
liberty is never in any other danger than to be lost: And if it cannot be lost,
which he confesses, I may infer it can be in no danger at all.

J. D. THe third pretense was out of moral Philophy misunderstood, that
outward objects do necessitate the will. I shall not need to repeat what he
has omitted, but only to satisfy his exceptions; The first is, that it is
not material, though the power of outward objects do proceed from our own
faults, if such faults of our proceed not from causes in our own power. Well,
but what if they do proceed from causes that are in our own power, as in truth
they do, then his answer is a mere subterfuge. If our faults proceed from
causes that are not, and were not in our own power, then they are not our
faults at all. It is not a fault in us not to do those things, which never were
in our power to do. But they are the faults of these causes from whence they do
proceed. Next he confesses, that it is in our power by good endeavors, to
alter those vicious habits which we had contracted, and to get the contrary
habit. True (says he) but then the contrary habit does necessitate the one
way, as well as the former habit did the other way. By which very consideration
it appears, that that which he calls a necessity is no more but a proclivity.
If it were a true necessity, it could not be avoided, nor altered by our
endeavors. The truth is Acquired habits do help and assist the faculty; but
they do not necessitate the faculty. He who has gotten to himself an habit of
temperance, may yet upon occasion commit an intemperate act. And so on the
contrary. Acts are not opposed to habits, but other habits. He adds, that we
are not moved to prayer or any other action but by outward objects, as pious
company, godly Preachers, or something equivalent. Wherein are two other
mistakes, first, to make godly Preachers, and pious company, to be outward
objects, which are outward Agents. Secondly, to affirm that the will is not
moved but by outward objects. The will is moved by it self, by the
understanding, by the sensitive passions, by Angels good and bad, by men, and
most effectually by acts or habits infused by God, whereby the will is excited
extraordinarily indeed, but efficaciously and determinately. This is more than
equivalent with outward objects.

Another branch of mine answer was, that a resolved and prepared mind is able
to resist both, the appetibility of objects, and the unruliness of passions. As
I showed by examples. He answers that I prove Ulysses was not necessitated to
weep, nor the Philosopher to strike, but I do not prove that they were not
necessitated to forbear. He says true. I am not now proving, but answering.
Yet my answer does sufficiently prove that which I intend. That the rational
will has power, both to slight the most appetible objects, and to control
the most unruly passions. When he has given a clear solution to those proofs
which I have produced, then it will be time for him to cry for more work.

Lastly, whereas I say, that outward objects may be dangerous, but cannot be
destructive to true liberty. He catches at it, and objects that liberty is in
no danger, but to be lost, but I say, it cannot be lost, therefore (he infers)
that it is in no danger at all. I answer; First, that liberty is in more danger
to be abused than to be lost. Many more men do abuse their wits than lose them.
Secondly, liberty is in danger likewise to be weakened or diminished, as when
it is clogged by vicious habits contracted by our selves, and yet it is not
totally lost. Thirdly, though liberty cannot be totally lost out of the world,
yet it may be totally lost to this or that particular man, as to the exercise
of it. Reason is the root of liberty, and though nothing be more natural to a
man than reason, yet many by excess of study, or by continual gurmandizing, or
by some extravagant passion, which they have cherished in themselves, or by
doting too much upon some affected object, do become very sotts, and deprive
themselves of the use of reason, and consequently of Liberty. And when the
benefit of liberty is not thus universally lost, yet it may be lost
respectively to this or that particular occasion. As he who makes choice of a
bad wife, has lost his former liberty to chose a good one.

Numb. 23.
J. D. FOurthly, the natural Philosopher does teach, that the will does
necessarily follow the last dictate of the understanding. It is true indeed the
will should follow the direction of the understanding, but I am not satisfied
that it does evermore follow it. Sometimes this saying has place, Video
meliora proboque Deteriora sequor. As that great Roman said of two Sailers,
that the one produced the better reasons, but the other must have the office.
So reason often lies dejected at the feet of affection, Things nearer to the
senses moove more powerfully. Do what a man can, he shall sorrow more for the
death of his child, than for the sin of his soul. Yet appreciatively in the
estimation of judgment, he accounts the offense of God, a greater evil than
any temporal loss.

Next, I do not believe that a man is bound to weigh the expedience or
inexpedience of every ordinary trivial action to the least grain in the
balance of his understanding, or to run up into his Watchtower with his
perspective to take notice of every Jack-daw that flies by, for fear of some
hidden danger. This seems to me to be a prostitution of reason to petite
observations, as concerning every rag that a man wears, each drop of drink,
each morsel of bread that he eats, each pace that he walks. Thus many stepps
must he go, not one more, nor one less, under pain of mortal sin. What is this
but a Rack and a Gibbet to the Conscience? But God leaves many things
indifferent, though man be so curious he will not. A good Architect will be
sure to provide sufficient materials for his building, but what particular
number of stones, or trees, he troubles not his head. And suppose he should
weigh each action thus, yet he does not, so still there is liberty. Thirdly, I
conceive it is possible in this mist and weakness of human apprehension, for
two actions to be so equally circumstantiated, that no discernible difference
can appear between them upon discussion. As suppose a Surgeon should give
two plasters to his Patient, and bid him apply either of them to his wound,
what can induce his reason more to the one than to the other, but that he may
refer it to chance, whether he will use? But leaving these probable
speculations which I submit to better judgments, I answer the Philosopher
briefly thus; Admitting that the will did necessarily follow the last dictate
of the understanding as certainly in many things it does. Yet,

First, this is no extrinsecall determination from without, and a man's own
resolution is not destructive to his own liberty, but depends upon it. So the
person is still free.

Secondly, this determination is not antecedent, but joined with the action.
The understanding and the will, are not different Agents, but distinct
faculties of the same soul. Here is an infallibility, or an hypotheticall
necessity, as we say, Quicquid est quando est, necesse est esse: A necessity of
consequence, but not a necessity of consequent. Though an Agent have certainly
determined, and so the action be become infallible, yet if the Agent did
determine freely, the action likewise is free.

T. H. THE fourth opinion which he rejects, is of them that make the will
necessarily to follow the last dictate of the understanding, but it seems he
understands, that Tenet in another sense than I do. For he speaks as if they
that held it did suppose men must dispute the sequel of every action they do,
great and small, to the least grain, which is a thing, that he thinks with
reason to be untrue. But I understand it to signify, that the will follows
the last opinion or judgment, immediately preceding the action, concerning
whether it be good to do it or not, whether he has weighed it long before or
not all. And that I take to be the meaning of them that hold it. As for
example, when a man strikes, his will to strike follows necessarily that
thought he had of the sequel of his stroke immediately before the lifting of
his hand. Now if it be understood in that sense, the last dictate of the
understanding does certainly necessitate the action, though not as the whole
cause, yet as the last cause, as the last feather necessitates the breaking of
an horses-back, when there are so many laid on before, as there needs but the
addition of that one to make the weight sufficient. That which he alleges
against this, is first, out of a Poet, who in the person of Medaea says, Video
Meliora proboque, Deteriora sequor. But the saying (as pretty as it is) is not
true, for though Medaea saw many reasons to forbear killing her children, yet
the last dictate of her judgment was, that the present revenge of her husband
outweighed them all. And thereupon that wicked action followed necessarily.
Then the story of the Romans, that of two competitors said, one had the better
reasons, but the other must have the office. This also makes against him, for
the last dictate of his judgment, that had the bestowing of the office was
this, that it was better to take a great bribe, than reward a great merit.
Thirdly, he objects that things nearer the senses moove more powerfully than
reason. What follows thence but this, That the sense of the present good is
commonly more immediate to the Action, than the foresight of the evil
consequents to come. Fourthly, whereas he says, that do what a man can, he
shall sorrow more for the death of his son, than for the sin of his soul; it
makes nothing to the last dictate of the understanding, but it argues plainly,
that sorrow for sin is not voluntary. And by consequence repentance proceeds
from causes.

J. D. THE fourth pretense alleged against Liberty was, that the will does
necessarily follow the last dictate of the understanding, This objection is
largely answered before in several places of this Reply, and particularly,
Numb. 7. In my former discourse, I gave two answers to it: The one certain and
undoubted, That supposing the last dictate of the understanding did always
determine the will, yet this determination being not antecedent in time, nor
proceeding from extrinsecall causes, but from the proper resolution of the
Agent, who had now freely determined himself, it makes no absolute necessity,
but only hypotheticall, upon supposition that the Agent has determined his
own will, after this or that manner. Which being the main answer, T. H. is so
far from taking it away, that he takes no notice of it. The other part of mine
answer was probable; That it is not always certain, that the will does always
actually follow the last dictate of the understanding, though it always ought
to follow it. Of which I gave then three reasons, one was, that actions may be
so equally circumstantiated, or the case so intricate, that reason cannot give
a positive sentence, but leaves the election to liberty or chance. To this he
answers not a word. Another of my reasons was, because reason does not weigh,
nor is bound to weigh the convenience or inconvenience of every individual
action to the uttermost grain in the balance of true judgment. The truth of
this reason is confessed by T. H. though he might have had more abetters in
this than in the most part of his discourse, that nothing is indifferent, that
a man cannot stroke his beard on one side, but it was either necessasary to do
it, or sinful to omit it, from which confession of his, it follows, that in
all those actions, wherein reason does not define what is most convenient,
there the will is free from the determination of the understanding. And by
consequence the last feather is wanting to break the horses back; A third
reason was, because passions and affections sometimes prevail against judgment,
as I prooved by the example of Medaea and Caesar, by the neerness of the
objects to the senses, and by the estimation of a temporal loss more than sin.
Against this reason, his whole answer is addressed. And first, he explaneth the
sense of the assertion by the comparison of the last feather, wherewith he
seems to be delighted, seeing he uses it now the second time. But let him like
it as he will, it is improper for three reasons; First, the determination of
the judgment is no part of the weight, but is the sentence of the trier. The
understanding weighs all Things, Objects, Means, Circumstances, Convenience,
Inconvenience, but it self is not weighed. Secondly, the sensitive passion in
in some extraordinary cases, may give a counterfeit weight to the object, if it
can detein or divert reason from the balance, but ordinarily the Means,
Circumstances, and Causes concurrent they have their whole weight from the
understanding. So as they do not press the horses back at all until reason lay
them on. Thirdly, he conceives that as each feather has a certain natural
weight, whereby it concurres not arbitrarily, but necessarily toward the
overcharging of the horse; So all objects and causes have a natural efficiency
whereby they do Physically determine the will, which is a great mistake. His
Objects, his Agents, his Motives, his Passions, and all his concurrent causes,
ordinarily do only moove the will morally, not determine it naturally. So as
it has in all ordinary actions a free dominion over it self.

His other example of a man that strikes, whose will to strike follows
necessarily that thought he had of the sequel of his stroke immediately before
the lifting up of his hand) as it confounds passionate, indeliberate thoughts,
with the dictates of right reason. So it is very uncertain, for between the cup
and the lips, between the lifting up of the hand, and the blow, the will may
alter, and the judgment also. And lastly, it is impertinent, for that necessity
of striking proceeds from the free determination of the Agent, and not from the
special influence of any outward determining causes. And so it is only a
necessity upon supposition.

Concerning Medaeas choice, the strength of the argument does not lie either in
the fact of Medaea, which is but a fiction, or in the authority of the Poet,
who writes things rather to be admired than believed, but in the experience of
all men, who find it to be true in themselves. That sometimes reason does show
unto a man the exorbitancy of his passion, that what he desires is but a
pleasant good, that what he loses by such a choice is an honest good, That
that which is honest is to be preferred before that which is pleasant, yet the
will pursues that which is pleasant, and neglects that which is honest. St.
Paul says as much in earnest as is feined of Medaea. That he approoved not
that which he did, and that he did that which he hated, Romans 7.15. The Roman
Story is mistaken; There was no bribe in the case but affection. Whereas I urge
that those things, which are nearer to the senses do moove more powerfully, he
lays hold on it; and without answering to that for which I produced it,
infers, That the sense of present good is more immediate to the action than the
foresight of evil consequents. Which is true, but it is not absolutely true by
any antecedent necessity. Let a man do what he may do, and what he ought to do,
and sensitive objects will lose that power which they have by his own fault,
and neglect. Antecedent or indeliberate concupiscence does sometimes (but
rarely) surprise a man, and render the action not free. But consequent and
deliberated concupiscence, which proceeds from the rational will does render
the action more free, not less free, and introduces only a necessity upon
supposition.

Lastly, he says, that a man's mourning more for the loss of his Child than for
his sin, makes nothing to the last dictate of the understanding. Yes, very
much. Reason dictates, that a sin committed, is a greater evil than the loss
of a child, and ought more to be lamented for, yet we see daily how affection
prevails against the dictate of reason; That which he inferrs from hence, that
sorrow for sin is not voluntary, and by consequence that repentance proceeds
from causes, is true, as to the latter part of it, but not in his sense. The
causes from whence repentance does proceed are Gods grace preventing, and man's
will concurring. God prevents freely, man concurs freely. Those inferior
Agents, which sometimes do concur as subordinate to the grace of God, do not,
cannot, determine the will naturally. And therefore the former part of his
inference, that sorrow for sin is not voluntary, is untrue, and altogether
groundless. That is much more truly, and much more properly said to be
voluntary, which proceeds from judgment, and from the rational will, than that
which proceeds from passion, and from the sensitive will. One of the main
grounds of all T. H. his errors in this question is, that he acknowledges no
efficacy, but that which is natural. Hence is this wild consequence,
Repentance has causes, and therefore it is not voluntary. Free effects have
free causes, necessary effects necessary causes, voluntary effects have
sometimes free, sometimes necessary causes.

Numb. 24.
J. D. Fifthly, and lastly, the Divine labors to find out a way how liberty may
consist with the prescience and decrees of God. But of this I had not very long
since occasion to write a full discourse, in answer to a Treatise against the
prescience of things contingent. I shall for the present only repeat these two
things. First, we ought not to desert a certain truth, because we are not able
to comprehend the certain manner. God should be but a poor God, if we were able
perfectly to comprehend all his Actions and Attributes.

Secondly, in my poor judgment, which I ever do and ever shall submit to
better, the readiest way to reconcile Contingence and Liberty, with the decrees
and prescience of God, and most remote from the altercations of these times, is
to subject future co^tingents to the aspects of God, according to that
presentiallity which they have in eternity. Not that things future, which are
not yet existent and coexistent with God, but because the infinite knowledge of
God, incircling all times in the point of eternity, does attain to their future
Being, from whence proceeds their objective and intelligible Being. The main
impediment which keeps men from subscribing to this way is, because they
conceive eternity to be an everlasting succession, and not one indivisible
point. But if they consider, that whatsoever is in God is God, That there are
no accidents in him, for that which is infinitely perfect cannot be further
perfected. That as God is not wise but Wisdom it self, not just but Justice it
self, so he is not eternal but Eternity it self. They must needs conclude that
therefore this eternity is indivisible, because God is indivisible, and
therefore not successive, but altogether an infinite point, comprehending all
times within it self.

T. H. THE last part of this discourse contains his opinion about reconciling
Liberty with the Prescience, and Decrees of God, otherwise than some Divines
have done, against whom he had formerly written a Treatise, out of which he
only repeateth two things. One is, that we ought not to desert a certain truth,
for not being able to comprehend the certain manner of it. And I say the same,
as for example, that he ought not to desert this certain truth; That there are
certain and necessary causes, which make every man to will what he wills,
though he do not yet conceive in what manner the will of man is caused. And yet
I think the manner of it, is not very hard to conceive, seeing that we see
daily, that praise, dispraise, reward, punishment, good and evil, sequells of
men's actions retained in memory, do frame and make us to the election of
whatsoever it be that we elect. And that the memory of such things proceeds
from the senses. And sense from the operation of the objects of sense, which
are external to us, and governed only by God Almighty. And by consequence,
all actions, even of free and voluntary Agents are necessary.

The other thing he repeateth is, that the best way to reconcile Contingency
and Liberty, with the prescience and decrees of God, is to subject future
contingents to the aspect of God. The same is also my opinion, but contrary to
what he has all this while labored to prove. For, hitherto he held liberty
and necessity, that is to say, liberty and the decrees of God irreconcilable,
unless the aspect of God (which word appears now the first time in this
discourse) signify somewhat else besides Gods will and decree, which I cannot
understand. But he adds, that we must subject them according to that
presentiality which they have in eternity, which he says cannot be done by
them that conceive eternity to be an everlasting succession, but only by them
that conceive it an indivisible point. To this I answer, that as soon as I can
conceive Eternity an indivisible point, or any thing, but an everlasting
succession, I will renounce all I have written in this subject: I know St.
Thomas Aquinas calls eternity Nunc stans, an ever abiding now, which is easy
enough to say, but though I fain would, I never could conceive it. They that
can, are more happy than I. But in the mean time he allows hereby all men to
be of my opinion, save only those that conceive in their minds a nunc stans,
which I think are none. I understand as little how it can be true that God is
not just, but Justice it self, not wise but Wisdom it self, not eternal but
Eternity it self. Nor how he concludes thence, that Eternity is a ponit
indivisible, and not a succession. Nor in what sense it can be said, that an
infinite point, etc. wherein is no succession, can comprehend all times, though
time be successive.

These phrases I find not in the Scripture. I wonder therefore, what was the
design of the Schoolmen, to bring them up, unless they thought a man could
not be a true Christian, unless his understanding be first strangled with such
hard sayings.

And thus much in answer to his discourse, wherein I think not only his
squadrons, but also his reserves of distinctions are defeated. And now your
Lordship shall have my doctrine concerning the same question, with my reasons
for it positively and briefly as I can, without any terms of Art in plain
English.

J. D. THat poor discourse which I mention, was not written against any
Divines, but in way of examination of a French Treatise, which your Lordships
Brother did me the honor to show me at York; My assertion is most true, that
we ought not to desert a certain truth, because we are not able to comprehend
the certain manner. Such a truth is that which I maintain, that the will of man
in ordinary actions is free from extrinsecall determination. A truth
demonstrable in reason, received and believed by all the world. And therefore
though I be not able to comprehend or express exactly the certain manner how it
consists together with Gods Eternal Prescience, and Decrees, which exceed my
weak capacity, yet I ought to adhere to that truth, which is manifest. But T.
H. his opinion of the absoute necessity of all events, by reason of their
antecedent determination in their extrinsecall and necessary causes, is no such
certain Truth, but an innovation, a strange paradox, without probable grounds,
rejected by all Authors, yea, by all the world. Neither, is the manner how the
second causes do operate so obscure, or so transcendent above the reach of
reason, as the Eternal Decrees of God are. And therefore in both these
respects he cannot challenge the same privilege. I am in profession of an old
truth derived by inheritance or succession from mine ancestors. And therefore,
though I were not able to clear every quirk in Law, yet I might justly hold my
possession until a better title were showed for another. He is no old
Possessor, but a new Pretender, and is bound to make good his claim by evident
proofs, not by weak and inconsequent suppositions, or inducements, such as
those are which he uses here, of praises, dispraises, rewards, punishments,
the memory of good and evil sequells, and events, which may incline the will,
but neither can nor do necessitate the will. Nor by uncertain and accidental
inferences such as this, The memory of praises, dispraises, rewards,
punishments, good and evil sequelis do make us (he should say dispose us) to
elect what we elect, but the memory of these things is from the sense, and the
sense from the operation of the external objects, and the Agency of external
octjects is only from God, therefore all actions, even of free and voluntary
Agents, are necessary. To pass by all the other great imperfections, which are
to be found in this Sorite. It is just like that old Sophistical piece: He
that drinks well, sleeps well, he that sleeps well, thinks no hurt, he that
thinks no hurt lives well, therefore he that drinks well lives well.

In the very last passage of my discourse, I proposed mine own private opinion,
how it might be made appear, that the Eternal Prescience and Decrees of God
are consistent with true liberty and contingency. And this I set down, in as
plain terms as I could, or as so profound a speculation would permit, which
is almost wholly misunderstood by T. H. and many of my words wrested to a wrong
sense. As first, where I speak of the aspect of God, that is his view, his
knowledge, by which the most free and contingent actions were manifest to him
from eternity, Heb. 4.11. All things are naked and open to his eyes, and this
not discursively, but intuitively, not by external species, but by his
internal Essence; He confounds this with the Will, and the Decrees of God:
Though he found not the word Aspect before in this discourse, he might have
found prescience. Secondly, he charge me that hitherto I have maintained,
that Liberty and the Decrees of God, are irreconcilable. If I have said any
such thing, my heart never went along with my pen. No, but his reason why he
charge me on this manner, is because I have maintained, that Liberty and the
absolute necessity of all things are irreconciliable. That is true indeed. What
then? Why (says he) Necessity and Gods Decrees are all one. How all one? that
were strange indeed. Necessity may be a consequent of Gods Decrees, it cannot
be the Decree it self. But to cut his argument short. God has decreed all
effects which come to pass in time, yet not all after the same manner, but
according to the distinct natures, capacities and conditions of his creatures,
which he does not destroy by his Decree; Some he acts, with some he
cooperateth by special influence, and some he only permits. Yet this is no
idle or bare permission, seeing he does concur both by way of general
influence, giving power to act, and also by disposing all events necessary,
free, and contingent to his own glory. Thirdly, he charge me, that I allow
all men to be of his opinion, save only those that conceive in their minds a
Nunc stans, or how eternity is an indivisible point, rather than an everlasting
succession. But I have given no such allowance. I know, there are many other
ways proposed by Divines, for reconciling the Eternal Prescience, and Decrees
of God, with the Liberty and Contingency of second causes, some of which may
please other judgments better than this of mine. Howsoever, though a man could
comprehend none of all these ways, yet remember what I said, that a certain
truth ought not to be rejected, because we are not able, in respect of our
weakness, to understand the certain manner, or reason of it. I know, the
Lodestone has an attractive power to draw the Iron to it; And yet I know not
how it comes to have such a power.

But the chiefest difficulty, which offers it self in this Section is, whether
Eternity be an indivisible point (as I maintain it) or an everlasting
succession; as he would have it. According to his constant use, he gives no
answer to what was urged by me, but pleads against it from his own incapacity.
I never could conceive, says he, how eternity should be an indivisible point.
I believe, that neither we, nor any man else can comprehend it so clearly, as we
do these inferior things. The nearer that any thing comes to the essence of
God, the more remote it is from our apprehension. But shall we therefore make
potentialities, and successive duration, and former and later, or a part
without a part (as they say) to be in God? Because we are not able to
understand clearly the divine perfection, we must not therefore attribute any
imperfection to him.

He says moreover, that he understands as little how it can be true which I
say, that God is not just but Justice it self, not eternal but Eternity it
self. It seems howsoever he be versed in this question, that he has not
troubled his head overmuch with reading School-Divines, or Metaphysicians, if
he make faculties or qualities to be in God, really distinct-from his essence.
God is a most simple or pure act, which can admit no composition of substance
and accidents. Does he think that the most perfect Essence of God cannot act
sufficiently without faculties and qualities? The infinite perfection of the
Divine essence, excludes all passive or receptive powers, and cannot be
perfected more than it is by any accidents. The attributes of God, are not
diverse virtues, or qualities in him, as they are in the creatures, but really
one and the same, with the Divine Essence, and among themselves. They are
attributed to God, to supply the defect of our capacity, who are not able to
understand that which is to be known of God, under one name, or one act of the
understanding.

Furthermore he says, that he understands not how I conclude from hence, that
Eternity is an indivisible point, and not a succession. I will help him. The
Divine Substance is indivisible; But Eternity is the Divine Substance. The
major is evident, because God is actus simplicissimus, a most simple act,
wherein there is no manner of composition, neither of matter and form, nor of
subject and accidents, nor of parts, etc. and by consequence no divisibility.
The minor has been clearly demonstrated in mine answer to his last doubt, and
is confessed by all men, that whatsoever is in God, is God.

Lastly he says. He conceives not how it can be said, that an infinite point,
wherein is no succession, can comprehend all time which is successive. I
answer, that it does not comprehend it formally as time is successive, but
eminently and virtually, as Eternity is infinite. To day all Eternity is
coexistent with this day. To morrow all Eternity will be coexistent with to
morrow, and so in like manner with all the parts of time, being it self without
parts. He says, He finds not these phrases in the Scripture. No, but he may
find the thing in the Scripture, that God is infinite in all his attributes,
and not capable of any imperfection.

And so to show his antipathy against the Schoolmen, that he has no liberty
or power to contain himself, when he meets with any of of their phrases or
tenets, he falls into another paroxisme or fit of inveighing against them; And
so concludes his answer with a plaudite to himself, because he had defeated
both my squadrons of arguments, and reserves of distinctions,

Dicite Io Paean, and Io bis dicite Paean. But because his eyesight was weak,
and their backs were toward him, he quite mistook the matter. Those whom he
see rowted and running away were his own scattered forces.

Numb. 25.
T. H. My opinion about Liberty and Necessity.

FIrst, I conceive that when it comes into a man's mind, to do or not to do
some certain action, if he have no time to deliberate the doing or abstaining,
necessarily follows the present thought he had of the good or evil
consequence thereof to himself. As for example, in sudden anger the action
shall follow the thought of of revenge, in sudden fear the thought of escape.
Also when a man has time to deliberate, but deliberates not, because never any
thing appeared, that could make him doubt of the consequence, the action
follows his opinion of the goodness or harm of it. These actions I call
voluntary. He, if I understand him aright, calls them Spontaneous, I call them
voluntary, because those actions that follow immediately the last appetite are
voluntary. And here where there is one only appetite, that one is the last.

Besides, I see it is reasonable to punish a rash action, which could not be
justly done by man, unless the same were voluntary: For no action of a man can
be said to be without deliberation, though never so sudden, because it is
supposed he had time to deliberate all the precedent time of his life, whether
he should do that kind of action or not. And hence it is, that he that kills
in a sudden passion of anger, shall nevertheless be justly put to death,
because all the time wherein he was able to consider, whether to kill were good
or evil, shall be held for one continual deliberation, and consequently the
killing shall be judged to proceed from election.

J. D. THis part of T. H. his discourse hangs together like a sick man's
dreams. Even now he tells us, that a man may have time to deliberate, yet not
deliberate; By and by he says, that no action of a man, though never so
sudden, can be said to be without deliberation. He tells us Numb. 33. that the
scope of this section is to show what is spontaneous. Howbeit he shows only
what is voluntary; so making voluntary and spontaneous to be all one, whereas
before he had told us, that every spontaneous action is not voluntary, because
indeliberate. Nor every voluntary action spontaneous, if it proceed from fear.
Now he tells us, that those actions, which follow the last appetite, are
voluntary, and where there is one only appetite, that is the last. But before
he told us, that voluntary praesupposeth some praecedent deliberation and
Meditation of what is likely to follow, both upon the doing and abstaining from
the action. He defines Liberty, Numb. 29. to be the absence of all extrinsecall
impediments to action. And yet in his whole discourse he labors to make
good, that whatsoever is not done, is therefore not done, because the Agent was
necessitated by extrinsecall causes not to do it. Are not extrinsecall causes,
which determine him not to do it, extrinsecall impediments to action. So no man
shall be free to do any thing, but that which he does actually. He defines a
free Agent to be him, who has not made an end of deliberating, Numb. 28. And
yet defines liberty to be an absence of outward impediments. There may be
outward impediments, even whilst he is deliberating. As a man deliberates
whether he shall play at Tennis, and at the same time the door of the
Tennis-court is fast locked against him. And after a man has ceased to
deliberate, there may be no outward impediments, as when a man resolves not to
play at Tennis, because he finds himself ill disposed, or because he will not
hazard his money. So the same person, at the same time, should be free and not
free, not free and free. And as he is not firm to his own grounds, so he
confounds all things, the mind and the will, the estimative faculty and the
understanding, imagination with deliberation, the end with the means, humane
will with the sensitive appetite, rational hope or fear, with irrational
passions, inclinations with intentions, A beginning of Being with a beginning
of working. Sufficiency with efficiency. So as the greatest difficulty is to
find out what he aims at. So as I had once resolved not to answer this part of
his discourse, yet upon better advise, I will take a brief survey of it also;
and show how far I assent unto, or dissent from that which I conceive to be his
meaning.

And first, concerning sudden passions, as Anger or the like; That which he
says, that the action does necessarily follow the thought, is thus far true,
that those actions, which are altogether undeliberated and do proceed from
sudden and violent passions, or motus primo primis, which surprise a man, and
give him no time to advise with reason, are not properly and actualally in
themselves free, but rather necessary actions, as when a man runs away from a
Cat or a Custard, out of a secret antipathy.

Secondly, as for those actions wherein actual deliberation seems not
necessary, because never any thing appeared that could make a man doubt of the
consequence. I do confess, that actions done by virtue of a precedent
deliberation, without any actual deliberation in the present when the act is
done, may notwithstanding be truly, both voluntary and free acts, yea, in some
cases, and in some sense more free, than if they were actually deliberated of
in present. As one who has acquired by former deliberation and experience, an
habit to play upon the Virginal, needs not deliberate what man, or what Jack
he much touch, nor what finger of his hand he must move to play such a lesson;
Yea, if his mind should be fixed, or intent to every motion of his hand, or
every touch of a string, it would hinder his play, and render the action more
troublesome to him. Wherefore I believe, that not only his playing in
general, but every motion of his hand, though it be not presently deliberated
of, is a free act, by reason of his precedent deliberation. So then (saving
improprieties of speech, as calling that voluntary which is free, and limiting
the will to the last appetite, and other mistakes, as that no act can be said
to be without deliberation) we agree also for the greater part in this second
observation.

Thirdly, whereas he says, that some sudden acts, proceeding from violent
passions, which surprise a man, are justly punished, I grant they are so
sometimes, but not for his reason, because they have been formerly actually
deliberated of, but because they were virtually deliberated of, or because it
is our faults, that they were not actually deliberated of, whether it was a
fault of pure negation, that is, of not doing our duty only, or a fault of bad
disposition also, by reason of some vicious habit, which we had contracted by
our former actions. To do a necessary act is never a fault, nor justly
punishable, when the necessity is inevitably imposed upon us by extrinsecall
causes. As if a child before he had the use of reason shall kill a man in his
passion, yet because he wanted malice to incite him to it, and reason to
restrain him from it, he shall not die for it in the strict rules of particular
Justice, unless there be some mixture of public Justice in the case. But if
the necessity be contracted by our selves, and by our own faults, it is justly
punishable. As he who by his wanton thoughts in the daytime, does procure his
own nocturnall pollution. A man cannot deliberate in his sleep, yet it is
accounted a sinful act, and consequently, a free act, that is not actually
free in its self, but virtually free in its causes, and though it be not
expressly willed and chosen, yet it is tacitly and implicitly willed and
chosen, when that is willed and chosen from whence it was necessarily produced.
By the Leviticall Law, if a man dug a pit, and left it uncovered, so that
his neighbors Ox, or his Ass, did fall into it, he was bound to make
reparation, not because he did chose to leave it uncovered on purpose that such
a mischance might happen, but because he did freely omit, that which he ought
to have done, from whence this damage proceeded to his neighbor. Lastly,
there is great difference between the first motions, which sometimes are not in
our power, and subsequent acts of killing or stealing, or the like, which
always are in our power, if we have the use of reason, or else it is our own
fault, that they are not in our power. Yet to such hasty acts done in hot
blood, the Law is not so severe, as to those which are done upon long
deliberation, and prepensed malice, unless (as I said) there be some mixture of
public Justice in it. He that steals an horse deliberately may be more
punishable by the Law, than he that kills the owner by Chance-medley. Yet the
death of the owner was more noxious (to use his phrase) and more dammageable to
the family, than the stealth of the horse. So far was T. H. mistaken in that
also, that the right to kill men, does proceed merely from their being noxious,
Numb. 14.

Numb. 26.
T. H. SEcondly, I conceive when a man deliberates, whether he shall do a thing
or not do a thing, that he does nothing else but consider, whether it be better
for himself to do it, or not to do it. And to consider an action, is to imagine
the consequences of it, both good and evil, from whence is to be inferred,
that deliberation is nothing but alternate imagination, of the good and evil
sequells of an action or (which is the same thing) alternate hope and fear, or
alternate appetite to do, or quit the action of which he deliberateth.

J. D. IF I did not know what deliberation was, I should be little believed in
my knowledge by this description. Sometimes he makes it to be a consideration,
or an act of the understanding, sometimes an imagination, or an act of the
fancy, sometimes he makes it to be an alternation of passions, hope and fear.
Sometimes he makes it concern the end, sometimes to concern the means. So he
makes it I know not what. The truth is this in brief. Deliberation is an
inquiry made by reason, whether this or that definitely considered, be a good
and fit means, or indefinitely what are good and fit means to be chosen for
attaining some wished end.

Numb. 27.
T. H. THirdly, I conceive, that in all deliberations, that is to say, in all
alternate succession of contrary appetites, the last is, that which we call the
Will, and is immediately before the doing of the action, or next before the
doing of it become impossible. All other appetites to do and to quit, that come
upon a man during his deliberation, are usually called intentions, and
inclinations, but not wills, there being but one will, which also in this case
may be called last will, though the intention change often.

J. D. STill here is nothing but confusion, he confounds the faculty of the
will, with the act of volition, he makes the will to be the last part of
deliberation. He makes the intention, which is a most proper and elicite act of
the will, or a willing of the end, as it is to be attained by certain means, to
be no willing at all, but only some antecedaneous inclination or propension.
He might as well say, that the uncertain agitation of the needle hither and
thither, to find out the Pole, and the resting or fixing of it self directly
toward the Pole, were both the same thing. But the grossest mistake is, that
he will acknowledge no act of a man's will, to be his will, but only the last
act, which he calls the last will. If the first were no will, how comes this to
be the last will? According to this doctrine, the will of a man should be as
unchangeable as the Will of God, at least so long as there is a possibility to
effect it. According to this doctrine concupiscence with consent should be no
sin, for that which is not truly willed is not a sin; Or rather should not be
at all, unless either the act followed, or were rendered impossible by some
intervening circumstances. According to this doctrine no man can say, this is
my will, because he knows not yet, whether it shall be his last appeal. The
truth is, there be many acts of the will, both in respect of the means, and of
the end. But that act, which makes a man's actions to be truly free, is
Election, which is the deliberate chosing or refusing, of this or that means,
or the acceptance of one means before another, where diverse are represented by
the understanding.

Numb. 28.
T. H. FOurthly, that those actions, which man is said to do upon deliberation,
are said to be voluntary, and done upon choice and election. So that voluntary
action, and action proceeding from election, is the same thing. And that of a
voluntary Agent, it is all one to say he is free, and to say, he has not made
an end of deliberating.

J. D. THis short Section might pass without an animadversion but for two
things. The one is, that he confounds a voluntary act with a free act. A free
act is only that which proceeds from the free election of the rational will
after deliberation, but every act that proceeds from the sensitive appetite of
man or beast, without deliberation or election, is truly voluntary. The other
thing observable is his conclusion, that it is all one to say, a man is free,
and to say, he has not made an end of deliberating. Which confession of his,
overturnes his whole structure of absolute necessity, for if every Agent be
necessitated to act what he does act by a necessary and natural flux of
extrinsecall causes, then he is no more free before he deliberates, or whilst
he deliberates, than he is after, but by T. H. his confession here, he is more
free, whilst he deliberates, than he is after; And so after all his
flourishes, for an absolute or extrinsecall necessity, he is glad to fit
himself down, and rest contented with an hypotheticall necessity, which no man
ever denied or doubted of. Ascribing the necessitation of a man in free acts to
his own deliberation, and in indeliberate acts to his last thought, Numb. 25.
what is this to a natural and special influence of extrinsecall causes.
Again, Liberty (says he) is an absence of extrinsecall impediments, but
deliberation does produce no new extrinsecall impediments, therefore (let him
chose which part he will) either he is free after deliberation, by his own
doctrine, or he was not free before. Our own deliberation, and the direction of
our own understanding, and the election of our own will, do produce an
hypotheticall necessity, that the event be such as the understanding has
directed, and the will elected. But forasmuch as the understanding might have
directed otherwise, and the will have elected otherwise, this is far from an
absolute necessity. Neither does liberty respect only future acts, but present
acts also. Otherwise God did not freely create the world. In the same instant
wherein the will elects it is free, according to a priority of Nature, though
not of time, to elect otherwise. And so in a divided sense, the will is free,
even whilst it acts, though in a compounded sense it be not free. Certainly,
deliberation does constitute, not destroy liberty.

Numb. 29.
T. H. Fifthly, I conceive liberty to be rightly defined in this manner. Liberty
is the absence of all the impediments to action, that are not contained in the
nature, and in the intrinsecall quality of the Agent. As for example, the water
is said to descend freely, or to have liberty to descend by the Channel of the
River, because there is no impediment that way, but not across, because the
banks are impediments. And though water cannot ascend, yet men never say it
wants the liberty to ascend, but the faculty or power, because the impediment
is in the nature of the water and intrinsecall. So also we say, he that is tied
wants the liberty to go, because the impediment is not in him, but in his
hands, where as we say not so of him that is sick or lame, because the
impediment is in himself.

J. D. HOw that should be a right definition of liberty which comprehends
neither the Genus nor the difference, neither the matter nor the form of
liberty, which does not so much as accidentally describe liberty by its marks
and tokens; How a real faculty or the Elective power should be defined by a
negation, or by an ababsence, is past my understanding, and contrary to all the
rules of right Reason, which I have learned. Negatives cannot explicate the
nature of things defined. By this definition, a stone has liberty to ascend
into the air, because there is no outward impediment to hinder it, and so a
violent act may be a free act. Just like his definition are his instances of
the liberty of the water to descend down the Channel, and a sick or a lame
man's liberty to go. The later is an impotence and not a power or a liberty.
The former is so far from being a free act, that it is scarce a natural act,
Certainly, the proper natural motion of water, as of all heavy bodies, is to
descend directly downwards toward the center, as we see in rain, which falls
down perpendicularly. Though this be far from a free act, which proceeds from a
rational appetite, yet it is a natural act, and proceeds from a natural
appetite, and has its reason within in self. So has not the current of the
River in its channel, which must not be ascribed to the proper nature of the
water, but either to the general order of the universe, for the better being
and preservation of the creatures (otherwise the waters should not moove in
Seas and Rivers as they do, but cover the face of the earth, and possess their
proper place between the air and the earth, according to the degree of their
gravity.) Or to an extrinsecall principle, whilst one particle of water
thrusts and forces forward another, and so comes a current, or at least so
comes the current to be more impetuous, to which motion the position of the
earth does contribute much, both by restraining that fluid body with its banks
from dispersing it self, and also, by affording way for a fair and easy
descent by its proclivity. He tells us sadly that the water wants liberty to go
over the banks, because there is an extrinsecall impediment, But to ascend up
the channel it wants not liberty, but power. Why? Liberty is a power, if it
want power to ascend, it wants liberty to ascend. But he makes the reason why
the water ascends not up the channel, to be intrinsecall, and the reason why
it ascends not over the banks to be extrinsecall, as if there were not a rising
of the ground up the channel, as well as up the banks, though it be not so
discernible, nor always so sudden. The natural appetite of the water is as
much against the ascending over the banks, as the ascending up the channel.
And the extrinsecall impediment is as great in ascending up the channel as
over the banks, or rather greater, because there it must moove, not only
against the rising soil, but also against the succeeding waters, which press
forward the former. Either the River wants liberty for both, or else it wans
liberty for neither.

But to leave his metaphorical faculties, and his Catachresticall Liberty. How
far is his discourse wide from the true moral liberty, which is in question
between us. His former description of a free Agent, that is, he who has not
made an end of deliberating, though it was wide from the mark, yet it came much
nearer the truth than this definition of Liberty, unless perhaps he think that
the water has done deliberating, whether it will go over the banks, but has
not done deliberating, whether it will go up the channel.

Numb. 30.
T. H. Sixthly, I conceive, nothing takes beginning from it self, but from the
action of some other immediate Agent without it self. And that therefore when
first a man had an appetite or will, to something, to which immediately before
he had no appetite nor will, the cause of his will is not the will it self, but
something else, not in his own disposing. So that where as it is out of
controversy that of voluntary actions the will is a necessary cause; And by
this which is said the will is also caused by other things whereof it disposes
not, it follows that voluntary actions have all of them necessary causes, and
therefore are necessitated.

J. D. THis sixth point does not consist in explicating of terms, as the
former, but in two proofs, that voluntary actions are necessitated. The former
proof stands thus, Nothing takes beginning from it self, but from some Agent
without it self, which is not in its own disposing, therefore etc. concedo
omnia, I grant all he says, The will does not take beginning from it self.
Whether he understand by will the faculty of the will, which is a power of the
reasonable soul, it takes not beginning from it self, but from God, who created
and infused the Soul into man, and endowed it with this power: Or whether he
understand by will, the act of willing, it takes not beginning from it self,
but from the faculty, or from the power of willing, which is in the Soul. This
is certain, finite and participated things cannot be from themselves, nor be
produced by themselves. What would he conclude from hence? that therefore the
act of willing takes not its beginning from the faculty of the will? Or that
the faculty is always determined antecedently, extrinsecally to will that
which it does will? He may as soon draw water out of a pumice, as draw any such
conclusion out of these premises. Secondly, for his taking a beginning, Either
he understands a beginning of being, or a beginning of working and acting, If
he understand a beginning of being, he says most truly, that nothing has a
beginning of being in time from it self, But this is nothing to his purpose.
The question is not between us whether the Soul of man, or the will of man be
eternal, But if he understand a beginning of working or mooving actually, it
is a gross error. All men know that when a stone descends, or fire ascends, or
when water, that has been heated returns, to its former temper, the beginning
or reason is intrinsecall, and one and the same thing does moove and is moved
in a diverse respect. It mooves in respect of the form, and it is moved in
respect of the matter. Much more man, who has a perfect knowledge and
prenotion of the end, is most properly said to moove himself. Yet I do not deny
but that there are other beginnings of humane actions, which do concur with the
will, some outward as the first cause by general influence, which is evermore
requisite, Angels or men by persuading, evil spirits by tempting, the object
or end by its appetibility, the understanding by directing. So passions and
acquired habits. But I deny that any of these do necessitate or can necessitate
the will of man by determining it Physically to one, except God alone, who does
it rarely in extraordinary cases. And where there is no antecedent
determination to one, there is no absolute necessity but true Liberty.

His second argument is ex concessis, It is out of controversy (says he) that
of voluntary actions the will is a necessary cause. The argument may be thus
reduced. Necessary causes produce necessary effects, but the Will is a
necessary cause of voluntary actions. I might deny his major; Necessary causes
do not always produce necessary effects, except they be also necessarily
produced, as I have showed before the burning of Protagoras his book. But I
answer clearly to the minor, that the will is not a necessary cause of what it
wills in particular actions. It is without controversy indeed, for it is
without all probability. That it wills, when it wills, is necessary, but that
it wills this or that, now or then, is free. More expressly the act of the will
may be considered three ways; Either in respect of its nature, or in respect
of its exercise, or in respect of its object. First, for the nature of the act;
That which the will wills is necessarily voluntary, because the will cannot be
compelled. And in this sense, it is out of controversy, that the will is a
necessary cause of voluntary actions. Secondly, for the exercise of its acts,
that is not necessary. The will may either will or suspend its act. Thirdly,
for the object that is not necessary but free, the will is not extrinsecally
determined to its objects. As for example, The Cardinals meet in the conclave
to chose a Pope, whom they chose he is necessarily Pope. But it is not
necessary that they shall chose this or that day. Before they were assembled
they might defer their assembling, when they are assembled, they may suspend
their election for a day or a week. Lastly, for the person whom they will
choose, it is freely in their own power, otherwise if the election were not
free, it were void, and no election at all. So that which takes its beginning
from the will, is necessarily voluntary, but it is not necessary that the will
shall will this or that in particular, as it was necessary, that the person
freely elected should be Pope, but it was not necessary, either that the
election should be at this time, or that this man should be elected. And
therefore voluntary acts in particular, have not necessary causes, that is,
they are not necessitated.

Numb. 31.
T. H. SEventhly, I hold that to be a sufficient cause to which nothing is
wanting that is needful to the producing of the effect. The same is also a
necessary cause, for if it be possible, that a sufficient cause shall not bring
forth the effect, then there wanted somewhat which was needful to the
producing of it, and so the cause was not sufficient. But if it be impossible
that a sufficient cause should not produce the effect, then is a sufficient
cause a necessary cause, (for that is said to produce an effect necessarily,
that cannot but produce it) Hence it is manifest, that whatsoever is produced,
is produced necessarily, for whatsoever is produced has had a sufficient cause
to produce it, or else it had not been. And therefore also voluntary actions are
necessitated.

J. D. THis section contains a third Argument to prove that all effects are
necessary, for clearing whereof it is needful to consider how a cause may be
said to be sufficient or insufficient.

First, several causes singly considered may be insufficient, and the same
taken conjointly be sufficient to produce an effect. As two horses jointly are
sufficient to draw a Coach, which either of them singly is insufficient to do.
Now to make the effect, that is the drawing of the Coach necessary, it is not
only required, that the two horses be sufficient to draw it, but also that
their conjunction be necessary, and their habitude such as they may draw it. If
the owner of one of these horses will not suffer him to draw, If the Smith have
shod the other in the quick, and lamed him; If the horse have cast a shoe, or
be a resty jade, and will not draw but when he list, then the effect is not
necessarily produced, but contingently more or less, as the concurrence of the
causes is more or less contingent.

Secondly, a cause may be said to be sufficient, either because it produces
that effect which is intended, as in the generation of a man, or else, because
it is sufficient to produce that which is produced, as in the generation of a
Monster. The former is properly called a sufficient cause, the later a weak and
insufficient cause. Now, if the debility of the cause be not necessary, but
contingent, then the effect is not necessary, but contingent. It is a rule in
Logic, that the conclusion always follows the weaker part. If the premises
be but probable, the conclusion cannot be demonstrative. It holds as well in
causes as in propositions. No effect can exceed the virtue of its cause. If the
ability or debility, of the causes be contingent, the effect cannot be
necessary.

Thirdly, that which concerns this question of Liberty from necessity most
nearly is. That a cause is said to be sufficient in respect of the ability of
it to act, not in respect of its will to act. The concurrence of the will is
needful to the production of a free effect. But the cause may be sufficient,
though the will do not concur. As God is sufficient to produce a thousand
worlds, but it does not follow from thence, either that he has produced them,
or that he will produce them. The blood of Christ is a sufficient ransom for
all mankind, but it does not follow therefore, that all mankind shall be
actually saved by virtue of his Blood. A man may be a sufficient Tutour, though
he will not teach every Scholar, and a sufficient Physician, though he will
not administer to every patient. Forasmuch therefore as the concurrence of the
will is needful to the production of every free effect, and yet the cause may
be sufficient, in sensu diviso, although the will do not concur. It follows
evidently, that the cause may be sufficient, and yet something, which is
needful to the production of the effect, may be wanting, and that every
sufficient cause is not a necessary cause.

Lastly, if any man be disposed to wrangle against so clear light, and say,
that though the free Agent be sufficient in sensu diviso, yet, he is not
sufficient, in sensu composito, to produce the effect without the concurrence
of the will, he says true, but first, he bewrayes the weakness and the fallacy
of the former argument, which is a mere trifling between sufficiency in a
divided sense, and sufficiency in a compounded sense. And seeing the
concurrence of the will is not predetermined, there is no antecedent necessity
before it do concur, and when it has concurred, the necessity is but
hypotheticall, which may consist with liberty.

Numb. 32.
T. H. LAstly, I hold that ordinary definition of a free Agent, namely that a
free Agent is, that, which when all things are present, which are needful to
produce the effect, can nevertheless not produce it, Implies a contradiction,
and is nonsense, being as much as to say, the cause may be sufficient, that is
necessary, and yet the effect not follow.

J. D. THis last point is but a Corollary, or an Inference from the former
doctrine, that every sufficient cause produces its effect necessarily, which
pillar being taken away the superstructure must needs fall to the ground,
having nothing left to support it. Lastly, I hold (says he) what he is able to
prove is something. So much reason, so much trust, but what he holds concerns
himself not others. But what holds he? I hold (says he) that the ordinary
definition of a free Agent implies a contradiction, and is nonsense. That
which he calls the ordinary definition of liberty is the very definition which
is given by the much greater part of Philosophers and Schoolmen. And does he
think that all these spoke nonsense? or had no more judgment than to
contradict themselves in a definition? He might much better suspect himself,
than censure so many. Let us see the definition it self: A free Agent is that,
which when all things are present, that are needful to produce the effect, can
nevertheless not produce it. I acknowledge the old definition of Liberty, with
little variation. But I cannot see this nonsense, nor discover this
contradiction. For in these words all things needful, or all things requisite,
the actual determination of the will is not included. But by all things
needful or requisite. All necessary power either operative or elective, all
necessary instruments and adjuments extrinsecall and intrinsecall, and all
conditions are intended. As he that has pen and ink, and paper, a table, a
desk, and leisure, the art of writing, and the free use of his hand, has all
things requisite to write if he will, and yet he may forbear, if he will. Or as
he that has men and money, and arms, and munition, and ships, and a just
cause, has all things requisite for war, yet he may make peace, if he will. Or
as the King proclaimed in the Gospel, Matthew. 22.4. I have prepared my dinner,
my oxen and my fatlings are killed, all things are ready, come unto the
marriage. According to T. H. his doctrine, the guests might have told him, that
he said not truly, for their own wills were not ready. And indeed if the will
were (as he conceives it is) necessitated extrinsecally to every act of
willing, if it had no power to forbear willing what it does will, nor to will
what it does not will, then if the will were wanting, something requisite to
the producing of the effect was wanting. But now when Science and conscience,
reason and Religion, our own and other men's experience does teach us, that the
will has a dominion over its own acts to will, or nill without extrinsecall
necessitation. If the power to will be present in actu primo, determinable by
our selves, then there is no necessary power wanting in this respect to the
producing of the effect.

Secondly, these words to act or not to act, to work or not to work, to produce
or not to produce, have reference to the effect, not as a thing which is
already done, or doing, but as a thing to be done. They imply not the actual
production but the producibility of the effect. But when once the will has
actually concurred with all other causes and conditions, and circumstances,
then the effect is no more possible, or producible, but it is in being, and
actually produced. Thus he takes away the subject of the question. The question
is whether effects producible be free from necessity. He shuffles out effects
producible, and thrusts in their places effects produced, or which are in the
act of production. Wherefore I conclude, that it is neither nonsense nor
contradiction to say, that a free Agent, when all things requisite to produce
the effect are present, may nevertheless not produce it.

Numb. 33.
T. H. FOr my first five points where it is explicated, First, what Spontaneity
is, Secondly, what Deliberation is, Thirdly, what Will, Propension and Appetite
is, Fourthly, what a free Agent is, Fifthly, what Liberty is, There can be no
other proof offered, but every man's own experience, by reflecting on himself,
and remembering what he uses to have in his mind, that is what he himself
means, when he says, an action is spontaneous, A man deliberates, such is
his will, That Agent, or that action is free. Now, he that so reflecteth on
himself cannot but be satisfied, but that deliberation is the considering of
the good and evil sequells of the action to come, That by Spontaneity, is
meant inconsiderate proceeding, (for else nothing is meant by it.) That will is
the last act of our Deliberation. That a free Agent, is he that can do, if he
will, and forbear, if he will. And that Liberty is the absence of exteruall
impediments; But to those that out of custom speak not what they conceive, but
what they hear, and are not able, or will not take the pains to consider what
they think, when they hear such words, no argument can be sufficient, because
experience, and matter of fact is not verified by other men's Arguments, but by
every man's own sense, and memory. For example, how can it be prooved, that to
love a thing, and to think it good are all one, to a man that does not mark his
own meaning by those words. Or how can it be proved that Eternity is not nunc
Stans, to a man that says these words by custom, and never considers how he
can conceive the thing it self in his mind. Also the sixth point, that a man
cannot imagine any thing to begin without a cause, can no other way be made
known but by trying how he can imagine it. But if he try, he shall find as much
reason (if there be no cause of the thing) to conceive, it should begin at one
time as another, that is, he has equal reason to think, it should begin at
all times, which is impossible. And therefore he must think there was some
special cause, why it began then rather than sooner or later, or else, that it
began never, but was Eternal.

J. D. NOw at length he comes to his main proofs; He that has so confidently
censured the whole current of Schoolmen and Philosophers of nonsense, had
need to produce strong evidence for himself. So he calls his reasons, Numb. 36.
demonstrative proofs. All demonstrations are either from the cause or the
effect, not from private notions and conceptions, which we have in our minds.
That which he calls a demonstration deserves not the name of an intimation. He
argues thus; That which a man conceives in his mind, by these words
Spontaneity, Deliberation, etc. that they are. This is his proposition which I
deny. The true natures of things are not to be judged by the private ideas, or
conceptions of men, but by their causes and formal reasons. Ask an ordinary
person what upwards signifies, and whether our Antipodes have their heads
upwards or downwards; And he will not stick to tell you, that if his head be
upwards, theirs must needs be downwards. And this is because he knows not the
formal reason thereof. That the Heavens incircle the earth, and what is
toward heaven is upwards. This same erroneous notion of upwards and downwards
before the true reason was fully discovered, abused more than ordinary
capacities, as appears by their arguments of pend^li homines, and pendulae
arbores. Again, what do men conceive ordinary by this word empty, as when they
say an empty vessel, or by this word Body, as when they say, there is no body
in that room, they intend not to exclude the air, either out of the vessel,
or out of the room. Yet reason tells us, that the vessel is not truly empty,
and that the air is a true body. I might give an hundred such like instances.
He, who leaves the conduct of his understanding to follow vulgar notions, shall
plunge himself into a thousand errors, like him who leaves a certain guide to
follow an ignis fatuus, or a Will, with the wispe. So his proposition is false.
His reason, That matter of fact is not verified by other men's Arguments, but by
every man's own sense and memory, is likewise maimed on both sides, whether we
hear such words, or not, is matter of fact, and sense is the proper judge of
it. But what these words do, or ought truly to signify, is not to be judged
by sense but by reason. Secondly, reason may, and does oftentimes correct
sense, even about its proper object. Sense tells us that the Sun is no bigger
than a good Ball, but reason demonstrates, that it is many times greater than
the whole Globe of the earth. As to his instance, How can it be proved, that to
love a thing, and to think it good, is all one to a man that does not make his
own meaning by these words, I confess, it cannot be proved, for it is not true.
Beauty and likeness, and love, do conciliate love as much as goodness, cos
amoris amor. Love is a passion of the will, but to judge of goodness, is an act
of the understanding. A Father may love an ungracious Child, and yet not
esteem him good. A man loves his own house better than another man's, yet he
cannot but esteem many others better than his own. His other instance, How can
it be proved that eternity is not nunc stans, to a man that says these words
by custom, and never considers how he can conceive the thing it self in his
mind, is just like the former, not to be proved by reason, but by fancy,
which is the way he takes. And it is not unlike the counsel, which one gave to
a Novice about the choice of his wise, to advice with the Bells, as he fancied
so they founded, either take her, or leave her.

Then for his assumption it is as defective as his proposition, That by these
words spontaneity, etc. men do understand as he conceives. No rational man does
conceive a spontaneous action, and an indeliberate action to be all one, every
indeliberate action is not spontaneous. The fire considers not whether it
should burn, yet the burning of it is not spontaneous. Neither is every
spontaneous action indeliberate, a man may deliberate what he will eat, and yet
eat it spontaneously. Neither does deliberation properly signify the
considering of the good and evil sequels of an action to come: But the
considering whether this be a good and fit means, or the best, and fittest
means for obtaining such an end. The Physician does not deliberate whether he
should cure his Patient, but by what means he should cure him. Deliberation is
of the means not of the end. Much less does any man conceive with T. H. that
deliberation is an imagination, or an act of fancy, not of reason, common to
men of discretion with mad men, and natural fools and children, and bruit
beasts. Thirdly, neither does any understanding man conceive, or can conceive,
either that the will is an act of our deliberation, the understanding and the
will are two distinct faculties, or that only the last appetite is to be
called our will. So no man should be able to say this is my will, because he
knows not whether he shall persevere in it, or not. Concerning the fourth point
we agree that he is a free Agent that can do, if he will, and forbear if he
will. But I wonder how this dropped from his pen, what is now become of his
absolute necessity of all things? If a man be free to do and to forbear any
thing, will he make himself guilty of the nonsense of the Schoolmen; and run
with them into contradictions for company? It may be he will say he can do if
he will, and forbear if he will, but he cannot will if he will. This will not
serve his turn, for if the cause of a free action, that is, the will to be
determined, then the effect, or the action it self is likewise determined, a
determined cause cannot produce an undetermined effect, either the Agent can
will, and forbear to will, or else he cannot do, and forbear to do. But we
differ wholly about the fifth point. He who conceives liberty aright, conceives
both a liberty in the subject to will, or not to will, and a liberty to the
object to will this, or that, and a liberty from impediments. T. H. by a new
way of his own cuts off the liberty of the subject, as if a stone was free to
ascend, or descend, because it has no outward impediment. And the liberty
toward the object, as if the Needle touched with the Lodestone were free to
point, either toward the North, or toward the South, because there is not a
Barrecado in its way to hinder it, yea, he cuts off the liberty from inward
impediments also: As if an Hawk were at liberty to fly when her wings are
plucked, but not when they are tied. And so he makes liberty from extrinsecal
impediments to be complete liberty, so he ascribes liberty to bruit beasts, and
liberty to Rivers, and by consequence makes Beasts and Rivers to be capeable of
sin and punishment. Assuredly, Xerxes, who caused the Hellespont to be beaten
with so many stripes, was of this opinion. Lastly, T. H. his reason, that it is
custom, or want of ability, or negligence which makes a man conceive otherwise,
is but a begging of that which he should prove. Other men consider as seriously
as himself, with as much judgment as himself, with less prejudice than
himself, and yet they can apprehend no such sense of these words, would he have
other men feign that they see fiery Dragons in the Air, because he affirms
confidently that he sees them, and wonders why others are so blind as not to
see them?

The reason for the sixth point is like the former, a fantastical, or
imaginative reason. How can a man imagine any thing to begin without a cause,
or if it should begin without a cause, why it should begin at this time rather
than at that time? He says truly, nothing can begin without a cause, that is
to be, but it may begin to act of it self without any other cause. Nothing can
begin without a cause, but many things may begin, and do begin without
necessary causes. A free cause may as well choose his time when he will begin,
as a necessary cause be determined extrinsically when it must begin. And
although free effects cannot be foretold, because they are not certainly
predetermined in their causes, yet when the free causes do determine
themselves, they are of as great certainty as the other. As when I see a Bell
ringing, I can conceive the cause of it as well why it rings now, as I know the
interposition of the earth to be the cause of the Eclipse of the Moon. Or the
most certain occurrent in the nature of things.

And now that I have answered T. H. his Arguments drawn from the private
conceptions of men concerning the sense of words, I desire him seriously
without prejudice to examine himself and those natural notions, which he finds
in himself, not of words, but of things, these are from nature, those are by
imposition, whether he does not find by experience that he does many things,
which he might have left undone if he would, and omits many things which he
might have done if he would, whether he does not somethings out of mere
animosity, and will without either regard to the direction of right reason, or
serious respect of what is honest, or profitable, only to show that he will
have a dominion over his own actions, as we see ordinarily in Children, and
wise men find at some times in themselves by experience. And I apprehend this
very defense of necessity against liberty to be partly of that kind. Whether
he is not angry with those who draw him from his study, or cross him in his
desires, if they be necessitated to do it, why should he be angry with them,
any more than he is angry with a sharp winter, or a rainy day that keeps him at
home against his antecedent will, whether he does not sometime blame himself,
and say, O what a fool was I to do thus and thus, or wish to himself, O that I
had been wise, or, O that I had not done such an act. If he have no dominion
over his actions, if he be irresistibly necessitated to all things what he
does, he might as well wish, O that I had not breathed, or blame himself for
growing old, O what a fool was I to grow old.

Numb. 34.
T. H. FOr the seventh point, that all events have necessary causes, it is
there proved in that they have sufficient causes. Further, Let us in this place
also suppose any event never so casual, as for example, the throwing Ambs-ace
upon a pair of Dice, and see if it must not have been necessary before it was
thrown, for, seeing it was thrown, it had a beginning, and consequently a
sufficient cause to produce it, consisting partly in the Dice, partly in the
outward things, as the posture of the parties hand, the measure of force
applied by the caster, The posture of the parts of the Table, and the like; In
sum, there was nothing wanting that was necessarily requisite to the
producing of that particular cast, and consequently, that cast was necessarily
thrown. For if it had not been thrown, there had wanted somewhat requisite to
the throwing of it, and so the cause had not been sufficient. In the like
manner it may be proved that every other accident, how contingent soever it
seem, or how voluntary soever it be, is produced necessarily, which is that J.
D. disputes against. The same also may be proved in this manner, Let the case
be put, for example of the weather, It Is necessary that to morrow it shall rain,
or not rain. If therefore it be not necessary, it shall rain, it is necessary
it shall not rain. Otherwise it is not necessary that the proposition. It shall
rain, or it shall not rain, should be true. I know there are some that say, it
may necessarily be true, that one of the two shall come to pass, but not singly
that it shall rain, or it shall not rain. Which is as much as to say. One of
them is necessary, yet neither of them is necessary; And therefore to seem to
avoid, that absurdity they make a distinction, that neither of them is true
determinate but indeterminate Which distinction, either signifies no more than
this, One of them is true, but we know not which, and so the necessity remains,
though we know it not: Or if the meaning of the distinction be not that, it has
no meaning. And they might as well have said, One of them is true, Tytyrice but
neither of them Tupatulice.

J. D. HIs former proof, that all sufficient causes are necessary causes is
answered before, Numb. 31. And his two instances of casting Ambs-ace, and
raining to morrow, are altogether impertinent to the question now agitated
between us, for two reasons. First, our present controversy is concerning free
actions, which proceed from the liberty of man's will, both his instances are of
contingent actions, which proceed from the indetermination, or contingent
concurrence of natural causes. First, that there are free actions, which
proceed merely from election, without any outward necessitation is a truth so
evident, as that there is a Sun in the Heavens, and he that doubts of it may
as well doubt whether there be a shell without the Nut, or a stone within the
Olive. A man proportions his time each day, and allots so much to his
Devotions, so much to his Study, so much to his Diet, so much to his
Recreations, so much to necessary, or civil visits, so much to his rest, he who
will seek for I know not what causes of all this without himself, except that
good God who has given him a reasonable Soul, may as well seek for a cause of
the Egyptian Pyramides among the Crocodiles of Nilus. Secondly, for mixed
actions which proceed from the concurrence of free and natural Agents, though
they be not free, yet they are not necessary, as to keep my former instance, a
man walking through a street of a City to do his occasions, a Tile falls from
an House and breaks his head, the breaking of his head was not necessary, for
he did freely choose to go that way without any necessitation, neither was it
free, for he did not deliberate of that accident, therefore it was contingent,
and by undoubted consequence there are contingent actions in the World which
are not free. Most certainly by the concurrence of free causes, as God, the
good and bad Angels and men, with natural Agents sometimes on purpose, and
sometimes by accident many events happen, which otherwise had never happened;
many effects are produced which otherwise had never been produced. And
admitting such things to be contingent not necessary, all their consequent
effects, not only immediate, but mediate must likewise be contingent, that is
to say, such as do not proceed from a continued connection and succession of
necessary causes, which is directly contrary to T. H. his opinion.

Thirdly, for the actions of bruit beasts, though they be not free, though they
have not the use of reason to restrain their appetites from that which is
sensitively good by the consideration of what is rationaly good, or what is
honest, and though their fancies be determined by nature to some kinds of
work, yet to think that every individual action of theirs, and each animal
motion of theirs, even to the least murmr, or gesture is bound by the chain
of unalterable necessity to the extrinsecal causes or objects, I see no ground
for it. Christ says one of these Sparrows does not fall to the ground without
your Heavenly Father, that is without an influence of power from him, or
exempted from his disposition, he does not say which your heavenly Father
casts not down. Lastly, for the natural actions of inanimate Creatures,
wherein there is not the least concurrence of any free, or voluntary Agents,
the question is yet more doubtful, for many things are called co^tingent in
respect of us, because we know not the cause of them, which really and in
themselves are not contingent, but necessary. Also many things are contingent
in respect of one single cause, either actually hindered, or in possibility to
be hindered, which are necessary in respect of the joint concurrence of all
collateral causes. But whether there be a necessary connection of all natural
causes from the beginning, so as they must all have concurred as they have
done, and in the same degree of power, and have been deficient as they have
bee^ in all events whatsoever, would require a further examination if it were
pertinent to this question of liberty; but it is not. It is sufficient to my
purpose to have showed that all elective actions are free from absolute
necessity. And moreover, that the concurrence of voluntary and free Agents with
natural causes, both upon purpose and accidentally has helped them to produce
many effects, which otherwise they had not produced, and hindered them from
producing many effects, which otherwise they had produced. And that if this
inintervention of voluntary and free Agents had been more frequent than it has
been, (as without doubt it might have been) many natural events had been
otherwise than they are. And therefore he might have spared his instances of
casting Ambs-ace and raining to morrow. And first for his casting Ambs-ace. If
it be thrown by a fair Gamester with indifferent Dice, it is a mixed action, the
casting of the Dice is free, but the casting of Ambs-ace is contingent, a man
may deliberate whether he will cast the Dice, or not, but it were folly to
deliberate whether he will cast Ambs-ace, or not, because it is not in his
power, unless he be a cheater that can cogge the Dice, or the Dice be false
Dice, and then the contingency, or the degree of contingency cease,
accordingly as the Caster has more, or less cunning, or as the figure, or
making of the Dice does incline them to Ambs-ace more than to another cast, or
necessitate them to this cast and no other. Howsoever so far as the cast is
free, or contingent, so far it is not necessary. And where necessity begins,
there liberty and contingency do cease to be: Likewise his other instance of
raining, or not raining, to morrow is not of a free elective act, nor always
of a contingent act. In some Countries as they have their nati venti their
certain winds at set seasons, so they have their certain and set rains. The
Ethiopian rains are supposed to be the cause of the certain inundation of
Nilus. In some eastern Countries they have rain only twice a year, and those
constant, which the Scriptures call the former and the later rain. In such
places not only the causes do act determinately and necessarily, but also the
determination, or necessity of the event is foreknown to the inhabitants. In
our Climate the natural causes celestial and sublunary do not produce rain so
necessarily at set times, neither can we say so certainly and infallibly, it
will rain to morrow, or it will not rain to morrow. Nevertheless, it may so
happen that the causes are so disposed and determined, even in our climate,
that this proposition, it will rain to morrow, or it will not rain, to morrow
may be necessary in it self, and the Prognostics, or tokens may be such in the
sky, in our own bodies, in the creatures, animate and inanimate as
weather-glasses, etc. that it may become probably true to us that it will rain
to morrow, or it will not rain to morrow. But ordinarily it is a contingent
proposition to us, whether it be contingent also in it self, that is, whether
the concurrence of the causes were absolutely necessary, whether the vapors,
or matter of the rain may not yet be dispersed, or otherwise consumed, or
driven beyond our coast, is a speculation which no way concerns this question.
So we see one reason why his two instances are altogether impertinent, because
they are of actions which are not free, nor elective, nor such as proceed from
the liberty of man's will.

Secondly, our dispute is about absolute necessity, his proofs extend only to
Hypothetical necessity. Our question is, whether the concurrence and
determination of the causes were necessary before they did concur, or were
determined. He proves that the effect is necessary after the causes have
concurred, and are determined. The freest actions of God, or man, are necessary
by such a necessity of supposition. And the most contingent events that are, as
I have showed plainly, Numb. 3. where his instance of Ambs-ace is more fully
answered. So his proof looks another way from his proposition. His proposition
is, that the casting of Ambs-ace was necessary before it was thrown. His proof
is that it was necessary when it was thrown, examine all his causes over and
over, and they will not afford him one grain of antecedent necessity. The first
cause is in the Dice: True, if they be false Dice there may be something in it,
but then his contingency is destroyed. If they be square Dice, they have no
more inclination to Ambs-ace, than to Cinque and Quater, or any other cast. His
second cause is the posture of the parties hand: But what necessity was there
that he should put his hand into such a posture. None at all. The third cause
is the measure of the force applied by the caster. Now for the credit of his
cause let him but name, I will not say a convincing reason, nor so much as a
probable reason, but even any pretense of reason, how the Caster was
necessitated from without himself to apply just so much force, and neither more
or less. If he cannot, his cause is desperate, and he may hold his peace for
ever, his last cause is the posture of the Table. But tell us in good earnest
what necessity there was why the Caster must throw into that Table rather than
the other, or that the Dice must fall just upon that part of the Table, before
the cast was thrown: He that makes these to be necessary causes, I do not
wonder if he make all effects necessary effects. If any one of these causes be
contingent, it is sufficient to render the cast contingent, and now that they
are all so contingent, yet he will needs have the effect to be necessary. And
so it is when the cast is thrown, but not before the cast was thrown, which he
undertook to prove: who can blame him for being so angry with the Schoolmen,
and their distinctions of necessity into absolute and hypothetical, seeing they
touch his freehold so nearly.

But though his instance of raining to morrow be impertinent, as being no free
action, yet because he triumphs so much in his argument, I will not stick to go
a little out of my way to meet a friend. For I confess, the validity of the
reason had been the same, if he had made it of a free action, as thus: Either I
shall finish this reply to morrow, or I shall not finish this reply to morrow,
is a necessary proposition. But because he shall not complain of any
disadvantage in the alteration of his terms; I will for once adventure upon his
shower of rain. And first, I readily admit his major that this proposition
(either it will rain to morrow, or it will not rain to morrow, is necessarily
true, for of two contradictory propositions, the one must of necessity be true,
because no third can be given. But his minor that it could not be necessarily
true, except one of the Members were necessarily true, is most false. And so is
his proof likewise. That if neither the one nor the other of the Members be
necessarily true, it cannot be affirmed that either the one, or the other is
true. A conjunct proposition may have both parts false, and yet the proposition
be true, as if the Sun shine, it is day, is a true proposition at midnight. And
T. H. confesses as much, Numb. 19. If I shall live I shall eat, is a necessary
proposition, that is to say, it is necessary that that proposition should be
true whenever uttered. But it is not the necessity of the thing, nor is it
therefore necessary that the man shall live, or that the man shall eat. And so
T. H. proceeds, I do not use to fortify my distinctions with such reasons. But
it seems he has forgotten himself, and is contented with such poor
fortifications. And though both parts of a disjunctive proposition cannot be
false, because if it be a right disjunction, the Members are repugnant, whereof
one part is infallibly true, yet vary put the proposition a little to abate the
edge of the disjunctions, and you shall find that which T. H. says to be
true, that it is not the necessity of the thing which makes the proposition to
be true. As for example vary it thus: I know that either it will rain to
morrow, or that it will not rain to morrow is a true proposition: But it is not
true that I know it will rain to morrow, neither is it true that I know it will
not rain to morrow, wherefore the certain truth of the proposition does not
prove, that either of the Members is determinately true in present. Truth is a
conformity of the understanding to the thing known, whereof speech is an
interpreter. If the understanding agree not with the thing it is an error, if
the words agree not with the understanding it is a lie. Now the thing known is
known either in it self, or in its causes. If it be known in it self, as it is,
then we express our apprehension of it in words of the present tence, as the
Sun is risen. If it be known in its cause, we express our selves in words of
the future tense, as to morrow will be an Eclipse of the Moon. But if we
neither know it in its self, nor in its causes, then there may be a foundation
of truth, but there is no such determinate truth of it, that we can reduce it
into a true proposition, we cannot say it does rain to morrow, or it does not
rain to morrow. That were not only false but absurd, we cannot positively say
it will rain to morrow, because we do not know it in its causes, either how
they are determined, or that they are determined, wherefore the certitude and
evidence of the disjunctive proposition is neither founded upon that which will
be actually to morrow, for it is granted that we do not know that. Nor yet upon
the determination of the causes, for then we would not say indifferently,
either it will rain, or it will not rain, but positively it will rain, or
positively it will not rain. But it is grounded upon an undeniable principle,
that of two contradictory propositions, the one must necessarily be true. And
therefore to say, either this, or that will infallibly be, but it is not yet
determined whether this, or that shall be, is no such senseless assertion that
it deserved a Tytyrice Tupatulice, but an evident truth which no man that has
his eyes in his head can doubt of.

If all this will not satisfy him, I will give one of his own kind of proofs,
that is an instance. That which necessitates all things according to T. H. is
the decree of God, or that order which is set to all things by the eternal
cause ( Numb. 11.) Now God himself, who made this necessitating decree, was not
subjected to it in the making thereof, neither was there any former order to
oblige the first cause necessarily to make such a decree, therefore this decree
being an act ad extra was freely made by God without any necessitation. Yet
nevertheless, this disjunctive proposition is necessarily true. Either God did
make such a decree, or he did not make such a decree. Again, though T. H. his
opinion were true that all events are necessary, and that the whole Christian
world are deceived, who believe that some events are free from necessity, yet
he will not deny, but if it had been the good pleasure of God, he might have
made some causes free from necessity, seeing that it neither argues any
imperfection, nor implies any contradiction. Supposing therefore that God had
made some second causes free from any such antecedent determination to one, yet
the former disjunction would be necessarily true. Either this free undetermined
cause will act after this manner, or it will not act after this manner.
Wherefore the necessary truth of such a disjunctive proposition does not prove,
that either of the members of the disjunction singly considered, is
determinately true in present, but only that the one of them will be
determinately true to morrow.

T. H. THe last thing, in which also consists the whole controversy, Namely,
that there is no such thing as an Agent, which when all things requisite to
action are present, can nevertheless forbear to produce it, or (which is all
one) that there is no such thing as freedom from necessity, is easily inferd
from that which has been before alleged. For, if it be an Agent, it can work,
And if it work, there is nothing wanting of what is requisite to produce the
action, and consequently, the cause of the action is sufficients. And if
sufficient, then also necessary, as has been proved before.

J. D. I Wonder that T. H. should confess, that the whole weight of this
controversy does rest upon this proposition. That there is no such thing as an
Agent, which, when all things requisite to action are present, can nevertheless
forbear to act; And yet bring nothing but such poor Bull-rushes to support it.
If it be an Agent (says he) it can work, what of this? A posse ad esse non
valet argumentum, from can work, to will work, is a weak inference. And from
will work, to does work upon absolute necessity, is another gross
inconsequence. He proceeds thus, If it work, there is nothing wanting of what
is requisite to produce the action, True, there wants nothing to produce that
which is produced, but there may want much to produce that which was intended,
One horse may pull his heart out, and yet not draw the Coach whither it should
be, if he want the help or concurrence of his fellows. And consequently (says
he) the cause of the action is sufficient. Yes sufficient to do what it does,
though perhaps with much prejudice to it self, but not always sufficient to do
what it should do, or what it would do. As he that begets a Monster should
beget a man, and would beget a man, if he could. The last link of his argument
follows; And if sufficient, then also necessary, stay there; by his leave there
is no necessary connection between sufficiency and efficiency, otherwise God
himself should not be All-sufficient. Thus his Argument is vanished. But I will
deal more favorably with him, and grant him all that, which he labors so much
in vain to prove, That every effect in the world has sufficient causes: Yea
more, that supposing the determination of the free and contingent causes, every
effect in the world is necessary. But all this will not advantage his cause the
black of a bean, for still it amounts but to an hypotheticall necessity, and
differs as much from that absolute necessity, which he maintains, as a
Gentleman, who travailes for his pleasure, differs from a banished man, or a
free Subject from a slave.

Numb. 36.
T. H. AND thus you see how the inconveniences, which he objecteth must follow
upon the holding of necessity, are avoided, and the necessity it self
demonstratively prooved. To which I could add, if I thought it good Logic, the
inconveniency of denying necessity, as that it distroyes both the Decrees and
Prescience of God Almighty; for whatsoever God has purposed to bring to pass
by man as an instrument, or foreseeth shall come to pass, A man, if he have
Liberty, such as he affirms from necessitation, might frustrate, and make not
to come to pass. And God should either not foreknow it, and not Decree it, or
he should foreknow such things shall be as shall never be, and decree that
which shall never come to pass.

J. D. THus he has labored in vain to satisfy my reasons, and to prove his
own assertion. But for demonstration there is nothing like it among his
Arguments. Now he says, he could add other Arguments, if he thought it good
Logic. There is no impediment in Logic, why a man may not press his Adversary
with those absurdities which flow from his opinion, Argumentum ducens ad
impossible, or, ad absurdum, is a good form of reasoning. But there is another
reason of his forbearance, though he be loath to express it. -- Haeret lateri
laethalis arundo. The Arguments drawn from the attributes of God do stick so
close in the sides of his cause, that he has no mind to treat of that
subject. By the way take notice of his own confession, that he could add other
reasons, if he thought it good Logic. If it were predetermined in the outward
causes, that he must make this very defense and no other, how could it be in
his power to add or substract any thing. Just as if a blind-man should say in
earnest, I could see, if I had mine eyes: Truth often breaks out, whilst men
seek to smother it. But let us view his Argument: If a man have liberty from
necessitation, he may frustrate the Decrees of God, and make his prescience
false. First, for the Decrees of God, This is his Decree, that man should be a
free Agent; If he did consider God, as a most simple Act without priority or
posteriority of time, or any composition, He would not conceive of his Decrees,
as of the Laws of the Medes and Persians, long since enacted, and passed
before we were born, but as coexistent with our selves, and with the acts which
we do, by virtue of those Decrees. Decrees and Attributes are but notions to
help the weakness of our understanding to conceive of God. The Decrees of God,
are God himself, and therefore justly said to be before the foundation of the
world was laid. And yet coexistent with our selves, because of the Infinite and
Eternal being of God. The sum is this, The Decree of God, or God himself
Eternally constitutes or ordaines all effects which come to to pass in time,
according to the distinct natures or capacities of his creatures. An Eternal
Ordination, is neither past nor to come, but always present. So free actions
do proceed, as well from the Eternal Decree of God as necessary, and from that
order which he has set in the world.

As the Decree of God is Eternal, so is his Knowledge. And therefore to speak
truly and properly, there is neither foreknowledge nor after-knowledge in him.
The Knowledge of God comprehends all times in a point by reason of the eminence
and virtue of its infinite perfection. And yet I confess, that this is called
foreknowledge, in respect of us. But this foreknowledge does produce no
absolute necessity. Things are not therefore, because they are fore-known, but
therefore they are fore-known, because they shall come to pass. If any thing
should come to pass otherwise than it does, yet Gods knowledge could not be
irritated by it, for then he did not know that it should come to pass, as now
it does. Because every knowledge of vision necessarily presupposes its object.
God did know, that Judas should betray Christ; but Judas was not necessitated
to be a traitor by Gods knowledge. If Judas had not betrayed Christ, then God
had not fore-known that Judas should betray him. The case is this; A watchman
standing on the steeples-top, as it is the use in Germany, gives notice to them
below (who see no such things) that company are coming, and how many; His
prediction is most certain, for he sees them. What a vain collection were it
for one below to say, what if they do not come, then a certain prediction may
fail. It may be urged, that there is a difference between these two cases. In
this case the coming is present to the Watchman, but that which God
fore-knowes is future. God knows what shall be; The Watchman only knows
what is. I answer, that this makes no difference at all in the case, by reason
of that disparity which is between Gods knowledge and ours: As that coming is
present to the Watchman, which is future to them who are below: So all those
things, which are future to us, are present to God, because his Infinite and
Eternal knowledge, does reach to the future being of all Agents and events.
Thus much is plainly acknowledged by T. H. Numb. 11. That foreknowledge is
knowledge, and knowledge depends on the existence of the things known, and not
they on it. To conclude, the prescience of God does not make things more
necessary, than the production of the things themselves; But if the Agents were
free Agents, the production of the things does not make the events to be
absolutely necessary, but only upon supposition that the causes were so
determined. Gods prescience prooveth a necessity of infallibility, but not of
antecedent extrinsecall determination to one. If any event should not come to
pass, God did never foreknow, that it would come to pass. For every knowledge
necessarily presupposes its object.

Numb. 37.
T. H. THis is all thath has come into my mind touching this question, since I
last considered it. And I humbly beseech your Lordship to communicate it only
to J. D. And so praying God to prosper your Lordship in all your designs, I
take leave, and am my most Noble and obliging Lord, Your most humble servant T.
H.

J. D. HE is very careful to have this discourse kept secret, as appears in
this Section, and in the 14. and 15. Sections, If his answer had been kept
private, I had saved the labor of a Reply. But hearing that it was
communicated, I thought my self obliged to vindicate, both the truth and my
self. I do not blame him to be cautious, for in truth, this assertion is of
desperate consequence, and destructive to piety, policy, and morality. If he
had desired to have kept it secret, the way had been to have kept it secret
himself. It will not suffice to say as Numb. 14. that Truth is Truth; This the
common plea of all men. Neither is it sufficient for him to say, as Numb. 15.
That it was desired by me, long before that he had discovered his opinion by
word of mouth. And my desire was to let some of my noble friends see the
weakness of his grounds, and the pernicious consequences of that opinion. But
if he think that this ventilation of the question between us two may do hurt,
truly I hope not. The edge of his discourse is so abated; that it cannot easily
hurt any rational man, who is not too much possessed with prejudice.

Numb. 38.
T. H. POstscript, Arguments seldom work on men of wit and learning, when they
have once engaged themselves in a contrary opinion. If any thing do it, it is
the showing of them the causes of their errors, which is this; Pious men
attribute to God Almighty for honor sake, whatsoever they see is honorable in
the world, as seeing, hearing, willing, knowing, Justice, Wisdom, etc. But
deny him such poor things as eyes, ears, brains, and other organs, without
which, we worms, neither have, nor can conceive such faculties to be; and so
far they do well. But when they dispute of Gods actions Philosophically, then
they consider them again, as if he had such faculties, and in that manner, as
we have them, this is not well, and thence it is they fall into so many
difficulties. We ought not to dispute of Gods Nature, he is no fit subject of
our Philosophy, True Religion consists in obedience to Christ's Lieutenants,
and in giving God such honor, both in attributes and actions, as they in their
several Lieutenancies shall ordain.

J. D. THough Sophistical captions do seldom work on men of wit and learning,
because by constant use they have their senses exercised to discern both good
and evil, Heb. 5.14. Yet solid and substantial reasons work sooner upon them
than upon weaker judgments. The more exact the balance is, the sooner it
discovers the real weight, that is put into it. Especially if the proofs be
proposed without passion or opposition. Let Sophisters and seditious Orators
apply themselves to the many headed multitude, because they despair of success
with men of wit and learning. Those whose gold is true, are not afraid to have
it tried by the touch. Since the former way has not succeeded, T. H. has
another to show, as the causes of our errors, which he hopes will prove more
succesfull. When he sees he can do no good by sight, he seeks to circumvent us,
under color of curtesy, Fistula dulce canit volucrem dum decipit auceps. As
they, who behold themselves in a glass, take the right hand for the left, and
the left for the right, (T. H. knows the comparison) so we take our own
errors to be truths, and other men's truths to be errors. If we be in an
error in this, it is such an error as we sucked from nature it self, such an
error as is confirmed in us by reason and experience, such an error as God
himself in his sacred Word has revealed, such an error as the Fathers and
Doctors of the Church of all ages have delivered, Such an error wherein we
have the concurrence of all the best Philosophers, both Natural and Moral, such
an error as brings to God, the glory of Justice and Wisdom and Goodness,
and Truth, such an error as renders men more devout, more pious, more
industrious, more humble, more penitent for their sins. Would he have us resign
up all these advantages to dance blindfold after his pipe. No, he persuades us
too much to our loss. But let us see what is the imaginary cause of an
imaginary error. Forsooth, because we attribute to God whatsoever is
honorable in the world, as seeing, hearing, willing, knowing, Justice Wisdom,
but deny him such poor things, as eyes, ears, brains, and so far he says we do
well. He has reason, for since we are not able to conceive of God as he is,
the readiest way we have, is by remooving all that imperfection from God, which
is in the creatures. So we call him Infinite, Immortal, Independent. Or by
attribubuting to him all those perfections, which are in the creatures after a
most eminent manner, so we call him Best, Greatest, most Wise, most Just, most
Holy. But says he, When they dispute of Gods actions Philosophically, then
they consider them again, as if he had such faculties, and in the manner as we
have them.

And is this the cause of our error? That were strange indeed, for they who
dispute Philosophically of God, do neither ascribe faculties to to him in that
manner that we have them, Nor yet do they attribute any proper faculties at all
to God. Gods Understanding, and his Will is his very Essence, which for the
eminency of its infinite perfection, does perform all those things alone, in a
most transcendent manner, which reasonable creatures do perform imperfectly, by
distinct faculties. Thus to dispute of God with modesty, and reverence, and to
clear the Deity from the imputation of tyranny, in justice, and dissimulation,
which none do throw upon God with more presumption, than those who are the
Patrons of absolute necessity, is both comely and Christian.

It is not the desire to discover the original of a supposed error, which
draws them ordinarily into these exclamations, against those who dispute of
the Deity. For some of themselves dare anatomise God, and publish his Eternal
Decrees with as much confidence, as if they had been all their lives of his
cabinet council. But it is for fear, lest those pernicious consequences, which
flow from that doctrine essentially, and reflect in so high a degree upon the
supreme goodness, should be laid open to the view of the world; Just as the
Turks do, first establish a false religion of their own devising, and then
forbid all men upon pain of death to dispute upon religion; Or as the Priests
of Molech (the Abomination of the Ammonites) did, make a noise with their
timbrells all the while the poor Infants were passing through the fire in
Tophet, to keep their pitiful cries from the ears of their Parents: So they
make a noise with their declamations against those, who dare dispute of the
nature of God, that is, who dare set forth his Justice, and his goodness, and
his truth, and his Philanthropy, only to deaf the ears, and dim the eyes of
the Christian world, least they should hear the lamentable ejulations and
howlings, or see, that ruefull spectacle of millions of souls tormented for
evermore in the flames of the true Tophet, that is Hell, only for that which
according to T. H. his doctrine was never in their power to shun, but which
they were ordered and inevitably necessitated to do. Only to express the
omnipotence and dominion, and to satisfy the pleasure of him, who is in truth
the Father of all mercies, and the God of all consolation. This is life
eternal (says our Savior) to know the only true God and Jesus Christ, whom
he has sent. Joh. 17.3. Pure Religion and undefiled before God, and the
Father, is this, to visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and
to keep himself unspotted from the world, says St. James, Jam. 1.27. Fear God
and keep his Commandments, for this is the whole duty of man, says Solomon,
Eccles. 12.13. But T. H. has found out a more compendious way to heaven: True
Religion (says he) consists in obedience to Christ's Lieutenants, and giving
God such honor both in attributes and actions, as they in their several
Lieutenances shall ordain. That is to say, be of the Religion of every
Christian Country where you come. To make the Civil Magistrate to be Christ's
Lieutenant upon earth, for matters of Religion; And to make him to be Supreme
Judge in all controversies, whom all must obey, is a doctrine so strange, and
such an uncouth phrase to Christian ears, that I should have missed his
meaning, but that I consulted with his Book, De Cive c. 15. Sect. 16. and c.
17. Sect. 28. What if the Magistrate shall be no Christian himself? What if he
shall command contrary to the Law of God, or Nature, Must we obey him rather
than God? Act. 14.19: Is the Civil Magistrate become now the only ground and
pillar of Truth? I demand then why T. H. is of a different mind from his
sovereign, and from the Laws of the Land concerning the attributes of God and
his Decrees? This is a new Paradox, and concerns not this question of liberty,
and necessity? Wherefore I forbear to prosecute it further, and so conclude my
reply with the words of the Christian Poet, Caesaris jussum est ore Galieni
Princeps quod colit ut colemus omnes,
Aeternum colemus Principem dierum,
Factorem Dominumque Galieni.


FINIS.

