An Appendix to my humble Petition, lately presented to the most Honorable
Courts of Parliament: wherein I did but lightly touch upon the point of
Consecration: Now because as I conceive, the Kings Supremacy is therein denied,
I humbly crave leave further to clear up this point.
Of a Bishops Consecration to his Office.
THe Office of a Bishop as I humbly conceive, is a mixed office, partly divine,
and partly humane or Civil: It is Divine, as concerning the Administration of
the Word and Sacraments. It is Humane, as concerning the use of their coercive
power in the Church: For 1. They receive authority to exercise a coercive
power by Commission from the King; and therefore it is humane. 2. It cannot be
proved to be Divine, and therefore it must be humane. 3. I prove, it is not
Divine; because Christ forbade his Apostles, and in them all the Clergy to
exercise authority, Mat. 20.25, 26. And St. Peter forbade it saying, Not as
though ye were Lords over Gods heritage, or people, 1 Pet. 5.3. So that this
Jurisdiction, Authority, and Coercive power is not divine, because Christ
forbad it. 4 Coercive power in the Church has been used by Kings, Princes, and
Rulers, Ezra 10.8. 1 Kings 2.27. And therefore it is not divine, but humane.

A Bishop was ordained a Minister, before he was consecrated and made a Bishop:
and when he steps above the Ministry, into the office of a Bishop, then De novo
he takes upon him the office to rule and exercise authority and his coercive
power over an whole Diocese. If then he preach and administer the Sacraments
(which few of them do, or do as other Ministers constantly) then he preaches
not as a Bishop, but as a Minister: And when he rules over a Diocese, he
rules not as a Minister, but as a Bishop. Whereby it appears, that the office
of a Bishop, as he is a Bishop, i^ only to rule and exercise a Coercive power:
and this power is an humane or Civil thing. Hence it follows,

That being this Authority is humane, it must be of and from the King, and must
be derived from the King, who is supreme in Authority in or over the Church:
The King derives his authority and supremacy from Christ, 1 Pet. 2.13. But
Bishops like other Magistrates must derive all their authority, not from Christ
immediately, but from the King: Wherefore if the King may have his right,
Bishops must be consecrated only in the Kings name, not in Christ's name; for
this is to derive from another and higher power than the King, and to make
themselves next unto CHRIST, and equal to the KING, for the King only is next
unto Christ: but Bishops are now consecrated by authority of Christ and the
holy Ghost immediately, and Peter's keys: not in the name of the King, whereby
they deny the Kings authority and supremacy in the Church, in their
consecration as I conceive it. I have formerly wrote in defense of the Kings
Prerogative and Supremacy, and here added this, as being more full, and more
clear.

Object. 1. But Bishops may say, We have authority from the King, to exercise
our Coercive power: and therefore we acknowledge the Kings Authority and
Supremacy?

I answer, 1. By distinguishing between an office and the exercise of that
office. If therefore you own the Kings Supremacy in the exercise of your
office, yet it follows not, that thereby you own it in your office, and in
your Consecration to your office: It is evident, that you deny it in your
Consecration, because you refuse to consecrate in the Kings Name, and do all in
the name of another and higher power. 2. Your authority from the King, to
exercise your office, does not imply the Kings Supremacy: thereby indeed you
acknowledge the Kings Authority, but not his Supremacy. 3. As far as I can see,
you acknowledge neither the Kings Supremacy, nor his Authority in your office,
nor in the exercise of it: For in your Courts, you issue out all Citations,
Processes, Summons, and Excommunications, not in the Kings name, but in your
own names. 4. Supposing but not granting, that in the exercise of your office,
the Kings Supremacy is by consequence implied, why then do you not in express
words do it also, but refuse to do it in the Consecration to your office? For
both the office and the exercise of it, are wrought to be from the same hand
and power.

Object. 2. Again, Bishops may say, We took the Oath of Supremacy at our
Consecration, and therefore we own the Kings Supremacy.

I answ. 1. You took this Oath indeed at your Consecration, but not in your
Consecration: before it, but not in it: for about a quarter of an hour before
Consecration this Oath is taken: but in Consecration it is not, nor any words
expressing or implying the Kings Supremacy: And yet all Magistrates in the
Kingdom, who exercise a Coercive power, do besides the Oath of Supremacy, take
also a Commission in the Kings name, as deriving their Authority from him, and
so should Bishops do in Consecration. 2. Bishops a little before Consecration,
do swear that the King is supreme in Authority, but presently after in their
Consecration they deny it; for they refuse to name the King, or own his
Supremacy: For they are Consecrated in the name of another and higher power
than the King, as in the name of Christ, the holy Ghost, and as by the
authority of Peter's keys. Suppose, a Judge, high Sheriff, or Mayor of a City,
who after they have taken the Oath of Supremacy, should refuse to take also a
Commission for their office in the Kings name? and will derive their Authority
from some other or higher power, as from the Emperor of Rome, or Germany,
would not this be a denial of the Kings Authority and Supremacy? It will not
excuse the matter to say, we first took the Oath of Supremacy: and can the like
excuse Bishops from denying the Kings Supremacy in their Consecration? My
humble Petition therefore is, that if it may stand with your Honors wisdom,
this Consecration may be altered and changed into a Commission in the Kings
name; like as it is with all Magistrates, who exercise a Coercive power under
the King.

Your Honors humble and dutiful Servant, THEOPHILUS BRABOVRN,


