REMARKS On a Late DISCOURSE OF WILLIAM LORD BISHOP OF DERRY; CONCERNING The
Inventions of Men in the Worship of God.

4 Ephesians. 25. -- Speak every man truth with his neighbor: for we are members one
of another.

By J. Boyse.

Printed for Eliphal Dobson, Matthew Gun, and Patrick Campbel, Booksellers in
Dublin. 1694.

The PREFACE.
I Am so averse to all Controversies in general, and particularly to those less
momentanous ones, that are still continued between the Established Church and
Protestant Dissenters, that it is not without great reluctance and regret, that
I am once more engaged in 'em by the following Remarks, on the late celebrated
Discourse of the Bishop of Derry, concerning the Inventions of Men in the
Worship of God. For I look on that revival of these Debates amongst us, which
his Lordship's Discourse has given occasion for, as very unseasonable in this
Kingdom, and particularly at this juncture. We have here so valuable a common
Interest (even a conjunction of our Religious and Civil ones) that requires all
our joint endeavors to promote, that we have no need to be diverted from 'em,
by awakening any dormant Contests about the interest of lesser Opinions and
Practices. And this seems the more improper at such a time when there was a
prospect of a Parliament being called here, and of the same Bill of Indulgence
for Protestant Dissenters coming before 'em, that is already past in England. A
Bill that seems most necessary here to encourage the Replanting this
impoverish't and desolate Kingdom with Protestants, by providing that Legal
Security for all of 'em, that would beget a mutual confidence in each other,
facilitate a nearer Union of our Affections, and bind us all in more inviolable
duty to their Majesty's; under whose Indulgent Government we should all enjoy
both Protection and Favor. Whereas the renewing these Disputes has too
probable a tendency to put the Spirits of Men into a new ferment, in which they
will be less disposed for so calm and peaceable, so charitable and healing
Counsels. For it is rare to find these public Debates so managed, as not to
widen Differences rather then compose 'em and heighten rather than allay the
animosities of the contending Parties.

But yet I humbly conceive that his Lordship has by this Discourse laid the
Dissenters under an unavoydable necessity of resuming these Debates, so far as
they are handled therein: And accordingly there are two Reasons, that I shall
offer for the publication of these Remarks.

1. The Protestant Dissenters could not omit this attempt to defend themselves
without betraying both the Interest of Truth, and that of their own Innocence
and just Reputation.

For his Lordship's. Discourse having charged us in so many Instances with
casting God's own Appointments out of his Worship, and with introducing so
great a mixture of Human Inventions, has brought us under this unhappy Dilemma,
That either we must seem to Own the Truth and Justice of so heavy a charge by
our Silence: or if we think our selves greatly wronged must appear, tho
unwillingly, and unseasonably, in our own Vindication. For as the Bishop, by
his former Attempt, (without any occasion given him) to disseize us of our
Spiritual Birthright, (I mean to exclude us from the Catholic Church) obliged
us to assert our just claim to that invaluable privilege; So by this New Essay
to represent our Worship as so miserably corrupted with Human Inventions, and
disagreable to the Directions of Scripture he has laid us under the same
obligation, to assert it is purity and Conformity to that sacred Rule, so far as
we think it unjustly accused of deviating from it. So that I hope our moderate
Conforming Brethren (toward whom we bear the most charitable disposition) will
by no means be offended with us, for our modest endeavors, to clear our selves
from so invidious a charge, or to retort it on our Accuser, where his Arguments
are more cogent against the practices he undertakes to defend, then those he
opposes. Nay we think the Bishop himself cannot blame us for this, who has so
frequently urged us to examine what he has alleged against us; demanded our
proof of such Principles as he imputes to us; and hereby signified that he
expects from us the Result of our serious thoughts on what he has offered to
our View. So that we cannot refuse to oblige him herein, without failing of the
respect we owe to his Lordship as well as the Justice we owe to Truth and to
our Selves. And even Charity it self seems to prompt us to it; For as we would
be glad to reconcile his Lordship, and all that applaud his Book, to a more
favorable opinion of our Worship, then is therein suggested, so we are
necessitated in order thereto, to show him those mistakes on which his
prejudices against it are founded.

2. The Bishops manner of treating this Subject seems too disingenuous to pass
without some just Animadversions upon it.

It Is indeed true that his Lordship has shown great dexterity of Wit in
treating of this Controversy in so new a method and Tour, as to put the
Dissenters on the necessity of defending themselves from the force of an
Argument, in which they thought hitherto they had rather the advantage of being
Assailants. And he has for the most part wrote with an Air of seriousness and
gravity becoming the weight of the Subject as well as the dignity of his
Character. Nor do there want some kind expressions that seem to argue, that his
former censoriousness and rigor is allayed, since in this Discourse he so often
treats us with the obliging apellation of his Friends and his Brethern. It Is
true some jealous People think it doubtful, because, tho he call us Friends in
one place, he seems to explain it of Back-Friends, p. 169. in another and tho
he often style us his Brethren that may be only in the same sense as Heathens
and Publicans are, since he still speaks of us as fallen off from the Church,
and disbelieving the Report of the Gospel, p. 166. But I am willing rather to
measure his Inclinations by those kind and charitable Words that seem to drop
from his Pen, when his Thoughts are cool, then by those harsher ones that the
heat of Dispute may suggest. Only his Brethren would have been greatly
satisfied, to have found some more explicit declaration of his Charity by his
owning us to be a part of the Catholic Church, and think he would have best
consulted his own reputation by repairing the wrong done to so many excellent
Churches in casting 'em so peremptorely out of it.

But there are these following Instances of so great disingenuity in his
Discourse, as deserve some just Reflections on 'em. As

1. He has in every part of it run into many mistakes about matter of Fact, and
some of 'em so gross, that a very ordinary care and diligence in his Enquiries
might have prevented. Nor needed he have gone farther to have rectified many of
those mistakes then (not only the Diocese, but) the City where he now resides.
And yet in some of those mistakes he speaks with so great a height of assurance
as is enough to possess all those Readers with the belief of the truth of what
he delivers, who take these matters on the credit of his testimony and
relation. But it is well for us, that the strongest Asseverations will not
change the nature of things, nor weigh down, the evidence of sense in matters
of Fact. And therefore I hope that his Lordship will not misinterpret it as a
failure in the deference we owe to his Character, if we call such palpable
misrepresentations of our Principles or Practices, calumnies, and urge him
either to prove or retract 'em. For sure he that unjustly accuses others, has
no right to blame 'em for telling him that he dos so; and cannot expect that
those he accuses should out of excess of Civility and Complement seem to
countenance his groundless Accusations by a cold and faint denial, and forbear
to manifest their own Innocence for fear of exposing thereby the Reputation of
their Reverend Accuser. And therefore, if the charge of injustice and wrong
done us, in his accounts of us, that so often occurs in these Remarks, may seem
harsh and severe, he must thank himself for it, and has no ground to complain
if the charge it self be true.

2. He has taken occasion from such palpable mistakes in matters of Fact, to
fasten upon us the most invidious, but the most unjust Reflections, tho gilded
over with smooth and specious language (like bitter Pills covered with Leaf
Gold) to make 'em go the more easily down. And of these so many will occur
under each Chapter as will supersede the necessity of mentioning 'em here.

3. Where he mistakes our Principles and Practices, he frequently feignes a
great many Reasons, as alleged by us in defense of those he groundlessly
imputes to us, and spends a great part of his Book in confutation of 'em;
whereby his ignorant Readers that take these matters on trust from him are
tempted to imagine he is confuting us, when he is only fighting with his own
shadow, and answering Objections, which himself dos not pretend to produce any
Author for. See the Chapter of Prayer, from p. 57. to p. 67. See the Chapter of
Hearing, from p. 86. to p. 101. See the Chapter of Bodily Worship, from p. 130.
to p. 142.

Now I take this method of treating such Controversies, wherein the reputation
of a great body of Protestants are concerned, to be so highly disingenuous,
that as such Authors deserve a gentle Reproof, so it is necessary out of regard
to charity and peace it self to obviate the pernicious influence of such
Writings. For such Writings tend to make differences between us seem greater
then they are, and to exasperate rather then heal the Wounds caused by 'em.
Whereas a contrary, judicious, and fair stating of Controversies tends to
narrow 'em, and seldom fails to bring the contending parties to a nearer
agreement of Judgment as well as Affection. And this I can truly profess to be
the principal design of these Remarks. And tho I am conscious of the weakness
of my own abilities for such an undertaking, yet I am not, of any inclination
to set Protestants at a greater distance from one another. On the contrary, I
shall think my time in writing these Remarks well employed, if they contribute
any thing to reconcile sober Protestants to more favorable and charitable
thoughts of those different modes of worship that yet remain among 'em, and to
convince 'em how little these differences should signify to abate our esteem
and love for such who are agreed with us in those ^ar more important matters,
wherein the Kingdom of God chiefly consists. For as all that in these things
serve our common Master, are herein acceptable to God, so they should be (on
the same score) approved and affectionately honored by one another, 1 Romans Chapter
14 Ver. 18. And therefore if his Lordship can show me any thing in these Papers
contrary to this design, or any such misrepresentation of their Principles and
Practices, as I have here charged him with in reference to ours, I shall most
readily retract it, as I humbly expect the like candor from himself.

Having truly proposed what were my inducements to publish these Remarks, I
shall only add one Observation necessary to prevent mistakes, viz. That the
matters treated on in this Discourse of the Bp's are by no means the main hing
on which the Controversy between the Established Church and the Dissenters
turns. So that his Lordship has only acted in this defense of the Established
Church like the Governor of a Garrison that takes the greatest pains to
maintain the best fortified parts of it, while he leaves those feeble places
unguarded, against which the Strongest Batterys are placed. But none can blame
his Lordships prudence in choosing a Post which he thought himself most capable
to make good. And if he not only defend that, but in a resolute sally seize
some of the Enemies Canon and turn it against themselves, It must be owned for a
considerable Service. No doubt he supposes he has done so; how justly, I shall
leave to the Reader's unbyast Judgment when he has perused these Remarks, in
which I shall trace his Lordships steps in the clear and accurate method he has
laid down.

Contents of the several Chapters
REmark^ on the Introduction, from p. 1. to p. 10. Remarks on the I Chapter
concerning Praises On the Bishop's Account of the Directions of the holy
Scripture concerning it, from p. 10 to p. 19. On the Bp's Application of 'em to
the practice of the Established Church, and that of the Dissenters, from p. 19
to p. 31.
Remarks on the II Chapter concerning Prayer. On the Bp's Account of the
Directions of the holy Scriptures concerning it, from p. 31 to p. 51. On the
Application of 'em, etc. from p. 51 to p. 72.
Remarks on the III Chapter concerning Hearing. On the Bp's Account of the
Directions of the holy Scriptures concerning it, from p. 72 to p. 82. On the
Application of 'em, etc. from p. 82. to p. 104.
Remarks on the IV Chapter concerning Bodily Worship. On the Bp's Account of
the Directions of the holy Scriptures concerning it, p. 105, 106. On the
Application of 'em, etc. from p. 106 to p. 113. On the Bp's Arguments for
kneeling at the Receiving the Lord's Supper, from p. 113 to p. 123. -- On the
remainder of that Chapter, from p. 123 to p. 130.
Remarks on the V Chapter concerning the Lord's Supper. On the Bp's Account of
the Directions of the holy Scripture concerning the frequency of Receiving, p.
131, 132. On the Application of 'em, etc. from p. 132 to p. 138.
Remarks on the Conclusion. On the Bp's Advice to the Conforming Clergy of his
Diocese, from p. 138. to p. 141. On his Advice to the Dissenting Ministers of
it, from p. 142 to p. 157. On his Advice to the Conforming Laity of his
Diocese. p. 158, 159, On his Advice to the Dissenting Laity of it, from p. 159
to 170.
APPENDIX. 1. Concerning Baptism, and the use of the Cross, and of Godfathers
and Godmothers, from p. 171 to 177. 2. Concerning sinful Human Inventions in
the Discipline of the Church, p. 177. Requests to the Reverend Conforming
Clergy in 13 particulars, from p. 177 to 191. Postscript, relating to the Bible
-- Poetry, from p. 192 to 198.

ERRATA.
Preface, line 2d. for momentanous, read momentous.

PAge 13. line 1. blot out and. p. 29 l. 19. for Aventinus and Anoymus read
Aventinus Annal. Boior. l. 3. p. 300 Edit. Ingolst. 1554. and Aymon. de Gestis
Francorum, lih. 4. and cap. 64. and 144. p. 55. l. 15. blot out of. p. 88. l.
25. for 2 Chronicles. 19. chapter 23 v. read 29 chapter p. 102. l. 18. for condems, 1.
condemns. p. 117. l. 30. read, For his first Answer to the Argument brought for
fitting, from the example of the Apostles, when Christ administered this
Sacrament, viz. p. 137. l. 15, 16. r. Not celebrating it oftener in each, etc.
p. 156. last line, r. spiritual. p. 165. l. 32. blot out a. p. 169. l. 15. And
for the common custom of many such Sponsors, who pretend to excuse themselves
from what they have promis't, by devolving the charge back on the Parents as
soon as the Baptism is over, it is no better than a profane trifling with so
sacred a thing as a publ^ck Religious Vow and Promise. The Book is wrong pag'd,
from 168 to the end.

Remarks upon the Introduction.
UPon the Review of the Introduction, and comparing it with the following
Chapters, I was greatly surpised to find these 3 unusual and palpable defects
in it, than which, I scarce know 3 more inexcusable ones a Writer can be guilty
of, that pretends to treat a controversial subject, Viz.

1. Tho he styles his Book, A Discourse concerning the Inventions of men in the
Worship of God, Yet he has not in all those 188 pages, of which it consists, so
much as once stated the true notion of 'em, or told us what he means by 'em. A
strange oversight in one that pretends to have so carefully examined this
matter, and has said so many things relating to it, which he could not but
foresee would fall under the critical examination of those on whose principles
and practices he has made so many and severe Reflections; especially when he
could not well be ignorant that the subject he undertakes to discourse on is
very ambiguous, and capable of being taken in so different senses. But it is
easy to ghess what kind of superstructure he is like to raise, when he has
forgot to lay the foundation. So that we are obliged to desire his Lordship to
write another Discourse to state the Question; that we may know what the
Arguments in this are levelled for, or against.

2. But there is a worse fault this Discourse is chargeable with, viz. That as
far as his Lp's meaning can be gathered from his words, he has given us 2
inconsistent Notions of human Inventions in the Worship of God, which yet he
has taken no care to distinguish, and tell us fairly when he intends the one,
and when the other.

Sometimes by the Inventions of men in the Worship of God, he seems to
understand some things relating either to the matter, or the manner of
Religious Worship, that are unlawful and sinful. Thus in his first Paragraph,
Our blessed Savior (says he) has taught us that there are some ways of
worshipping God which have so great a mixture of human Invention in 'em, that
they are vain and unacceptable to him, for which he quotes 7 Mark 7. A passage
which (as I shall show anon) plainly refers to those Jewish Traditions which
our Savior there arraigns as guilty of sinful superstition. And again in his
principles, p. 3. he seems to lay down his Notion of the Inventions of men in
the worship of God, when he there tells us, That since God has given us a
certain direction for his Worship in the H. Scriptures, It is to be supposed
that all ways of Worship are displeasing to him, that are not expressly
contained, or warranted by Examples of H. men mentioned therein. It Is true
indeed, that if he intend this for a description of such human Inventions, we
are not much the wiser for it, (as I shall observe afterward). But this we may
certainly infer from it, that he understands by 'em such ways of Worship as
are displeasing to God, because destitute of scriptural Prec^pt and Pattern.
Now I would entreat his Lordship to acquaint us how we shall reconcile this
with his owning such things to be lawful, to which this very notion of human
Inventions does agree, and which he calls by that very name. To give him an
Instance in his first Chapter about Pra^se. He there charges the Dissenters way
of praising God by singing Psalms in meter as destitute of all Command or
Precedent from the Scripture, and as a purely human Invention, p. 24. And yet
in the very beginning of that Section that concerns the Dissenters manner of
Praising God, he desires us to observe, for preventing mistakes, that he does
not condemn the singing Psalms in Meter as unlawful. And no wonder, when he
foresaw that he must otherwise have condemned what is practiced in the
Parish-Churches; For tho he tells us this is but a voluntary entertainment of
devotion in their public Assemblies, yet there were all possible reason to
cast it out, if it were a sinful way of praising God according to the first
Notion of human Inventions. It Is evident then that he sometimes understands by
human Inventions some sinful ways of Worship, sometimes such innocent modes of
it as are of human determination. Nay, so jumbled are his notions of this
matter, that tho he own Sermons to have the warrant of scriptural Example, yet
he ranks 'em among the Inventions of men, p 102. And this uncertain sense of
this slippery phrase breeds so miserable a confusion in his whole discourse,
that when he tells us so often of our human Inventions, we are at a loss
whether he speak it by way of applause or censure, whether he commend our use
of Christian prudence, or arraign us as guilty of superstition. But

3. I have a severer Reflection yet to add, viz. That his Lp. has made this
strange confusion in his own Notions about human Inventions, the ground of the
most uncharitable censures of the Worship of his Brethren.

He does indeed in some cases accuse the Dissenters of laying aside the
commands of God relating to his Worship (how justly, will appear hereafter).
But I never find in his charge of human Inventions, that his premises amount to
any more than some modes of Worship in general necessary, but in particular
left to the determination of human prudence; And yet in his Conclusion he would
insinuate into his unwary Readers, as if he had proved our Worship guilty of
such superstitious Inventions, as our Savior's words, 7 Mark 7. caution us
against. And so many Instances of this kind will occurr in the examination of
the particular Chapters, as will spare me the labor of mentioning 'em here. I
shall therefore here only add, That if this thin sophism imposed on his own
understanding, it is great pity he should trouble the world with renewing a
debate concerning these things, before he had better digested his thoughts
about 'em; If it did not, where was his sincerity in founding so heavy an
Indictment on such proof as he knew was so lame and inconsistent?

Least therefore these Remarks should be guilty of the same faults with his
Lordship's Discourse, It will be necessary to set these matters in a clearer
light, which he has so studiously wrapped up in perfect obscurity.

I. This Phrase of the Inventions of men, as relating to the Worship of God,
occurrs thrice in our Translation of the Bible, viz. 106 Ps. 29. and 39 v. and
99 Ps. 8 v. In the first place, it is applied to the people of Israel's joining
in the sacrifices offered to Baal-peor; In the 2d, it is applied to their
imitating the Heathenish Inhabitants in the Land of Canaan, in that horrid
wickedness of sacrificing their children to Idols. In the 3d, it is most
probable by the Context, that the expression referrs to the Worship of God by
the Golden Calf, as an Image or symbol of his presence. So that if we borrow
our Notion of human Inventions in Religious Worship from the scriptural use of
that phrase, they always imply a violation either of the first or second
Command, either by setting up a wrong Object of Worship, or a forbidden and
corrupt way of paying our worship to the true Object of it. And if the Bishop
had proved the Worship of Dissenters guilty of such human Inventions, he had
done something to the purpose.

II. But if we derive our Notion of the Inventions of men in the Worship of
God, from that passage of our Savior which the Bishop cites from Mark 7. v. 7.
In vain do ye worship me, teaching for Doctrines the commandments of men, a
little care in examining it, will easily help us to state it right.

By the Commandments of men our Savior here plainly understands such, as
enjoined the doing or forbearing certain things as instances of Piety and
Holiness that recommend us to God, which he never prescribed in the law of
nature, or in his supernatural Revelation. Such Commandments of men he asserts
those Traditions among the Jews to be, that placed so much of holiness in
washing their hands before eating, or when they came from places of public
converse, as if this external cleanness could recommend 'em to the infinitely
pure eyes of the great God. And many such Instances of Apocryphal sanctity
occurr in the lives of Popish Saints, who placed so much of it in so many
unnecessary Austerities, and other trifling Fopperies. And no wonder our
Savior should condemn such human Traditions as thus tend to corrupt our
apprehensions of the nature and will of God, and possess us with such a false
idea of true Religion, as adulterates the simplicity of it.

These superstitious Precepts of men receive an Additional Aggravation, when
the observing 'em necessitates the violation of the Laws of God, Thus our
Savior arraigns the superstitious Tradition of the Jewish Doctors about the
obligation of rash Vows, which entangl'd 'em in the breach of the 5th Command,
7 Mark 11. And on the same account we condemn those rash vows of Celibacy in
the Roman Church, which so often involve those that make 'em in the violation
of the 7th.

Now if we apply this sense of the Commandments of Men to the Worship of God,
we shall have a clear Notion of such human Inventions as this Text does
condemn, As,

1. It condemns as sinful Inventions or Commands of Men, all such as enjoin
some new part of Religious Worship that has no stamp of Divine Authority. As
the Romish Church is herein guilty, when she presumes to add new Sacraments of
her own to those of Christ's Institution,

And it is an aggravation of these sinful Inventions of men, when the observance
of 'em is inconsistent with what God's own Laws prescribe relating to his
Worship. Of which the Romish Church is guilty, in setting up the Worship of
Images, the Invocation of Angels and Saints, the offering up Christ as a
Propitiatory Sacrifice in the Mass, and the Adoration of the Host.

2. Whereas every part of Worship enjoined by God, as Prayer, Pra^se, etc. is
capable of being performed in various circumstantial modes, If the Law of God
do expressly enjoin us any particular mode, then, to devise another of our own
exclusive of that which he has chosen and determined, is to bring in a sinful
human Invention into his Worship. Such sinful Inventions are prayers and
praises in an unknown Tongue, the Communicating in one kind, solitary
Communions, etc.

3. Nay, if the Commands of men make such Rites and Ceremonies of their own
devising, as are no way necessary, nor warranted by any general Rules of
Scripture, to become the stated Appendages of any part of divine Worship, and
the necessary terms of Communion in it, such Ceremonies seem to come within the
compass of what our Savior rejects as vain worship. For the imposing such
Rites and Ceremonies, seems to be an Act of human presumption that tacitly
arraigns those directions which God himself has given us concerning his
Worship, and our Communion in it, as defective. And such superstitious
Inventions of men those numberless Rites and Ceremonies seem to be, whereby the
Guides of the Roman Church have corrupted the simplicity of Christian Worship,
and defaced the true beauty and purity of divine Institutions with the
meretricious paint of their unnecessary pomp and pageantry. And his Lp. would
have done well to have cleared the Cross in Baptism from being one of these
human Inventions.

So that the Inventions of men in the Worship of God which this Text condemns,
are always some sinful corruptions of it, as to the matter or manner of it, or
some sinful Additions to it. If therefore his Lp. would manage this charge of
human Inventions to any purpose against the Dissenters, he must prove either
that they set up some new part of Worship which has no stamp of divine
Authority; or that where God has determined any particular mode for ordering
any part of his Worship, they reject that, and use one of their own devising;
or that they introduce some new Rites as stated Appendages of worship no way
necessary in general, and make 'em the terms of Communion in it. How little he
has done of that kind, will appear in the examination of his ensuing Chapters.

I might add here, We may justly rank among such human Inventions, all those
human Orders in reference to the Government and Discipline of the Church, that
set up any such new Officers in it without any warrant of Christ's Institution
as put down those that he has appointed, or deprive 'em of any part of that
power he has committed to 'em; Nay, all those Ecclesiastical Canons are such
sinful precepts of men as are inconsistent with the great Rules for unity and
concord, for mutual forbearance and charity, etc. which our Savior has laid
down And I should be very glad if his Lp. could clear the Established Church
from the charge of such human Inventions as these. For it is these are chiefly
the fatal Engines of our Divisions, as I may have occasion to observe in the
end of these Remarks.

III. It remains only that I subjoyn in order to the clearing the state of this
Controversy, That there is a very improper sense in which this phrase of human
Inventions in the Worship of God may possibly be used, viz. To signify such
modes and circumstances of divine Worship, as tho necessary in general by
Divine precept, yet are left in particular to be determined by human Prudence.
For tho God has commanded public Pray^r, Praise, Hearing, Celebration of the
Lord's Supper, etc. Yet what time or place we shall assemble in, In what order
these parts of Worship shall be performed, What particular devout posture we
shall use among several equally expressive of our religious Reverence, what
Translation of the Bible or Version of the Psalms we shall choose, what portion
of the Scriptures shall be read, explained and applied; What utensils shall be
employed in the celebration of the Sacraments, and a multitude of such
circumstances and modes of that kind are left to human Determination. Only
therein the general Rules of Scripture must be regarded, as That all be done to
Edification, and all things be done decently and in order, etc. 1 Cor. 14.26,
v. 40. Now to call such modes of Worship thus justly determined by human
Prudence, the Inventions of Men, even such as our Savior refers to 7 Mark 7.
is indeed common enough with such wild Sectaries, as the Quakers; but I am
sorry that his Lp. should thus espouse their Quarrel, and take up their
Arguments against us. And yet I hope to make it evident, That his Proof of
human Inventions in the Worship of Dissenters amounts to no more then such
prudential human Orders about the modes of Worship, as are undoubtedly
allowable and lawful; and That the Established Church is much more liable to
the same charge, many of whose Practices as well as those of Dissenters, I
shall be obliged in charity to defend from this weak and blind Accusation.

What I have here suggested will make it needless to take any farther notice of
the Principles his Lp. lays down in reference to the Worship of God, then to
annex these few brief Remarks on 'em.

For the 2 first, That it belongs to God only to give Rules how he will be
worshiped, and that the H. Scriptures contain the Revelation of God's Will
concerning his Worship, They are no other then what will freely be granted him,
unless he extend 'em to all circumstances and modes of Worship and exclude all
human Prudence in the determination of 'em.

For the 3d. which he infers from the 2 former, viz. That it concerns us to
keep as close as we can to those Directions which God has been pleased to
afford us in his Word, without adding to, omitting or altering any thing that
he has there laid down. I hope he intends no more by it, then that so far as
God has by those Directions enjoined any part of Worship, or expressly
determined the manner and circumstances of it, so far we must follow such
Directions; And therefore I hope he would not hereby insinuate as if those
Directions were so particular, as to appoint all the fore mentioned
circumstantial modes of Instituted worship. And I think this Caution the more
needful to be given him, because the Reason he offers for this Principle
carrys a very uncertain and dangerous sound with it, viz. For since God his
vouchsaft us a certain Direction for his Worship in the H. Scriptures, It is to
be supposed that all ways of Worship are displeasing to him, that are not
expressly contained or warranted by Examples of H. M^n therein. If his Lp. had
designed our Instruction by these Principles, he should not have delivered 'em
to us (like the Heathen Oracles) in so ambiguous terms, as leave us to ghess in
the dark what he means. For how shall we know. Whether by God's giving us a
certain Direction for his Worship, he means as to all the parts of it, or all
the circumstantial modes, and whether of these he intends by ways of Worship.
For if he intend the latter, (as any man would imagine by the whole tenor of
his following Discourse, wherein be so often applys that phrase, the ways of
Worship to the modes of it) viz. That God has given us so certain a Direction
for his Worship, as to all the circumstantial modes of it, that all such modes
of it are displeasing to him that have not express Scripture-Precept or
Pattern, This is so wild an Assertion, that I scarce think any more extravagant
one ever dropped from the pen of the most weak and scrupulous Sectaries, and so
very uncharitable, that if a man believed it, he would find it hard to join in
any Religious Assembly that I know of in the Christian World, I am sure he must
renounce all Communion with the Parish-Churches; so fatal is it to great Wits
to run into extremes, that his Lp. is not content with espousing the Dissenters
Principles without overdoing, and stretching 'em beyond all tolerable bounds;
so that if he should ever become a Proselyte to that Party, I am afraid he will
turn one of those rigid ones that were formerly called Brownists.

For what he calls his 4th and 5th Principle, I know of no Dispute there is
about 'em.

But I must crave leave in order to the clearing my way to the following
Chapters, to subjoyn 2 Principles or Postulata which his Lp. seems to have
forgot, but are highly necessary to a right Judgment concerning these matters,
Viz.

1. Where God has enjoined any part of Religious Worship in general, but has
not determined the particular mode and circumstances of it, There the
determination of 'em belongs to human prudence, and such determinations of 'em
are lawful and warrantable as are agreeable to the general Rules of Scripture
given to direct us therein. And therefore there may be various modes of
performing the same Religious duty, that are each allowable and lawful; tho
some particular circumstances may make one to some persons more expedient than
the other. Ex. gr. God has commanded us to pray, but he has no where expressly
determined (whatever his Lp. seems to insinuate to the contrary) whether we
shall pray with or without a set Form of words; both ways of praying therefore
may be lawful in general, tho particular circumstances may to some render the
one or the other way more convenient; nay the general Rule of doing all to
Edification, may perhaps in some cases oblige men to the one, and in some to
the other. I might say the same concerning singing in Prose or Meetre, Reading
a larger entire portion of Scripture without Exposition, or a lesser with it,
etc. So that in these cases wise men are very cautious on what grounds they go,
when they censure the Worship of others as unlawful, or charge it with sinful
human Inventions; and confident Accusers do but usually betray their own
Ignorance.

2. We that are Christians, should chiefly attend to the Rules and Examples of
the New Testament for our direction in the Worship of God. For those of the Old
Testament no farther concern us, than as any Rules delivered there belong to
the Moral Law, and the Reason of such Examples equally extends to us as it did
to them. And indeed to urge the Precepts or Patterns of the Worship used under
the Old Testament any farther, were to bring us again under the Mosaical
Pedagogy.

And as I hope, None will deny me these 2 reasonable Postulata, so the
usefulness of 'em in these Enquiries will appear in many of the Remarks on the
following Chapters, which I shall now address my self to the consideration of.

Remarks on the 1 Chapter concerning Praises.
ANd here I shall so far observe the same method his Lp. has laid down, as
First to consider the directions of Scripture concerning this part of Divine
Worship, and then the Application his Lp. makes of 'em to the manner of
performing it in the Established Church, and in the Dissenters Congregations.

First, As to the Directions of the H. Scriptures concerning this part of
Divine Worship, I shall offer what follows as the Result of the most diligent
Enquiry I could make, and hope it is a juster as well as clearer Account than
that his Lp. has given.

There are but these 2 ways of offering our public Praises to God enjoined in
the New Testament, viz. either by Singing Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs;
or by Thanksgiving without vocal Melody.

I. As to Thanksgiving without vocal Melody, I would observe,

1. We have most express command for it as one principal stated part of our
public Worship. 1 Timothy 2.1, I exhort therefore, that first of all
Supplications, Prayers, Intercession, and giving of thanks be made for all men,
etc. And this part of Worship was usually joined with that of Prayer. Thus 4
Phil. 6. In every thing by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, let your
requests be made known to God. So 4 Col. 2. -- 1 These. 5.17, 18. And
accordingly, Blessing, or Giving of Thanks is mentioned as one stated part of
the Devotions of Christian Assemblies, 1 Cor. 14. v. 16. And that those
Thanksgivings were different from Psalms or Songs is hence evident, both
because they were to be varied according to their different occasions for 'em
from the mercies they daily received, which such Psalms or Songs could not be,
(For those are always supposed to be a set invariable form of words); and
because they were ordinarily intermixed with public Prayer.

2. For the matter of these Public Thanksgivings, the New Testament chiefly
directs us to insist on those peculiar mercies of God to us through a Mediator,
which the Gospel most clearly reveals to us, and of which there is either none,
or but very obscure mention made in any Forms of Thanksgiving recorded in the
Old.

For if we go through all the solemn Thanksgivings that occur in the New
Testament, we shall find 'em to run in a strain as much sublimer than that of
those in the Old, as that clearer transcends that obscurer Revelation. How
suitable to the Evangelical dispensation is that Thanksgiving of the Ap. Paul? 1
Ephesians. 3.4, 5, etc. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
has blessed us with all spiritual Blessings in heavenly things in Christ,
According as he has chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that
we should be holy and blameless before him in love, Having predestined us to
the Adoption of children by Christ to himself, etc. Or that of the same
Inspired Writer, 1 Col. 12, 13. etc. Of the same strain is that of the Ap.
Peter, 1 Ep. 1 Chapter 3, 4, etc. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who according to his abundant mercy has begotten us again to a lively
hope by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an Inheritance
incorruptible, undefiled, and that never fades away, reserved in Heaven for us,
etc. See 1 Rev. 5.6. unto him that loved us, and washed us from our Sins in his
own Blood, and has made us Kings and Priests to God, etc. 5 Rev. 13, 14, etc.

These are certainly the best Patterns after which our public Thanksgivings in
Christian Assemblies should be drawn. And no Thanksgivings recorded in the Old
Testament do so expressly and clearly mention these inestimable blessings of the
New Covenant, or the matchless love of our God and Savior in the manner of
conferring 'em, as these recorded in the New; and consequently our praises
should ordinarily, as to the very matter of 'em, greatly differ from, and go
beyond those used in the Jewish Church.

3. We read of no other part the people had in these public thanksgivings in
the New Testament more than their adding their Amen to 'em. So much these words
of the Ap. Paul imply, 1 Cor. 14.16. Else when thou shall bless with the
Spirit, how shall he that occupies the room of the unlearned say Amen at thy
giving of thanks. All Expositors on the place refer it to the custom of the
peoples saying Amen at the end of public prayers and praises* I might produce
the testimony of Justin Martyr and other ancient Christian Writers of the 3
first Centuries to this purpose; but since the Bishop seems to allow this
Exposition, p. 42. I need insist no farther on it here.

And it is the more requisite to take notice of this way of praising God by
Thanksgivings without vocal melody, because the Bp. seems to confound it with
that other way of praising God with Psalms, and from which it is plainly
distinguished. And this leads me to consider.

II. The Praises the New Testament requires us to offer unto God by Singing.

And what was to be thus sung, we may learn from those 2 passages of the Ap.
Paul cited by the Bishop, 5. Ephesians. 19. and 3 Col. 16. viz. Psalms, Hymns and
spiritual Songs, or Odes. On which passages I would make the following Remarks.

I do fully agree with the Bishop that this Passage of the Apostle's does
warrant our use of the Psalms of David in our public praises, because it is
highly probable the word Psalms refers to 'em. But then I must add, it is no
less probable that the Apostle does by Hymns and spiritual songs intend others
besides those of H. David, especially such as contain matter of praise more
entirely suited to the state of the christian Church under this clearer Light
of the Gospel; As there are many solemn thanksgivings in many places of the New
Testament easily capable of being turned into Hymns and spiritual Odes by being
adapted to this use of singing 'em. And I see no reason to doubt but this
passage does as fully Warrant our composing and using such, as it dos the use
of the Psalms of David. So that the want of 'em seems to be one defect in this
part of Worship both among Conf's and NC's, tho some of the latter have of late
reformed it by the frequent use of New Testament Hymns in their Congregations,
especially in the celebration of the Lord's Supper. There are indeed Anthems
sometimes sung in the Cathedrals, but it is in a way wherein the body of the
People cannot join with 'em.

2 But the New Testament recommends no other use of Psalms, etc. in the public
Praises of God, besides that of Singing 'em.

The use of 'em is no where enjoined in the New Testament, but in those places
forequoted 5 Ephesians. 19. and 3 Col. 16. and 5 James 13. and all those directions
require the Singing 'em. That grace wherewith we must make Melody to the Lord
in our hearts presupposes some Melody made with our Voices to which the other
should correspond.

And there seems to be this obvious Reason why Singing 'em is so expressly there
enjoined, because in that Religious duty thus ordered, Nature assists grace,
and our delight in vocal harmony tends to elevate our affections more easily
toward their blessed Object. So that we neither comply with the Apostles
precept, nor indeed with the reason of it, by barely repeating or saying such
Psalms, Hymns and spiritual Songs without singing 'em (except when we only read
'em for Instruction, without using 'em as Forms of Praise). Nor has the Bp.
produced any example of such Psalms and Hymns being said, as
contra-distinguisht from being sung. For the 118 Ps. 2. he dos well not to
insist on it to this purpose. For it no more proves our being required to say
Psalms, as distinguished from singing 'em, than the word saying proves it, when
applied to that New Song which is expressly said to be sung, 5 Rev 9. He tells
us indeed that we find in Scripture several sacred Hymns, particularly of
Hannah, the B. Virgin, Zacharias, and Simeon, and the Saints in Heaven, 7 Rev.
12. and 11.17. which are said to have been said by 'em respectively, and the
circumstances of the story do not make it probable that they were sung. Answ.
It Is true indeed, we commonly call these passages Hymns, because they are
easily capable of being turned into Hymns. But we do so improperly, For it is
certain the Scripture never gives 'em that Title, but appropriates it to what
was sung. What Hannah spoke is called a Prayer, 1 Samuel 2. v. 1. That solemn
Thanksgiving ascribed to the Virgin Mary, has no Title given, (or if it was a
Song, there is as much evidence of its being sung, as of its being only said).
Zacharias's thanksgiving is called prophesying, 1 Luke 67. Simeon's is called
Blessing God, (...) (the word used for Thanksgiving 1 Cor. 14.16.) The 7 Rev.
12. -- and 11.17. are plainly Thanksgivings. Since then the Bp. has not
produced one Instance of Psalms, Hymns, or Spiritual Songs that were said, as
distinguished from being sung, it is evident this use of 'em in the praises of
God is unscriptural, and is far from having either precept or pattern in the
Bible to warrant it; and if we judge of it by the Bp's own Principles, we must
pronounce it unlawful: Nay, it is the more to be suspected, because it crosses
the only direction given us about the use of 'em in this part of public
Worship.

3. Since the New Testament requires our Praising God publicly by singing
Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual Songs, it dos fully warrant us to adapt the Psalms
of David to that use by turning 'em into meter.

For it is one great general Rule of Scripture, that all things in public
Worship should be done to Edification, 1 Cor. 14. v. 26. It Is evidently most
conducive to Edification, that the whole Congregation join in the praises of
God by singing Psalms (according to his Appointment in the places
forementioned). But this cannot be without turning 'em into meter, because the
generality of the people cannot sing 'em in prose, but must if they sing 'em,
have 'em accommodated to that use by such measures as are familiar to 'em. And
the addition of Rhyme is but a convenient condescension herein to the weakness
of the people, to whom Verse without it is, through custom, become less grateful;
(even as those consulted the help of our weak memories, who first divided the
Bible into Chapters and Verses). So that these circumstances plainly fall under
the determination of human prudence, and are accordingly determined very
agreeably to that general Rule I cited before. And I may justly add, that the
Psalms thus translated into Meter (provided the true sense of the Inspired
Writer be delivered) are as truly the Word of God, as the Psalms translated
into prose; And we are as much obliged to turn the Psalms into meter for this
use of singing 'em, as to traslate 'em out of Hebrew- meter into prose for our
Reading and Instruction. For they can no more serve the use of being generally
sung without the one, than that of being read for Instruction without the other.

4. It Is highly probable that the Psalms of David were composed in meter, quite
contrary to what the Bp. so frequently suggests, p. 5.9.21.

It Is indeed true that we are now very unable to give an exact Account of it.
And it is no wonder, when our knowledge of the Hebrew Language is so imperfect,
and the distance of time so very great. But if we will credit those who were
more capable to judge of that matter, by having the advantage of us in both
these respects, we must dissent from his Lp's opinion in it. For that grave
Historian Josephus assures us, lib. 7. cap. 10. that the Psalms were wrote in
various sorts of meter, of which he mentions two, some Trimeters, and some
Pentameters. And indeed this is so plain of some of 'em, as particularly the
111th and 112th, that all Expositors take notice of the measures that plainly
appear in 'em, and there can be no reasonable doubt about it. Every verse
having in the beginning and middle 2 letters in order of the Hebrew Alphabet,
only the 2 last have each 3 letters, tho the measures are even in them alike
with the others. There is no less appearance of meter in the 119th Psalm, as
all Critics observe upon it. See the learned Gataker's account of the several
Tunes to which the Psalms were suited, and the manner of singing 'em in his
Cinnus. And if the Psalms were composed in meter, that they might be sung, It Is
certainly most agreeable to the example of Scripture to turn 'em into meter for
the same end and use.

III. For Responses, There is no doubt that in such places of Scripture as the
Bp. has alleged, (7 Rev. from the 9th to the 13th. (Tho in the paraphrasing
this Text, 7 Rev. 11, 12. his Lp. commits an odd mistake in supposing the
Angels and Elders to join in saying what we read, v. 12. whereas it is the
Angels alone to whom that part belongs, tho they stood about the Throne, and
about the Elders, and the 4 Beasts. (...), etc.) 19 Rev. The instance of
Miriam, The 24th. and 118th Ps. and especially in the Song of Solomon, which
his Lp. seems to have forgot.) There is an Allusion to dramatick writings. But
it is observable that there is some difference in the persons introduced as
answering one another, and in the matter spoken, that required this alternate
way of singing. But I see nothing the Bp. has produced to make it probable that
this way of alternate singing was the ordinary practice of the Christian Church
in the New Testament. He does indeed alledg those words of the Ap. Paul to that
purpose, 1 Cor. 14.31. For ye may all Prophesy one by one, etc. which (he tells
us) amounts to praising God by way of Responses, because prophesying (he says)
includes Psalms, Doctrines, Tongues, Revelations and Interpretations, p. 11.
But it is strange his Lp. should examine his criticisms no better. For if he
compare the 26 v. of that Chapter with the 6th, he will easily find that
prophesying instead of including all those things mentioned v. 26. is
distinguished from 'em, v. 6th; And if he will compare this 31 v. with those that
precede, and those that follow it, he cannot but see, that it imports only a
direction to the Prophets to speak in their due order without interrupting one
another, since that God, in whose name they spoke, was not the Author of
confusion, but of peace, v. 33. And accordingly some judicious Expositors
understand these words, v. 32. [The spirits of the Prophets are subject to the
Prophets] of those that were inspired, being capable of refraining to speak
even what they had an impulse for, till they could do it in regular order.

IV. For Instruments of Music there is no Question of their being used in the
Worship of the Jewish Church. But then it must be considered, that it is highly
probable these Instruments of Music belonged not to the Worship of their
Synagogues, but only to the service of their Temple. And there was a particular
Institution for 'em, as appears from Numb. 10. -- 32 Levit. 23, 24. And those
other Instruments of Music which David appointed, 1 Chronicles. 16.4, 5. he is
expressly said to have done it upon the Commandment of the Lord by his Prophets,
2 Chronicles. 29.25. And they are on that account called God's Musical Instruments,
1 Chronicles. 16.22. -- and 2 Chronicles. 7.6. as having the stamp of his Authority. Nor
dos the single instance of Miriam's Timbrels signify any more to prove that the
use of 'em was no part of the Ceremonial Law, than the use of Sacrifices before
Moses's time can prove that they were not. Besides, Miriam being there called
the Prophetess, there is just reason to suppose that she used those Timbrels
upon a particular impulse, as David is said to have instituted his upon such a
particular command from the inspired Prophets. Since then Instrumental Music
belonged to the Temple-service, which was but ceremonial and typical, it must
be abolisht with that service; And we can have no warrant to recall it into the
Christian Church without as particular an Institution for it, as it had under
the Law, any more than we have to use other abrogated rites of the Jewish
Religion. Nor needs there any particular command for laying it aside, when the
whole Temple-service, of which it is a part, is so plainly cashiered, and it was
not, that we can find, used in the Worship of the Synagogues, from which alone
we can pretend to draw any safe Pattern for Evangelical Worship. And it is
certain that there is no mention of it is being used in the Worship of the
Christian Church. And indeed it seems more suitable to divine Worship when there
was more of external pomp allowed in it. I confess his Lp. would persuade us
the Apostles recommend such musical Instruments, because the Ap. James, when he
exhorts those that were merry to sing Psalms, uses the word (...), 5 James 13.
which he tells us, signifies in the Original, singing with an Instrument, p.
13. But sure his Lp. can lay no stress on this Argument, when it is so
apparently weak, and so often concludes wrong. Of which I shall give him a
parallel instance of his own. He tells us, p. 111. that (...) (the word
generally used in the New Testament for Worship) signifies in the Original, to
pay homage by kissing the hand. And might he not as wisely infer from thence,
that we are still obliged to pay our external homage the same way. But if he
look again on that passage of the Ap. James, he will find this slender
criticism too weak a foundation for Organs to stand on, because the Apostle
could not reasonably suppose all those to have Instruments of Music by 'em, or
to be capable of using 'em, whom he there exhorts to vent their spiritual joys,
by singing of Psalms. Since then there is no warrant for Instrumental Music,
from either precept or example in the New Testament, the Bp. is obliged by his
own principles on that account to turn it out of the Church. And indeed for the
Cathedral Music, it is hard to reconcile it with 1 Cor. 14.11, 15, 26. For the
Apostle requires that all things be done to Edification, and consequently that
no worship be offered up but what is clearly understood; since if we know not
the meaning of the voice of him, that speaks, he is but a Barbarian to us; Now
the generality of the people complain that the Chaunters and Choristers are
just such Barbarians to 'em, because their voice is not so articulate as to
enable 'em to understand what they play or sing.

Secondly, Having considered the Directions of the Scripture relating to this
part of Religious Worship, Let us consider the Application thereof to the
Praises of God as celebrated in the Established Church, and in the Dissenters
Congregations.

And before I enter on the Representation that his Lp. gives, I shall only
briefly suggest, That it is evident from the foregoing scriptural Account, That
the way of praising God among the Dissenters, is exactly suited to the precepts
and examples of the New Testament relating to this religious duty. For they
praise God both.

1. By solemn Thanksgivings, and those suited to that glorious Revelation of
the Gospel, and the peculiar Subjects of Praise it furnishes us with, not
excluding what the Providence of God toward his Church or toward our selves
does suggest as matter of our grateful acknowledgments.

And these are so stated a Part of our Worship that the Directory requires the
Minister either in his Prayer before, or that after Sermon, to offer such
Thanksgivings, and accordingly suggests these Heads of 'em, admirably agreeable
to the strain of the Gospel.

He is to give thanks, for the great Love of God in sending his Son Jesus
Christ to us, For the Communication of his H. Spirit, for the light and liberty
of the glorious Gospel, and the rich and heavenly Blessings revealed therein,
as namely Election, Vocation, Adoption, Justification, Sanctification, and hope
of Glory; For the admirable goodness of God in freeing the Land from
Antichristian Darkness and Tyrany, and for all other National Deliverances etc.
and for many temporal Blessings.

2. By singing of Psalms, Hymns and spiritual Songs in which duty they consult
the Peoples edification by putting such Meter versions of the Psalms of David
into their hands, as adapt 'em for this use of 'em which the Scripture enjoins.
And I am sure those in use among 'em, as the Scots, Barton's or Patrick's
versions are incomparably better then that obsolete one which is still retained
in the Parish-Churches, tho for what reason is hard to imagine, unless it be
from a spleen against Reformation, of which some think the least step very
dangerous.

One would think then our manner of Praising God were unexceptionable. But his
Lp. it seems has very different apprehensions of this matter, of which he gives
us this Summary and very strange Account.

The Case then between our Church and you in this point, I think impartially
stands thus. Our Church Praises God every Day with 5 or 6 Psalms, besides other
Hymns of his own Appointment, and in his own Words and Method, and yet is
deserted and condemned by you in this very point, as teaching for Doctrines the
Commandments of men; Whereas you who only Praise him in a piece of a Psalm of a
few verses, and in a method of your own finding out, persuade your selves that
you keep the Ordinances of God pure and unmixed from human Invention.

And this his Lp. Recommends to the serious consideration of Dissenters, as
they will herein expect to bear the Trial of God's Judgment in this matter, p.
24.

Answer: I must confess my self amazed to read these words, and am willing
rather to impute 'em to his forgetfulness and inconsideration, then to arraign
his judgment or sincerity. But he is so far from having sum'd up this matter
with the impartiality he pretends to, that he has been so unfortunate as scarce
to have said one true word in his Representation on either side. As will appear
upon a particular Examination.

Our Church (says he) praises God every Day with 5 or 6 Psalms, besides other
Hymns, of his own Appointment, and in his own words and method.

What does his Lp. mean? Has God indeed appointed the Psalms of David to be the
stated Forms of Thanksgiving in the Christian Church, as Thanksgivings are
distinguished, from Psalms, Hymns and spiritual Songs, (as I have shown him they
plainly are)? He is so far from having proved any such thing, that since his
Lp. has learnt us the way of challenging, I must use the freedom of demanding
his Proof of it; For I take it to be a rash Assertion, and of dangerous
consequence. I have shown him already that the New Testament recommends no
other use of the Psalms of David in our public Praises except singing 'em; Nor
indeed are they expressly mentioned at all, tho we suppose 'em intended in 5
Ephesians. and 3. Col. But when the Ap. Paul so often commands us to to give thanks
for all men, In all things to give Thanks, to join Thanksgiving with all our
Prayers, he never recommends the Psalms of David as Forms of such
Thanksgivings. And no wonder, For besides that we have frequent particular
Occasions of public Thanksgiving, which there is nothing in the Psalms adapted
to, even the Psalms themselves do not contain the principal matters of
Christian Thanksgivings; For they make no express mention of the infinite love
of God the Father of our Ld. J. Christ in sending his own Son, as our great
Prophet, to reveal his will to us, and dye for us as our Attoning Sacrifice,
that he might redeem us by his precious blood; in raising him from the dead;
exalting him to such glory and dignity as the Head of his Church, and Head over
all things to it; and in appointing him the Author of Eternal Salvation to all
that believe and obey him. Nor do they so clearly mention these great and
precious promises made to us through this Mediator of a better Covenant,
especially those that relate to our adoption, and to the heavenly glory. And
yet these and the like instances of the matchless love of God discovered to us
in J. Christ (that glorious mirror of divine love) are so proper matter for
our express grateful acknowledgments, that they should make up the principal
part of our public Thanksgivings, as they do in all those solemn ones recorded
for our imitation in the New Testament; And indeed without 'em, this part of
Worship in a Christian Church would be most grossly defective and unsuitable to
the Gospel as the last and clearest Revelation of the will of God. I deny not
but we may in our Christian Thanksgivings, make use of the expressions of H.
David, when we celebrate God's works of Creation, or of his common or special
Providence, because so far they contain suitable matter of Praise for a
Christian as well as for a Jewish Assembly. But for celebrating the great work
of Redemption, which ought to be the chief work of our Praises on that day,
which is now called the Ld's day (as being consecrated to the glory of our
Redeemer, as Lord of the New Creation) it is evident the Psalms of David cannot
serve us, but we must derive the subject of those Praises entirely from the New
Testament. And therefore to suppose, as the Bp. here dos, that the Psalms of
David are to be the chief stated part of our Christian Praises, is no better
than to reduce the Christian to the imperfection of the Jewish Church. And this
is so plain, that as I observed before, when the Ap. recommends the singing the
Psalms of David, yet he joins Hymns and Spiritual Songs with 'em, which no
doubt were to run in a strain more suited to the Evangelical dispensation. I
confess the Bp. has found out a wonderful knack of turning the Psalms of David
into Christian Hymns, by adding the Gloria Patri to 'em, as if that Doxology
altered the matters of Praises contained in 'em.

So when he says, Our Church praises God with 5 or 6 Psalms and other Hymns of
his own Appointment, Why dos he call the Thanksgiving of Zacharias, the Virgin
Mary, and Simeon, Hymns, which the Scripture calls not so? And why dos he take
it for granted instead of proving it, that God has appointed what they spoke on
that occasion for stated forms of Thanksgivings in all Christian Assemblies,
when there is so much in 'em suited to the particular case of those persons,
that tho they are useful for our instruction, yet they are not calculated for
forms of thanksgivings to us. If we must choose forms out of the Scripture, the
Apostolical ones I produced under the head of Thanksgivings, will far more
exactly suit us.

Again, when he says, Our Church praises God with 5 or 6 Psalms, etc. in his
own words and method. Why dos he groundlesly imagine the words of the
Prose-translation of the Psalms to be more the words of God than the words of a
Metre-translation, that do as truly express the sense of the Original? Nay, why
dos he pretend that they praise God by Psalms in his own method, when they have
so plainly deviated from his method in the following Instances. As,

1. In the Cathedrals where the Psalm is sung by the Quire, It Is none of God's
method that the greater part of the people should be excluded from joining in
his Praises through their incapacity to sing 'em in Prose. For (besides the
probable Arguments alleged before to prove that the Psalms were composed and
sung in meter by the Jews) this is plainly disagreeable to the Ap's Rule, that
all things should be done to Edification.

2. In the Parish-Churches when the Psalms are only said, not sung, they are so
far from using God's method, that their practice has neither Scripture-precept
nor pattern, but is one of the Bp's human Inventions. Nay, it is disagreeable to
the precepts of the New Testament, which enjoin the singing of Psalms in our
praises; and tho his Lp. pretends a dispensation for saying 'em, I have shown
him the invalidity of his proofs for it, so that we have only his bare word for
it.

3. The method of Responses in the Parish-Churches, as applied by them to all
Psalms, even those wherein there is no variety of matter, nor different persons
introduced as speaking in 'em, is unscriptural, and generally scarce agreeable
to common reason, or to the rule of decency and order, that where the sense is
continued through several verses, it should be interrupted and broken, by being
tosst between the Minister and People, just as in the Litany, the Minister and
People make up the Prayer between 'em. So that this is another of the Bp's sort
of human Inventions.

The Bp. adds, Our Church praises God with 5 etc. and yet is deserted by you in
this very point, as teaching for doctrines the Com-Commandments of men.

Answ. If he means that some weak people may allege such reasons for their
deserting the Established Church, because they think these unscriptural
practices I have last mentioned, such superstitious commands of men as our
Savior speaks of, 7 Mat. 7. It Is indeed possible it may be true; for who can
be responsible for all that injudicious people say? But I know none of the
Non-conf. Writers that have condemned 'em as unlawful, or applied that Text to
prove 'em so. But I must tell his Lp, That if any should pass this harsh
censure on 'em, he is the only person I know of, that has furnished 'em with an
Argument ad Hominem, which I know not how he can Answer. For what if they
should reason thus, That way of Worship is displeasing to God, which is neither
expressly contained in, nor warranted by the Examples of H. Men in Scripture,
being one of the commandments of Men condemned by our Savior, 7 Mark 7. but
the way of Praising God with Psalms and Hymns without singing 'em and of using
Responses in all Psalms, is neither expr^sly contained in the H. Scriptures,
nor warranted by the Examples of H. Men therein, and yet it is the general
Practice of all the Parish-Churches E -- The first Proposition is entirely his
own; The second I have proved in these Remarks, and showed that his Instances
to the contrary signify nothing to his purpose, let himself therefore look to
the Conclusion.

And as he has so palpably misrepresented matters on his own side, so he has
done it much more foully on the Dissenters. Concerning whose practice his words
are.

Whereas you who only Praise him in a piece of a Psalm of a few verses, and in
a method of your own finding out, persuade your selves that you keep the
ordinances of God pure and unmixed from human Inv^ntion.

Answer. I desire his Lp. when he is pleased to examine these matters over
again to give us some reason why he so confidently tells us, that the
Dissenters only praise God in a piece of a Psalm. Does he not know that public
Thanksgivings without vocal melody, are a Scriptural way of praising God, and
most expressly enjoined for that end, as a stated part of the Worship of
Christian Assemblys, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. and mentioned as their constant Practice, 1
Cor. 14 16? And dos he not know that such solemn Thanksgivings are a stated
part of the Worship of Dissenters? He cannot pretend Ignorance of this, when he
has so diligently Read the Directory, out of which I have quoted him, the heads
of such Thanksgivings; and if he compare 'em with the patterns of Apostolical
Thanksgivings I mentioned before, he will find they are exactly drawn after their
excellent Copy. Nor could he be Ignorant that the Directory enjoins such
Thanksgivings to be constantly joined with the Prayer before, or after Sermon,
(as the New Testament also directs us to offer 'em up together) unless he read
it with so partial an eye, as to overlook its excellencys, and only spy its
defects. And I must add, that the practice of Dissenters in this part of
public Worship to the utmost of my observation, is very conformable to this
Rule of the Directory. So that his Lp. is obliged to do us right, by rectifying
this palpable mistake concerning this part of our Worship, and would do well to
understand our Worship better before he undertake to represent it with so
confident pretenses to impartiality.

I would here only subjoyn, That such solemn Thanksgivings as these, are
undoubtedly of God's appointment. For if he pretend, that they are not offered
in any words that God has immediately dictated (as he tells us, their Church
praises him in his own words). I answer, That cannot be justly imputed to us as
a fault, unless God had been pleased to dictate such Forms of Thanksgiving to
us; which if he can show us, he will make the happiest discovery that ever man
yet did, and such a one as will soon end all our Debates about this matter. But
I am afraid he must bring a new Bible for that purpose; for I can find no such
in that we have. And indeed if God had provided such Forms of Thanksgiving for
the Christian Church, What need were there of any human Liturgy for this
ordinary part of our Worship? What need those few Collects of Thanksgiving (and
indeed too few, and too defective) which occur in the Common Prayer Book? Or
how could any on this supposition excuse their Arrogance in adding to the Forms
God has already prescribed, or annexing those that are of human Composure to
those that are of divine? But I hope he will pretend no more to produce any such.
For as to the Psalms, I have showed him before that they were never intended
for such Forms of Thanksgiving to the Christian Church; whose Praises, if
confined to the matter of 'em, would be extremely defective, and unanswerable
to the Christian Institution, which so far transcends the Mosaical Economy.

For what his Lp. says of the Dissenters praising God only in a piece of a
Psalm of a few verses, and in a method of their own finding out, I shall only
add to what I have already suggested, the following Remarks.

1. That I think the Dissenters sing as much, and usually much more of the
Psalms of David every Ld's-day, than they do in the Parish-Churches. In most
they sing 'em thrice, in some four times. Nor do I know of any obligation laid
upon us to sing a whole Psalm every time, especially the longer ones, and the
shorter they often sing whole.

2. That tho our method of singing 'em in meter require something of human
skill to adapt 'em for that use, yet it is no more than what those Scriptures
warrant, nay plainly oblige us to, that require our singing 'em jointly in
public Assemblys, and to do it in a way most conducive to Edific^tion.

His Lp. indeed tells us, That he takes it for granted, that he Apostles and
primitive Christians praised God in prose, and that meter and rhyme are, for
ought appears, of human Invention. But is it not strange that his Lp. should
confound those two ways of Praising God, which the New Testament so clearly
distinguishes? That they praised God with Thanksgivings in Prose, is
unquestionable; but that they praised God in prose Psalms, is, as I have shown
him, highly improbable. For as in some Psalms there is plain evidence of meter,
so we have great reason, from the testimony of Josephus to judge the same of
the rest. And therefore his conceit that the Spirit of God gave no gifts for
composing Psalms in verse, in opposition to the Heathens, who wrote their
Prophecys and Hymns in verse, is a mere invention of his own: For as there is
so clear proof that some of the Psalms were inspired in verse, and so great
probability the rest were, so many judicious Expositors do conclude the quite
contrary, from 1 Cor. 14.26. where Psalmestry seems to be intended as one of
those extraordinary gifts; And it is far more probable that the Spirit of God by
enjoining the singing of Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, did intend to
rescue so noble a thing as Poetry from its wretched abuse by the Heathen
Priests, that it might be consecrated to the service of God in his Temple, and
become an incentive and help to true Devotion. So that our way of using Psalms
is far more clearly of God's Appointment, because more conformable to his
particular direction for singing 'em, and to his general Rules of doing it to
Edification, than theirs wherein they differ from us, as when they are among
them only said not sung, or sung in prose, not in meter, and that only by the
lesser part of the Congregation.

So what upon the whole, I cannot see the least reason why the Dissenters
should in this point be afraid of the Judgment of God, to the Rules of whose
Gospel this part of their devotions is so exactly conformed; or why they should
be ashamed to appeal herein to the judgment of all unprejudiced men. Nay, I
hope they may venture to appeal to his Ep's own judgment, when he is at leisure
to review this matter, and correct his own unhappy mistakes about it.

I shall therefore conclude this Chapter with a few Remarks on some passages
that occur in his 2d and 3d Section; As,

1. I see no reason why his Lp. should think the force, vigor, and loftiness
of the Psalms any more lost in a meter than in prose-translation p. 19th.

It Is true indeed, the metre-translation of Hopkins and Sternhold is but ill
done, so is that prose-translation which the Common Prayer Book still uses. And
it seems an unreasonable humor to retain both, when there is both a prose and
metre-translation far more unexceptionable. The metre-version commonly called
the Scots, is far better than that used in the Parish-Churches. Barton's
exceeds that, and Mr. Patrick's (if he had not taken too great a liberty of
paraphrasing) excels both; and I doubt not, if a judicious person would
undertake the work, 'twere easily possible to have a metre-version that would
exceed the prose in all these advantages; And such a one would be of
extraordinary use to raise the devotion of the people in this part of divine
Worship.

2. The Bp. tells us, p. 21. that we have a command to translate the Psalms
which supposes into prose (because the Original is so) but none to turn 'em
into meter, etc. Now if, on the contrary, the Original was composed in meter
(as I have showed to be most probable) then, by his own Argument, the command
to translate 'em, supposes it must be done into meter, because the Original is
so. And therefore the Bp. has in that and the following page, not only
groundlesly supposed the true sense of David's Psalms, when turned into meter,
to be none of God's word, but has on that account unreasonably excluded 'em
from being any substantial part of God's Worship, and speaks slightly of 'em,
as if they were intended for little better than a pleasing diversion and
amusement. Now if he really believe what he says, I think he should in all
reason warn the People against their present Practice. For it is certain they do
by singing 'em in time of public Worship, intend 'em as a substantial part of
it, and will be surpised to find this use of 'em censured as an human
Invention; whereas if on the contrary the singing 'em in Meter be most
conformable to scriptural Precept and Pattern, and bare saying 'em dissonant
from both, the Bp. can never excuse himself on his Principles from thus
preferring one of his human Inventions to a Divine Institution.

As to the imperfect way of singing the Psalms by reading every line, it is
indeed a defect, but such as we must be forced to condescend to, unless we
could prevail with all our People to get Psalm Books and learn to Read, or to
commit 'em to memory.

3. I wonder why his Lp. should charge the Dissenters with asserting Responses,
in public Worship to be unlawful, p 23. If he alledg the idle talk of some
weak people to that purpose, is it Ingenuous in him to mention that as the
general Opinion of Dissenters? What if we should in Retaliation pick up all the
weak and foolish censures of those of his Communion and charge 'em on the
Conformists in general? would he take this well? If not, why dos he forget our
Saviors Rule, not to do others what he would not they should do to him, 6 Luke
31. But as it is sufficient to justify our disuse of Responses that we have
neither Precept nor Example for their being used in a Christian Church, so he
has the least reason to blame any weak Dissenters for censuring 'em as
unlawful, since he has put the most dangerous Argument to Prove 'em so into
their mouths, and if I did not know his Principle to be erroneous, I should
join with 'em in that censure.

As to Church-Musick, I shall only add, That what is commonly used in the
Cathedrals, seems at least to be very suspicious, and hardly consistent with
the Rules of the Ap. 1 Cor. 14 11, 15, 26. which I mentioned before; and this
sort of Music has indeed been severely censured by many Protestant Divines at
home and abroad, nay by many Papists themselves, who confess it to be unknown
in the Church in its purest Ages, and but a late invention, which those that
trace it the farthest, referr no higher than Pope Vitalian's time about the
year 690, but others make it of a much later date; Aventinus, and Anoimus in
their Histories mention Organs as a Rarity never seen in France or Germany
before the 7th. Century; Nor were they in general use in Aquiuas Aq. Sec. 2dae
Q. 91. Art. 2. ad. 4.
his time, as Cajetan observes upon his so freely declaring his judgment
against 'em. Even Erasmus himself (who, tho he favored the Reformation, yet
was cautious and slow enough in his advances toward it) could not forbear to
complain of this in the Romish Church as an abuse, which he thought needed to
be reformed, as both unsuitable to the gravity and solemnity of Christian
Worship, and needlessly expensive, by introducing a crew of chargeable creatures
into the Church, to no good purpose, or rather to an ill one. His words on 1
Cor. 14. are these, Operosam quandam and theatricam Musicam in sacras aedes
induximus, tumultuosum diversarum vocum garritum, qualem non opinor in
Graecorum aut Romanorum Theatris unquam auditum fuisse. In hunc usum magnis
salariis aluntur puerorum greges, quorum aetas in perdiscendis hujusmodi
gannitibus consumitur. Tantis sumptibus oneratur Ecclesia ob rem pestiferam,
etc. We have brought a cumbersome and theatrical Music into our Churches, a
confused noise of many voices, such as I think was never heard in the Greek or
Roman Theaters. For which purpose whole Troops of Boys are maintained at great
charge, whose time is wasted in learning this Gabbling. Such expense is the
Church burdened with for a thing that is but mischievous, etc. I would
therefore advise his Lp. to be more cautious of censuring their Opinion, (who
make such Music in the Worship of God unlawful) as against nature and
Scripture, and on that account a dangerous superstition and encroachment on
Christian liberty. For as to the Scripture, it has certainly no foundation
there in any precept or example that concerns us Christians; and sure he dos
not imagine that the light of Nature dictates such Music in the Worship of God,
for then he must make it more necessary than he himself pretends to do. And it
looks more like superstition, according to his own notion of it, to introduce
such Music into the Church without any scriptural ground; And he may be sure,
the Dissenters are not the more fond of it for being one of Pope Vitalian's
inventions, and retained among us in conformity to the practice of the Romish
Church. I confess if any use of Organs be allowable, it is that in the
Parish Church of directing the people into the Tune of the Psalms they sing,
and it is on that account chiefly that the Reverend Mr. Baxter thinks 'em lawful
and allowable. But as this very use of 'em is certainly destitute of any
scriptural precept or pattern obligatory to us Christians; so however others
may entertain a more charitable opinion of 'em, yet the Bp, if he will be
consistent with himself, must condemn 'em as a human Invention, and (to use his
Countreymen's phrase) must turn the Whistles out of the Kirk.

Remarks on the Second Chapter concerning Prayer.
AND here according to his Lp's method we must consider,

1. The Directions of the H. Scriptures in reference to this part Religious
Worship, Of which it will be necessary to give a fuller and more exact account
than his Lp. has done, and to show how far I agree with, or dissent from that
he has given. And here I shall trace his steps, and consider what occurs to
this purpose in the Old Testament and the New.

First, for the Old Testament.

I. I grant him that in some particular cases God did recommend to the Jews a
Form of Words in their Addresses to him.

Such a Form that Confession he mentions seems to be, which the people were to
make when they entered into the Land of Canaan, upon their offering the
first fruits, 26 Deuteronomy. 3.5. Such a Form also, was the Prayer mentioned in the
same Chapter, v. 13, 14, 15. which was to be presented by him that gave the
third years tyths. And by the way it may be observed, that neither of these
Forms related to the public Worship celebrated on their weekly Sabbath. Such a
Form of Blessing I doubt not that mentioned, 6 Numb. 23. was. And it is highly
probable that Form of words was repeated in the several Removes of the Ark, 10
Numb. 35.

But then I must add, that for the other passages he alleges as Instances of
Forms, They are either only directions as to the matter of Prayer, or no
Instances of Forms at all, but rather of free, or (as he calls 'em)
extempore-prayers.

Thus it is not reasonable to understand the words of Joel, 1 chapter 14. 2 chapter 17.
of any more than the Prophet's suggesting to 'em suitable matter of Complaint
and Supplication; For sure he cannot imagine that the Prophet intended they
should repeat only those few words when they were to sanctify a Fast, and call
a solemn Assembly. If indeed the Prophet had made mention of a Liturgy they had
already, and had charged 'em to add these words as a new Form to it, These
instances had been something to the purpose; but since there is not the least
intimation of any such thing, we can no more conclude these words to be
intended for a stated Form, than those words formed into Petitions which
Ministers often in their Sermons suggest to the people when they instruct 'em
in the duty of Prayer; And I might on the same grounds say, That all the
patterns of Prayer in the Directory are prescribed Forms. The same may be said
as to the passage quoted from 14 Hos. 2. On which place Dr. Comber (from whom
our Author seems to have transcribed the greatest part of this Section) very
boldly tells us, Orig. and Use of Lit. p. 3d.
but on no other warrant then his own word, that God promised to heal their
backslidings on their using that Form. It is enough to make us more suspicious
of Forms when men turn 'em into Charms by attributing so great Effects to the
use of 'em. But it is strange that his Lp. should imagine those words mentioned
in that large Prayer of Solomon, 1 Kings 8.47. (We have sinned, we have done
perversely, we have committed wickedness) to be a Form of Confession prescribed
to the Jews, merely because the same words are repeated, in a very large Psalm
mixed of Confession and Thanksgiving, viz. 106 Ps. 6. and in another different
Confession of Daniel's 9 chapter 5? When not only, are these very words repeated in
both those places with different additions to 'em, but those 2 larger
Confessions are in quite different words. And the making use of these words of
Solomon in each of 'em, is so far from proving a prescribed Form, that by the
same Argument he may call all extempore-prayers Forms, because there are
several Confessions and Petitions in 'em put up in scriptural Expressions. And
yet his Lp. lays so great stress on this Instance, as to tell us with admirable
confidence, That it appears from hence that they were not left arbitrarily to
choice and discretion, tho other words might be joined with 'em when there was
occasion to enlarge or vary the Form.

Answ. What did not the Penman of the 106 Ps. think himself left to his
choice, when he enlarges Solomon's Confession that makes up but one verse into
a Psalm that consists of 48 verse? And did not Daniel think himself left to his
own choice, when tho this large Confession in the 106 Ps. was prepared to his
hands, yet he uses another of his own quite different from this, because more
suitable to the sense he had of the present condition of the Jewish Church? So
that these 2 Confessions, instead of being instances of Prayer by a prescribed
Form, are plain instances of occasional and free, (or, as he calls it,
Extempore)-Prayer.

The same may be applied to those words, 106 Ps. 47. quoted from 1 Chronicles.
16.35. For sure the use of a few words recorded in one Psalm, in the composure
of another, when all the rest of the Psalm in each is quite different, is but a
very lame proof of a prescribed Form, and furnishes us rather with a stronger
Argument to the contrary.

So that the Bp. had better have confined himself to Dr. Comber's proofs, than
add so impertinent ones as these, which make rather against him; And I wonder
he omitted that very convincing one for the Antiquity of Liturgys, which the
foresaid Dr. draws from the 4 Genesis 26. Then men began to call upon the name of
the Lord.

All then that can be inferred from what is granted him, is, That God did in
some few cases prescribe to the Jews a Form of words, and when he did so, they
were obliged to use it. So that this mode of Praying by a set Form of words,
is not in general unlawful. And if this Concession will do his Lp. any service,
he is welcome to it.

II. I see not the least Evidence in the Old Testament of a stinted Liturgy
prescribed by God to the Jewish Church, even as to their ordinary public
Prayers.

And if such a Liturgy be that which the Bp. intends to assert when he tells
us, p. 25. That the Scriptures direct us to offer up our Prayers in a set and
prepared Form of words, I must desire his Lp. to bring us better proof of it,
than what he has alleged from p. 25. to p. 29. and I have here examined. To
which he adds what I would now farther consider, That the whole Book of Psalms
is a collection of Prayers of all sorts. And there are few of 'em, but what are
most excellent Forms of Prayer, expressed in such pathetick, significant and
moving words, that we have great reason to thank God for furnishing us with
'em, and which we can never hope to equal by any of our own invention, such as
are the 4, 5, etc. On this Account they were used by the Jews as the constant
service and Liturgy performed in their Temple, as we may gather from what I
formerly quoted.

Answ. Why he should call the whole Book of Psalms a collection of Prayers of
all sorts, when the far greatest part of 'em are undoubtedly Praises, as
distinguished from Prayers, I know not. That some Psalms consist much of
Petitions, and consequently may be called Prayers, I doubt not. But then he
should have considered that these Prayers are composed in the strain of Songs,
and most probably in meter, and were designed to be sung, as appears concerning
those he mentions, viz. the 4th, 5th, 6th, 7the 9th, 10th, 12th; all of which
(except the 10th that has no Title) are directed to the chief Musician, or
expressly asserted to be sung. Now it is certain such Psalms of Prayer as are
intended to be publicly sung, must be set forms; But there is no necessity
that other ordinary Prayers should be such set forms that were never composed
in that manner, nor designed for that use. And therefore it is strange that he
should think the quoting the 2 Chronicles. 29. v. 30. a suffi^^ent or of, that these
Psalm-prayers were used by the Jews as a constant Service and Liturgy performed
in their Temple, if by Liturgy he means such prose-prayers as our Liturgy
consists of, and about which we are now only concerned to enquire. For that
Text speaks not one word of Prayers at all, but only of Praises, and if it had
mentioned or included Prayers, it could refer to no other Prayers but such as
were sung, which we all agree must be set forms. And these Psalm prayers the
Bp. knows the D ssenters he opposes never scrupled. For they are useful to be
sung for Instruction by those, who cannot offer 'em up as properly a prayer,
because their condition and circumstances are no way like the Psalmist's, when
he composed 'em. But the Question is concerning prayers in the proper sense,
such as are not songs, but composed in prose, and in the same style as our
other ordinary requests are; for such are the prayers of the English Liturgy,
and it is for such a Liturgy the Bp. is obliged to produce us some precept or
pattern in the H. Scriptures And these Instances of psalm-prayers signify
nothing to this purpose. Nor indeed do we among all the instances of public
prayers recorded after the time of the Psalms being penned find one of these
psalm-prayers used; But on the contrary, those that do occur are plainly free
and conceived prayers, such as the present occasions of presenting 'em did draw
from the devout minds of the pious supplicants. Of which I shall give some
instances under the next head. I shall only add, That if the Bishop think these
psalm prayers of H. David better for our use than any of human composu e, why
dos he not lay aside all the Collects of the Common prayer book that are
certainly of human Invention, and confine himself to the Psalter as his only
Liturgy for prayer as well as praise? What can excuse his using worse, when he
has better? Or rather why should he imagine 'em intended for forms of
prose-prayer to us at all, any farther than David's devout expressions may be
used so far as they suit our case, when the New Testament so largely instructs
us to offer our prayers in so different a manner from that practiced in the
Old, particularly with a more express reference to J. C rist as our great
Mediator of Intercession, nay when the Gospel more clearly furnishes us with
suitable matter of Prayer, by that ^uller Revelation it brings of the divine
Will to us.

III. God was so far from confining the Jews to any stinted Liturgy, that most
of the prayers, both private and public recorded in the Old Testament, are
conceived or free prayers, without any set or prescribed Forms.

Such were most of the private Prayers mentioned in the sacred History. What
prescribed form had Abraham's Servant, when he so heartily prays, (24 Genesis 12,
13) for success in the errand on which his Master had sent him, to fetch a Wife
for his Son Isaac, unless it had been composed for him by a spirit of prophecy?
Abraham's prayer, 20 Genesis 17. was doubtless occasional and extempore. So was
Jacob's for deliverance from his Brother ^sau, 32 Genesis 9 So are many of Moses
on particular occasions of God's displeasure against the people, 32 Exodus 11,
12. etc. 31, 32, etc. No doubt Hannah's Prayer for Children was of this sort,
and that too after she had obtained what she desired, 1 Samuel 1.10. 2 Samuel 1,
etc. Such was Hezekiah's when visited with sickness, 38 Is. 3. And such was
Nehemiah's, mentioned 1 chapter 4, 5, 6, etc. It were endless to produce all the
particular instances of this kind; And it is plain these holy men would have
been at a sad loss how to address themselves to God on such occasions, if they
could not have prayed without a Book, or had been tied to set forms. But they
needed no Prompter, when their necessities suggested arguments and expressions,
and out of the abundance of the heart their mouths spoke.

For Public Prayers there are no less clear Instances of such as were
conceived or free, even after the Psalms of David were penned, which the Bp.
imagines to have been the Jewish Liturgy. Such was that Excellent Prayer of
Solomon's upon the Dedication of the Temple, 1 Kings 8.22. Such was that of Asa
when that vast Ethiopian Host came against him, 2 Chronicles. 14.11. such was that
of Jehosaphat on a like occasion, 2 Chronicles. 20.5. etc. That of Hezekiah in
reference to Rabshekah's blasphemous Threats was an Instance of either private
or public free Prayer, 36 Is. 15, 16. Of the same kind was Ezra's, 9 Ezra. 5,
6, 7. The Confession in Nehemiah 9 chapter 5, 6, 7. etc. is not taken from any
precedent Form, but wholly new. And yet it is evident that in most of these
cases those Holy Men might have made up Forms of Prayer for those occasions out
of H. Davids' words in some of the Psalm prayers, but they chose rather to
offer up such Prayers as the serious sense of their present case did suggest to
'em, and that made 'em ready suppliants to God for Relief, without the need of
seeking out a prescribed Form for their purpose.

Now as the Bp. may safely infer from God's having recommended a Form of words
in Prayer in reference to some cases, that prayer by a set Form is not in it
self unlawful, so I may much more infer from these more numerous Instances of
free prayers, That our prayers according to the Examples of these H. Men,
should be accommodated to our several particular occasions and necessities, and
therefore it is so far from being unlawful, to use conceived or free prayers
without any prescribed Form, that to tie up our selves to such set and
prescribed Forms will not ordinarily answer the frequent Calls which we have in
the Providence of God to this holy Duty, by such various Emergency's as no set
Forms can Exactly suit.

Nay whereas the Bp. can infer no more from his Instances then that when God
prescribes us a Form we should use it, and he approves our doing so, we may
from these Examples last produced with equal reason infer, that we may use free
prayer in those occasions, in which God has not prescribed us any such Forms;
and that he does approve this way of addressing our selves to him, with such
Prayers as the feeling of our own necessities and consideration of our
particular case dos prompt us to offer.

I shall only add, That if there be no Evidence of such a stinted Liturgy in
the Jewish we can much less expect any proof of one in the Christian Church,
because such a Liturgy if necessary at all, was much more so under the Old
Testament, when there was not such an abundant Effusion of the H. Spirit in his
Graces and Gifts as now under the New. Nay if the Jewish Church had no stinted
Liturgy prescribed by God, much less had any uninspired men any power given 'em
to prescribe one, and confine all public Administrations to Forms of their own
Composure. But this will lead me to consider the Directions.

Secondly, Of the New Testament.
And here I shall first consider those 2 things the Bp. insists on, and then
shall propose some farther account of the directions that occur in reference to
the mode of Praying in this part of the H. Scriptures.

I. I shall consider those 2 things the Bp. insists on in favor of Praying by
prescribed Forms,

1. I think it (says he) certain that our Savior and his Apostles prayed by a
Form, for they joined in the Worship of the Temple and Synagogues, which
consisted in Psalms, as I have already showed, and in some certain Forms of
Prayers added to 'em, and constantly used in their daily service, as we learn
from those that give an Account of the Jewish Worship at that time. Now our
Savior and his Apostles being frequently pr^sent at their service both in the
Temple and Synagogues, it is manifest they approved their manner of addressing
themselves to God by set Forms, p. 30. 31.

Answ. That our Savior and his Apostles prayed by a Form when they used the
psalm prayers, there is no doubt, and so do all those that sing 'em. That there
was a stinted Liturgy besides, or a collection of Forms of prose-prayer to
which the public Administrations were confined to the exclusion of occasional
free Prayer, the Bp. has no where proved; and the contrary is far more probable
from many instances of such free-prayer in the Old Testament, which I have
before alleged. Nay, should we, to oblige his Lp, grant him, that some forms
of prose-prayer were ordinarily used in the Jewish Worship (tho we must do it
on the uncertain credit of Rabbinical Writers, whose testimony is of little
value, and not on the testimony of the H. Scripture) yet I see not how the Bp.
can make any more of this, than that our Savior thought it not unlawful to
join in such public forms of prose-prayer, but it will by no means follow,
that he preferred such public forms before free-prayers, and designed by his
practice to recommend the former to the Christian Church to the exclusion of
the latter. (For as I shall show him anon, there are strong presumptions to the
contrary) And yet unless his Lp. could draw this Inference from our Savior's
and the Apostles practice, I see little service it can do him. Nay I fear, if
the Argument from our Savior's and his Apostles practice herein be urged so
far, it will prove much more than those intend who use it. For it will prove
that we ought in imitation of their example, to retain and adhere to that
Liturgy which these Gentlemen pretend the Jews had, (and which they tell us
they can yet produce the particular parts of), to whose forms of Prayer Dr.
Comber tells us, that our Savior added his, and was herein so afraid of
Innovation as to take every sentence out of the jewish Forms then in use Orig.
of Lis. p. 6.
; If so, why is not this jewish Liturgy still used by us? If we must have a
stinted Liturgy, such a one were most unexceptionable, as we are sure our
Savior approved by joining in? Why then should ordinary Pastors presume to
frame Liturgys of their own, and use that liberty in composing 'em, which our
Savior was too m^dest to allow himself? And why should they impose so many
forms on others, when our great Master imposed but one, and such a one as he
borrowed the very sentences of from the Forms then publicly used. So that
these Gentlemen should, if they will be consistent with themselves, plead for
laying aside our Liturgy, and using that old one which Dr. Lightfoot has so
happily retrieved for us out of the Jewish Rabbis. I would therefore advise
'em to use this Argument from the practice of the Jewish Church in our
Savior's time (about which we are at the best but very uncertain) with great
tenderness and caution, least they overdo with it, and least the jewish Liturgy
instead of under propping the Common Prayer Book, undermine and throw it down.

2. He tells us, p. 31. That our Savior has put this matter out of all dispute
with impartial men, by prescribing a Form to his Disciples, when they desired
him to teach them to pray as John did his Disciples. For we find his way of
teaching 'em was not by directing 'em to wait for the impulses of the Spirit
and immediate Inspiration from God, of what they were to offer up to him; We do
not find him saying, When ye pray speak what shall then come into your minds,
or what shall be given you in that hour, without taking thought about what they
should say, etc. But here is an express command of Christ to his Disciples to
use these words when they pray.

Answ. His Lp. has a very happy faculty of arguing matters of Dispute before he
state 'em, For indeed the stating 'em might chance to spoil all the force of
his Arguments; and therefore he generally thinks it more advisable to let that
alone. He tells us, Our Savior has put this matter out of all Dispute with
impartial Men by prescribing a Form to his Disciples. What matter of Dispute
dos his Lp. mean? Is it whether a form of Prayer be lawful? Or is it, whether
our Savior has prescribed a stinted Liturgy to the Christian Church in their
public Administrations, or whether he has commissioned Ordinary Pastors to
prescribe and impose such a Liturgy, and confine others to the use of it? Or
whether he in general enjoins us to pray only by a Form, or not ordinarily
without one? If he mean the first, (whether a Form of Prayer be lawful?)
That Is no matter of Dispute at all, between the Dissenters and the Established
Church, for as I shall show him anon, there is never a Meeting in which they do
not use one, and there are many in which this particular form of prayer is
constantly used. So that if this be all he would prove he may spare his labor,
tho perhaps his Arguments for this are not altogether so convincing and solid
as he imagines. If the Question be, (whether our Savior has prescribed a
stinted Liturgy to the Christian Church?) as one would think it should, What
signifies his prescribing this single form, to the proof of it, unless the Bp
thinks our Liturgy should consist only of that one prayer, or could produce
more forms prescribed by our Savior to make up a Liturgy; And if he could do
that, what will become of the Service Book, What have we to do with that human
Invention, when we have a Liturgy appointed and composed by our Savior
himself? If the Quest. be, (Whether our Savior has commissioned the ordinary
Pastors of the Church to prescribe and impose public Forms?) what dos all he
here alleges about this single form prescribed by Christ, signify to prove
any such thing, when he can produce no such commission, nor the least shadow of
it in all the New Testament, nay when the Rules of it about Prayer seem rather
inconsistent with any such Commission (as I shall show him anon)? If the Quest.
be, (Whether our Savior in general enjoins us to pray only by a form, or not
ordinarily without one?) what dos any thing his Lp. has alleged signify to
the right determination of this Question? If he design to prove that Christ by
prescribing this form, has enjoynd in general our Praying only by a set form
and never otherwise, (as one would think his following words would import, when
he tells us, That our Savior's teaching 'em was not by directing 'em to wait
for the impulses of the Spirit, and immediate Inspiration from God of what they
were to offer up to him; We do not find him saying, when ye pray, speak what
shall come into your minds, or what shall be given you in that hour without
taking thought about what they were to say), he knows well enough his Argument
is no way conclusive; For he himself owns that God has not forbidden all
extempore prayers, nay owns that some occasions require the use of 'em in
public, and that in such cases a man may depend on the assistance of God's
Spirit when he has not-time to reduce his desires into form before he offers
'em, p. 54, 55. He cannot therefore, without contradicting himself, pretend
that our Savior, by prescribing this form, intended to exclude all extempore
or free prayer. Nor is there any force in the Argument to prove that our
Savior intended to oblige us ordinarily to pray by a form, because he once
prescribed one as a comprehensive summary of our desires. For his general Rules
(as I shall observe anon) do far more directly favor and countenance free
prayer, than this one instance dos the use of forms, especially of forms
imposed by others, about which the main dispute lies. And what he has here
offered to confirm it, signifies nothing to the purpose; or if it did, would
prove too much. For our Savior may teach men the way of free prayer, without
directing 'em to wait for the Impulscs of the Spirit and immediate Inspiration
from God, since none pretend to such impulses and immediate inspiration as
necessary in order to it. He himself owns, that in cases of necessity we may
depend on the assistance of the Spirit to pray extempore, and yet he dos not, I
hope, mean we may expect such immediate inspiration. Nay, our Savior may
advise us to free prayer without telling us, We must speak what comes into our
minds, or shall be given us in that hour, without taking thought what we are to
say, For free prayer is so far from excluding serious premeditation, that no
man should use it, especially in public, without it, unless in cases of
absolute necessity. Nay, if this reason signified any thing, it would prove too
much, that we are never to pray extempore at all, because we have no ground
even in cases of necessity to expect such immediate Inspiration. And here I
would once for all, caution his Lp. against that common mistake he seems to run
into, as if we imagined the assistance of the H. Spirit in Prayer to lie in
immediately dictating our words to us, Whereas we no more expect that in Prayer
than in Preaching. For we suppose this Gift of Prayer to be a common gift. And
tho we have known many private Christians, whose natural parts in all other
things are but weak and low, endued by the Spirit of God with a considerable
measure of this Gift, as the fruit and reward of their diligence in this duty,
Yet we doubt not that many natural Endowments, as readiness of apprehension,
copiousness of fancy, tenderness of affection, fluency of expression may
contribute much to dispose a man for greater eminency in it; Nor do we think
the assistance of the H. Spirit in this duty alters that style or way of
expression that nature or custom has habituated men to. So that the H. Spirit
is no more accountable for the indecent expressions of good men in Prayer than
in Preaching, tho we may expect his help both in our endeavors to acquire
abilities and gifts for these duties, and in the exercise of 'em.

But before I dismiss what he has said in reference to this Prayer of our
Lord, I shall subjoyn the following Remarks thereon.

1. If it shou^^ b^ granted that our Savior gave this as a Form of Prayer to
his Disciples, and intended it for the perpetual use of his Church, yet no more
can be inferred from thence than our obligation to use that particular (...)
For if he had intended our ordinary use of other Forms, it is reas^nable to
suppose he would have prescribed 'em himself, or commissioned his Apostles to
do so, or instructed them to leave some orders with other ordinary Pastors to
have composed 'em.

2. Many learned men that do allow the Lord's Prayer to have been a prescribed
Form, do not think it designed for the perpetual use of the Church, but only
for a temporary Form.

To this purpose they observe that the three first Petitions [Hallowed be thy
Name, Thy Kingdom come, Thy Will be done, etc.] seem to be chiefly calculated,
both to the doctrine which Christ as well as John delivered concerning the
Kingdom of God being at hand, and to the expectation the pious Jews then
generally entertained of the Messiah's Kingdom being publicly set up in the
world; They observe farther, that in the Petition for forgiveness of sins,
There is not the least mention made of the sacrifice, the death, or blood of
Christ, in virtue whereof we must now sue for pardon; whereas our Savior after
his Resurrection and Ascension is every where proposed, as our High Priest,
Mediator, Intercessor and Advocate, of which there is no notice taken in this
Form. And hence they suppose that it is on this account that our Lord long after
the delivery of this Form tells his Disciples, 16 Joh. 24. Hitherto have ye
asked nothing in my Name, and therefore he requires 'em now to ask the Father
in his Name, and assures 'em he will grant their Petitions. And accordingly
they observe that the Doxologys mentioned in Scripture after our Savior's
Ascension, lead us directly and expressly to ascribe our Praises to God by
Christ, or in his Name, of which there is not the least hint in that used in
the Ld's-Prayer. Whence they conclude it to be chiefly suited to the state of
the Disciples of Christ, while under his personal Ministry on Earth, in which
the principal mysteries of the Gospel that depended on his Death, Resurrection
and Ascension were not yet so ^learly revealed. And the more some labor to
prove these Pe^itions taken out of some Jewish Forms, the more do they
streng^hen this Opinion, That this Form was no farther intended for our ^^se
than as a Pattern in respect of the things prayed for, but was ^ot so much as
to be a Pattern in respect of the manner of pray^ng. In which respect it is most
reasonable to suppose our manner ^f praying should greatly differ from that of
the Jews, particu^arly by being offered up in the name of Christ.

I do not give this opinion as my own, but propose it to his Lp's.
^onsideration, to allay that confidence wherewith he asserts so po^itively our
obligation to the constant use of the Lords Prayer; for which I do not see any
thing so Plausible and Probable produced ^y him, as the Authors of this Opinion
alledg in favor of it. For ^e tells us without any limitation that we are
particularly Command^d whenever we pray, to use this Prayer. For which
Assertion I can ^ee no show of Proof. Nor can I reconcile it to those many
Instan^es of Prayer recorded in the New Testament, in none of which do we Read
of this being used. Nay I do not think his Lp. or any Man else supposes himself
obliged to use the Lords Prayer always; ^e pray whenever we crave a Blessing on
our food, But dos his Lp. ^lways use the Lords Prayer on that occasion? So that
we must be cautious of stretching our Saviors words too far; For if we should
take 'em in their most strict sense, we should never offer up any other Prayer
but that at all.

3. The compilers of the Directory seem to give the most fair and just Account
of the Lords Prayer, viz. That it was chiefly designed as a perfect Pattern,
but may also be conveniently used as a Form of Prayer.

That it is a perfect Pattern his Lp-will not deny, and the admirable method and
order as well as the comprehensiveness of it is Petitions show it be so as to
the matter of Prayer. And the words of our Lord seem to recommend it also as a
fit Compendium and Summary of our Desires. Tho that it was so strictly intended
for a Form as that all alteration of the words in it should be so dangerous as
the Bp. suggests, I do not see. And it is strange he should no better ward off
the common objection against this conceit, viz. That the words of the Prayer
are not the same in the 2 Evangelists. For tho we should allow him that
trespasses and debts are the same in the Syriack, yet sure he cannot be
ignorant that not only are the words different in the 4th. Petition, but what
is more material, the Doxology is left out in the Evangelist Luke, where our
Savior's words seem more express for the use of this Prayer. Nay it is pleasant
that his Lp. should, to aggravate the danger of altering the words, compare it
to the danger of altering those of our Creed, p. 35. As if he did not know,
that the words of it have been frequently altered, that no writer in the 3
first Centuries has the Creed (called the Apostle's) in the same words that we
have now, and that the Forms we meet with in Ignatius, Irenaeus, Tertullian,
Origin, Cyprian, and Gregory Neocaesar are all in different words, nay in some
Forms several Articles are inserted that are not in others, Nay in the Creed as
we have it, no doubt the Article of Christ's descending into Hell should be
altered as to the words of it, because we do not commonly take Hell for the
invisible state which (...) was designed to express. I confess it is something
more formidable when he compares the danger of altering the words in the
Lord's-Prayer to that of changing the word given by the General in a Battle, p.
35. Tho where the wit or sense of the comparison lies, I cannot imagine, unless
his Lp. thinks the bare words of that Prayer to be as frightful to the Infernal
Fiends as some crafty Priests have pretended the Name or Psalter of the Virgin
Mary is, but apprehends those our spiritual enemies will resume their courage
if we make the least change in 'em.

I shall only add here, That his Lp. has not produced any other instance of a
prescribed Form of Prayer in the New Testament besides this; He dos indeed, p.
50. tell us, That Christ in his Agony repeated a verse of the 22d Psalm, and as
some believe (says he) the whole Psalm, by which Act he recommends to us Forms
of Prayer with his dying breath, as the most proper means of expressing our
condition to God, and as most suitable to the divine Majesty. To which I shall
only return this brief Answer, That his Lp. would have done well, first to have
told us, what grounds any have to believe that our Savior repeated the whole
Psalm, and if he did not, how the repeating one verse of it so applicable to
his present case, should be a proof of his using a form of Prayer at all, and
much more how it should prove his recommending such forms to us with his dying
breath, etc. As if a man might not in a free prayer, choose out and apply some
scriptural expressions to his own case. Indeed the words he quotes are not
properly a Prayer at all, and if they were, look altogether as like an instance
of occasional free-prayer, so that if I would argue at this loose rate, I might
with as good reason pretend that our Lord recommended extempore-prayers with
his dying breath, etc.

II. The Bp. has not produced the least evidence of Christ's enjoining or
recommending to Christian Churches the use of stinted Liturgys even as to the
ordinary public Prayers which they are to offer up.

So that tho the same matters of Prayer constantly occur in that duty when
publicly offered especially in the celebration of Baptism and the Ld's-Supper,
yet neither dos our Savior nor his Apostles prescribe any stated forms for
'em. Whereas if our Lord had judged 'em so necessary, or so highly useful as
some pretend, Nothing could have been more conducive to have fixed the use of
'em, and prevented all corruptions in 'em, as well as scruple about 'em, than
to have furnished the Church with a Divinely inspired Liturgy. Nay, what is more
considerable, Christ and his Apostles content themselves with giving us general
commands to pray, and with all prayer and suppli^ation for all men, etc. but
never gave the least order to the Pastors of the Church to compose forms of
Prayer for public Worship, in those Churches that were planted and settled
under the care of ordinary Teachers, who had not the same immediate Inspiration
as the Apostles themselves. Dos not this plainly imply that they took not such
an imposed Liturgy to be necessary to the Churches Edification and Peace? but
rather supposed that the ordinary occasions of public Prayer were too various
and different to be confined to such set and prescribed forms? If it be
pretended, there was no need of their prescribing such Forms when the Jewish
Liturgy was still extant and used, I answer, That (not to repeat what has been
objected against the pretensions of a stinted Liturgy among the Jews). I hope
none can imagine that a Jewish Liturgy could be suitable to the Christian
Economy after our Savior's Ascension, in the Christian Churches that were
planted by the Apostles. So that if a Liturgy in general were necessary to the
Christian Church, there was the greater reason why they should have substituted
one in the room of the Jewish in the Churches they settled; Since then they no
way so much as recommend such a Liturgy, but left even ordinary Pastors to the
free exercise of their own abilities, in Prayer as well as in other parts of
their public ministrations, We may with great probability infer that they
judged it more conducive to Edification that the Pastors of Churches should use
those ordinary gifts wherewith they were furnished for the performance of this
duty without being tied up to any sett-forms; And accordingly those that have
been most anxiously concerned to find out fixed and stinted Liturgys in the 3
first and purest Ages of Christianity, have but lost their labor, and have but
trifled with us in their most confident pretenses to discover such Liturgys. As
appears by Mr. Clerkson's Discourse of Liturgys, and Mr. S B's Examination of
Dr. Comber's Answer in his Scholastical History of the use of Liturgys.

III. It Is evident, That the general Rules of Scripture cannot be duly observed
by those that pray no otherwise than by a set Form of Words.

They command us to pray with all Prayer and Supplication, and for all men, In
every thing to make known our Request to God, 6 Ephesians. 18. -- 4 Col. 6. -- 1 Timothy
2.1, etc.

Now it is evident there is a vast variety of occasions and emergencys in which
we should apply our selves to God by Prayer, which it cannot be expected any
prescribed Forms should exactly suit. This is most obvious in our
Closet-prayers. There is scarce any one day in which we have not some occasion
to vary our Requests. There are some particular failings we have occasion
particularly to confess, renounce, and implore divine Aid against; Or there are
some particular dutys which we need to beg direction and assistance for the
discharge of. So that our own meditation every day must suggest to us the most
proper matter of our addresses to God, and many requests suitable to our
particular case must be excluded, if we confine our devotions to the set forms
of others. So that such as are at present forced through their Ignorance, and
inability to confine themselves to such Forms, are like lame People that cannot
go without the help of Crutches; And for such so to sit down and satisfy
themselves with their Book-prayer and prescribed Forms, as to go no farther,
would be (to use the significant expressions of the excellent Bishop Wilkins)
as if a Man who had once need of crutches should always afterward make use of
'em, and so necessitate himself to a continual Impotency. Nay the Bp. himself
could not but own that the use of conceived prayers is founded on that general
Rule of Scripture, which Commands us to ask of God what we lack, p 56. But then
he groundlesly adds the following words which it is most proper I should
consider in this place. viz. of this Rule our own Prudence makes the
Application in such extemporary occasions, but when we set up this human
Application of this general Rule in opposition to that particular manner of
asking Commanded by God, and Practiced by H. Men, which is by set and
premeditated Forms, in the ordinary Worship of God, and turn God's way out of
his worship to make room for one of our own, This is to displace a particular
Command of God on pretense of guiding our selves by a general one; In which we
are not only more liable to mistakes, but we fail of paying due respect to
God's directions. For general Commands only take place in such Cases where God
has not laid down a Particular Rule.

Answ. His Lp. here very Prudently takes for granted what he has no where
Proved, that God has given a particular Command to the Christian Church to Pray
in all ordinary cases by set and premeditated Forms. But has he brought any
other Proof of this then that Christ once Recommended one comprehensive Pattern
or Form? And dos he think this amounts to a Command that we should in all
ordinary cases use Forms, when there is not one tittle to that purpose in the
H. Scriptures and Particularly in the New Testament; when there are no such
Forms given us by God, nor the least Direction who should compose 'em for us?
If we should allow him that the Lords Prayer is prescribed as a Form that must
be constantly used in Private and Public Worship (which he neither has, nor
indeed can any man Prove) yet all that he could infer thence, were, That we
have a particular Command to use that Form; but it will by no means follow,
that we have any such particular Command to use other human prescribed Forms in
all our ordinary Prayers. So that to use free prayer in our ordinary Public
Worship dos not displace any particular command, nor turn God's way out of his
Worship to make room for our own. For God has undoubtedly by this general
precept obliged us to free-prayer, and has no way confined the use of it to
extraordinary cases only, having no way recommended any set form to
Christians, unless we take this comprehensive pattern of Christ's to be One, and
if we do, that is the only one he has enjoined. So that I may more justly hence
infer, That those turn God's way out of his Worship, who confine men in their
public Administrations to such human sett-forms as God has no where enjoined
the use of, by either general or particular precept, and are indeed in the Bp's
sense only human Inventions; whereas those more exactly observe his directions,
who use the only form which there is any appearance of his having prescribed to
us Christians, but as to all other Prayers, use the freedom which God allows us
when he enjoins no other Forms but this.

IV. It seems highly agreeable to the Wisdom of God, that the mode of praying
with or without a form should be left so far undetermined as to confine us to
neither way by any particular precept.

And therefore he has only given us general rules relating to this duty, and
one comprehensive either Pattern or Form, but has left us in the particular
exercises of this duty to the determination of Christian Prudence, whether we
shall use a sett-form or not. For there is no doubt, but that the ignorance and
weakness of some may need such crutches, as sett-forms, especially when they
pray with others; and therefore such helps are allowed 'em. And yet more grown
and improved Christians should by their advancement in divine knowledge, by
their frequent consideration of their own necessities, and by frequent exercise
in this duty, endeavor to attain those Gifts that may set 'em above the need
of those helps, and enable 'em to express their own sentiments and desires in
Prayer to God on all emergent occasions, without running to other men's books
and composures for that end. Especially Ministers should be furnished with such
a Gift. And therefore God has not thought fit to hinder the exercise of, and
improvement in such an excellent Gift, by prescribing to either People or
Ministers a stinted Liturgy even in reference to the most ordinary occasions of
Prayer.

V. For what his Lp. adds about the peoples joining with the Minister in
repeating of public Prayer, p. 36, 37, 38, etc. I shall only subjoyn,

1. That it is not denied that the people expressed their joining in the public
Prayers in Christian Assemblys by adding their Amen to 'em, as appears from 1
Cor. 14.16. And if under the Old Testament they added to their Amen,
Hallelujah, as 106 Ps. 48. or He is good, for his mercy endures for ever, 2 Chronicles. 7.3. It makes no great difference in the matter.

2. Yet he has brought neither precept nor example from the New Testament of
the peoples Repeating the Prayer together with the Minister.

For that passage, 4 Acts 24. proves no more than a consent of their minds
((...)) to that Prayer which was then offered up. (And the same might be said
of his instance out of the Old Testament, 21 Judges 2.) And here the Bp. very
gravely obtrudes upon us a wonderful conceit of that Assembly being inspired,
not only to think the same thing, but to utter the same words, p. 37, for which
there is no necessity from the words, nor indeed any great probability. For the
instance of Paul and Silas it has less weight in it. They might pray together,
tho one only spoke, and yet both use their voices in singing together. And as
the Bp. himself observes, It might be a Psalm they sung including both matter
of prayer and praise. Nor will it follow, that because they might sing a
Psalm-prayer, that they might say a prose-prayer together. And it is strange
that his Lp. should produce the 6 Rev. 9, 10, etc. as an example of peoples
joining their voices in public Prayer, because we read there of the souls of
the Martyrs under the Altar crying with a loud voice, How long, O Lord, holy
and true, etc. For sure he dos not take crying with a loud voice in a literal
sense, when spoken of departed souls that have none. If indeed he could prove
that those souls had aetherial vehicles, and in those vehicles were furnished
with organs of speech, this might be a notable argument to his purpose. But
otherwise, That argument he uses, p. 40. from the peoples saying Amen at the
end of the Prayer, is better of the two, tho how it will prove their repeating
the whole Prayer, I know not: any more than how the peoples joining with the
Minister in singing will prove their joining in those Prayers that require no
such use of their voice. For the Angels and Elders, 7 Rev. 11. I have shown him
his mistake before. So that he is far from having brought any clear proof as he
pretends, p. 40. to excuse their practice herein from being one of his own sort
of human Inventions. And tho I am more charitable than to take this advantage
to arraign it as unlawful, yet I must confess I am not very fond of it; because
it seems less suitable to the gravity and solemnity of Christian Worship, and
brings in a confused noise in a Christian Assembly, too like that of a Dover
court, where it is said all speak, and none hear.

Having considered the Directions of the H. Scriptures concerning this part of
Religious Worship, I come to examine the Application his Lp. makes of 'em to the
principles and practice of Conformists and Dissenters. And,

First, for the Principles of Dissenters, I shall give a true Account of 'em,
and then consider that very strange one his Lp. has offered.

.I I shall give a true Account of their Judgment as far as it can be taken,
from their most judicious Writers on this subject, or the public proposals
they have made in reference to these matters.

1. They always carefully distinguish between the Gift, and the Grace or Spirit
of Prayer. By the Grace or Spirit of Prayer, they understand those inward holy
desires and devout affections, which the H. Spirit forms and excites in the
minds of good men, and which are the life and soul of our external Prayers. By
the Gift of Prayer they understand, An ability of choosing suitable matter of
Prayer, and offering it up to God in expressions fit to represent our inward
pious desires and affections on all emergent occasions. This Gift they have
always owned to be separable from the Grace of Prayer, Many that have the one
being destitute of the other. So far are they from confounding these two
distinct things, as the Bp. unhappily supposes 'em to do. This Gift of Prayer
they suppose the effect of the divine blessing on our diligent study and
meditation, and frequent exercise in this holy duty. As all other ordinary
Gifts of the Spirit of God are. For they suppose the Gift of Prayer as well as
that of Preaching capable of falling under Rules for its attainment and
exercise, and do accordingly highly approve of those which that Judicious
Divine Bp. Wilkins has laid down in that excellent Discourse he calls his Gift
of Prayer. That there is such a Gift his Lp. himself owns, p. 46. and p. 54.
And I shall add under this Head, that there are very different degrees of this,
as there are of all other Abilities and Gifts.

2. They do indeed suppose that ordinarily all Ministers shou'^ be furnished
with a competent measure of the gift of prayer (as well as that of Preaching)
in order to their due discharge of this duty on that variety of occasions that
occurs in their public ministrations and private visits. For as no prescribed
Forms can possibly suit all such occasions, so to be incapable of assisting the
devotion of their people in 'em, is they think a miserable defect in those
whose office it is to give themselves continually unto Prayer, 6 Acts, v. 4.
and who will but very lamely perform it without such abilities. And therefore
Bp. Wilkins justly censures the want of it in them as their great fault and
shame. Gift of Prayer, p. 13.


3. They do by no means suppose every good man to be endued with this Gift,
much less with such a measure of it, as will qualify him to perform that duty
in his Family without the help of Forms. And therefore they often urge such to
the use of Forms in their Families as cannot without such helps keep up that
duty in 'em without the hazard of exposing it to contempt. (Nor do they
disallow all use of forms in secret Prayer it self; tho they think it no way
advisable for Christians to confine themselves to 'em in their
Closet-devotions, since they cannot do so without suppressing many desires
suitable to their present condition; Nor can their want of words be a just
reason for their limiting themselves to such forms, since they are not needful
in secret Prayer. Our very groans and sighs are a language our heavenly Father
sufficiently understands). But yet they do suppose the want of this gift to be
a great defect, and judge such a degree of it ordinarily attainable by
continued diligence and exercise as is necessary to the suiting our
Family-Prayers to our particular necessities, and therefore do urge those under
their care to endeavor after it. And they do suppose that the H. Spirit is
ready to assist good men in such endeavors, not only by exciting their devout
affections, but by enlightening their minds to understand their spiritual
necessities, by directing 'em in the matter of their Prayers, by bringing the
promises of God to their remembrance, by strengthening and elevating their
natural faculties to more vigorous exercise, by quickening their indisposed
minds, and helping 'em against their manifold infirmities. And so much they
think included in what the Apostle declares concerning the assistance of the H.
Spirit in this duty, 8 Romans 26. And herein they assert no more than the
Reverend Bp. Wilkins has done before 'em, who not only affirms, That this Gift,
if seriously endeavored after, may be attained in some measure, by any one
that has common capacity, p. 13. but speaks of such Christians as satisfy
themselves with their Book-prayer, and go no farther as remaining still in
their Infancy, p. 11. and recommends this gift even to private Christians from
the Excellency of it, from its sutableness and necessity (as being part of our
spiritual Armor, which it is as unbecoming a Christian to be defective in, as
for a Soldier to be without skill in the use of Arms), from its special
advantages and fruits (as enabling a man on all occasions to relate his
condition, and suit his desires and expressions according to several
emergencys), and from the inconveniences a man is exposed to by the want of it,
(when being surpised with any sudden exigency or strait he knows not how to
relate his condition, or bespeak God's assistance without having recourse to
some prescribed Form, which perhaps has no proper reference to the particular
occasion), p. 22, 23, 24. And I cannot better represent our judgment concerning
these 2 different modes of Praying than in his excellent words. What one says
of Counsel to be had from Books, may be fitly applied to this Prayer by Book.
That it is commonly of it self something flat and dead, floating for the most
part too much in generalitys, and not particular enough for each several
occasion. There is not that life and vigor in it to engage the affections, as
when it proceeds immediately from the soul it self, and is the natural
expression of those particulars whereof we are most sensible. And if it be a
fault not to strive and labor after this gift, much more is it to jeer and
despise it by the name of extempore-prayer and praying by the Spirit, which
expressions (as they are frequently used by some men by way of reproach) are
for the most part the sign of a profane heart, and such as are altogether
strangers from the power and comfort of this duty, p. 12.

Thus far that learned and pious Bp. whose sentiments in this matter are, I
perceive, very different from his Lp's.

4. They are far from excluding premeditation in the exercise of this Gift of
Prayer.

On the contrary, they think it ordinarily necessary as to the matter of our
Prayers; Nay, they do not exclude all premeditation as to words, any farther
than the tying our selves to a Form of 'em may shut out such suitable petitions
as the Spirit of God may suggest to our minds in the fervor of our Devotions,
which did not occur to 'em in our previous meditation. And therefore they think
the name of extempore, and much more that of unpremeditated Prayers, very unfit
to express those which they offer up according to such an ability and gift; For
they suppose that such as pray with others, especially in public Assemblys,
should prepare themselves for it by considering beforehand the particular
cases and necessities of those that join with 'em. And against such Prayers I
can find nothing in that Text he alleges, When thou go to the house of God,
be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty to utter any thing
before God; For God is in Heaven, and thou upon Earth, therefore let thy words
be few, 5 Eccles. 1, 2. For sure his Lp. cannot think they enjoin of Prayers by
a prescribed Liturgy; For if we pray so, there is no need of this caution, that
we should not be rash with our mouth, and that our w^rds be but ^ew, because it
will not lie in our power to enlarge or contract what we say, when we confine
our selves to the words that others dictate to us. The Text dos indeed properly
refer to private vows in the house of God, but may by parity of reason be
supposed to forbid our Praying without due premeditation, and multiplying our
expressions without any suitable affections Which caution we account very
necessary in all free-prayers, even in private, and much more in public ones.
So that this place affords a much stronger Argument for Free-prayers than
against 'em.

5. They do not condemn all Forms of Prayer either in private or public as
unlawful in themselves.

They recommend such Forms to those whose inability renders such helps needful.
Many of their practical writings propose such Forms to the ignorant and weak.
The Westminster-Assembly expressly recommend the use of the Ld's-Prayer as a
Form. Nay, the N^ Ministers that treated with those commissionated by K.
Charles the 2d. at the Savoy proposed a Reformed Liturgy, with some allowance
of liberty to Ministers for free occasional Prayer, as a ground of
accommodation. Of which I shall have occasion to take more notice in what
follows.

Having premised this just Account of the Dissenters Principles, I come

II. To examine those which his Lp. ascribes to 'em, p. 43, 44, etc. which I
shall do in his own words, least I should be thought to wrong him as
notoriously as he has done his Brethren. Speaking concerning their way of
Prayer.

I shall endeavor (says he) to represent it with all fairness and
impartiality, and leave you to judge as God shall direct you, and as you will
answer it at the last day.

1. And here I find that some of your Writers are of opinion, that the Spirit
of Prayer is given to all the children of God in some measure, for enabling
their hearts to conceive, and their tongues to express convenient desires to
God, and that therefore Forms of Prayer are of no necessary use either in
public or private, on the contrary that they stint the Spirit, and hinder men
from stirring up, or using that Gift that God has given 'em.

2. Others of you go farther, and affirm that all Forms of Prayer are unlawful
to Christians, and that therefore it is a sin to join in a Worship where they
are used, or to be present at it.

3. That the Minister is the mouth of the Congregation, and and that he only is
to speak publicly to God in behalf of the people, and that they are not to
join their voices but only their hearts with him.

Upon these Principles you forsake our Worship, etc. And First, For that
position of your Directory, that the Spirit of Prayer is given to all the
children of God in some measure, for enabling their hearts to conceive, and
their tongues to express convenient desires to God, I entreat you to consider,
what promise or foundation it has in Scripture, etc. and in the same p. 45.
This Doctrine is a mere Invention of men, and the Worship built on it a vanity
in the sense of our Savior, 7 Mark 7. This Principle his Lp. largely endeavors
to confute from p. 45. to p. 53. where he calls it the great Principle of the
Dissenters Worship, and tells the people, Now, my friends, it lies upon your
Teachers who are of this persuasion, to produce plain Scripture for your
Principles, or else to confess, etc. Again, p. 62. he falls severely on this
poor Principle.

Answ. I am afraid I shall much surprise his Lp. when I tell him that I can
find no such Principle, nor indeed any thing like it either in sense or sound
in the whole Directory. I would therefore entreat him to read it over once
more, that he may oblige me with the account of the page where it lies; And I
may the more reasonably request this favor of him, because he has put me to
the trouble of reading it twice or thrice over on this occasion to no purpose.
And I suppose the Reverend Compilers of the Directory gave him no commission to
coin principles for 'em merely that he might have the satisfaction of confuting
'em. But I Will do him the Justice he has not done them, by acquainting the
Reader, that upon a strict enquiry, I suppose his Lp. has mistaken some
directions of a General Assembly in Scotland concerning secret and Family
Worship, etc. printed there, A. D. 1647. for the Directory of public Worship
published by the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, A. D. 1644. And if I be in
the right in this conjecture, I must add, that I could very easily forgive him
this mistake, if he had used any sincerity in representing the judgment of that
grave and pious Synod. But if it appear that he has obtruded upon 'em an
Opinion which they no way assert, nay which the passage from whence he draws it
is rather inconsistent with, then the best Apology he can make for himself, is
to own his mistake, and to make 'em some reparation for so gross an abuse. And
whether this be not the true Account of the matter, I leave the Reader to
judge, when he compares the words of the Assembly with the Opinion the Bp.
ascribes to 'em.

In the forementioned directions of that Assembly concerning secret and
Family Worship, p. 9. Direct. 9. are these words,

So many as can conceive Prayer, ought to make use of that Gift of God, Albeit
these who are rude and weaker may begin at a set Form of Prayer, but so as
they be not sluggish in stirring up in themselves (according to their daily
necessities) the Spirit of Prayer, which is given to all the children of God in
some measure; To which effect they ought to be more fervent and frequent in
secret Prayer to God, for enabling their hearts to conceive, and their tongues
to express convenient desires for their Family.

Now if these be the words his Lp. refers to, I would desire him to consider a
little better, how he can deduce this principle out of 'em, viz. That the
Spirit of Prayer is given to all the children of God in some measure, for
enabling their hearts to conceive, and their tongues to express convenient
desires to God, and as his Lp. adds, p. 53. without a Form. For the Bp. hereby
supposes that this Assembly thought that the Spirit of Prayer was the Gift of
Prayer, and that this Gift was in some measure given to all the children of
God, to enable 'em to pray without a Form. And therefore what the Assembly
calls stirring up in themselves the Spirit of Prayer, he explains by stirring
up the Gift, p. 44. And accordingly his arguments against 'em, all run on this
supposition, that they oppose praying by the Spirit to praying by a Form, and
imagine the Spirit and Gift of Prayer to be the same thing, and accordingly he
makes decency of expression a part of the Spirit of Prayer, p. 46.

Now what can be more opposite to the words and scope of that Assembly? Do they
not distinguish Christians into 2 sorts such as are more judicious and strong,
and such as are more rude and weak? Is it not the form^r whom they suppose to
have the gift of conceiving Prayer? And do they not suppose the latter to be at
present destitute of that gift, and (as Bp. Wilkins expresses it) to need Forms
as impotent people do crutches? they do indeed say the spirit of prayer, (i. e.
a devout and praying disposition) is given in some measure to all the children
of God. But they do not suppose therefore that all who have the spirit of
prayer have the gift also, but the quite contrary. All that their words can be
reasonably extended to import, is, That whereas there are manifold daily
necessities of Christian Families which prescribed Forms cannot suit, it is a
great infelicity to be unable to express our desires to God in those cases; And
therefore such as labor under that impotency, should be earnest to beg of God
such an ability and gift, so far as it is necessary for their due discharge of
this duty to the edification and comfort of their Familys; that they ought in
order to the attainment of it to cherish the spirit of Prayer, i. e. those
devout desires and affections which the spirit of God communicates in some
measure to all his children, according to their various necessities, and which
cannot but be greatly hindered and dampt when our inability confines us wholly
to the use of Forms, which cannot suit the particular condition of our selves
and Families. And they suppose that such an ability to pray sutably to our
particular necessities, is one of the ordinary gifts of the H. Spirit, which
private Christians should beg of God, and have encouragement to hope for (so
far as it is necessary to their compliance with his general commands of making
known their requests to him in every thing) in the diligent use of such helps
as they are furnished with, and frequent exercising themselves in this excellent
duty. Their words also do imply, that the more we grow in a devout and praying
disposition, the more easily may we attain some measure of that Gift, since out
of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, and the more we feel our own
spiritual necessities, the more easily dos the pinching sense of 'em supply us
with expressions and arguments in pleading with God for relief of 'em. And as
this is all that can be drawn from their words without offering violence to
'em, so it is no more than (as I have shown him) Bp. Wilkins asserts, and if his
Lp. have any thing to object against any of these Assertions which are
genuinely deduced from their words, I shall be very glad to hear it; But for
the Position he ascribes to that Assembly as laid down and expounded by him,
it is his own, and not theirs; And therefore it is he is concerned to prove it,
and seems not to deal so ingenuously as he should, in insulting so scornfully
over his own man of straw. For all his grave Reasonings concern no avowed
Principle of the Dissenters, and his discourse (from p. 46. to p. 57.) on this
head, is so far from being grateful and instructive to the Readers of all
sorts, (as he imagins, p. 49) that it rather nauseates all judicious Readers to
find his Lp. when he pretends to explain these matters, and set 'em in so clear
a light, so miserably confound those 2 things, the Spirit and Gift of Prayer,
which all accurate Writers on both sides so carefully distinguish, and must
necessarily do so, unless they have a mind to fight with shadows, and contend
in the dark without understanding one another. And therefore because he may
despise our Instructions, I would desire his Lp. before he writes any more on
this subject, to read the 3 first Chapters of Bp. Wilkins Gift of Prayer, which
he will find wrote with admirable judgment, and much more grateful and
Instructive than those crude and indigested Notions he has here offered.

There are several passages in what he says on this pretended Principle of the
Dissenters, which I have elsewhere taken notice of, and shall only add, that
whereas, p. 45. he tells us, There is no Command in Scripture requiring us to
worship or pray to God in a conceived extemporary or unpremeditated Form, or so
much as an example in a settled ordinary Congregation, where it was practiced,
I hope I have already said enough to satisfy an unprejudiced Reader, that God's
commands, in reference to Prayer, do certainly enjoin free prayer, that there
is not the least command to pray in general by set Forms, that there is no
command for the use of any particular Form, unless the Lord's-Prayer, which yet
is but doubtful; And that there are more examples of free prayer in Scripture,
than of Prayer by prescribed Forms; That there is not the least evidence of any
prescribed Liturgy used in the Apostles time, or in the 2 or 3 succeeding ages,
and consequently there is great reason to conclude they used free prayer, or
prayed in the exercise of their abilities and gifts; so that we have far more
probable grounds to conclude prescribed Liturgies of human composure destitute
of scriptural prec^pt and example; And if his Lp. will on that account censure
'em as an human Invention, and a piece of vain Worship, he may use his liberty.
For I shall satisfy my self with defending our own practice without such harsh
Reflections of that of others.

P. 50. His Lp. asserts without the least proof, That Moses, David, and our
Savior used Forms of Prayer. For the Instance that relates to our Savior, it
has been already considered.

So when, p. 52. he should prove that H. men in Scripture reduced their Prayers
into Forms before they offered 'em up in the Congregation, he dos not produce
one instance relating to Prayer in prose, about which the only dispute lies,
much less dos he produce any instance of their using Forms of such Prayers
composed by other men, and those uninspired persons too.

His Lp. having examined this first Principle he charges the Dissenters with,
proceeds to the

Second, That all Forms of Prayer are unlawful to Christians, and that it is a
sin to join in a Worship where they are used, or so much as to be present at it.

And this Principle his Lp. takes the pains to confute, from p. 57. to p. 65. I
do indeed perceive that he was better advised than to quote any Writer among
the Dissenters for this strange opinion. But since in his laborious confutation
of it he all along supposes some considerable part of the Dissenters to be
maintainers of it, I must freely tell his Lp. that unless he can produce some
one Author at least that has asserted any such Principle, I must make bold to
charge the breach of the 9th Command upon him, and hope he will either produce us
some testimonies of such as avow and maintain it, or do us the justice of
retracting so gross a calumny. For my own part, I never yet met with any one
person amongst either their Ministers or their people, that ever entertained so
wild and unreasonable an Opinion. Nor indeed can they entertain it without
plainly condemning their own continual practice.

Dos he not know that the Dissenters called Congregational as well as those
called Presbyterian do every meeting dismiss the people with a Form of Prayer,
I mean the Apostolical Blessing, The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Love
of God, and the Communion of the H. Spirit be with you all, Amen, 2 Cor. 13. v.
14. And can he deny this to be a Form of Prayer, when the solemn Blessing among
the Jews 6 Numb. 23. which Aaron and his Sons were ordered to pronounce, is one
of his Lordship's chief instances of a prescribed Form of Prayer? So that if
there be any Dissenters of the Opinion his Lordship attributes to 'em, they
should renounce Communion with their own Churches, and much more with the Dutch
and French Churches, among whom larger Forms are frequently used, which he
knows they are far from doing, whatever others may have done, who so
uncharitably unchurch 'em for want of Prelatical Ordination. I have already
told him that the Directory recommends the Lord's Prayer as a Form, and such
Forms of Prayer were drawn up for public use by the NC Divines at the Savoy in
their Proposals for Accommodation, (and indeed the most unexceptionable ones I
have yet seen, as consisting almost entirely of scriptural expressions); Nay
even those who are most severe in condemning stinted Liturgys, do it not,
because they think Forms of Prayer unlawful, but because they look on the
confining all public Prayers to such prescribed Forms, as a pernicious Engine
to exclude the exercise of that Ability or Gift with which all duly qualified
Ministers are endu'd for Prayer as well as Preaching, nay to exclude many
occasional requests which such set Forms could make no particular provision
for. So that the whole of what he has said from p. 57. to p. 65. dos no more
concern the Dissenters than himself, and it is easy for his Lp. to triumph when
he meets with no Adversary.

And yet there are some things in his confutation of this pretended Principle
very liable to exception. As to instance in two.

1. Since it appears by the foregoing Remarks that God has no more commanded
our Praying with a Form than without one, he should, if he had been impartial,
have represented the contrary Opinion of the unlawfulness of free prayer, to be
of altogether as dangerous consequence as that which he confutes, and he will
find that the best arguments he brings against the latter, are altogether as
valid against the former. For that former Opinion would have divided men from
the Communion of the whole Church in its first and purest Ages; And the
forbidding free-prayer is attended with as many pernicious eff^cts as the
forbidding of Forms, and perhaps more, so that the Devil may have altogether as
subtle and dangerous designs to drive on by seducing men to the one of these
mistakes as to the other, Nay this Opinion of the unlawfulness of free-prayer
may as much tend to flatter men with a good opinion of themselves, as if they
discharged that duty sufficiently, when, like the Papists, they have run over
their Beads; As the other Opinion can tempt men to think they are partakers of
the sanctifying influences of the H. Spirit, because they partake of a common
Gift; And I am sure the condemning free-prayer has a far more pernicious
influence to hinder secret devotion. For in free-prayer a man needs not express
his desires in words at all, and therefore need not forbear praying for want of
a Form, whereas if he omit free-prayer, he must rarely ever suit that part of
his devotions to his particular circumstances and condition.

2. As his Lp. has sufficiently wronged the Dissenters by falsely imputing such
a Principle to 'em, so he has greatly added to the injury, by telling the
world, That on this account the pious custom of training up young people to a
constant course of Devotion in their morning and evening secret prayers is too
universally laid aside among the Dissenters, as he has found by experience, and
for the truth of the observation, he says he dare appeal to all of the
Dissenters.

Answ. What is it that a man who is grown remarkable for his Talent of
asserting boldly, dare not venture on? But sure he cannot hope by mere
confidence to persuade us out of our senses. And therefore since he appeals to
us in this matter, we must needs tell him, We take what he asserts to be
contrary to undoubted matter of Fact; For we know of no Protestants in the
world that more universally urge all in their Families to constant secret
prayer than the Dissenters; And we could wish there were (proportionably to the
numbers on each side) one of their Communion for five or ten of the Dissenters
that maintain daily Family Prayer. I know comparisons are odious, and therefore
should never have made this, if his Lp's gross partiality had not extorted it,
who in this charge has seemed to lay aside all regard to truth, or indeed to
any appearance and show of it. It were very desirable that some of our
Convocations would take as effectual a course to promote secret, and
Family-devotion as that General Assembly in Scotland, (on whose words he would
have obtruded his first pretended Principle of the Dissenters) who not only
advise all particular persons to prayer and meditation, but enjoin Pastors to
press it on all under their charge, and the Heads of Familys to have a care
that both themselves and all within their charge be daily diligent therein.
Directions, etc. p. 1. And I can hear of no Ministers that so frequently urge
this duty on their People as theirs. Nor do I know of any among the Dissenters
that scruple the teaching their children the Lord's Prayer or other short
Forms, tho they may perhaps take more pains than others to prevent their saying
'em by rote without understanding 'em. But I wonder much what his Lp. means
when he tells us so gravely, p. 64. As for children and ignorant people among
those of this persuasion, I am well assured, many of 'em never bow their knees
in secret to God, and several of those that are grown up are forced to speak
aloud, or cannot pray at all, which is against the nature of secret-prayer, and
exposes not only the person that uses it to the censure of hypocrisy, but the
duty to contempt. I shall not now enquire how he is assured of what they do, or
do not in secret; Nor need he sure be told, that there are too many children
and ignorant people in their Communion as well as that of the Dissenters, that
after all the pains taken to persuade 'em to their duty, do yet neglect it; But
sure there is some strange mystery in what he asserts of those that are grown
up, if we could but find it out. Dos h^s Lp. then imagine, that praying without
a Form must nec^ss^rily dispose a man to speak loud, whereas if he prayed by a
Form, it would oblige him to whisper his devotions softly? Or would a
conforming Layman that is unaccustomed to secret Prayer, be less liable to this
inconvenience of bawling out, because he has his Prayer book before him? Sure
one would think there is as little danger of this in conceived prayer, in which
we need not fo^m our d^sires into words, or use our voice at all. But if his
Lp. in this only designed to ^ell us of the weakness that some indiscreet
persons have run into, perhaps through their zeal and earnestness (tho
ill-govern'd), but which their opinion or practice, as Dissenters, has no
influence on, Why dos he trouble the world with such little impertinent storys
as signify nothing to the purpose, unless it be to expose his way of arguing to
be smiled at by the children and ignorant people themselves? But what trifling
things may not a wise man say when he pleads the Cause of a Party instead of
that of Truth.

For his Lp's Third Principle of Dissenters, viz. That the Minister is the
Mouth of the Congregation, and that the people have nothing to do but to join
with him in their hearts.

I shall only suggest concerning it, That it is true we think the Minister is
the Mouth of the Congregation, and can find neither precept or pattern in
Scripture for the Congregation's repeating a whole prayer together with the
Minister, much less of their so dividing the words between 'em, as that the
people rather make the Prayer, (as in most Petitions of she Litany); nor dos
the passage he alleges from 15 Romans 6. prove any such thing; And therefore on
his weak Principles we might condemn their practice in this point as unlawful;
But we are far from being so rash and forward in our blind censures as he
groundlesly insinuates, p. 66. Nor do we (as he here asserts) suppose that the
people have nothing to do but to join in their hearts with the Minister, but
suppose their adding their Amen a fit testimony of their assent to the public
Prayers they join in, and he may in the Morning-Exerci^es of the Dissenting
Ministers Printed at London find a whole Sermon on that head, urging the people
to pronounce their Amen more audibly than usually they do.

Having examined his Lp's unjust Account of their Principles, I think it
requisite to add a few things relating to

Secondly, Their general practice; Concerning which I shall only suggest

1. Such as follow the Directory, tho they are not confined to the words there
proposed, yet look on 'em as the patterns to which the ordinary part of their
Prayers should be conformed. And accordingly, The Directory dos require
Ministers to pray to that effect; Nor dos it disallow the use of those very
expressions, where the defectiveness of the Minister's Gifts, or his
unpreparedness by meditation renders it most conducive to public edification.
So that neither are such Ministers left arbitrarily to choice as to the most
stated and constant matters of Prayer, nor the people left wholly at
uncertainty about 'em.

2. All Forms of Words in public Worship are not disused by 'em.

They constantly use our Savior's words, 2 S Matthew. 19. I Baptize thee in the
Name, etc. in that Ordinance. So do they retain his own words in the delivering
the Bread and the Cup in the Lord's Supper (tho, by the way, our Service Book
has groundlesly altered and transformed 'em into a Prayer, for which I hope his
Lp. will censure the Compilers of it, as having preferred their own Invention
before Christ's Institution). So when they give the Blessing, (which is a
Prayer) they do it usually in some of the Apostolical Forms mentioned in the
New Testament. Several of 'em use the Lord's-Prayer as a Form, according to the
advice of the Directory. And for those that disuse it, it is because they either
think it no Form suited to the Christian Church after Christ's Resurrection and
Ascension, or else think it not intended as a Form but only a Pattern, because
they never read afterward in the New Testament of its being used as a Form.
Nay perhaps some may be too much led to the disuse of it, in opposition to the
contrary extreme of others, who place some peculiar merit or virtue in the
repeating these words. And his Lp. seems to be one that has run into this
extreme, not only by supposing us obliged to use these words whenever we pray,
p. 32, 33. and making the use of 'em a Badge of our Christian Profession, p.
35. but by recommending the saying these words as the way to obtain pardon for
our infirmities in our other prayers, p. 34. But I wonder who those are of whom
his Lp. tells us that they publicly dispute against this Form, because of that
Petition in it, Forgive us our Trespasses as we forgive them that trespass
against us, p. 34. For I could never hear of any such public Disputation on
that Subject, nor indeed of any Dissenter that ever offered such a foolish
Objection; some of 'em perhaps may have censured those as hypocritical in the
use of this Petition, who are so far from forgiving their enemies, as to bear
an irreconcilable temper toward their Friends and their Brethren.

3. The true Reason, why the Dissenting Ministers so generally disuse Forms of
Prayer composed by others, is not, because they judge all Forms of Prayer
unlawful, but because they think free-prayer gives 'em the advantage to suit
this part of their Ministrations better to the Edification of their people.

And they are very much confirmed in this Opinion, both by what they observe in
the H. Scriptures, and by experience.

As to the H. Scriptures, They not only find no such stinted Liturgys
prescribed either by Christ or his Apostles, but no orders given to any Pastors
of the Church to compose 'em for others, much less any warrant to enjoin the
use of 'em. They think it therefore most probable, if not certain, that even
ordinary Pastors in the Apostles time, and in some Ages after used free-prayer,
i. e. their public Prayers as well as Sermons were the exercise of those
ordinary Gifts and Abilities with which they were furnished for their
ministerial Office, and not a mere repetition or reading of Forms pres^ribed to
'em by others. Nay, they think the confining Pastors to such prescribed Forms,
renders 'em incapable of complying with the general Rules of Scripture, that
require us to suit our Prayers to all particular emergent occasions, which the
Bishop himself owns cannot well be done without the use of free (or as he calls
'em) extempore-prayers, p. 54. They think it therefore every way the safest to
come herein as near as possible to the practice of the Christian Church in the
Apostles time, and those succeeding Ages wherein it retained most of its
primitive purity.

Nor are they less strengthened in their judgment by experience, on which some
stress may be justly laid when we are to determine the modes of Worship (^eft
undetermined in Scripture) agreeably to the general Rules of Scripture, and
especially that of doing all to Edification. Now the Dissenters observe, that
where public Forms have been imposed, and the ministration of Pastors confined
to 'em, It has been generally attended with ill effects both in reference to
Ministers and people.

1. In reference to Ministers. For as in those Christian Countries where
Preaching has been disused, and Forms of Instruction and Exhortation (called
Homilys, or Sermons) provided for the Clergy, they have by this use of 'em,
sunk into general ignorance and sloth, and taken little pains to furnish
themselves with abilities to instruct their people; So, where stinted Liturgys
have been imposed, the Clergy, by the constant use of 'em, generally so
habituate themselves to these Crutches, that they are unable to go without 'em,
and find themselves at a great loss, when they should accommodate their public
or private prayers to that great variety of particular occasions wherein they
should be the mouth of their people in their addresses to God. Whereas the
constant exercise of their abilities in public Prayer as well as Preaching
greatly improves 'em, and furnishes 'em for assisting their Flocks with their
prayers in all those manifold necessities, in which prescribed Forms are no
more pe^tinent to their case, than general remedies to particular diseases.

2. In reference to the people. For they generally observe them prone to grow
more cold and unaff^cted under the continual use of such forms, and
consequently in greater danger of turning that holy duty into a customary
lifeless repetition of the words prescribed to 'em. And tho this be not in it
self a necessary inevitable consequence of prescribed form^, because no doubt a
well prepared mind may use such with true fervor of pious affection; yet
considering the common temper of mankind, there is something in the constant
use of the same words, that dos as naturally tend to dull our affections, as
the constant use of the same Instrument and Tune is tedious to a musical Ear,
whereas a suitable variety tends more to raise and elevate 'em. And tho perhaps
some few very devout persons may avoid this inconvenience of constant public
Forms, yet it seems incurable in the generality of the people, whose case must
be chiefly considered, when we consult their Edification in determining the
particular modes of Worship.

I will not disown that there are some inconveniencys on the other side, which
I shall propose with the same freedom, and offer my thoughts of 'em.

It Is indeed true as the Bp. suggests, p. 41. that in a stinted Liturgy the
people are more exactly acquainted beforehand with the words of the Prayer
they are to join in, than when the Minister is left to the exercise of his own
Abilities. But as this inconvenience relates rather to the words than the
ordinary matter of our Prayers, so how little weight there is in the argument
drawn thence against free-prayer, I refer the Reader to the excellent reply
given to it by the forementioned Bp. Wilkins, Gift of Prayer, p. 12.
Whereas (says that pious Author) it is commonly objected by some, That they
cannot so well join in an unknown Form (For so he calls free-prayer in respect
of those that hear it) with which they are not beforehand acquainted; I
answer, That Is an inconsiderable Objection, and dos oppose all kind of Forms
that are not publicly prescribed. As a man may in his judgment assent unto any
divine Truth delivered in a Sermon which he never heard before, so may he join
in his affections to a holy desire in a Prayer which he never heard before. If
he who is the Mouth of the rest deliver through imprudence what we cannot approve
of, God dos not look upon it as our Prayer, if our desires do not say Amen to
it.

But the main inconvenience arises from the danger of ex^osing the duty to
contempt by unbeseeming expressions, which men of weak judgments often fall
into, Of which his Lp. gives us a hint, p. 56. and (give him his due) expresses
himself with great modesty and truly Christian prudence on that occasion, where
the weakness and indecencys of some might perhaps have given him some real
advantage to expose 'em. But as to this I shall only suggest, That I think such
as are incapable of using free-prayer without apparent hazard of rendering it
contemptible by their indecent manner of performing it, should no more be
admitted to the Ministerial Office, than those that cannot Preach without the
same danger. Or at least, that where no better can be had, such should rather
(according to the direction the General Assembly in Scotland forementioned
gives to Masters of Familys) begin with some good Forms, till by study and
exercise they are capable to do better.

Having said thus much in reference to our practice, I shall only subjoyn as to
that of the Established Church,

1. That for persons uninspir'd to compose Forms of Prayer, and impose the use
of 'em upon others, is neither warranted by scriptural precept or pattern, and
is in the Bp's sense only an human Invention. But to confine all public
Prayers to such prescribed Forms, is inconsistent with the general Rules of the
H. Scriptures relating to this duty.

2. That the Reading of public Prayer, (I mean Prose not Psalm-prayers) has
neither precept nor example in the Word of God, nor indeed in the practice of
the Primitive Church, in which it was the common custom to pray, either with
their eyes shut or lifted up toward Heaven. And indeed this practice tends so
much to dull the affections of those that join in this duty, that it is great
pity that those who for want of the gift of prayer, are obliged to use Forms,
should not at least be furnished with the gift of memory to repeat 'em without
Book.

3. I think the Arguments used in the grand Debate at the Savoy against the
frequent Repetitions in the Litany, and the shortness of the Collects as
defects that needed being reformed have never yet been well answered.

And now I shall conclude this Chapter, by taking a little notice of the
wonderful discovery the Bishop has made of that double Artifice or Trick the
Dissenters use, to make Forms of Prayer of their own pass with the people for
extempore-ones; The one by composing several Forms, and committing 'em to
memory, and then transposing the several parts of 'em; The other, by remembering
the several ways they have tried in their secret prayers to express the same
thing, p. 55, 56. As to which, I shall only observe, That the Dissenters have
some reason to take it unkindly that he should expose their secrets to the
world; But this is a piece of treachery that must always be expected from those
that desert their own Party, and have no other way to ingratiate themselves
with their new friends. Only they wonder why he should strive to make two
secrets of one; For they cannot clearly discern any gre^ter difference between
these two methods, than between two different ways of expressing the same
thing. But to do right to his Lp's admirable Wit, what he has discovered is yet
so real a secret to all I have discourst about it, that I cannot find one of
'em was acquainted with it before, and therefore we are all obliged to return
him thanks for teaching us this new and more dexterous Art of managing our
Devotions.

Remarks on the Chapter concerning Hearing. And First, for the Directions of
the H. Scriptures about it, I shall only observe,
I. THat I do fully agree with him in general, That the Word of God should be
Read in Christian as well as in Jewish Assemblys.

There is no doubt it was so in the Jewish Synagogues, And it is highly
reasonable to suppose that the Writings of the New Testament were designed to
be read in Christian Churches according to what the Bp. has quoted from 4 Col.
16. And there is no doubt they were so read in the Primitive Churches. Tho that
other place which the Bp. cites, (wherein the Apostle Paul charges Timothy to
give Attendance to Reading as well as Exhortation and Doctrine, 1 Timothy 4.13)
will not afford any cogent argument to this purpose. Because Reading here as
well as Meditation, v. 15. may be understood of those private subservient means
which young Timothy was here advised to use for promoting his proficiency in
divine knowledge, and furnishing him the better for the exercise of his
Ministry in Exhortation and Doctrine. And this I take to be the more probable
sense of the words.

II. That Reading the Law, is in the Scriptures called Preaching of it, I do
not find any solid proof for.

For in the passage he alleges for this purpose, 15 Acts 21. Moses in old time
has in every City them that Preach him, being read in the Synagogues every
Sabbath Day) Preaching may be there justly understood of those Expositions of
the Law, and Applications of it, which were usual, and are elsewhere observed
by the Bp. from 13 Acts 14. p 75. And of such Exposition and Application it is
most reasonable to understand that noted place 8 Neh. 8. where it is said, They
read in the Book in the Law of God distinctly, and gave the sense, and caused
'em to understand the Reading. And the Bp. dos not expressly determine whether
giving the sense must be understood of a Grammatical or a Theological
Interpretation, p. 74. I hope he includes the latter; For indeed to suppose
that those words me^r^y relate to translating the words of the Law out of the
Hebrew into another Language, is to put a very jejune sense on 'em without the
least necessity, and contrary to probable evidence from other places and
particularly from that forementioned 13 Acts 14. To which I might add the
testimony of Philo, who tells us ( apud Eusebius. de Prepar. Evang. lib. 8. cap.
2.) that the Priests or one of the Elders was wont to read the Law, and then
distinctly explain it. But tho I would not exclude a Grammatical Exposition of
the words of the Law from being intended here, yet I fee no reason why the Bp.
should hence recommend to us the Reading the Original sometimes in public
Assemblys, as he seems here to do, p. 74. unless he could suppose two things;
First, that the body of our people could as easily come to understand Hebrew
and Greek, as those Jewish Exiles might recover the knowledge of their
mother tongue; and Secondly, that the generality of Readers had the same Gift
of Reading those Original Languages, as some in the Primitive Church had of
speaking all others, viz. by Inspiration. For I am afraid otherwise many of 'em
would but go very untowardly about the performing such a Task as the Bp. would
here set 'em.

III. There is yet less ground for that peculiar sense he has assigned to
Preaching in the New Testament.

He tells us in general, It signifies to declare or proclaim the word of God as
a Herald or Crier proclaims the Laws and Orders of a King. Hence (says he)
only those that proclaimed the Gospel to such as had not heard it before, or
read the Old Testament to the people, are said to Preach. Preaching is
distinguished from Teaching and Exhortation; and it is observable that in the
whole New Testament, tho Reading the Scriptures is called Preaching, yet
interpreting 'em' applying 'em, or exhorting the people from 'em in a Christian
Auditory, is never called by that Name. P. 71. And again, p. 72. The O^iginal
words which properly signify Preaching; are (...) and (...). From all which it
is manifest, that there are only two ways by which the word of God is properly
Preached; The first is, when it is declared to those that never heard it before;
The second is, when the very words of the Scripture are read publicly to the
people as a Crier dos a Proclamation which he dos not word himself, but reads
it in the words in which it is delivered to to him.

Answ. His Lp. would do well to examine his Criticisms a little better before he
assert 'em so confidently; For there is none of these new ones he here offers,
but seem liable to very strong objections, which I should be glad to hear his
solution of.

For against his new Notion of the sense of the word Preaching in the New
Testament, I would propose this obvious one; The Apostle Paul in writing his
Epistle to the Romans styles those to whom he directs it, Beloved of God and
called to be Saints, and Thanks God that their Faith was spoken of throughout
the whole world, v. 7, 8. And yet he tells 'em that he often purposed to come
to 'em, but was let hitherto, v. 13. and adds, v. 15. So much as is in me I am
ready to preach the Gospel to you that are at Rome also. And here is the word
(...) Let us then apply it to one of these two ways of Preaching, to which the
Bp. has confined the sense of that word. It cannot be understood of declaring
the Gospel to th^se that never heard it before, For he tells us, Their Faith
had been spoken of throughout the whole World; So that the Gospel could be no
new tidings to 'em. He must then (if the Bp's Criticism be true) mean no more,
than that he often purposed to see 'em, because as much as in him was, he was
ready to read 'em some Chapters out of the Old Testament at Rome also. Now if
this were his main errand and business there, he need not have been so much
concerned about the matter. The disappointment of his purpose could be no great
prejudice to 'em, unless he supposed they had none among 'em able to read. Nor
needed he speak of his reading a Chapter as so difficult a thing, which he was
ready to do as much as in him lay. It Is plain then the Apostle was a stranger
to the Bp's notion of Preaching; for he thought instructing those more fully in
the doctrine of Christianity who had already embraced it, might be fitly called
by this name.

So when he tells us, Preaching is distinguished from Teaching, How hard is it
to reconcile this with the following Texts. We read in the 28 Acts, v. 30, 31.
That Paul abode two years at Rome, preaching the kingdom of God, and teaching
those things which concern the Lord Jesus Christ. So that the Bp. is very
curious to distinguish those two expressions which the Inspired Historian
plainly took for synonimous ones. So the same Writer gives us an account of the
Apostle Paul's Speech to the Elders at Ephesus, in which what he calls teaching
'em, 20 Acts, v. 20 he calls teach^ng the Gospel, and preaching the kingdom of
God among 'em, v. 25. And in both these places the word (...) is used, and in
this latter a phrase of the same import too with the other, viz. (...). But
perhaps an argument drawn from interest may prevail above any other. The
Apostle Paul tells us, 1 Cor. 9.14. the Lord has ordained that those who
preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel. This Text he knows is generally
applied by Expositors to prove a maintenance due to ordinary Ministers. And Mr.
Mede particularly by (...) here, understands the reward of good tidings. But if
ordinary Pastors of the Church have no other way now left of preaching the
Gospel, but reading the Scriptures (as according to the Bp's notion they have
not) I am afraid the people would sadly grudge 'em so large Revenues on the
bare account of such Preaching. But if he will give the Apostle leave to explain
his own meaning, he will find that preaching is the same thing with Teaching, or
instructing the people in the Christian Doctrine; For it is so explained in
those two parallel places, 6 Gal. 6. Let him that is taught in the word
communicate to him that teaches in all good things. And 1 Timothy 5.17. Let the
Elders that rule well be accounted worthy of double honor, especially them
that labor in word and doctrine. If these be parallel Texts, as Expositors
have hitherto taken 'em to be; then to teach, to labor in word and doctrine,
are the same thing as to preach. And by the way, if the reward of good tidings
be due to those that preach the Gospel, and if Readers be now the only
Preachers of it in a Christian Kingdom (as the Bp's notion supposes) how come
things to be so unequally managed, and so contrary to the Apostle's direction,
that they get the least share of the Reward for it? Why are these true
laborious preachers put off with so stingy an allowance, while those Bishops
that in his sense never preach at all, engross the double honor to themselves,
both the Dignity and the Revenues which belong to such as preach the Gospel? I
shall only add the following Texts; I hope the Bp. will grant that our Savior
commissioned his Apostles to preach when he sent 'em to disciple all Nations,
28 Matthew. two last ver. And yet he enjoins 'em to teach 'em all things he had
commanded. And the Apostle Paul accordingly in the same verse calls himself a
preacher and a teacher, 2 Timothy 1.11. And these expressions are plainly used as
equivalent ones, 5 Acts 42. And they ceased not to teach and preach Jesus
Christ. So 15 Acts, v. 35.

Again, he tells us, That preaching is distinguished from exhortation. Now I
think we have no reason to imagine the Apostle Paul understood any such
distinction, when he exhorts Timothy, 2 Timothy 4.2. to preach the word ((...)) to
be instant in season and out of season, to reprove, rebuke, exhort with all
long-suffering and doctrine. For these latter expressions seem to explain the
former. And I hope he will allow the Apostle Peter to have preached, in the 2
Acts from the 14th to the 40th ver. And yet what he spoke is called an
Exhortation, v. 40. Nay, to put the matter out of doubt, it is said of John the
Baptist, 3 Luke 18. That many other things in his Exhortation he preached unto
the people. (...).

Again he says, That interpreting the Scriptures, applying 'em, and exhorting
the people from 'em in a Christian Auditory, is never called Preaching.

Now either those many discourses of the Apostles recorded in the Acts are not
Preaching, or else quite contrary to the Bp's notion, Preaching was
interpreting the scriptures, applying 'em, and exhorting the people from 'em.
For I would fain know what else he can make of the Apostle Peter's Sermon, 2
Acts, from the 14th to the 40th. 3 Acts, from the 12th to the end. 4 Acts, from
the 8th to the 20th. Of Stephen's, 7 Acts. Of the Apostle Peter's, 10 Acts,
from the 34th to the 44th. Of the Apostle Paul's, 13 Acts, in which single
instance, the Bp. will find almost all his Notions overthrown together. For, v.
15. After the reading the Law and Prophets, the Rulers of the Synagogue send to
Paul and his company this Message, Ye men and brethren, if ye have any word of
Exhortation for the people, say on. The Apostle addresses himself to comply
with their proposal. And accordingly his discourse contains an Explication of
several passages out of the Old Testament relating to the promised seed of
Abraham, an application of 'em to our Blessed Savior, and an exhortation to
'em from thence to believe in him, and not despise and reject him. And this
very discourse the Apostle calls declaring glad tidings, (or preaching, for the
word is (...)) v. 32. If the Bp. object this discourse was not in a Christian
Auditory, it is easily answered, What can the difference of the Auditory signify
to alter the nature of the discourse, As if the very same discourse in a
Synagogue should be preaching, but quite another thing in a Christian Church.
It Is plain here that the Apostle preached when he interpreted the Scriptures
relating to Christ, applied 'em, and exhorted the people from 'em, so that
these are the same thing. And if he still pretend that such Exposition and
Application had some other name given it when used in a Christian Auditory than
that of preaching; I shall, to remove this shadow of a pretense, farther add, I
suppose he will not doubt, but the Apostle Paul either found, or at least
planted a Christian Church at Rome, long before his two years expired, and yet
he is all that time said to preach the kingdom of God among 'em. So no doubt
there was a Christian Church at Ephesus; and yet Timothy residing there, is
exhorted to preach the word, to be instant in season and out of season. And in
the place I first alleged, the Apostle Paul was desirous to preach the Gospel
to those at Rome, whose Faith was already so eminent, and so publicly known
and celebrated. And indeed, tho the Gospel be in the strictest sense only news
to those that first hear it, yet it dos not cease to be good tidings, or a
joyful message for being often repeated. So that since the Bp. has so ill hap
in every one of his Criticisms, I would advise him to be more sparing and
deliberate in offering 'em to public view; for his talent dos not seem to lie
much that way.

IV. The Scriptures have left it to human prudence to determine, What portion
of 'em shall be read in our public Assemblys, and in what order and method.

To clear this, We must consider there are two ways of Reading the Scriptures
in order to the peoples instruction from 'em. As either

1. When some consid^rable portion of 'em is read together. As some part of a
Book or Epistle, a Psalm, etc. For the division of the Scriptures into chapter
and verse are but a matter of late Invention.

2. When several passages are read out of several Books, of the Old or New
Testament, which are parallel to each other, and serve to explain the same
Doctrine, or clear and enforce the same duty.

And tho the phrase of Reading the Scriptures be by common custom appropriated
to the former, yet if we will speak strictly, It dos as truly belong to the
latter; and it is of this latter way of Reading the Scriptures for the people's
instruction that we have the clearest warrant from the examples of the
Apostles, and the accounts given us in the New Testament of the practice of the
Christian Church. Nor do those banish either of these ways of reading (either
an entire portion, or several parallel Texts) that interpose an explicatory and
applicatory Paraphrase between the several parts that are read. Nor dos the Bp,
that I can find, so much as pretend to produce any thing from Scripture against
the intermixing such a paraphrase in our reading the Scriptures. Now if he
consult all the Sermons of the Apostles recorded in the Acts, he will find that
they did read (or what is the same, did recite verbatim, and propose to the
consideration of the people) several passages of the word of God, all tending
to illustrate and prove some truth or duty of the Christian Religion. And their
practice herein was conformable to that of our Blessed Savior, who employed the
first Christian Sabbath, I mean the day of his Resurrection, not in reading an
entire portion of Scripture, but in expounding to the two Disciples all those
passages in Moses and the Prophets that related to himself and his death,
resurrection and ascension, 24 Luke, 24 Luke, from the 13th. to the 28th. Nor
do I find in that account given of the Worship of Christian Churches, 1 Cor. 14
chap. any mention made of Reading the Scriptures, as a distinct thing from
Doctrine and Interpretation; So that I know of no one precept or example in all
the New Testament relating to the Christian Church for this way of reading,
unless what may be inferred from the 4 Col. 16. And when this Epistle is read
omong you, cause that it be read also in the Church of the Laodiceans, and that
ye likewise read the Epistle from Laodicea. But then we must not urge the
Inference from these words too far, for I know of none that think themselves
obliged by it to read a whole Epistle at one time, tho no doubt it was fit the
Colossians should so read this Epistle then, as we should be as forward to read
a much longer that came newly to us from the same inspired Pen. And yet because
reading an entire portion of Scripture was so constantly practiced in the Old
Testament, and the reason of it seems in part to extend to us, I do think it is
very fit that that way of Reading should be also retained in our public
Assemblys; tho how long an entire portion shall be ordinarily read, and in what
order, must be determined by Christian prudence according to the general Rules
of Scripture.

V, It Is granted that the Word of God should be read with great solemnity; but
there is no particular posture prescribed in our hearing of it.

For tho we read, 8 Neh. 5. that the people stood at the opening the Book of
the Law, yet that posture seems there to refer to the Blessing we read of in
the following verse. And tho we should grant that the people stood here when
the Law was read, yet they are elsewhere said to sit. Thus, 33 Ezekiel. 30, 31.
when they came professedly to hear what was the word that came forth from the
Lord, yet they are described as sitting before him as his people. And those
assembled in the Synagogue on the Sabbath Day, 13 Acts, 14, 15. are represented
as using the same posture, as sat down while the Law and Prophets were read.

VI. For explaining and applying the Scripture by way of Doctrine and
Exhortation, It was a constant part of their Lord's Day worship in Christian
Assemblys in the Apostles time.

Doctrine is mentioned together with breaking of Bread and Prayers, as one
branch of their stated devotions, 2 Acts 42. 1 Cor. 14 26. Nor do we read of
one Christian Assumbly that I remember on that day without it. And it appears
by the testimony of the Ancients, that it was constantly practiced in the first
ages of Christianity (as the Bp. himself grants, p. 76) their Sermons being
usually an explication and practical emprovement of that portion of Scripture
which had been read. Nor dos what the Bp. suggests, p. 75. render it probable
that this was not constantly done in Christian Churches. For what he produces
from 13 Acts 15. concerns the Jewish Synagogues, and even the argument drawn
from thence is not cogent, for tho there had been constant provision for
Enlargement, yet the Rulers of the Synagogue knowing that the Apostle and his
followers pretended to some new Doctrine, might send that message to 'em. For
what he says from 12 Romans 6, 7, etc. That St. Paul supposes him who Teaches,
and him whose office it was to exhort, distinct from him that ruled and
ministered. And it dos not appear that every Church was furnished with all these
Officers; I shall only answer, It dos not appear from this place, that these
four things required four distinct Officers. We read only of two ordinary
Officers in the Christian Church, viz. Elders, or Bishops and Deacons; See 1 Timothy 3. 1 Tit. 1 Phil. 1. 20 Acts 28. To the latter, ministering to the poor
belonged; To the former, Teaching, Exhorting and Ruling; and as these were
several branches of the same Office, so probably since there were many such
Bishops or Elders constituted in every particular Church, 14 Acts 23. 1 Tit. 5.
Some might have their talents and abilities more suited to one part of their
work, and others to another; and accordingly they might ordinarily divide their
ministrations, and each attend what he was qualified for. And accordingly the
Bp. well observes, that that the Apostle Paul conjoyns Doctrine and Exhortation
in his charge to Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.13. And it is probable both are included in
the Apostle Peter's Exhortation to Elders, 1 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3.

Lastly, I do agree with him that there should be such a summary of the
principal doctrines of the Gospel as our Catechisms and Confessions of Faith
usually contain; Which form of sound words should be held fast; Tho that the 6
Heb. 1, 2. contains that form mentioned, 2 Timothy 1.13. is but doubtful, and it is
much more doubtful whether that 6 Heb. 1, 2. contained six distinct principles
or heads of doctrine; Of which, more afterward.

Having considered the Directions of H. Scriptures in reference to Hearing, I
shall now examine the Application the Bp. makes of 'em to the Practice of the
Established Church, and that of the Dissenters
IN representing the practice of the Dissenters, he promises to do it with the
same Candor and Sincerity that he has hitherto endeavored to observe. What
sort of Candor and Sincerity that is, the Reader has already had a sufficient
taste of, and he will find the Bp. dos not in this Chapter vary from the
Precedents he had given in the former; For how little regard he has had to
Truth, in the following Accusations, will appear upon a particular review of
'em.

I. He charges the Dissenting Ministers with disregarding Scripture-Rules and
Example, and with laying aside all those methods of Instruction the Scriptures
recommend to us, except it be that of Exposition and Exhortation. Insomuch
(says he) that tho a man frequent your Meetings all his life, yet he has no
security, or hardly possibility, of learning from your public Teachings all
the great mysteries of his Religion, or the necessary principles of his Faith.
For which he alleges these two things for proof.

1. For first, your Teachers are entirely left to their choice what place of
Scripture they will explain, or what Subject they will handle; And hence it
happens that hardly any one man in his life, ever goes through the necessary
Articles of Faith, or of Practice in his public Sermons: And for the truth of
this, he appeals to our selves.

2. You have no sumary of Principles enjoined to be either read or taught in
your public Assemblys.

Answ. There are some Accusations so gross and shameless, that it is hard for a
man to treat 'em with decency, and to such Accusers we are often forced to
apply the Archangel's language, Ep. Jude, v 9. But our Author has that peculiar
infelicity, that the more notorious untruths he delivers, he is still the more
confident in 'em, and nothing will serve him, but appealing to th^se for the
truth of what he says, who most certainly know it to be false. For with what
face can the Bp. say, That a man may frequent the D^ssenters Meetings all his
lifetime, and yet have no security, or hardly possibility of learning from
their public Teachings all the great mysteries of his Religion, or Principles
of his Faith, and appeal to our selves as witnesses, that hardly any one man in
his life, ever goes through the necessary Articles of Faith, or of Practice in his
public Sermons? Dos he indeed hope to persuade the world, that the great
mysteries and Principles of the Christian Religion ( Fx. gr. the doctrine of
the Trinity in Unity, the Incarnation of Christ, his Offices as our Mediator,
Faith in him, and Repentance toward God, or Regeneration and Conversion, the
privileges of all Believing Penitents, their Pardon and Justification, their
Adoption and Right to the heavenly Inheritance, the office of the H. Spirit as
our Sanctifier and Comforter, the necessity of his supernatural Aids, the
different future states of the Righteous and the Wicked, the general
Resurrection and final Judgment, etc.) are seldomer taught in their Pulpits
than in those of the Conformists? Or that the Dissenting Ministers less
frequently urge the great duties of Godliness, Righteousness, Sobriety, and a
heavenly mind and life upon their Hearers? Dos he not know that the Directory
requires that ordinarily the Subject of the Minister's Sermon shall be some
Text of Scripture holding forth some Principle or Head of Religion? Nay, dos he
not know that the peculiar mysteries of the Christian Religion are so much more
frequently inculcated in the Sermons of Dissenters, as occasioned some of 'em
to reproach the Conformists with Preaching little but morality, and borrowing
their Discourses rather from Cicero and Seneca than from the Apostolical
Writings, and the Conformists to reproach them with turning all Christianity
into mysteries, and Preaching morality too little? (I do not recite these
criminations as approving 'em, for I abhor such general and blind censures, but
as an evidence that matter of fact is in the general opinion of both sides
contrary to the Bp's representation of it). Or dos he think it a good argument
to prove that it is hardly possible for our people to learn the necessary
Articles of their Faith from our public Teachings, merely because we are left
to our choice as to the Subject we treat on? Can he find any scriptural Rule or
Example prescribing to ordinary Teachers the exact order in which they should
explain the mysteries of Christian Religion to the People; and yet was it
therefore hardly possible for the people in the first age to learn 'em all from
their public Teachings? As if ordinary judgment and prudence were not
sufficient to direct every Minister in this part of his duty. And whereas he
says, that hardly any one man in his life ever goes through the necessary
Articles of Faith, or of Practice in his public Sermons, and appeals to our
selves herein, I must needs tell him, all the Ministers that I have discourst
with, are amazed to think what should tempt him to assert what all our Hearers
know to be a groundless calumny.

And whereas he tells us, That we have no summary of Principles enjoined to be
either read or taught in our public Assemblys, I might here enquire what
precept or example he can produce from Scripture, requiring our Reading or
Teaching such a summary in public, distinct from the H. Scriptures. Nay, tho
we should grant him that the Apostle Paul intends such a summary by the form of
sound words mentioned, 2 Timothy 1.13. yet how will he certainly prove that it was
to be publicly read and taught from Timothy's being charged to hold it fast?
The 39 Articles of Religion the Bp. no doubt takes to be such a form of sound
words that is to be held fast, and yet they do not think it necessary to be
publicly read and taught, any farther than the Doctrine of Ministers should be
conformed to it. But if he intend hereby to accuse the Dissenters as careless
of their peoples being instructed in such a summary of the Principles of
Religion, or (as we commonly speak) of their being catechized, I do not know
any Ministers in the world whom he can less justly accuse in this matter. And
perhaps the Ministers of the North of Ireland, and those in Scotland, do
(speaking generally) outstrip all others that we know of in the Christian
world, as to their unwearied diligence in catechizing those under their charge.
And indeed the Bp's accusations put me on the necessity of doing 'em justice in
this point, by giving the Reader some account of their general practice. To
that purpose I must premise, that they divide all the persons in their Parishes
grown up to years of discretion into Communicants and examinable persons. For
Communicants, they do not only strictly examine them as to their knowledge when
first admitted to the Lord's Table, but also personally visit each of 'em once
a year at least, and particularly examine 'em as to their progress both in the
knowledge and practice of Religion. For examinable persons, they divide their
Parishes into so many districts, and accordingly for every district once a
year, they publicly appoint the time and place when they intend to catechize
'em, and accordingly go through the whole of the Catechism with 'em. Nay, they are
so punctual and exact herein, that if any have been absent, they publicly
appoint another day for the catechizing 'em. So that there is not one of these
persons in their Congregations come to years of age, who is not once every year
constantly instructed in the principles of the Christian Religion, and
personally examined about his knowledge of 'em. Now either the Bp. knows this
matter of fact, or he dos not. If he do not, Why will he pretend to censure so
confidently what he is so entirely ignorant of? If he do, How can he excuse
himself in asserting, that there is no security, or hardly possibility of the
Dissenters learning from the public Teachings of their Ministers all the great
mysteries of their Religion, or necessary Articles of their Faith, when those
very Ministers among whom he resides, take so effectual a method, that there is
not one soul under their care, but if he learn 'em not, it is grossly his own
fault, and cannot be imputed to the neglect of his Minister. And if the
subtilty of this charge lie in the word public Teachings, I shall only add,
that these catechizings of the persons contained in these several districts are
public Teachings, and such days are publicly appointed for 'em, on which the
people can best convene for that end. And I could wish his Lp. could give us as
satisfactory an account of the diligence of the Conforming Clergy in
instructing all the particular persons under their inspection and charge. And I
may add, that in the Meetings of Dissenters here, and in England, it is the
general practice to catechize publicly on the Lord's-days, and the Catechism
is usually gone through once every Summer. And I am sure our Catechism is a far
more comprehensive summary of the Doctrins and Precepts of the Christian
Religion than that used in the Established Church. So little reason reason has
he to accuse those that rather set others a Copy worthy their imitation. And
what his Lp says of 'em, is so contrary to truth, that if their people be as
willing to learn as they are diligent to teach, it is scarce possible that any
of 'em should be ignorant of the necessary Principles of their Faith.

For the Assemblys Catechism he has some exceptions against it, which I shall
briefly consider.

1. It no ways (says he) answers the design of a form of sound words, which
should contain only the first and necessary Principles of the Oracles of God in
such words and method as may make it easily apprehended and attained by the
weak and unlearned, which make up the bulk of the people.

Answ. How can the Bp. expect any Reply to so general a charge. I rather think
the Assemblys Catechism is herein excellently suited to the various capacities
of Catechumens. It has at the end, the Creed, the Lord's Prayer, and Ten
Commandments as the summary of our Belief, desires and practice. And in those,
I hope his Lp. will grant the first and necessary principles of the Oracles of
God are plainly laid down. And indeed the Church-Catechism contains little
more. But for those whose capacity is something more improved, the Questions
and Answers in that Catechism do excellently explain the three forementioned
summarys of our Religion, and lay down such other Principles as are the most
important and needful inferences from 'em. And why dos our Author imagine that
no form of sound words must comprehend more than what is to be first taught the
lowest sort of Catechumens, when almost all the Reformed Churches do herein
differ from him; few of whom compose Catechisms for their people that are not
rather longer than the shorter one composed by the Assembly.

And whereas he adds, Our Catechism is full of hard words, school-terms, and
abstruse notions no wise necessary to be known, nor possible to be understood
by children or unlearned persons, for whose Edification principally a Catechism
ought to be designed; I only add, If he had expected any Answer, he should have
been particular in his accusation, and not left us to ghess in the dark what
instances he grounds it upon.

Again, He accuses it of being so long and intricate, that no one child in ten
gets it by heart, nor one in 500 retains it, as he says he has found by
experience; To which I shall only answer, that as we have little reason to
believe the Bp. has so often tried this matter as to enable him to pass so
particular a judgment about it, so his experience and ours (who have better
opportunity of trying it) do no way agree. For we know there is nothing in this
particular computation that comes near to truth in matter of fact. And I
believe if his Lp. make a more accurate trial, he will find as many of the
Dissenters children that have got their Catechism by heart, as of others that
have done so by the Church-Catechism, even tho the former be so much larger.
And if any of 'em forget it again, it is their own fault, not their Minister's,
who more exactly examine 'em in that point, than any others that I know of. But

2. His severest charge against this Catechism is, That notwithstanding its
length, it is imperfect; some of the principles of the Apostle's Catechism
being quite left out of it, I mean laying on of hands joined with Baptism, 6
Heb. 2. A great defect sure in a Catechism to leave out a fundamental of
Christianity.

Answ. Is it not strange that the Bp. should have no regard to the reputation
of his own Church in such weak censures as these? Dos he mean that our
Catechism has laid aside the expression of of laying on of hands, or the thing
signified by it. If he mean only the expression, could he not easily foresee
that such an objection against the Assemblys Catechism has no weight in it?
Nay, that the Church-Catechism is liable to the same objection? I would desire
him to take the pains to read it over, and tell us where he can find laying on
of hands mentioned in it. If he means the thing signified by laying on of
hands, Why dos he not tell us what it is, but leave us to blind conjectures
what this fundamental Principle is which he charges our Catechism as defective
for the omission of? Dos he mean such laying on of hands on children as our
Savior used when he blessed 'em, 19 Matthew. 13? Or laying on of hands on the sick
when they were healed, 7 Mark 32? Or Imposition of hands on such as the
Apostles Baptized in order to the communicating the extraordinary gifts of the
H. Spirit to 'em, 8 Act 17? Or imposition of hands in order to the setting
persons apart to some sacred Office or Charge, 6 Acts 6? Or imposition of hands
on the Sacrifice, 1 Lev. 4. 8 Numb. 12. 29 Exodus 15. 2 Chronicles. 19. v. 23? For
Expositors mention all these various senses of the word in their comments on 6
Heb. 2. Now I would entreat him to review 'em, and tell me which of these sorts
of imposition of hands is spoken of in the Church-Catechism. (For I hope he dos
not mistake the Rubric about Confirmation for a part of it.) If none of 'em
are mentioned in it for the Instruction of Catechumens, why should he charge
that as a great defect in our Catechism which is wanting in their own? But what
if I should tell him, it is highly probable that neither Baptisms nor Imposition
of hands are mentioned in that forecited summary of Principles, 6 Heb. 2. as
distinct Principles at all? He knows Expositors observe that the Original may
be read thus, Not laying again the foundation of Repentance from dead works and
Faith in God, being the Doctrine of Baptisms and Imposition of hands (i. e. the
Doctrine typify'd by those two rites in the Jewish Religion, their legal
Washings or Purifications, and the Imposition of hands on the head of the
Sacrifice). For as those legal Purifications were typical of Repentance from
dead words, so that Imposition of hands on the head of the Sacrifice was
typical of Faith in God through a Mediator and his attoning sacrifice. Or we may
take both these rites as typical of Faith in God, through the expiatory and
cleansing virtue of the Mediator's Sacrifice. And I shall suggest three things
to strengthen this Exposition. First, that this Exposition is most agreeable to
the scope of the Inspired Writer, who was about to treat of this Sacrifice of
Christ, and its expiatory virtue, as the Antitype of the legal Purifications
and Sacrifices, (as appears from the 9th chapter of that Ep). Secondly, because
Baptisms in the plural number is never, that I know of in all the Scriptures,
used concerning Christian Baptism, but is used in this very Ep. concerning the
Jewish Washings or Purifications, 9 Heb. 10. Thirdly, because it is not easily
conceivable how any of the other sorts of Imposition of hands should come to be
made here by the Inspired Writer, a fundamental principle of the Christian
Religion. For why should the Doctrine of External Baptism or that of Imposition
of hands in any of the senses forementioned, be any more rank't among
Fundamental Articles, than the Doctrine of the Lord's Supper, of which there is
not the least mention made here? But since the Bp. seems to insinuate here as
if he took the Confirmation practiced in the Established Church to be one of the
Principles mentioned, 6 Heb. 2. I would very gladly, if he be of that Opinion,
understand what grounds he has for it. For I am prone to suspect that the Order
of the Church about Confirmation, is an Abuse that needs to be reformed. Were
there nothing more in it, than a grave Bishop's praying over children, and
using this common Jewish custom as our Savior did, of laying his hands on
their heads while he prayed, I should not much quarrel with it, tho why the
Parish-Minister's Prayers and Blessing (under whose Pastoral care they are)
should not be as significant, I know not. But I understand no good reason, why
the Bishop should be ordered to say in the Collect used on this occasion, That
he lays hands on 'em by the example of the H. Apostles, to certify 'em by this
sign, of God's favor and gracious goodness toward 'em. For I take the
Arguments which the learned Daille has produced against his Romish Adversaries,
in his admirable Discourse about Confirmation, to prove, That the Apostles laid
hands on the newly-baptiz'd only to communicate the extraordinary gifts, not
the ordinary sanctifying influences of the H. Spirit, to be unanswerable. How
come our Bishops then to lay hands on children after their Example, when they
do not pretend to any such power of communicating those extraordinary gifts as
the Apostles had? Nay, what divine warrant have they to certify children by
this sign, of God's favor and gracious goodness toward 'em? What promise can
they produce of God's annexing his favor to this sign? If they can produce
such a promise, here is a New Sacrament of divine Institution in the Christian
Church besides Baptism and the Lord's Supper. If they can produce none, here
seems to be a new Human Sacrament. For according to the definition of the
Church-Catechism, Here is an outward visible sign, viz. The Imposition of
hands; It Is a sign of spiritual grace, no less than God's favor and gracious
goodness; The Sign is made a means of conferring it, because those that use it,
profess to do it in imitation of the holy Apostles, who did certainly by their
Imposition of hands communicate the holy Spirit; And it is expressly made by the
Collect a pledge to assure 'em of it.

Here wants nothing then but Christ's Institution, which if it be not produced,
here is in the proper sense of the word, a sinful Invention of men in the
worship of God. And we shall have the greater reason to be jealous of it, if
our Author advance the doctrine of it into an Essential Article of our
Religion. However we may hence perceive that 'twas not in vain that the Church
Catechism puts so wary an Answer into the childrens mouths when that Question
is proposed, How many Sacraments are there? Answ. Two only as generally
necessary to Salvation, viz. Baptism and the Lord's Supper. But if Confirmation
be a Sacrament of divine Institution at all, I know not why it should not be as
necessary to Salvation as either of the other; If it be not, Why is it
retained? I know indeed there is a sort of Confirmation which those excellent
Divines Mr. Hanmer and Mr. Baxter plead for, i. e. They would have adult
persons obliged publicly to own their Consent to the Baptismal Covenant in
order to their Admission to the Lord's Supper, But then they would have this
done at such years when they are capable of professing an understanding,
serious and credible consent to it. But this can no way excuse the common
practice of the Established Church in admitting children to it as soon as they
can say the Creed, the Lord's-Prayer, and Ten Comandments, tho no such
understanding consent to their Baptismal Engagements can be expected from 'em.
For this is no better than perverting a most useful practice (and agreeable to
the general Rules of Scripture) into an empty Formality, or rather a solemn
Trifling and Mockery.

Having dispatched the First, I come to consider the Bp's
II CHarge against the practice of Dissenters which I shall deliver in his own
words, But the most sad and deplorable defect of your performance of this duty,
is your casting out the Reading of the Word of God from most of your public
Assemblys directly contrary to God's Institution and Ordinance for the
Instruction of his Church; Insomuch that in many of your Meetings, setting
aside a verse or two for a Text or Quotation at the discretion of the Teacher,
the voice of God is never publicly heard among 'em. This is matter of fact,
and undeniable. And in all the Meetings of the North of Ireland in a whole
year, perhaps there is not so much Scripture read as in one day in our Church,
by the strictest enquiry I could make, etc. Sure it is a sad thing that a man
may go to most Meetings many years, and never hear one entire Chapter read in
'em.

Answ: It Is really deplorable, that some men, when they write for a Party make
so little conscience of Truth, as to offer the most barefac't untruths for
undeniable matters of fact. And I am sorry that the Bp. should be so
unfortunate in his Enquirys, as to meet with no better Informers than such as
have so grossly imposed upon his credulity in the accounts they have given him
of the practice of Dissenters. And therefore to ease him of these sad thoughs
that he seems possessed with on this occasion, I must relate matters of fact more
truly to him, viz. That it is the general practice of the Ministers in the North
of Ireland, for about three quarters of the year (For in most Meetings the
Winter quarter is only excepted) to read every morning an entire portion of
Scripture (usually a whole Chapter, or at least so much of one as they can go
through with in an Exposition of half an hours length). And upon the best
enenquiry I can make, he will find very few Meetings, if any at all, that vary
from this practice, What Apology then can he make not only for his charging 'em
with casting-out the Reading of the Scriptures, but for his telling us, that
perhaps there is not so much Scripture read in all the Meetings in the North of
Ireland in a year, as in one day in the Established Church. Let us suppose there
are 40 Meetings in the North of Ireland, and let us suppose in each Meeting
half a Chapter read every Ld's-day for three quarters of the year; (And this is
the least that is really read, for they more commonly read a whole Chapter) yet
by this computation there will be near 800 Chapters read in those Meetings in a
year; And will his Lordship persuade us that there is as much read in one day
in the Church? If he mean that there is as much read in one day in all the
Parish-Churches in the North, there is nothing like Truth in his Assertion. If
he mean there is as much read every day in each Parish Church (as his words
seem to import) what he asserts is so ridiculous, that one would think, if he
had no regard to truth, yet he should have some to common sense, in his
accusations. Nay, I must add, that I look upon his Lordship's charge as so
unjust, that if we take the Scriptures to be read whenever they are verbatim
recited to the People, and compute all the parallel passages of Scripture that
occur in their Expositions, and in their Sermons (in both which the N. C.
Ministers in general, and particularly those in the North of Ireland, never
used to be sparing in the use of their Concordances) I see little reason to
doubt but there is as much of the Scriptures read, or as much of the inspired
word of God proposed for the Instruction of the people in each Meeting, as
there is in each Parish Church. And in the former it is always read with this
advantage, that whatever is read, is expounded too, in order to the peoples
being more fully instructed in it. And if this be a just account of matter of
fact, I hope his Lordship will think himself obliged in honor and conscience
to disabuse his Readers by retracting so gross a flander as this, of our
casting out the reading of the Scriptures, and justling the word of God out of
our solemn Meetings, so that his voice is seldom publicly heard in 'em.

For if there be any difference between us and the Established Church in this
point, It lies in this, Whether the Reading a larger entire Portion without any
explication (or, as he speaks, without cover or gloss) or a shorter entire
portion of it, with an explication chiefly drawn from parallel passages of
Scripture, that give light to that which is read, be more conducive to the
Instruction and Edification of the People? And here the Dissenters are ready to
join issue with him. For as to this debate, we may justly appeal to all sober
and unprejudiced persons. It Is certain their way of Reading the Scriptures
without any Exposition of 'em, is far the easi^st; and he need not take any
great pains to recommend it to the Clergy, who are not likely to be fond of
this human Invention of lecturing on 'em. But if the other way of reading 'em (
viz. with a brief explication) be not more instructive and edifying to the
People, it is because the Scriptures are best understood by the People without
any help from their Teachers. And if so, why did our Savior appoint any
public Teachers in his Church at all? If there be such a plainness in the
Scriptures as needs little explication to ordinary Hearers, If they apply
themselves better than any man can do (as his Lp. insinuates when he seems to
touch on this debate, p 94.) Why should such Teachers undertake so needless a
task? Why should they spoil the plainness and efficacy of the Scriptures with
their useless endeavors to explain 'em to the understandings, and urge 'em on
the Consciences of their people? Nay, if the bare Reading the Scriptures be
most edifying, mere Readers are far preferable to the best Teachers, and a good
pair of eyes and lungs will enable the most ignorant Curate to contribute as
much to the Instruction and Salvation of the People by the exercise of those
natural Talents, as the most judieious Divine can by his laborious endeavors
to explain and apply the Scripture, and by the exercise of those gifts which
are the product of the Divine Blessing on his unwearied study of those sacred
Writings. And if his Lp. can persuade us of the truth of this, we shall save a
great deal of our money that we lay out in buying, and our pains in reading
such useless things as Commentarys on the Bible. But sure when our Protestant
Divines assert the Scriptures to be plain in all things necessary to Salvation,
(as he tells us, p. 94.) they do not mean so plain, as to exclude our diligence
in comparing one part of Scripture with anothor, or the help of Teachers to
direct and assist us therein. Much less do they suppose their help unnecessary
to our growing in divine knowledge, and going on to perfection in it.

It Is indeed true that there are some few Meetings (tho perhaps not five in
this whole Kingdom) in which there is rarely any entire portion of Scripture
read. And yet even these the Bp. dos unjustly charge with banishing the Reading
of the word of God, since they retain that most useful way of Reading it, (
viz. the Reading many parallel Texts that illustrate the same Truth or duty) of
which we have the most frequent Examples in the New Testament. And indeed there
are few Sermons of Dissenters in which there is not as much of the Scriputres
recited to the People, as if put together, would make up two or three Chapters.
But I confess I take the omission of this other way of Reading (viz. an entire
por^ion at once) to be a defect which I wish reformed in those few. Nay, when
the shortness of the days in the Winter-quarter leaves no room for Exposition,
I could wish the reading an entire portion were still more generally continued,
as it is done in some Congregations; In that to which I belong, both are
continued throughout the whole year. The Bp. may indeed justly charge us with
falling short of reading so much as the Directory recommends, but he will find
it hard to prove that we fall short of what any command of God to the Christian
Church obliges us to. And I do impartially think there are no Christian
Assemblys whatever, wherein more of the voice of God in his Word is heard by
the People, and more unwearied diligence used to bring 'em to the understanding
of what he has there revealed.

Since then I have rectified his Lp's mistake in matter of fact, I hope he may
easily see how little we are concerned in the reasons he brings to condemn what
he so falsely accuses us of, viz. our general casting out the reading of the
Scriptures, or in the Answers he gives to such Excuses as he pretends are
alleged to justify it.

He tells us indeed, that he has found such pretenses to justify it, but he was
wiser than to produce his Authors for 'em. As if the public were concerned in
all the follys he can pick up in his conversation with ignorant people. And no
wonder when he meets with so weak Opponents, that he can easily triumph over
'em, or rather that he can answer the Arguments he frames to himself. For as I
have showed him, the generality of the Dissenters need no apology for not
reading the Scripture; whatever others may do for laying aside the Exposition
of what is read, to whose consideration I would recommend the excellent words
of St. Austin on 1 John where speaking of the Scripture, he says, Quare
legitur si sil^bitur? aut quare auditur, si non exponitur? and those of St.
Bernard, Temp. 55. Non tradit matter parvulo nucem integram sed frangit eam et
nucleum porrigit. But yet there are several passages in his discourse on this
Head, from p. 84 to p. 103. too gross to pass without some remark on 'em.

P. 85. He bids us, Remember of whom it is said, 7 Mark 6. This people honors
me with their lips, but their heart is far from me. While you thus justle out
the word of God out of your solemn Meeting to make room for your own Sermons, I
beseech you to consider whether this be not laying aside the Commandments of
God for men's Inventions, unless you will call your Sermons (as some Quakers are
said to do) as much the word of God as the Bible.

Answ. Dos his Lp. indeed imagine, that a sermon which chiefly consists of
several parallel passages of the word of God compared togther, and recited in
that order as may illustrate or apply each other, justles out the word of God?
Or dos a Lecture, which is an entire portion of Scripture, read and explained,
justle it out? Is the word of God excluded by being explained and applied when
it is read? Or do those less honor the Word of God in their hearts, who desire
to hear it expounded and applied, then those that are content to have it read
without any such additional help to understand it and profit by it? May we not
as wisely tell our Author that he has just led out this Text by paraphrasing
it, especially when he has done it so untowardly, and so little agreeably to
the design of our Blessed Savior? Nay how comes he here to call Sermons the
Inventions of Men? Dos he think that God has not as expressly enjoined Teaching
and Exhortation, as Reading the Scriptures to Christian Pastors? Nay of the two
more expressly, there being far more numerous and plain passages for the former
then for the latter, as distinguished from the former? How comes he then to make
that a human Invention which he owns has scriptural Example to warrant it, p.
75. nay for which I have produced him plain precepts too? Nay how comes he to
assign us so wonderful a Reason, why we must own Sermons to be men's
Inventions, viz. that otherwise we must call them (as some Quakers are said to
do) as much the word of God as the Bible? Dos he indeed espouse that sottish
Opinion of the Quakers who account every thing in the Worship of God a human
Invention that is performed in the exercise of our own rational Faculties, and
requires our Study and Meditation in the composure of it? If he do, I am afraid
he must abandon the Reading of the Scriptures as an human Invention too,
because that requires the use of our Eyes, and some small use of our
Understandings too to read right? Nay he must on the same account call all the
Collects in the Liturgy human Inventions (as the Quakers do) because he cannot
pretend 'em to be as much divinely inspired as the Prayers recorded in the
Bible. And dos he expect that we should regard such uncharitable censures as
are founded on such wild and confused Notions as these are, any more than we do
the senseless clamours of the Quakers themselves, who at least in this matter
speak more consistently with themselves then his Lp. dos when he talks of human
Inventions?

His Lp tells us, p. 88. Many of our common People are strangers to the History
of the Bible, and the first Principles of Christianity.

Answ. Either he means they are more so, in proportion to those that are
members of the Established Church, or he dos not, If not to what purpose dos he
upbraid the Dissenters with it. If he dos, I would desire him to consult his
credit a little better then by obtruding so notorious untruths upon the world.
It Is impossible to make exact Computations of this kind; But I doubt not, that
if he takes a thousand Families of each Communion, he will find that for one of
the Conforming Laity that reads the Scripture daily in their Families there are
ten or more of the Dissenters. I am credibly informed by such as live in the
North, that most Families of Dissenters read the Scriptures daily, and
especially on the Lord's day, both before they come to the public worship and
after; And it is partly on that account that the Ministers lay down their
Expository Lectures in the depth of Winter. Whereas since comparatively so few
Conforming Families have the Scriptures read in 'em, there may be perhaps the
greater necessity for the reading a larger entire portion of 'em in the Parish
Churches. I may say the same as to the other branch of the Accusation, For the
account given before of the care of their Ministers to catechize every
particular person in their Parishes renders it absolutely incredible that their
People should be greater strangers to the first Principles of Christianity then
others on whom no such particular pains are bestowed.

The Bp. tells us, p. 95. Reading a Verse or two, and trusting to the
Minister's Application, without the Peopl's being acquainted with the whole
Body of Scripture, dos put Christians too much in the power of their Teachers,
etc. This is the very Artifice whereby the Romish Priests keep their People in
Ignorance; And your Teachers using the same method seems too like a design on
their Hearers, and tempts the World to suspect that they are afraid of the
naked simplicity of the Scriptures, since they dare not trust the People with
hearing 'em publicly read, except they add their own glosses on 'em.

Answ. Has his Lp. any just ground for this invidious Comparison? Do the Romish
Priests when they Preach put Bibles into their people's hands? Do they read it
to 'em in their Mother Tongue? Do they urge their people to bring Bibles with
them, and like the Noble Beraeans, to examine all they deliver, and not to take
things on trust from their Teachers, without trying what they hear by that
infallible Test? And yet he knows this is the Dissenters practice, to whose
Meetings most of their people bring Bibles, whereas few comparatively bring 'em
to the public Churches, unless it be that small part of 'em which the
Common Prayer Book contains. Nay, do not those rather imitate the Romish
Priests, who tho they lock not up the Scriptures in an unknown Tongue, yet
never open 'em when they read 'em by a judicious Exposition? Or dos he think
bare reading the Scriptures, without ever comparing 'em, will best acquaint the
People with the body of 'em? Or dos he think the People are in greatest danger
of being seduc't, when the Scriptures are explained as well as read to 'em, and
that they are then likest to take up the right sense of 'em when they have no
Interpreter to guide 'em? Were the Apostles afraid of the naked simplicity of
the Scriptures because they took so much pains to add their own glosses on 'em?
Or dos he think that mere Readers have done more to recover Christianity to
it is primitive simplicity and purity, and to reclaim the world from the
delusions of Popery then the most laborious Expositors? Why then do we not
throw away all our Commentaries on the Bible? Why dare not his Lp. in this
Discourse trust us with the naked simplicity of the Scriptures he quotes in it
without adding his own glosses on 'em? Or will he own this for a just
temptation to suspect that he has some design upon his Readers?

For the 5th. Excuse, p. 96. viz. That the Word of God, that dead Letter, is a
dull formal thing, without spirit or life, where it is not applied, etc. I
wonder what Dissenter suggested it to his Lordship; For it is a very dull
pretense, and yet I do not see that the main thing he insists on in his Answer
dos vary much from the nature of the Objection. For not to insist on his still
calling that a human Invention, which is undoubtedly of Divine Appointment,
(and by his own Confession has the warrant of Scriptural Example, p. 75,) If
there be any thing to the purpose against the Dissenters practice in his 3d.
and 4th. Consideration, it must be founded on this supposition, That it is a
great character of a Spiritual Man to love to hear the Scriptures read without
any Exposition or Application, but of a Carnal Man, to delight more in
Scripture read and expounded too, then in the Scripture barely read. For so he
applies that noted passage of the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 2.13. And thence He
reproaches the Dissenters as (notwithstanding all their pretenses to a more
then ordinary spiritualness and reformation) little advanced above the natural
man that neither receives nor relishes the things of God, at least not as they
ought.

Answ. If any thing could put us out of conceit with Expositions of the
Scripture, it would be such scurvy and abusive ones as this, which his Lp. here
offers. And I do not believe there is any Dissenter but would delight in the
perusal of those excellent words of the Apostle, while he nauseates such an
insipid gloss on 'em. For must it not argue a strange Confusion in a man's
Notions of things to suppose those things so opposite and inconsistent that so
admirably accord together? Dos the Bishop think the style of the Scriptures is
as familiar to ordinary Readers now, as it was to those to whom the several
parts of it were first immediately directed, or that there is no difficulty in
the ordinary parts of it that renders a brief Interpretation highly useful to
the Church? And do those love or relish the Word of God less then others, who
are not contented with the bare reading of it without desiring all the help
their Teachers can give 'em for their right understanding and applying it? Was
it an Argument of a carnal mind in the Queen of Candace's Treasurer that he was
not satisfied with reading God's Word by the Prophet Isaiah, without desiring
Philip to expound it, 8. Acts 27? Is it so carnal a practice in Ministers to
read Commentators on the Bible, or in the People to desire to enjoy this fruit
of their studies and labors? Is it a carnal temper to be most affected with
the Scriptures when we most clearly discern the true sense of 'em; but on the
contrary, a spiritual disposition to delight in 'em most when we understand 'em
least? Or rather, dos not such discourse as this look too like a shrewd design
to gratify the carnal and lazy humor of the Clergy, by excusing 'em from the
pains they should take in studying the Scriptures in order to the edifying
their People by a judicious interpretation of 'em? As if our Author would have
them all transformed into such as the 49th. Canon of the Church of England
refers to, who, tho Benefic't yet being unlicens't to Preach, are not to take
on them to Expound in their own Cure or elsewhere any Scripture or matter of
Doctrine, and have no higher privilege allowed 'em, then that they study to
read aptly and plainly (without glozing or adding) the Homilies already set
forth, etc. (And by the way, I perceive the Compilers of those Canons were
great Strangers to our Author's Notion of Preaching)

But after he has examined the pretenses he feigns the Dissenters to make, (for
it is evident they never brought any for not Reading the Scriptures) he ventures
to give us what he himself takes to be the true Reason of their supposed
Neglect of it, which he draws from 2 Timothy 4.3. of which he gives us an
admirable Interpretation. The Apostles words are, For the time will come when
they will not endure sound Doctrine, but after their own Lusts shall heap up to
themselves Teachers having itching Ears. Now an itching Ear (says the Bp.) is
one that loves novelty and variety. Because therefore our Church gives the
People little that is new in her prayers or reading the Scriptures, but retains
a Form of sound words in the one and the plain word of God in the other: Hence
it is that some People cannot endure our service, but heap up to themselves
Teachers that instead of Prayers and Praises of God's immediate Appointment
will gratify 'em every meeting with a new Prayer without troubling 'em with
such Prayers and Sermons as they think old which are incomparably better; Only
the itching Ears of the People, as the Apostle foretold are pleased with the
novelty and variety of the one, and disgust the repetition of the other, as the
Israelites did that of Angels Food, 78 Ps. 25.21 Number. 5.

Answ. If we be so fond of Novelty and Variety as the Bp. supposes, he has been
very studious to gratify our humor in this new Paraphrase, of which I dare say
no Expositor before him ever dreamed. For whereas the Apostle is plainly
speaking of such as could not endure sound Doctrine, and therefore sought out
Teachers that would gratify 'em with some new Doctrines, more grateful to their
Lusts or Fancys, and entertain their itching Ears (as the Apostle explains
himself in the next verse:) with Fables instead of Truth. The Bp. dos with
profound judgment apply it to those that desire to have the Scriptures clearly
explained to their Understandings, and impartially applied to their
Consciences. As if the Apostle had here quarreled with the People for desiring
Sermons, when he had in the very verse before urged Timothy to preach the word,
To be instant in season and out of season, To reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all
long suffering and Doctrine. And if we should grant the Bp. for once (tho as I
have showed him before there is no reason for it) that the Apostle by preaching
the word understood Reading it, yet according to himself, Rebuking, reproving
and exhorting with all long suffering and doctrine must imply an Exposition and
Application of what was read. So that the Bp. has unhappily expounded and
applied this passage of the Apostle in direct opposition to the very scope of
it, which was to urg Timothy to constant preaching in our and the common sense
of the word, as the most effectual means to cure people of that itching desire
after such new Doctrines and Fables as would please their wanton fancys or
vicious Inclinations. Whereas the Bp. imagines that the Apostle here condems
the People's fondness for such Sermons as the very fault they were to be cured
of, and so strangely mistakes the Remedy for the Disease. I confess how much
soever our Ears may itch after Novelty and Variety, yet he could not reasonably
expect they would be charmed with contradictions, which instead of tickling 'em
grate upon 'em. And truly if our Author gives us no better Exposition and
Application of Scripture then this, We Will be much rather satisfied he should
only read it to us, For then there would be less danger of misunderstanding it.
But I wonder why his Lp. should tell us of Prayers and Praises of God's
appointment? Dos he not know the Collects of the Liturgy are as much of human
Composure as our free prayers? Why then should they be any more compared to
Angels Food then ours, which are rather more agreeable to scriptural precept
and Pattern? Nay, if the Scriptures read be Sermons of Gods Appointment, they
are not the less so, but the more for being explained and applied, as appears
from this very direction of the Apostle to Timothy, to preach the word to be
instant in season, etc. to rebuke, etc.

I shall conclude what relates to our practice with the concluding words of
this chapter of the Bp's.

But as Aaron to please the Israelites made the Golden Calf, so some Ministers
tho contary to their own principles have changed God's Institution to please
their People, and left out the constant regular Reading God's word because
their People grew weary of it. But let all men judge who behave themselves most
like the faithful Ministers of Christ, We who keep to the reading God's word
according to his own Institution, whether the People will hear or forbear, or
they that comply with 'em and lay aside God's command to oblige and please 'em.

Answ. I have already considered the injustice of this charge, And only add,
That those more fully comply with God's command, who read and expound then
those that only read. And I am sure as the Dissenters practice herein costs 'em
more labor, so, if their People be not more edified by it, It must be their
own fault. With what justice then or indeed with what sense dos his Lp. compare
the Dissenters practice herein to Aarons making a Golden Calf to please the
People? Are indeed Lectures and Sermons such dangerous Idols, Or is Hearing the
Scriptures expounded when read so pernicious a piece of Idolatry? Is not the
Interpretation of Scripture as truly a divine Ordinance as the Reading of it?
And will any man that considers what he says set the one in opposition to the
other? Or rather would not the confining Ministers to the Reading the
Scriptures only, tend to debase 'em into such a sort of Priests as Jeroboam
made of the meanest of the People when he set up the Worship of the Golden
Calves. 1 Kings 12.31. I mean such Priests as need little other furniture for
their public Ministrations then their book and their eyes, and are under no
obligation to study the Scriptures because they are under no necessity of
interpreting 'em to the People? And what a sort of Clergy are to be found in
Russia, Muscovy, and other parts of the Christian World, where they are turned
into mere Readers, we have so sad accounts from History, that if his Lp. intend
to turn his Clergy into such, by thus discouraging Sermons as an human
Invention, I should not blame the dissenting ministers for being loath to come
under his conduct and regulation.

I shall conclude this Chapter with observing in reference to the practice of
the Established Church.

1. That I suppose the Bp. will not pretend any Warrant from precept or Example
in the Holy Scriptures, for the reading such un-inspired Books as those of the
Apocrypha together with the Canonical Writings of the Old and New Testament in
the time of public Worship: And therefore I hope he will censure this himself for
one of his human Inventions. Especially since himself owns there is a tenth
part of the old Testament left out of the Churches order for the Reading it,
sure to exclude that and introduce in the stead of it, the story of Bell and
the Dragon, Tobit and his Dog, etc. looks very like the preferring mere human
Composures (some of which contain foolish and incredible Relations) before that
part of God's living Oracles. Not to mention how little care is taken to
distinguish 'em when read from the Canonical Scriptures, and prevent the common
people's mistaking 'em for such. But however his Lp's prudence is commendable
in taking no notice of this matter, because those Accusations are best past
over in silence, against which there is no defense.

2. That the common practice of the Conforming Clergy in the Country, of
having only one Sermon on the Lord's day, nay in the far greatest number of
Parishes of having no public Worship at all one part of the day, is a defect
that needs some effectual Reformation.

3. That the Dissenters seem to have better reason to blame the Conforming
Clergy for casting out the Exposition of the Scripture when read (as that
Exercise is now distinguished from Sermons) then the Bishop to reproach them
for not reading the Scripture.

Remarks on the Chapter concerning Bodily Worship. And here First, As to the
Directions of the holy Scriptures concerning it.
1. I Do readily agree with the Bp, That Bodily Worship is Commanded in the
Scriptures.

Not that I suppose it (as his Lp. dos) to be a distinct part of Worship from
Prayer, Praise, etc. but only a suitable Adjunct of it, (of which more
afterward).

2. I do agree with him also, that the most common postures of Bodily Worship
mentioned in Scripture, as used in Thanksgivings and Prayers were prostration,
kneeling or standing. As to this last of standing, the Bp. takes notice of it
as used in Thanksgivings, and p. 143. owns it to have been a Scripture-posture
in Prayer too. But since he gives no instances of it, as used in Prayer, I
shall take leave to subjoyn a few, and the rather because this is the posture
the Dissenters most generally use in this duty when publicly performed.

Of this posture in Prayer, the best Expositors understand Abraham's standing
before the Lord, 18 Genesis 22. Thus the Levites stood up in that Confession and
Prayer they made, 9 Neh. 4. etc. So to cry to God, and stand up, are used as
synonimous expressions, 30 Job 20. And 15 Jer. 1. Moses and Samuel's standing
before God is put for praying to him. So also, 18 Jer. 20. And accordingly it
was (as Grotius observes, on 6 Matt. 5.) the most universally-receiv'd custom
among the Jews to pray standing. Thus, 18 Luke, 10, 11. Two men went up to the
Temple to pray, and standing is the religious posture used by each of 'em. So
11 Mark. 25. When ye stand praying, forgive, etc. Hence Prayers were not only
called Stations by the Jews (among whom it was a celebrated saying, That
without stations the world could not subsist) but also by some of the most
ancient Christian Writers. For the Christians not only imitated the Jews in
this religious posture, but because they accounted their Lord's-days their
joyful Festivals, they forbad kneeling on 'em, and required standing.

3. As Prayer and Thanksgiving are such Acts of Worship wherein we immediately
address our selves to God, so hearing seems rather to be a mediate act of
Worship, and therefore the same posture of devotion seems not necessary
therein, as in our direct Addresses to him. And hence we read of sitting, as
the posture used in this part of Divine Worship, 33 Ezekiel. v. 31 -- And this is
practiced both in their Congregations and ours.

Being thus easily agreed as to the Directions of Scripture, It remains that we
consider

Secondly, the Application of 'em, In which the Bp. undertakes to represent the
Principles and Practice of the Dissenters.

I. As to our Principles, He says, You do not allow Bodily Adoration to be any
part of God's Worship.

Answ. If he mean that the Dissenters do not suppose that God is to be worshipped
with our body as well as spirit, and that we are not obliged to use such
external postures and behavior as may most fitly express our inward reverence
of God and subjection to him, nothing can be more groundless than to affirm
this concerning 'em. But if his Lp mean, that they do not allow bodily postures
of devotion to be in the same sense a part of religious worship, as Prayer,
Praise, Hearing, etc. are, It is true; And they think he has made a very
unaccurate enumeration of the parts of Worship, when he has omitted Baptism,
which is one undoubted part of it, and made those devout postures a part, which
are more properly an Adjunct of it. For they are not a distinct Duty from
Prayer and Praise, etc. but relate to the manner of performing 'em, which
should be fit to represent our profound veneration for that glorious Majesty
whom we adore. And in vain dos he refer us to what he had said, p. 105, 106.
etc. for the proof of these devout bodily postures being in this sense a part
of Worship. For we find nothing more there, then that God requires these
external marks of our inward Reverence, when we offer up our Prayers or
Thanksgivings, and has forbidden our paying 'em to any graven Image, that
accordingly it was the practice of holy men, both in the Old and New Testament,
to offer these parts of worship to God in such devout postures; And that the
Scriptures frequently call these external postures of devotion by the name of
Worship, on the account of their being the outward expressions, or the visible
marks and signs of it. All which we readily grant; But if he had said any thing
to the purpose, he should have proved, that mere bowing the knee, or
prostration, etc. when there was no other part of worship offered, neither
vocal nor mental, is yet made in Scripture a part of Worship; which as he has
not yet done, so I presume he will not in have do it. He dos indeed tell us, p.
110. that bodily worship is the most proper external Act of Adoration, that
Praying, Praising, etc. are not in Scripture termed Worship, and that these are
not immediate direct Worship properly so called, because they do not, as
bending or bowing the body, directly signify the subjection of our minds to
God, in which inward Worship properly consists, and accordingly he tells us,
the words used for Worship in the Old and New Testament signify properly and
originally some bodily Action.

Answ. That those bodily actions, which are external marks of reverence toward
God, and subjection to him, are called in Scripture Worship, has been already
granted; But the reason why they are called Worship in general, rather than
Prayer and Praise, etc. is not because these latter are not immediate direct
Worship properly so called, but because these bodily actions are the external
expressions of religious reverence and homage common to all these several parts
of direct and immediate Worship. For there is a more direct signification of
our subjection to God in our prayers, when we expressly declare therein our
humiliation for our sins, implore the pardon of 'em, acknowledge the rightful
Authority of God over us, and renew our vows of Obedience to him, than can be
supposed in any external postures whatsoever. The signification of our homage
by words being more distinct, clear, and full, than by gestures. I might say
the same of those praises, one great part whereof consists in celebrating the
sovereign authority and dominion of God, as well as the perfections of his
nature. So that these dutys do more directly express the devotion of our minds,
tho postures of bodily reverence must be annexed, because God must be glorified
with our bodies as well as spirits

But he tells us, The Directory not only leaves out, but excludes bodily
Worship, by requiring all to take their seats, or places, without Adoration, or
bowing themselves toward one place or other.

And this the Bp. severely decrys, as a Rule directly opposite to natural
Reason, as well as to the Commands of God, and the examples of his Saints.

Answ. If the Bishop had duly considered the true occasion of this Caution in
the Directory, he would not have put us under a necessity of reviving the
memory of those faults that seemed buried with their Authors, by straining
those expressions of the Directory beyond the true intent of 'em. For it is well
known this Caution was levelled against the manifold bowings and cringings
which AB Laud had endeavored to introduce into the Church; who upon the vain
conceit of some peculiar presence of Christ at the Altar, zealously propagated
the custom of bowing toward it; And he having a great influence on the
disposal of Church-preferments, on the account of his eminent station, and his
great Interest at Court, All the aspiring Clergy were ready to strive who
should outdo each other in that sort of bowing, which was then the surest way
to rise. The Parliament was greatly offended with these and the like
Innovations, and especially at the rigor wherewith he had endeavored to impose
'em on the Inferior Clergy. Now the Westminster-Assembly (composed almost
entirely of such as were Conformists) being called to reform such Abuses, do in
order to the effectual banishing these Innovations, give this Rule, by which
they intend no more, than that no such external Adoration or bowing should be
used by the people as they entered into the Church, because they supposed such
external Adoration should only be used when some part of public worship was
performed. But that they did by no means intend to forbid such external
Adoration when any part of public worship was offered, that required such
marks of our religious Reverence and Homage, is hence evident, viz. from their
requiring such as come in after public Worship is begun, reverently to compose
themselves to join with the Assembly in that Ordinance of God that is then in
hand, which can import no less than the putting themselves into a bodily
posture most suitable to that Ordinance, and expressive of due veneration
toward God in it. It Is true indeed, as to the particular posture, they leave
the people to that liberty the Scripture has done, which tho it recommend
several, yet dos not confine us to any one to the exclusion of the rest. So
that his Lp. has palpably misrepresented this Rule of the Directory (on that
occasion too needful and justifiable) that he might have some pretense to find
fault with it. For as I have here explained it to him, he may easily see, it is
neither contrary to reason nor Scripture, but only to a superstitious custom,
of A. B. Laud's Invention, or at least to one authorized and imposed by him.

II. Since then the Bp. has no just quarrel with the Principles, let us consider
what he has to say against the practice of Dissenters. And here he tells us,

1. At your Thanksgivings and Praises you neither bow nor stand up.

Answ. If he mean this of our singing of Psalms, He knows our posture is the
same herein with that used in the Parish Churches, and liable to no other
objections, than theirs. If he intends it of those Thanksgivings we offer up
together with our Prayers, what he here asserts, if he speak of the Dissenters
in general, is notoriously untrue, and contrary to plain matter of fact, as I
shall have occasion to observe farther in his charge that refers to our Prayers.

2. He charges us with casting out of our Worship the Confessions of Faith
themselves, which he tells us are a material part of the service of God, for
which he cites, 10 Romans 9, 10. If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord
Jesus, and shall believe in thine heart that God has raised him from the dead,
thou shall be saved, p. 129.

Answ. Why dos his Lp. think the bare citation of that Text a sufficient proof
of what he here infers from it, when he knows well enough, that these words are
by the stream of all judicious Commentators understood concerning the external
profession of the Christian Religion in general, (which we especially make in
our attendance on all the public Institutions of our Lord) but by none that I
can meet with besides himself concerning the repetition of a summary of the
Christian Faith in our public Assemblys. If they were to be understood of the
latter, it is but a very short summary we are here required to repeat, and such
a one as we never perform any part of Divine Worship without repeating much
more. But for the repeating that particular summary commonly called the
Apostle's Creed, or any other later one of human composure, there is not one
word in this place, nor indeed any precept or example in Scripture. So that the
Rehearsal of such a Confession of Faith, is, according to the Bp's notion, a
mere human Invention. And yet I am far from condemning the practice of the
Established Church in rehearsing the Apostle's Creed; and have known it retained
in some Meetings of Dissenters. Only I see no reason why those that use it,
should censure those that do not, when there is no clear warrant for it. And
the Bp. should, of all men, be least forward to do it.

3. He accuses the Dissenters of sitting generally at their public Prayers.

Answ. If he speak here of the generality of Dissenters in England, and in this
part of Ireland, what he says is notoriously untrue. I know few or none that
do it, except such as pretend bodily infirmity, in which case I suppose the Bp.
himself will allow it as much as to a sick man to pray in his bed. If he design
this charge only in refernce to the Dissenters in the North of Ireland, where
alone there seems to be any ground given for it, I shall first represent to him
what account the Ministers there give of this matter, and then add my own
thoughts in reference to it. Now they not only affirm, that the better sort of
their Hearers do generally stand, but that they frequently in their Discourses
to 'em recommend that, or kneeling, as the fittest posture, where bodily
imfirmity dos not hinder it. But they dare not be too peremptory in their
censuring those that pretend such infirmity, since many of their people travel
3 or 4 miles to their Meetings, and may therefore be reasonably supposed to be
incapable of long standing without danger of discomposing their minds for the
Worship of God. And for kneeling, the places where they meet are usually too
much crowded to admit of their using that posture. And there are some of 'em
think their sitting in such cases warranted by Scriptural pattern, particularly
the instance of David's sitting before the Lord, 2 Samuel 7, 8. As to this
account, I shall only briefly subjoyn, that I am truly sorry there are so many
that by sitting in public Prayer, have given some occasion for this censure of
the Bp's. For tho I doubt not, real infirmity is a just excuse for not
standing; yet it is too probable, that too many under that notion too far
consult their ease; for standing is generally used by Dissenters in Englund,
even in those places where many of the people go as far to their Meetings. And
for that passage alleged, 2 Samuel 7, 8. I do truly think there is some weight
in what the Bp. has offered, to render it probable that the word should be
translated, David stayed, or abode and certainly so many plainer and more
numerous examples of kneeling or standing are to be rather imitated by us than
this doubtful one of sitting. So that for such as use this slothful posture
without real necessity, to endulge their ease, I cannot excuse 'em from
irreverence in it. And hope they will not persist in a practice so offensive to
their brethren elsewhere, and dislik't by their Pastors. And methinks they
should be sensible of the indecency of it, if they consider, that they
themselves universally kneel or stand in Closet and Family Prayer, and it is
unaccountable why they should not as universally do it in public prayer, where
their bodily strength will permit. But then I must add, as to his Lordship,
that as he has no reason to reproach the Dissenters in general with this
unseemly practice, so, since the Ministers in the North have so faithfully
declared to their people their dislike of it, they can no more justly be
upbraided with it, than the Conforming Clergy with all that toying and
trifling, and that more open irreverence that is too common in many
Parish-Churches, and much more in the Cathedrals.

4. His next Charge is, At the Sacrament you sit, not only whilst you receive,
but at the Thanksgiving and Blessing before. And this posture (he says) the
Directory imposes on the Communicants, the contrary to scripture, in respect of
that part which concerns the Prayer and Thanksgiving, and without any command,
or so much as example from Scripture, in respect of the sitting at the time of
receiving.

Ans. That the Dissenters generally sit at the thanksgiving or blessing before
Receiving (or at the thanksgiving after it) is again notoriously contrary to
matter of fact. If this be practiced by some in the North of Ireland, they are
singular in it, nor shall I undertake to excuse 'em in it. For tho they allege
for it not only the example of the multitude's sitting at a common meal when
our Savior gave thanks, 14 Matthew. 19. but that there is no evidence of the
Apostles discontinuing their Table Gesture, when Christ past from the
Celebration of the Passover to the Celebration of his holy Supper (For the Text
says, As they were eating, Jesus took the bread, and blessed it, etc. without
any mention of a change of their posture); yet because this is but a doubtful
matter, I think it far safer to use the postures of Reverence more generally
recommended to us in our Thanksgivings and Prayers by the Scripture, than to
venture to omit them on so uncertain a ground.

But I wonder why the Bp. should so positively assert that the Directory
imposes on Communicants this posture of sitting at the Thanksgiving and Prayer
before Receiving. For I can see no ground for it from their own words, which I
perceive his Lp. was too wise to quote, and I shall therefore cite for him, and
leave the judgment to every indifferent Reader.

After this Exhortation, Warning and Invitation, The Table being before
decently covered, and so conveniently placed that the Communicants may orderly
sit about it, or at it, The Minister is to begin the Action with sanctifying
and blessing the elements of Bread and Wine set before him; The Bread in comely
and convenient Vessels, etc. Now it is plain, that these words about ordering
the Table come in as a parenthesis, and can import no more than that the Table
must be so placed, that the Communicants may sit at or about it; but that they
must actually sit during the Blessing, or Thanksgiving, is no way affirmed,
much less imposed; and I am sure the quite contrary is generally practiced.

But for sitting during the time of Receiving the elements, that indeed is
supposed, tho not enjoined by the Dir^ctory, and is generally practiced by Diss
nters.

I hope his Lp. dos not think our practice herein unlawful, since he declares,
p. 118. It Is not his intention to assert that the Scriptures require kneeling
at the Lord's Supper, p. 118. If then the debate be, whether our posture, or
theirs, comes nearer to the practice of the Apostles, and is more suitable to
the nature of the Institution it self, I think the Dissenters will have the
advantage. And since his Lp. has stated the controversy thus, I shall carefully
examine what he has here offered in favor of their practice, as preferable to
ours.

He tells us, p. 118, 119. That the Altar was of old the Lord's-Table, from
whence his Attendants were fed, from 1 Mal. 7. That on this account the
Israelites came to the Altar, and worshipped before it, as being God's Table, on
which the sacrifice was presented as his meat, of which they were permitted to
partake. From 2 Chronicles. 6.12, 13. and in 1 Kings 8.54. 2 Kings 18.22. That the
Communion Table is called the Lord's-Table, 1 Cor. 10.21. That the Israelites
partaking of the Altar, is proposed as an example for our partaking of the
Lord's Table, 1 Cor. 10.16, 18. That in 22 Ps. 29. there is an allusion to this
religious eating with bodily worship, That we must receive the Eucharist in
remembrance of Christ's death, whom we are commanded to worship, 45 Ps. v. 11.
See p. 118, 119, and 120.

Answ. His Lp. has so ill hap in his Criticisms, that he has directed us here
to one of the strongest arguments that I know of against himself. And to make
this good, I must set this account of the Jewish Sacrifices in a clearer light,
which he has treated so confusedly.

The Learned Dr. Cudworth in his excellent Treatise on the Lord's Supper as a
Feast upon a Sacrifice, divides the Jewish sacrifices into three sorts.

1. Such as were wholly offered up to God, and burnt on the Altar, and these
were called Burnt-Offerings.

2. Such wherein besides something offered to God on the Altar, the Priests had
also a part of, and these he subdivides into the Sin and Trepass Offering.

3. Such wherein, besides something offered to God, and a portion bestowed on
the Priests, the Owners themselves had a share, and these were called
Peace Offerings.

Now in all Sacrifices there was a Feast upon 'em. For the first sort of
sacrifices, viz. Burnt-offerings had always Peace Offerings annexed. In the 2d
sort, tho the Owners did not eat of it themselves, as not being perfectly
reconciled, because of some legal uncleanness, yet the Priests did eat of it as
their proxys. But in Peace Offerings, the Owners are supposed fully reconciled,
and were admitted to eat of the Sacrifice themselves, as a foederal rite of
amity and peace between God and them; For God entertained 'em as his Guests at
his Table, and feasted 'em with his provisions, according to the custom of
those Oriental Nations of confirming Covenants by eating and drinking together.
Now Christ's offering himself a sacrifice on the Cross, was most directly
typify'd by the Burnt-offering, and the Lord's Supper is a mystical Feast upon
the memorials of that Sacrifice, in allusion to these religious Feasts upon
Sacrifices under the Law of Moses.

From hence it plainly follows, that if the practice of the Jews in reference
to their Feasts upon the legal Sacrifices be the fittest pattern for ours in
our Feast on the memorials of the Sacrifice of Christ in the Lord's Supper, (as
the Bp. dos with very good reason assert; when from 1 Cor. 10, 16. he tells us,
That the Israelites partaking of the Altar, is proposed as an example of our
partaking of the Lord's-Table, p. 119.) then we must use the same posture in
our receiving the Lord's Supper, which they used in those Religious Feasts upon
Sacrifices, of which the Lord's Supper is the Antitype. If then the Jews
celebrated those Feasts in a Table Gesture, we should use the same gesture in
our celebration of the Lord's Supper. The Bp. would indeed persuade us that the
Jews did not, because we read of acts of external Worship paid to God at the
offering up of sacrifices. But it is plain this argument has no force in it,
unless he could prove they continued in that worshipping posture during the
time of their eating or feasting on the things that had been offered. But of
this he has not brought us the least shadow of proof, as he may see, if he
review his own discourse on this head. Nay, we do in our celebration of the
Lord's Supper first offer up acts of Worship to God (I mean solemn
thanksgivings and prayers, in which we celebrate his infinite mercy, in giving
his Son to dye, as the great propitiation for our sins, and by Faith as it were
present that sacrifice to the Father, and implore his pardon in virtue of it)
before we sit down to feast upon the memorials of Christ's sacrifice. And tho I
might here content my self with showing the invalidity of his argument, yet for
once to do a work of supererogation, I shall prove that the Jews did celebrate
these religious Feasts upon sacrifices, not in a worshipping-posture, but in a
Table Gesture, not kneeling, etc. but sitting.

^ee Dr. ^^llingft. ^. of his ^. of I^a^ry, p. 2, etc.
His Lp. knows that all our Protestant Divines plead against the Papists, that
the golden Calf was worshipped by the Israelites no otherwise than as a visible
symbol of the true God, and with the accustomed rites which they used in the
worship of him. Of which rites we have this plain account, 32 Exodus 5, 6. And
when Aaron saw it (i. e. the golden Calf, concerning which they said, These are
thy Gods, O Israel, that brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, v. 4.) he built
an Altar before it, and made proclamation, saying, To morrow is a Feast to the
Lord, or to Jehovah. And it follows, And they rose up early in the morning and
offered Burnt-offerings, and brought Peace offerings, and the people sat down
to eat and to drink, and rose up to play. Where their sitting down to eat and
drink was their celebrating this religious Feast upon the sacrifice, the
Peace Offerings being the provisions they fed on. And accordingly when the
Apostle Paul has occasion to mention this Instance of their Idolatry, he
recites no more than their siting down to eat and drink, etc. that being a
sufficient evidence of their joining in the Sacrifices, on which this was the
Religious Feast. Of such a feast upon a sacrifice we have a remarkable instance
given us, 1 Samuel 9.12, 13. compared with the 22 v. v. 12, 13. And they answered
'em and said, He is, behold, he is before you, make have now, for he came to
day to the City, for there is a Sacrifice of the people to day in the
high-place. As Soon as ye come into the City ye shall straitway find him, before
he go up to the high-place to eat, for the people will not eat till he come,
because he dos bless the Sacrifice, and afterward they eat that be bidden; and
v. 22. we read that Samuel took Saul and his Servant and brought 'em into a
Parlour, and made 'em sit in the chiefest place among them that were bidden,
which were about 30 persons. So that sitting was evidently their posture in
this Religious Feast upon the Sacrifice. Such a religious Feast was that
mentioned, 1 Samuel 16.6. etc. and sitting was again their posture in the
celebration of it. See 57 Is. 7 23 Ezekiel. 41. in both which places sitting was
the accustomed rite in all those Feasts upon Sacrifices among other Nations as
well as the Jews. So, 2 Amos 8. And of such Feasts on Sacrifices, see more 34
Exodus 15. 18 Exodus 12. 106 Ps. 28.

And from hence we may not only infer (according to the Bp's own argument) that
sitting at this mystical Feast on the memorials of Christ's Sacrifice is hereby
warranted as lawful, but that it is most agreeable to the nature of the
Institution it self, as the Lord's Supper is, Epulum ex oblatis. Nay this
posture seems hereby recommended to us, as most fit to signify our partaking of
the precious virtue and fruits of the sacrifice of Christ, and the honor the
blessed God puts upon us when he admits us to sit down as Guests at his holy
Table, in token of our being received into a state of amity and peace with him.
And we are not (as the Bishop groundlesly supposes, p. 120.) required to offer
immediate Worship to Christ, or to the Father in the act of Receiving at all.
We are indeed then required to eat and drink in remembrance of our blessed
Savior; but this rather argues that meditation is then our proper business,
and not prayer or praise; any farther than some ejaculatory desires or
thanksgivings may be intermixed in our meditations. But for solemn Worship we
have proper occasion for it, both before and after this mystical Feast, and in
that we do use a worshipping posture. And as none that know our principles can
question our paying divine honor to Jesus Christ as the Incarnate Word, or God
manifested in the flesh, so none can reasonably imagine our celebrating this
Feast upon his sacrifice in the posture most suitable to such Religious Feasts,
to be a denial of his Divinity; And therefore we are little concerned in the
order of the Protestant Churches of Poland, in opposition to the Socinians; If
they thought this rite of sitting to be of ill signification and original, it
appears from what has been said that they were mistaken; but as kneeling is of
a far more suspicious original, so we are sure it has been abused to the vilest
Idolatry.

For his first Answer, That we are not required, nor is it convenient to
imitate all that Christ did, And that the Apostle Paul mentions not this
posture as any part of what he had received from Christ concerning this
Sacrament, I need only Reply, That it is certainly safest to imitate the example
of the Apostles in such a posture as is evidently most agreeable to the nature
of the Institution. And tho the Apostle Paul dos not expressly mention it as
received from Christ, yet he sufficiently intimates so much to us, when in the
foregoing Chapter he compares this Feast on Christ's sacrifice with the
Religious Feasts on the Jewish ones, 1 Cor. 10.16, 17, 18, etc. in which this
posture was so universally received, that there was no need of expressing it.

For his second Answer, That he has proved religious eating was accompanied
with bodily Worship, and therefore if it were granted that we were obliged to
Receive this Sacrament in a Table posture, from the example of our Savior, yet
it would not follow that we should not receive it kneeling, etc. p. 123, 124.

Repl. It appears sufficiently from what has been already alleged, that the
Bp. confounds the Worship paid when the Sacrifice was offered with the posture
used when they came to feast upon it. And I have already produced him
undeniable evidence, that they celebrated their Religious Feasts upon
Sacrifices sitting, or in the same posture as their other meals, and never
kneeling, or in a worshipping posture; And consequently it will follow, that if
we should receive it in a Table Gesture, we must receive it sitting, and not
kneeling.

For his third Answer, That our Savior was not at a common Supper when he
instituted this Sacrament, but at the Passover, which was a sacramental eating,
and had a peculiar posture prescribed for it, 12 Exodus 11. and tho some think
(but without warrant from Scripture) that the Jews did not observe this, yet
it is owned they observed another, which differed from the common posture of
eating, and was accounted Religious; however it is spoken that our Savior
performed this eating with several religious Ceremonies that were not in the
first Institution. And he here instances in the Cup mentioned, 22 Luke 17. and
therefore (he adds) if we would imitate Christ, we ought to eat the
Lord's Supper in a way peculiar to it self, and different from our common meals.

Repl. That our Savior was celebrating the Passover when he instituted his
Supper is undoubted, and that the Passover was no common Supper, is also true.
For (as Dr. Cudworth has in the discourse I mentioned before evidently proved)
it was a Religious Feast upon a Sacrifice; But all this plainly concludes
against his Lp, because in every one of the three Evangelists, Matthew, Mark and
Luke, there is express mention of their sitting down when they celebrated this
Religious Feast. 26 Matt. 20. 14 Mark 18. 22 Luke 14. (...). For the posture
prescribed, 12 Exodus 11. there is no express mention either of their sitting or
standing, and I do not see any clear ground those few Expositors go upon, that
conclude the Israelites were then to eat the Passover standing, because they
were to have their shoes on; And even those Expositors suppose this posture of
standing to have been only used at that time, to signify their have in fleeing
from Egypt to be so great, that they had not time to eat otherwise, but to have
been disused afterward, and the common posture of other Religious Feasts upon
Sacrifices resumed in the celebration of this, viz. sitting. And whereas he
tell us, That it is owned the Jews observed a posture in the Passover different
from the common posture of eating, and accounted Religious, I must add, that
his Lp. is still unhappy in using arguments that make against himself. I
perceive he was so prudent as not to tell us wherein this posture used in
eating the Passover differed from that used in their common eating. For all
that I can find concerning it in the best Expositors, is only this. All agree
that they did eat the Passover sitting, but whereas in sitting at Table, in
their common meals, they sometimes sat with their bodies more erect and
straight, and sometimes in a more easy posture, leaning on one side, Grotius,
Baxtorf, and Dr. Lightfoot tell us, the Jews did usually in their eating the
Passover rather choose this more easy posture, and (as the last adds) to
signify the more fully their freedom from that servitude to which their
Ancestors were subjected in Egypt. So that of the two, this posture had less of
external reverence, than that sometimes used in their common eating, and not
more; For it was also used in their common eating, when they kept state, and
endulg'd most their own ease and pleasure. So that if the Bp. can hence draw
any argument against us, it is that our posture of sitting upright has rather
too much of reverence in it then too little. For the Cup mentioned 22 Luke 17.
I know not what it can signify to his purpose, whether we suppose with
Grotius, that 'twas usual to conclude the Passover with drinking round, or with
others, admit of a Transposition of the words. It Is evident our Savior
observed the common posture of Religious Feasts, viz. sitting, which posture
they used also in their common meals, only in their religious ones they always
used (as Grotius speaks) sessione solita molliori et honoratiori, the more soft
and honorable way of sitting at meat.

But his 4th. and full Answer is, That this argument drawn from the practice of
Christ and his Apostles goes on a false supposition that our Savior instituted
this Sacrament in the common posture of eating, which no wise appears in
Scripture, neither can it be inferred from any thing said or intimated by the
Evangelists, or St. Paul, but rather the contrary. And to render the contrary
more probable, he alleges, that our Savior and his disciples must be supposed
to be in a worshipping posture when he gave thanks, and blessed the bread, and
therefore that it is probable that he rose to bless and distribute the holy
Sacrament, as he did to wash his Disciples feet, 13 John 4. tho there be no
mention made in the three other Evangelists of his rising to do the former, any
more than of his rising to do the latter.

Repl. This is, I confess, a bold stroke, to call that so peremptorily a false
supposition, which used to be allowed us by those whose practice herein differs
from ours, as most probable at least. But it is no unusual thing for some
persons to supply the defect of an argument with an air of assurance in
proposing it, And that the Bp's argument here has no force in it. I hope to
convince him, if he will examine this matter without prejudice. I have shown him
before, that all the Evangelists agree that they sat in eating the Passover. He
himself owns there is no mention made of their changing their posture when
Christ instituted this Sacrament. All the strength of his argument then lies on
the probability of his blessing the elements in another posture, and
consequently distributing 'em so. Now since the Lord's Supper was an Antitype
of the Jewish Religious feasts upon Sacrifices, If it appear, that that there
were solemn Thanksgivings used in those Jewish Feasts, and yet notwithstanding
those that ate of 'em sat while they ate, then this solemn Blessing or
Thanksgiving used by Christ, gives us no ground to conclude that his Apostles
did not sit in their celebrating this mystical Feast on his Sacrifice, but we
have just reason to conclude the contrary; Now all Writers do agree, that in
the Passover-Feast there was solemn Thanksgiving used, and yet all grant that
Christ and his Apostles did eat it sitting. And the same may be observed in
other Religious Feasts upon Sacrifices, in that mentioned, 1 Samuel 9.13. we read
expressly of the Sacrifice being first blessed by Samuel, and yet we read as
expressly of their sitting down when they came to feast upon it. So that the
Bp's argument has no weight in it, since if applied to that rite in the Jewish
Religion that is parallel to this in the Christian, it concludes false, and
against plain matter of fact.

For his last Answer, That the Apostle Paul severely reproves the Corinthians
for their irreverence in receiving this Sacrament, and threatens 'em with
damnation for not discerning the Lord's-body, that is, for receiving it as
their common food, without distinguishing between 'em by a reverend and
religious Receiving it. And that it is but a due distinction between it and our
common food, to approach to the Lord's-Table with as much reverence as the Jews
did to their Altar, at which they never sat down.

Repl. What that Irreverence was which the Apostle reproves, he tells us, That
every one took before others his own Supper, and one was hungry, and another
drunk, 1 Cor. 11.21, 22. And this indeed was very gross irreverence, and such
as showed they did not duly consider the nature and design of this Institution,
as it was a common feast upon Christ's Sacrifice, wherein they were to
commemorate his death, and spiritually partake of his body and blood, i. e. of
all the precious fruits of his death and Sacrifice. But he dos by no means
charge 'em with irreverence for receiving the Bread and Wine in the same
posture they did their common food, tho the relation here given of their
practice renders it highly probable they did receive it so. His Reproof either
relates to the inward exercise of their minds, that they did not approach that
ordinance with that knowledge of, and Faith in a crucified Savior, or with
those devout affections toward him, which became those that received such
memorials of his body and blood; Or to their external deportment, that their
manner of eating was confuss'd, disorderly, uncharitable, and intemperate, but
not one word about their not eating in a posture of Worship. The solemn
Thanksgivings that precede and succeed our Receiving, as well as the quality of
what we eat and drink, and its consecration to this holy use are sufficient to
distinguish this religious Feast from our common meals. And tho the Jews might
kneel at their Altar when with the Sacrifice they offered up their Prayers, yet
I hope he is by this time convinced they were far from kneeling at their
Religious Feasts, since they rather used the most easy way of sitting in 'em.

If then it appear that sitting was the posture used by the disciples of Christ
when he administered this sacrament, If this posture be most agreeable to the
nature of the Institution, as it is a Feast on the Sacrifice of Christ, If the
posture seem to carry something in it most fit to signify the honor God admits
us to in virtue of that Sacrifice, (viz. to be treated by him as his reconciled
children and friends, by being Guests at his Table), Then for any man to
censure this posture as irreverent (as the Bishop seems to do, p. 144.) is
little better than to reproach the Apostles of Christ, and their blessed Master
to; and to refuse this posture on pretense of humility, is to refuse an
endearing mark of God's peculiar favor and condescension to us; And tho I am
so charitable notwithstanding all this, that I dare not positively condemn
kneeling as unlawful, yet how the Bp. will defend it from the stroke of his own
Principles, I cannot tell. For if this be the true account of the matter,
kneeling is a way of celebrating this part of divine Worship, which is neither
expressly commanded in Scripture, nor warranted by any examples there, nay set
up to the exclusion of that way which we have plain example for, and which is
most suitable to the nature of the Institution; let him then try how he will
defend the lawfulness of it without contradicting himself.

And thus much for the posture used in the celebration of the Lord's Supper.
But before I come to consider that Institution it self, I must add a few
Remarks on some remaining passages in his 3d. Section of this Chapter about
Bodily Worship.

His 5th Charge is, Too many of your Persuasion condemn us who conform to God's
Word in these particulars, as guilty of Superstition, and endeavor to render
our Conformity ridiculous, etc.

Answ. If he mean that many of the Dissenters condemn and ridicule them for
using the forementioned scriptural postures of Devotion, I cannot imagine what
ground he has for what he asserts. I have converst with 'em much more than his
Lordship, and I never could hear any such thing from 'em. I confess many
Dissenters may condemn such practices among 'em as bowing toward the East, (or
as the Laudians toward the Altar), bowing at the Name of Jesus rather than
that of Christ, or the name of the Father, or of the holy Spirit, or the name
of God, or Jehovah, (as if there were some peculiar reverence due to those five
Letters). The Reading in the Cathedrals one part of their Service in the body
of the place, and the other at the Altar, when there is no Communion to be
celebrated, the standing up at the Reading one part of the Scriptures more than
another, when all have the same stamp of Divine Authority; And the Bishop
himself has put a very good argument into their mouths against 'em; For these
are ways of Worship that have neither scriptural precept or pattern, and
therefore according to his Principle must be supposed to be human Inventions
displeasing to God.

To these particular Accusations he adds this general one,

In short, I entreat you to consider that you have not one visible act of
Adoration among you in your Assemblys, except we reckon in this number that
your men uncover their heads at Prayer, and yet even this is not required by
your Directory.

Answ. If he speak of Dissenters in general, Is it not strange he should so
confidently outface the Truth in matters of fact; when it is so notorious, That
standing, which is a visible and a scriptural posture of Adoration is so
generally used by Dissenters in all their Thanksgivings and Prayers? If some in
the North of Ireland are too negligent herein, it is the fault of those
particular persons, and no more justly chargeable on the body of Dissenters,
than the far grosser irreverence of too many of her Members is chargeable on
the Established Church. For the Directory, It dos in general require external
Reverence, but leaves the particular expressions and marks of it, as the
Scripture has done to the people's liberty; And accordingly, as some that have
convenience for it use kneeling, so the generality use standing, because there
are few of our Meetings, but either the straitness of the Seats, or the number
of those that meet, renders kneeling less practicable to the main part of the
Congregation. And standing is as undoubtedly a scriptural posture of Devotion
as kneeling.

Having thus cleared matters of fact, I must add, That for the pretenses he
here produces for the neglect of Bodily Worship, it is evident the Body of
Dissenters are no way concerned in 'em. For I could never yet meet with one of
'em that ever pretended that bodily Worship might be neglected. For even those
that sit at Prayer (and weakly alledg the sore-cited example of David for it)
yet are uncovered, and intend that as an expression of their reverence in all
acts of immediate worship. And much less did I ever hear any D ssenter alledg
such trifling reasons as these, for which his Lp. has not thought fit to
produce any Author, and therefore I know none we can father 'em on but himself.
And if he framed these arguments, he dos well to answer 'em; Or if he have met
with some in his conversation of so sottish an Opinion, that have no better
pleas for it, it is but just he should endeavor to show 'em their mistakes; But
why he cannot confute such weak people, without gross slanders against those
that are no way concerned in their errors, I know not; And I desire his Lp. to
consider what else he can make of the following passages.

P. 137. Speaking of these external postures of Reverence, he says, In cases
of necessity we think they may lawfully be omitted; But you are taught that in
no cases they may be lawfully practiced; You are taught rather to stay at home,
than to conform in their outward gestures or circumstances. You are advised
rather to abstain all your lives from the Lord's Supper, than receive it
kneeling. Now if you think God hates 'em so much, etc. and accounts 'em a
polluting his Ordinance, etc.

Answ. If his Lp. cannot produce so much as one among the Dissenting Ministers
that ever taught their people, That such postures of bodily Worship may in no
cases be lawfully practiced, then I hope he will own himself guilty here of a
very immoral practice. And if he can produce any such person, I dare undertake
that he shall be publicly censured by his Brethren for teaching so senseless
and ridiculous doctrine. But to make this a general charge against us, is the
most inexcusable aspersion that he could possibly cast upon us, and such as we
must demand from him, that he either prove, or ingenuously retract. I might say
the same concerning our people's being taught rather to stay at home than to
conform in their outward gestures, if he understand this of scriptural gestures
used in the Established Church. For what he adds as to kneeling at the
Lord's Supper, he cannot be ignorant that some of the most considerable Writers
for the NC's Cause in England have defended the lawfulness of it, tho his Lp.
cannot do it without contradicting himself. There are others indeed that do
think it unlawful, because they think it not only unsuitable to the nature and
design of the Institution, but a needless symbolizing with the Romish Church in
a posture abused to the most pernicious Idolatry, by which they are the more
confirmed in that Idolatry, notwithstanding the public protestation of the
Established Church against that abuse. I shall therefore only add, That if any
refuse to receive the Sacrament kneeling, his Lp. has the least reason to blame
'em, who by the Rubric and Canons is obliged to give it to none in the Church
but such as kneel; For sure it is a lesser fault to be too rigid and scrupulous
as to our own practice, than to impose it on others too, and to deny them the
privileges of Christian Communion for want of conformity to an unscriptural
gesture. If the former run into an extreme, moderate persons may have some
right to reprove 'em, but those have none who run much farther into the other.

Again, What excuse can the Bp. have for that passage, p. 138, 139.

But in your Meetings there is no obligation on any one to signify his
concurrence with the Congregation in any ordinary act of worship either by word
or gesture, and therefore this end of public Assemblys, ( viz. to signify our
sense and belief of the Being, etc. of God, and to stir up the same in others)
is utterly defeated by you. The Directory dos not require or allow the people
so much as to signify their assent by adding their Amen to the Prayers or
Thanksgivings there offered. But on the contrary, you ridicule those that
practice it, pursuant to the directions and examples in Scripture. And as to
gestures, such as kneeling, standing, or bowing the body, you condemn 'em all
as Relicts of Idolatry and Superstition. There remains therefore in your
Assemblys nothing whereby the people may testify their belief or assent to
what they hear, which was one design of the Meeting. Thus, by turning all
bodily Worship out of your Assemblys, you have made void this great end of 'em,
and left no visible distinction whereby any one may signify whether he assents
to the Worship offered, or dissents from it. The whole assembly being to one
another, mere Spectators and Hearers, not Joint-Worshipers.

Answ. His Lp. was I suppose weary of retailing his aspersions, and therefore
here gives 'em to us by wholesale. For it is not true that there is no
obligation on any in our Meetings to signify his concurrence with the
Congregation in any ordinary act of Worship by gesture. For the Directory
requires that such as come into the Congregation should reverently compose
themselves to join with the Congregation in that Ordinance that is then in
hand. Which implys their joining in such devout gestures as the nature of that
particular Ordinance dos require. And their constant attendance on the several
parts of public Worship, with their reverent behavior therein, is a public
declaration of their joining in it. It Is again untrue, that the Directory dos
not allow the people to signify their assent to the public Prayers and
Thanksgivings by saying Amen. For the very Catechism composed by 'em in
explication of the Conclusion of the Lord's-Prayer implys the contrary, that we
should in Testimony of our desire and assurance, to be heard say Amen. I
confess I know not what sort of modesty has made it too usual among us not to
repeat our Amen so loudly as is generally done in the Parish-Churches; And in
this particular I am of the same judgment with the Reverend Author of that
Sermon in the morning lectures on 1 Cor. 14. v. 16. who advises the pronouncing
it more aiudibly. Nor do I know of any Dissenters that ridicule any Conformists
for doing so. But, to charge us (as he here dos) with condemning kneeling,
standing, or bowing down, as Relicts of Idolatry and Superstition, is so gross
a calumny, and so unbecoming a man that pretends to sincerity and candor, that
he is obliged in common justice to repair the wrong he has here done us. For
kneeling and standing are postures so universally used by the D^ssenters, and
so frequently recommended and urged in their Printed Discourses and Sermons,
that they cannot, without the most stupid self contradiction, condemn 'em as
Relicts o^ Idolatry and Superstition; Nor did I ever hear of one person that
ever scrupled the use of 'em. Some may indeed have censured Kneeling at the
Sacrament, bowing toward the East or the Altar, etc. as such Relicts of
Idolatry and Superstition; but what is this to the use of those postures in
Religious Worship in general, of which the Bp. here speaks?

For those weak people of whom he tells us, p. 141. That they object against
kneeling and standing in the Congregation, that it is troublesome to 'em, They
do indeed offer a very lazy excuse; and if the Bp. has met with any such, he
dos well to shame 'em out of it. But I can by no means be of the Bp's opinion,
that any leave them on this score, because they find a way of Worship among the
Dissenters easier than theirs; Nor do I find that a man can sleep more securely
and quietly in the Meetings than in the Parish-Churches. I am sure I have
oftener heard such slothful people awakened by severe reproofs in the Dissenters
Assemblys than in theirs. So that I suspect those will fail of their design,
who come to our Meetings in hopes to take a more undisturbed Nap there

The Bishop seems, p 143. to assert, That kneeling in public Prayer is a duty
which we are bound to provide convenience for. But as he wisely takes it for
granted, instead of proving it, so he groundlesly imagins the Dissenters to
have some aversion to it, whereas I know of no posture more universally used by
'em in that duty in their Closets or Familys where they have convenience for
it. And I have seen it frequently used in those larger Seats in their Meetings
that were wide enough to allow room for it. So that I perceive his Lordship is
as great a stranger to our judgment and practice, as if he lived in some remote
part of the world, and yet pretends to give an account of it with as much
confidence as if he had continually frequented our Assemblys. I think I may
pretend to know 'em better, and therefore must in justice to 'em add, that in
those Meetings I have frequented, I have observed as great an appearance of
external Reverence and Devotion, of seriousness and gravity as in any other
Protestant Churches whatsoever either at home or abroad.

The Bishop concludes this Chapter with this Observation, But the truth of the
matter, as it seems to me, is, That your neglecting to kneel at the most solemn
of all Christian Ordinances, the Lord's Supper, dos harden you against
Reverence in the other parts of Divine Worship: And it is no wonder it should
do so; for if Reverence be not thought necessary in that duty, it may well seem
unnecessary in any other.

On which words I shall only add, That if by Reverence in that Ordinance of the
Lord's Supper, he means kneeling while we eat the Bread, and drink the Cup, I
have showed him that the Apostles used no such Reverence, and he may with the
same justice reproach them as he dos us. But it will by no means follow, that
we must not use a worshipping-posture when acts of immediate Worship are
offered, because we use it not, when no such acts are required; as none are,
during our eating and drinking in remembrance of Christ in that Institution. So
that I may more justly observe, That his Lordship's neglecting so long to
reason solidly, and to speak Truth concerning the Dissenters, has so hardened
him in the contrary practice, that he seems resolved to go on in it to the end
of the Chapter.

For the practice of the Established Church in reference to Bodily Worship. I
need add nothing to what has been already observed, ( p. 123, 124) concerning
bowing at the name of Jesus, standing up at the Reading some part of the
Scriptures rather than others, Reading in the Cathedrals one part of their
Service at the Communion Table, where few of the people can hear it, etc. For
which practices the Bp. must either bring us express scriptural precept or
pattern, or must censure 'em for his sort of human Inventions; and truly some
of 'em look too like superstitious ones; For they are either used and retained
for no reason at all, but mere arbitrary pleasure, or for such reasons as
include some superstitious conceit in 'em, as if some peculiar honor and
homage were due to that name of our Savior above others, And greater
veneration were due to some part of Scripture above the rest; And as if there
were either some peculiar sanctity in the prayers, or in the place, when they
are read at the Communion Table, or there were no better way of instructing the
people in their obligation to Communicate, than by this dumb sign of reading
some part of the Communion-Service there.

Remarks on the Fifth Chapter concerning the Lord's Supper.
And here

I. FOr the Account he gives us of what the Scriptures prescribe concerning the
frequency of Celebrating this Institution, I shall very easily agree with his
Lp.

For tho I think his Reasoning from the time of Celebrating the Passover, and
from the general Topic of our doing it as often as we have convenience for it,
is not very cogent to prove any obligation upon us to celebrate this Sacrament
every Lord's Day, Yet I do think his other arguments from Scripture are of
great weight to prove, that in the Apostles time this Ordinance was made one
constant part of their Lord's-days Worship, and I think it past doubt that this
was the universal practice of Christian Churches for several succeeding Ages.
So that in this respect I fear that the Reformed Churches themselves have not
yet come up to the practice of the truly primitive and Apostolical ones, as I
truly think were highly desirable. Many learned Authors, both Conf's and N C's
have freely delivered their judgments to the same purpose, and I know of none
that have disputed the matter of fact on which their arguments for reviving
this practice are founded. I know there are other judicious persons that do not
think the arguments drawn thence to be demonstrative, and do still conceive the
words, As often as ye eat this bread, etc. and do this as often as ye drink it in
remembrance of me, to leave the frequency of performing this duty to the
determination of human prudence. And tho their exceptions do not so far weigh
with me as to alter my judgment, yet I dare not be harsh in censuring such
whose apprehensions herein are different from my own.

All the Debate then remaining between the Bp. and me, will be concerning

II. The Practice of the Established Church and that of the Dissenters.

For the practice of the Established Church, I wonder why he should pretend
their Church has provided for those that desire to Receive every Lord's Day,
merely because of her ordering some part of the Communion-Service to be read
every Lord's Day, when it is so publicly known that there is no Bread and Wine
provided for such as may be disposed to Communicate; And why should the people
be taught their duty only by such dumb signs as that? or part of the
Communion-Service be read when there is no Communion intended? He dos indeed
very justly observe that the Canons require no more of every Parishioner, than
that he Receivee thrice a year; But why he should lay the blame of their
people's Receiving no oftener, on the ill example of the Dissenters, I cannot
imagine. For if it appear that the Dissenters generally Receive far oftener than
their Canons require, It will be very unaccountable how their example should
encourage that negligence of the Conforming Laity, which it rather reproves. I
confess, for the method of driving men to the Sacrament by punishment, (if he
intend this of the severe penaltys that follow upon a Writ de Excommunicato
Capiendo) we do not much admire it. To be admitted to the Lord's-Table, we
esteem so great a Privilege and Honor, that we think none should partake of
it, but such as do very earnestly desire and seek it, and are in the judgment
of human charity well fitted and prepared for it, by competent knowledge, and an
inoffensive conversation.

But we do by no means think those deserve to be admitted at all whom nothing
else can prevail with to come to this Sacrament, but the fear of a Prison; and
who are haled to that Holy Table, merely to escape the Jaylor's Clutches. Nor
is it reasonable to put Men under so strong Temptation to dissemble with God in
so solemn Vows, for the preservation of their Secular Interest. And for those
Dissenters that scruple Kneeling, Nothing could be more Unchristian than to
deny 'em the Lord's Supper without their compliance with that posture, and yet
punish 'em for not receiving it in their Parish Churches; which was no better
than to punish 'em for their being afraid of sinning. And if this be the
Discipline which his Lp. complains of being weakened, I know of few moderate and
wise Men that will be much troubled at it.

For the Practice of Dissenters,

1. He very groundlesly infers, That because the Directory leaves it to the
Ministers, etc. to determine how often this Institution shall be celebrated,
that they exclude it by this Rule, from being an ordinary constant part of
God's Service. For no more can be justly drawn from those words, than that they
left the matter to the liberty of those that had the over sight and care of
particular Congregations. So that if any Ministers thought the constant
celebration of this Sacrament every Lords Day, most convenient for the comfort
and edification of their People, this Rule does by no means forbid, but rather
enforce their doing it. But those indeed that think otherwise, are no farther
imposed on by this Rule, than to be obliged to do it frequently, which the
Directory (as the Bp. owns) expressly requires; and I doubt not they intended by
frequently, oftener than thrice a year. Nor can I imagine why he should any more
compare our practice with the Papists than their own: For do the
Parish-Ministers every Lord's Day offer the Sacrament to the People, or invite
'em to it, or afford 'em opportunities for it, any more than the Dissenters? Or
rather do not the Dissenters generally afford 'em opportunities much oftener?
Why should he then so severely condemn the Dissenters for what they are less
guilty of than themselves? If he pretend that the Sacrament is offered, because
part of the Communion-Service is read; Does he not know that if the People take
that for an Invitation, they will find themselves disappointed? And sure it is
better to make no offer of it than a delusory one.

2. He very confidently asserts, That the Dissenters rarely press the People to
Communion; They have few Sermons or Discourses to that purpose; And many of 'em
condemn our Zeal for endeavoring to restore the constant Communion precedented
in Scripture.

It Is strange that his Lp. should continually put us on so ungrateful a Task,
as the denying the Truth of what he says, by advancing such groundless
Accusations; I am sure the generality of 'em administer this Sacrament far
oftener than the generality of the Conforming Clergy; and it is seldom or never
administered without their taking occasion to press People to it. Nor do I find
any of their Printed Discourses on that subject, that omit their doing it: Nay,
I am inclined to believe there are as many N. C. Writers as Conformists, that
have preached and wrote for restoring the constant Communion precedented in
Scripture. And one would think that Experience should be sufficient to convince
him that the Dissenting Ministers press it more. For of those that attend the
Parish-Churches and the Meetings, I think it is evident, that if we make
allowance for the Numbers in general of those of each Persuasion the Communions
of the Dissenters will be found much more numerous as well as more frequent. I
confess, if his Lp. only mean, That we do not promiscuously urge all People to
come to this Ordinance, how ignorant or wicked soever, it is true; and I hope he
will not blame us for that, unless he think we may turn the Church into a
common sink and receptacle of profligate Sinners, and invite Swine to that H.
Table. (For such are all notoriously vicious persons in the Language of the
Scripture.) On the contrary, we have too great reason to complain, that too
many such are admitted in the Parish-Churches, notwithstanding the ineffectual
Provision of the Rubric and Canons, against this Abuse; of which no
Reformation can be expected to any purpose, till particular Pastors be restored
to the due Exercise of their Pastoral Power. But for those that have competent
Knowledge, and are of Unblameable Deportment, they are frequently urged to
attend this Institution; and particularly in the North of Ireland, the Minister
in visiting the several Districts, enquires of the Elders concerning such, that
besides the general Invitation from the Pulpit, he may particularly urge 'em to
their Duty.

3. For the Practice of Dissenters, he says, It Is worse than their Principles;
and concerning it he adds these remarkable words:

I appeal to you, Whether it is not reckoned a great thing among many of you,
if once in a year or two, a Communion be celebrated in one of your Meetings?
Nay, among some of you it is often omitted for several years together, and in
some places for ten or more. I fear I may say, Your People generally have too
little sense of the Obligation of Receiving it at all; and your Ministers
indulge 'em so far in this Corruption, that a man may live comfortably among
you, and with the Reputation of a Professor, to Thirty or Forty years of Age,
and never Receive at all. And by the best Enquiry I could make, I could not
compute that above One in Ten that go to your Meetings, ever Receive through
the whole Course of their Lives, notwithstanding Christ's positive Command to do
it in remembrance of him. So unhappily are Men overseen in laying aside the
Commands of God for their own Inventions. I should be glad to find that I were
mistaken in this Computation. In the mean time you must give me leave to tell
you plainly, That this practice of rare or no Communion, is so peculiarly your
own, that I think you are altogether singular in it; and are so far from having
any Precedent for it in Scripture, that I doubt whether any Precedent can be
found for you even among the most degenerate and barbarous People that ever
called themselves Christians.

Answ. In order to our passing a right Judgment on this Accusation of the Bp's,
I must give a brief Account of matter of Fact. For those Meetings in England,
and the South of Ireland, where Pastors are settled, the most of 'em constantly
celebrate the Lord's Supper once a Month, others once in six Weeks, or two
Months, and a few once every Lord's Day. I do not believe there are Six that
have it so seldom as once a Quarter. So that if the Bp. speak here of the
generality of Dissenters, (as we have reason to suppose, because he does not
here (as elsewhere) confine his Charge to any part of 'em) To reproach them as
guilty of rare or no Communion not to be precedented among the most degenerate
and barbarous People that were ever called Christians, is a Calumny of such a
heinous nature, that I shall in mere Civility and respect to his Character,
forbear to treat it as it deserves; and shall only desire him to bring the
Parish-Churches to that frequency of Communion so generally practiced among the
Dissenters, before he treat us any more with such rude Language, as we might
with so much advantage retort. If his Lordship pretend that he designed to
confine this to the North of Ireland, though he has expressed no such thing; yet
how little ground he had for this heavy Charge, will appear upon a due
Examination of matter of Fact: Of which I have this Account given by those that
know it much better than he can pretend to do.

It Is so far from being true, that it is rare if once in a year or two a
Communion be celebrated in their Meetings, that it is universally usual in every
Meeting where an ordained Minister is settled, to have the Lord's Supper
administered constantly Once a year, and Twice in the larger Towns. And what is
more considerable, wherever it is administered, it is usual for Two Thirds of the
Congregation to be Strangers. For it is their Custom in the North to have very
large and numerous Communions, so that when the Sacrament is administered in one
Meeting, it is usual for most of the Members of Neighboring Parishes to
frequent it: To which purpose they bring Certificates (or Communicatory
Letters) from their own Ministers. So that the generality of 'em (as I am
assured) do communicate four or five times in a year; many of them do it much
oftener; and all of 'em have the opportunity of doing it ten, twelve, or fifteen
times a year, if they will take the Advantage of receiving it as often as it is
administered within a few miles of their respective Habitations. And they
allege these two or three Reasons that have induced 'em to this Method, 1.
That hereby the vast Number of Communicants tends to increase the Solemnity of
the Institution, and represents in a more affecting manner the Communion of
Saints. 2. That every Parish having usually but one Minister, it is requisite
the Ministers of Neighboring Parishes should assist 'em on that occasion; and
consequently they usually bring their People along with 'em. 3. That the
Ministers of particular Congregations prepare their own people for it, by
visiting 'em round, examining every particular Member anew, about their
spiritual Estate, and making due Enquiry about their Conversation; all which
takes up a considerable time. This being a just account of their practice, though
I must freely profess I do prefer the general practice of Dissenters elsewhere,
of administering the Lord's Supper in each Congregation once a Month, and could
heartily wish it were made a constant part of the Lord's Day Worship; yet I see
not with what tolerable Justice the Bp. could upbraid 'em with their rare or no
Communion, when the Members of their Meetings do generally communicate much
oftener than the Members of the Parish-Churches: Nay, when their Ministers not
celebrating it in each particular Meeting, is occasioned by so extraordinary
care taken to prepare their People for it: Whereas there can be no other
Account given why the Parish-Ministers who take no such pains with their
People, administer it so seldom, but either their own Laziness, or the People's
Indevotion. And whereas he says, A man may live among 'em with the reputation
of a Professor, to Thirty or Forty Years, and never receive at all; If he mean
by a Professor, a Person accounted truly Religious, they declare they know not
of one Instance of that kind. And whereas he says, Not one in ten that go to
their Meetings receive through the whole course of their Lives, they do
profess, that by the best computation they can make, there is not one in ten,
or rather in 20 or 30, that do not receive, except such as are withheld for
want of competent Knowledge, or on the account of Scandal; and those that
communicate once, do it ordinarily on all following occasions.

So that upon the whole, the Bp. is much more concerned to find a Precedent for
the generality of the Members of Parish-Churches in their rare or no Communion,
than the Dissenters are for the Members of their Congregations. And much more
is he concerned to find a Precedent for himself in his so rarely speaking truth
concerning the Dissenters; and I fear that he will hardly find any (if I may
return him his civil expressions) except among the most degenerate and
barbarous Writers that were ever called Christians, I mean those Romish
Priests, who in their writing against Protestants have acquired a peculiar
dexterity in the practice of that Unchristian Maxim, Calumniare fortiter,
aliquid adhaerebit, Throw dirt enough, and some of it will stick.

REMARKS on the CONCLUSION.
1. FOr that part of it which contains his Lp's Advice to those of his own
Clergy, I shall take no farther notice of it than as it concerns the Dissenters.

P. 166. He tells 'em, They are never to despair whilst they have God's Truth
on their side, though whole Provinces should fall off from the Church, as all
they in Asia did from St. Paul, 2 Timothy 1.15. Though none should believe our
report, as it happened to our Savior himself.

Answ. This looks too like his former Language, when he so uncharitably
excluded us from the Catholic Church: For does he indeed think that Men's
going to the Dissenters Meetings is a defection from Christianity, and turning
Infidels to the Doctrine of the Gospel, as the expressions he alludes to
import? Since we agree in the Articles of Religion professed by the Established
Church (to which, by the way, the Dissenters of the two more strictly adhere);
since (as himself owns, p, 4.) we agree about the inward part of Divine
Worship; Nay, since we agree in the same external parts of it, Praise, Prayer,
Hearing and the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lord's Supper; and only disagree
about the mode of ordering those external Duties: Is it not most unreasonable,
and contrary to Christian Charity, and I might add to common sense, to speak of
such as in these Circumstantial Modes differ from him, as fallen off from the
Church, and dis-believing the Report of the Gospel? What is this but to turn
the Circumstantial Modes of Worship into Fundamentals, and thereby to turn the
Reformed Church in this Kingdom into a Sect and Party, i. e. to incur the
grossest sort of Schism, and most opposite to Christian Love? I hope I have in
these Papers shown our manner of performing these Duties, to be more agreeable
to Scriptural Precept and Pattern, and yet I would sooner suffer my Right Hand
to be cut off, than that any such Expression should drop from my Pen, that
should thus confine the Church of Christ to the Dissenters, and censure others
as fallen off from it. For I honor the Parish Churches as a very excellent
part of the Catholic Church, and such as compared with the Roman, Greek,
Abissine, etc. Churches, has attained to an excellent degree of Reformation.

P. 167, 168. He suggests to his Clergy, That they cannot be supposed to be
zealous in their Office out of any private Interest, or prospect of particular
profit, because their Maintenance and Preferments are ascertained by Law, and
depend not on the voluntary Contribution of the People; and he insinuates on
the other hand, That the Dissenters are more liable to be acted by other
Motives, since they must attain to Honor or Support by making or gaining a
Party.

Answ. If the Dissenting Ministers be acted in their Nonconformity by a Regard
to Temporal Interest, they deserve to be begged for Fools. Does he think that
upon their Conforming, they might not aspire to Ecclesiastical Dignities and
Preferments as well as others, if their Judgments could comply with all the
Declarations and Subscriptions that are required? How many could I name him, no
way inferior to his Lp. in any Ministerial Abilities, who never had so much as
100 l. a year from their People, while he enjoys, by common Report, a
Bishopric worth 2000? Not that they envy him his Wealth, but they think it
unreasonable he should upbraid them with their Poverty, as if it laid 'em under
Temptations to counter act their Judgments, to serve their Interest, when if
they could have done so, they never needed to expose themselves to those
Necessities. For it is plain that, quite contrary to what he suggests, the
Temptation of Interest lies chiefly on the other side. What Interest can
influence those Dissenting Ministers to make or gain a Party, who are sure to
be Losers by their adhering to it, and have all possible prospect of bettering
their Condition by forsaking it? And how much greater danger are those in of
being influenced by it, whose excessive Preferments depend on their turning the
Church into a Party, by keeping up narrow uncharitable terms of Ministerial
Communion? And why should he think the Inferior Clergy may not be moved to be
zealous in their Office, from a prospect of Interest and Profit? Does he think
himself and his Brethren Immortal? May they never expect a Fall of
Church-Preferments? Or are those Preferments so corruptly distributed, that no
diligence of an inferior Clergyman in his Office will signify any thing to
recommend him to 'em? Does Favor or Bribes so entirely prevail as to exclude
all consideration of Merit? Either he reasons very weakly here, or else he
insinuates what is very little to the credit of the Church.

P. 88. He does well to remind 'em, that they are Ministers of the Gospel, not
of a Party. Answ. But why then does he speak of all that dissent from 'em, as
fallen from the Church, and become Infidels?

He also in the same page justly speaks of our differences as of little
concern, comparatively with the common Interest of Holiness and Religion: But
when he tells us of these differences being insisted on only as the occasions
and Badges of those People who being resolved to separate themselves, are
obliged to take up little differences for a distinction: I would gladly know
who are most chargeable with taking up little Differences to make 'em the
Distinguishing Badges of a Party; They that arbitrarily impose such Unnecessary
Terms of Ministerial and Christian Communion, as our Common Lord never
required, and so make their own dividing Hedge and Enclosure in his sacred
Vineyard, or they that only scruple compliance with these suspected Terms, and
desire that the Common Rule of Christianity, may be the only Rule of
Conformity? They that on the account of these Differences cry up themselves
alone as the Church, or they that plead only to be a part of it, or at most a
more uncorrupted part? One would think the former look more like persons
resolved to separate themselves, especially when they contrive such Racks for
men's Judgments and Consciences as the Act of Uniformity contains. And the
latter cannot reasonably be supposed so obstinate, unless he imagine 'em fond
of Poverty and Misery, and in love with Separation for its own sake.

P. 169. He suggests, That while they have been defending their Common
Christianity against Papists, Deists and Socinians, the Dissenters have taken
that advantage to undermine 'em with their People, nay that some of 'em have
even joined with those Enemies to pull down their Constitution.

Answ. I think it is apparent that the Dissenters have rarely wrote in defense
of their own Cause, without being assaulted first. It was he first started the
Controversy in this Kingdom, by excluding 'em from the Catholic Church. It is
he has again renewed it by a fresh Charge of our Worship having little of God's
immediate Appointment, but abundance of Humane Inventions. Now if we be guilty,
it is indeed reasonable we should be silent; But if innocent, does he think our
Reputation too inconsiderable to be worthy of a Defense against the most
severe, and yet the most unrighteous Accusations? And if he did formerly with
the same Sword attempt to stab his Popish Adversaries and his Dissenting
Brethren, can he blame them for warding it off themselves, especially when at
the same time they warded it off from the generality of the Reformed Churches,
(whose Reputation he must have wounded through our sides) and directed the
point of it more fully against the Papists.

But I would gladly know, who those Dissenters are that joined with the
Papists, Deists, and Socinians, in a Confederacy to pull down their
Constitution. For I cannot imagine what ground he has for this Charge, unless
he refers to the attempts made in the late King James's time toward the Repeal
of the Penal Laws and Test. And if he intend that, dos he not know, That there
were far more of their Clergy, even the Dignitaries of their Church, that
joined in that design with the Court, then of Dissenting Ministers, of whom I
could never hear of above One or Two concerned, and even they had been both
exasperated by the barbarous Execution of those Laws upon themselves. And was
it more criminal in them to attempt to burn the Rod that had so unmercifully
lash't 'em, then in those to join in that design who had no other temptation
then hope of Court-Favour and Preferment? Nay dos he not know that the Body of
the Dissenting Ministers and People generously refused to concur in that design
when earnestly solicited to it; merely because they valued the general Interest
of the Reformed Religion, before any separate Interest of their own. And would
not a man of candor and ingenuity, have rather commended the carriage of the
main body of 'em, then reproach't 'em with the faults of so few, (in which he
knows they might recriminate with so much advantage) especially when such as
reproach 'em were so accessory to those faults by unchristian rigor and
cruelty? And by the way, If by their Constitution he means our frame of
Diocesan Episcopacy and Government, why dos he suggest our concurrence with
Papists to pull it down, when he knows well enough, if the Papists were in
power, they would continue and uphold the same Constitution, and only change
the Persons.

II. For that part of the Conclusion which is addressed to the Dissenting
Ministers of Derry.
FIrst, I do fully concur with him in his Advice; Not to treat one another with
scurrilous, and unseemly Reflections. But I hope he will not account those
such, wherein a Man is justly reproved for gross Misrepresentations of other
Men's Opinions and Practices, when he might easily have informed himself
better; or a trifling Argument not always treated with grimace, but sometimes
with the slight it deserves.

Secondly, I do also heartily concur with him in his request to 'em, That they
will not make the difference between us seem greater then really it is.

And I hope he will find it punctually observed in these Remarks, in which I
have so often disclaimed the Advantage given me by his own Principles to
censure several practices in the Established Church as unlawful. And therefore
I hope I may, without offense, humbly request his Lp. to take his own Advice;
And truly if he had done so sooner, he had spared me the ungrateful labor of
these Remarks on his late Discourse, which I hope may convince him, That the
tendency of his whole Book is to make the difference between us seem greater
then it is; partly by misreporting our Principles and Practices, and partly by
an unreasonable charge of human Inventions in the worship of God, that has no
other foundation, then either those misreports, or that necessary use of
Christian Prudence in determining some circumstantial modes of Worship, which
they make as well as we, and must be made in order to the Execution of God's
own Commands relating to his Worship. Nay it seems to be the main purpose of
his Discourse to represent the Worship of Dissenters, as so corrupted by human
Inventions; that it is become vain and unacceptable to God; Which is a Censure
that Charity forbids me to pass on the Worship of the Established Church, tho I
think I have proved that of the Dissenters much more conformable to Evangelical
Precept and Pattern. For I doubt not a gracious God makes merciful allowance
for manifold culpable Imperfections, where the Worship is in the main agreeable
to his Word, and those that offer it through weakness discern 'em not. But I
perceive it is far easier to give good Advice then to take it.

And for the particular Requests which his Lp. dos here in so friendly a
manner, address to the Dissenting Ministers of his Diocese, I shall take the
liberty to interpose my single Opinion. As.

1. I can freely concur with him in recommending that use of the Lord's-Prayer,
which as he justly observes, the Directory approves, because I take it to be a
very comprehensive summary of the matter of Prayer delivered in the most
accurate method and order. But then I must add, that as this use of it, in our
public Assemblies, is not with any certainty determined in Scripture, so it is
a matter wherein good men may well exercise their mutual forbearance and
charity.

2. I do as freely concur with him in desiring 'em to endeavor the reforming
that Irreverent practice, which too many of their Hearers seem to endulge
themselves too far in; viz. Of Sitting in the time of public Prayer. It Is
contrary to the general practice of their Brethern elsewhere, and I think of
all the Reformed Churches, and what is more considerable very disagreable to
the Precepts and Examples proposed in the Holy Scriptures. And I hope his Lp.
will think the more open Irreverence, and Levity, too common in many Parish
Churches to need as effectual Reformation.

3. I do also concur with him in desiring 'em to adhere more strictly to the
Advice of the Directory, by more frequent celebration of the Lord's Supper in
each particular Congregation.

For tho I am fully satisfied by their Accounts of matter of Fact, that their
Members do ordinarily Communicate more frequently than those of the Parish
Churches; and that n^ne has the name of a Professor among 'em that lives in the
neglect of this duty, quite contrary to the Bp's supposition; yet I look on the
practice of their Brethren in England, as in this particular, more conformable
to the rule of the Scriptures, among whom it is administered much oftener in each
Congregation. For I think it highly probable, that it was in the Apostles time
one constant part of the Lords day's Worship. I know this is not so practicable
among 'em, while they take so extraordinary pains with the People every time
they administer this Ordinance to 'em. But I do not see any absolute necessity
of that: they may continue their stated particular Visitations, without making
'em necessary to every Communion. And perhaps there may be too great a
difference put between this and other parts of Divine Worship, by imagining
that the frequent Celebration of it would tend to lessen the Reverence due to
it. To all that are serious, the frequent Renewal of their Vows on the
Memorials of a Crucified Savior is the most likely and effectual means to keep
their Souls under the constant awe of 'em. But the treating this Subject, as it
deserves, would require a large Discourse. I shall therefore only fubjoin, That
I hope his Lp. will take his own Advice, by endeavoring to have the Sacrament
more frequently administered in the Parish Churches, and especially that he will
put his Clergy on imitating the Zeal and Diligence of the Dissenting Ministers,
in their care to prepare their People for so solemn an Institution, and to keep
those from it, whose open and notorious wickedness tends to infect others by
the contagion of their Example, and to prostitute the honor of Religion to the
contempt of an Atheistical and Profane Age.

4. For this Advice about Reading the Scriptures, I shall so far concur with
him; that I wish the Rule of the Directory for reading One entire Chapter out
of each Testament may be observed, when the shortness of the days will not
leave room for Exposition, without excluding that other way of reading parallel
Texts, that occurs in what we call Preaching. But I must beg his Lp's pardon
for preferring the Reading One Chapter with a clear Exposition of it from
parallel Texts to the bare Reading two, or three, or more, without it;
notwithstanding his so confidently obtruding upon us his former groundless
Conceit, as if it were an undoubted Truth, That it is a carnal and sinful humor
in the People to be fonder of Sermons and Lectures of human Composure, then of
the pure Word of God in it is naked simplicity. For if he mean by it, That it is
a carnal and sinful humor to be fonder of having the word of God read,
explained, and applied, then barely read, (as certainly he must if he speak any
thing here to the purpose.) This is (as I have already shown him) no wiser a
conceit, then if he should tell us, It Is a carnal and sinful humor to be more
affected with the word of God when we clearly understand it, then when we do
not. And if so, why should this sinful humor of the People be indulged by
preaching at all? Why should any pains be taken to inform their Judgments by
leading 'em into the true sense of it? Or rather; why should the Bp. so weakly
oppose the purity and simplicity of the naked Word of God to a clear Exposition
of it? which used to be opposed only to the mixture of other doctrines that are
either contrary to, or at least not delivered in those inspired Writings. For
tho Sermons and Lectures be in part of human Composure, yet such as truly
answer that Character, are nothing else but the naked and pure Word of God
explained and enforced upon the Consciences of the People, without any mixture
of foreign, or corrupt doctrines. For even in their Sermons themselves, a great
part of the time is spent by the People in consulting and comparing various
parts of the word of God. And if such human Composures adulterate the
simplicity of the Word of God, Why should they not be excluded altogether, and
the Clergy be turned into mere Readers? Or rather, may we not in such confused
and deceitful Reasonings as these, suspect a carnal humor in men's crying up
the bare Reading the Word of God, to shift off the unwelcom Labor of
Expounding it. And therefore I should rather recommend the practice of the
Dissenters in their constant Expounding as well as Reading, to the imitation of
the Conforming Clergy; And I would particularly advise his Lp. not to speak so
slightly on all occasions concerning Sermons, because Preaching has hitherto
been accounted the most valuable Talent that he is master of.

5. For his 5th. Advice. It Is indeed true that many learned and sober Non
Conformists have judged occasional Communion with the Parish-Churches in the
ordinary Lords day worship lawful, and have advised their People to practice it
where they could have no other opportunities of Public Worship. Nay many of
'em have vindicated and practiced such occasional Communion with 'em in the
Lords Supper (tho I question whether any of 'em fully approve it in reference
to Baptism.) And tho I have no pretense to the first of the characters he gives
such Non Conformists yet he will find the same charitable temper and practice
recommended in the Reflections on his Answer to Dean Manby, p. 64. But methinks
his Lp. should, when he considers the truly christian moderation of such
Nonconformists, reflect with some concern on his own uncharitable Principles
toward 'em, in that Discourse which he has never yet disowned. And it would
seem very unreasonable in him to be too peremptory in demanding this from the
Dissenters, unless he would express equal charity on his part, and declare the
lawfulness of Communion with their Churches. And since he cannot deny but that
he has so fair Examples of Catholic Charity set before him, I hope he will
follow 'em; For otherwise this Request will appear on his side very partial and
unreasonable. And I hope this discourse may convince him that we have no sinful
human Inventions among us to affright him from Communion with us; Much less do
we make such Inventions the Conditions of our Communion in any part of Gods
instituted Worship. Nay since he so earnestly urges our occasional Communion
with them, I would desire him to render it more practicable by removing that
unhappy Bar to it which the 5th. Canon of the Church of Ireland lays in our
way. For by that Canon All are denounced Excomunicated, who shall affirm and
maintain that there are within this Realm other Meetings, Assemblys or
Congregations, then such as by the Laws of this Land are held and allowed,
which may rightly challenge to themselves the name of true and lawful Churches,
and it is ordered that such be not restored till they repent and revoke their
Error. Now he knows we all affirm and maintain our Churches to be true and
lawful ones, and therefore are by the Canon Excomunicated. Nor can we be
without a plain violation of this Canon readmitted without retracting what we
are so far from accounting an Error, that we think the contrary Opinion a very
uncharitable one. So that to invite us to Communion with 'em while this Canon
stands in force against us, is but to tantalize us, and offer us with one hand
what they withhold with the other. And there are but two ways to remove this
obstacle to our Communion with 'em, viz. either to discard that rigid and sour
Canon, or to procure an Act of Indulgence, and then our Assemblys being allowed
by the Law will not come within the reach of it.

6. For his Advice to the Dissenting Ministers of Derry, to warn their People
against such Books as maintain principles contrary both to theirs and those of
the Established Church, since he is pleased to name one of my own, I am more
particularly concerned to consider what dangerous principles it contains.

Now of the principles laid down in those Books, and the principles common to
him with the Presbyt. Ministers in the North, to which they are contrary, his
Lp. gives this Account; You are sensible that among those Protestants that
Dissent from our Church, some are Congregational and others Presbyterians, You
of this Diocese where I am concerned, profess to be of this latter sort, and
agree with us in owning, that by Christ's Appointment, the particular Churches
in convenient Districts ought, according to Scripture precedents to associate
under one Government, and these again to unite themselves into greater
combinations of Provincial and N^tional Churches; The difference between you
and us, is concerning these particular Districts; Namely, Whether the
Government of 'em ought to be in a Presbytery with a Bishop, as President and
Governor by Christ's Appointment, or in a College of Presbyters absolutely
equal. So then we both own National and Provincial Churches as well as single
Worshipping Congregations; But the Congregational Dissenters deny, that Christ
instituted any other Church besides a single Congregation, and affirm that all
other Churches, such as Classical, Provincial, or National, are human
Inventions, and that every single Congregation is independent, and may indeed
keep a fair Correspondence with it is neighboring Congregations, but it is not
under any common Government with 'em. These last are the Avowed Principles of
Mr. Baxter, Dr. Owen, Mr. Lob, Mr. Humphrys, Mr. Boyse, Mr. Alsop, Mr.
Clerkson, and generally of all the late Defenders of the Dissenters Cause in
England and Ireland that I have met with

Answ. I must own my self greatly obliged to his Lp. for giving me a place
among so many excellent Persons, for whom I have so great a Veneration. But I
must beg his pardon if I think him a very unfit person to represent the
Principles of others, who so seldom dos right to their Judgment when he goes
about it. For I know none of those Reverend Authors he has named, that would
take this for either an accurate or just Account of their Sentiments in this
matter; I am sure neither Mr. Baxter nor Mr. Humphreys would: And it is no way
ingenuous in the Bp. to give us this confused stuff as Mr. Baxters Principles
who has delivered his thoughts on this Subject so often and so largely, and
with so admirable accuracy and clearness; So that I shall rather choose to
refer the Reader to his many excellent Writings relating to this Subject of
Church-Goverment, then to attempt to give any Abstract of his Judgment from
'em. But for my own Principles, I know none I have yet avowed but what are
contained in the Reflections upon the Bp's. Answer to Dean Manby, having no
where else delivered my Sentiments in reference to Church Government; And for
those I appeal to the Reader whether the Bp. have done me any justice in his
Representation of 'em. And to that purpose I must beg the Readers pardon for
transcribing those Two passages in the Reflections which are the only places
that relate to this purpose.

P: 17 Particular Churches are the chief integrating parts of the
Church-Catholick. These Churches consists of one or more Pastors, and a
Christian Flock associated under his or their oversight for personal Communion
in Faith, Worship, and Holy Living. These Churches are obliged by the very
dictates of the Light of Nature, and general Rules of the H. Scripture, to
endeavor the preservation of all necessary Unity by the amicable consultations
of their associated Pastors. The judgment of such associated Pastors should be
submitted to by the People under their care, when it is not repugnant to the
Word of God, and contrary to the Interest of Religion. But the people do not
owe 'em a blind obedience, nor have such Pastors any power but for Edification.
Much less can such Bishops pretend to a higher power, whose very office Christ
never instituted, and whose pretended Relation to their Diocese is not founded
on the Peopl's consent to it. And if such Bishops should claim the sole power
of Church Government in a Nation, etc.

So p. 57, 58. Having there objected against the Bp's. Assertion, That the
supreme Government of our Church has always been in a National Council, or
Convocation, That Dr. Stillingfleet (now Bp of Worcester) durst not own such an
Ecclesiastical Governing Head of the Church of England, And that neither the
Light of Nature, nor general Laws of Scripture, would suggest such an Assembly
(i. e. one so chosen and constituted) as the Governing Head of the Church of
England, I then add, A duly elected Synod of Pastors in a Nation, to endeavor
the nearest unity and Concord of the particular Churches (as far as it is to be
expected on Earth) by their amicable Consultations, we grant to be most
desirable and eligible wherever it may be had. And the Judgment of such a Synod
should be complied with in all things not repugnant to the word of God. But we
cannot say so of an Assembly chiefly composed of Men, whose Office is not only
an Usurpation, but such as renders true Church Government impossible, and whose
Interest and grandeur inclines 'em to keep up the Divisions and Corruptions
which they have made. And so such a Convocations being entrusted by Christ,
with the National Church Government which Mr. K. is pleased to assert, I oppose
the judgment of the truly learned Archbp. Usher which he often professed to Mr.
Baxter, That Church Councills are not for Government, but for Unity, Not as
being in order of Government over the several Bishops, but that by Consultation
they may know their Duty more clearly, and by agreement maintain Unity, and to
that end they were anciently celebrated.

Since then this is all I have asserted in this matter, How comes the Bp. to
say, It Is my avowed Principle, That Christ instituted no other Church besides a
single Congregation, and, that all other Churches, such as Classical,
Provincial* or National, are human Inventions and that every single
Congregation is independent and may indeed keep a fair Correspondence with it is
neighboring Congregations, but it is not under any common Government with 'em,
when there is not one of these Propositions in the Reflections; nay, when I am
so far from avowing 'em that there is not one of 'em that I can assent to as
here laid down by his Lp. And what Authority can he pretend to declare for me
what my avowed Principles are? If he had any thing to say against the
Reflections, he should in common justice have quoted my Words, and given me
leave to speak my own Thoughts; (as I have done by him in these Remarks) At
least he should not have obtruded upon me what I never said or thought. It Is
none of my Principle, That Christ instituted no other Church besides particular
Congregations. For I believe he instituted both the Catholic Church, and such
National or Kingdom Churches (as that great Light of his Age, Mr. Baxter pleads
for in his late Discourse on that Subject) i. e. a Society constituted of a
Christian Sovereign Magistrate, and of Christian Subjects worshipping God
ordinarily in true particular pastoral Churches, over which the foresaid
Magistrate excercises a coercive Government by the Sword, as Pastors exercise a
Ministerial one by the Word. I do also judge Classical, Provincial, and National
Synods to be, so far from being an human Invention in the common sense of the
Word, i. e. a sinful or superstitious Invention of Men, that I think 'em highly
agreeable to the Light of Nature and the general Rules of Scripture, and have in
the Reflections positively asserted that particular Churches are obliged to
endeavor the preservation of Unity and Concord, by the amicable consultations
of their associated Pastors. I do not therefore think any particular Church to
be so independent, as to be under no obligation to enter into such associations
but the contrary. And to give him the true Account of this matter what I have
asserted in those Reflections, is but the common Principles wherein both the
Presbyterian and Congregational Divines are agreed, as he may see if he compare
those Passages I have quoted, with the Heads of Agreement between 'em since
drawn up. For in the 6th. Head, there are these Three particulars laid down.

1. That in order to concord, and in any other weighty and difficult Cases, it
is needful, and according to the mind of Christ, that the Ministers of several
Churches be consulted and advised with about such matters.

2. That such Meetings may consist of smaller or greater Numbers, as the matter
shall require.

3. That particular Churches, their respective Elders and Members, ought to
have a Reverential regard to their Judgment so given, and not dissent therefrom
without apparent grounds from the Word of God.

These are Propositions of the same import with those in the Reflections, and
they are so far from being inconsistent with any Principle of those called
Presbyterians, that the most eminent of those at London, have subscribed 'em.
It Is true indeed, the Presbyterians do assert more then this, and the Assembly
of Divines in their humble Advice concerning Church Government have some
Assertions, to which the Congregational Divines do not fully assent: But as to
these Differences, as I have not in the forementioned Book declared my own
Judgment, so I know no right the Bishop has to declare it for me, when he dos
not know it. I have indeed quoted the Judgment of Archbishop Usher concerning
the Ancient Councils, which he thought were not for Government but Unity, etc.
And if he will on this account rank that Venerable Primate among the
Congregational Divines, they will no doubt think themselves greatly honored
with his company. But for my own Thoughts, I shall freely subjoin, that I am
greatly inclined to think, That the difference between those that make Synods,
only Consultative Meetings, and those that call 'em Church Judicatories, and
ascribe a Governing Power to 'em, is in a great measure rather verbal then
real. For those that make 'em Church-Judicatories, assign 'em only a
Ministerial and Declarative Power, and never imagined that the People owed a
blind obedience to their determinations. And those that make 'em only
Consultative Meetings for preservation of Concord, yet assert such a deference
due to their Judgment, That it should be complied with, both by particular
Pastors, and their Flocks, in all things not repugnant to the Word of God: Nor
do they deny that such Synods may disown such particular Pastors and their
Flocks, as walk disorderly, by rejecting their just and necessary
Determinations, as no Members of their Association, or that they may entirely
disclaim Christian Communion with those particular Churches that persist
impenitently in maintaining such corruptions in Doctrine and Worship, as
directly strike at the very Vitals and Essentials of the Christian Religion.
And I see not what those can justly attribute to such Synods more then this,
who make 'em Governing Assemblies, or Ecclesiastical Judicatories. Nor do I
know any great difficulty there is in moderate and wise men's joining in all
the real use of such Synods, in order to the preservation of the Churches
peace; notwithstanding these different Names or Notions they affix to such
Ecclesiastical Assemblies and their Determinations: Of which more may occur
when I consider what his Lp. objects against the Principles he ascribes to me.

On the other hand, The Bishop has not truly stated the difference between the
Presbyterians and Prelatists, when he tells us; It Is concerning these
particular Districts; namely, Whether the government over 'em ought to be in a
Presbytery, with a Bishop as President and Governor, by Christ's appointment,
or in a College of Presbyters absolutely equal?

Answ. Dos not his Lordship know, that our Modern Prelates not only pretend to
a distinct and superior Office, (and not merely a higher degree in the same
Office) but assume all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to themselves? Do they not
plainly exclude all Presbyters from any share in it? Are not all Church
Censures past by the Chancellor, solely in the Bishop's name, without any
concurrence of the Presbyters of the Diocese, who have no voice in 'em, nor are
so much as called or required to be present in the Spiritual Court? Nay If this
be all that our Prelates pretend to, viz. To be Presidents in a Diocesan Synod,
in which the Presbyters of the Diocese share in the Government, How came they
to reject Archbp. Usher's model of Episcopacy, that allows such a stated
Presidency to Bishops, when this was offered by the Divines called
Presbyterians, at the memorable Savoy Conference, as the ground of
Accommodation? For tho those Divines did not think such a stated Presidency of
one Person of immediate Divine Appointment, yet they thought it such a
prudential human Constitution as they could for peace sake submit to. But he
knows the Bishops rejected that Offer with scorn, nay would not stand to the
King's Declaration about Ecclesiastical Affairs, that gave 'em much more of
power then Archbp. Vshers model. So that his Lp. seems not to understand the
Principles of his Brethern, and I am beginning to hope is of more moderate
Sentiments in this point then those Commissioners at that Treaty were.

It remains only under this Head, that I consider what he has to object against
those Principles of mine, as they are now truly cited from the Reflections. For
I hope he dos not think me obliged to defend Positions that are none of my own.

Now it is manifest (says he) That these Principles of theirs-are much more
different from your Principles then ours are: And the difference is much
greater and more material. For it is possible on your Principles and ours to
preserve Unity, and keep up some value for Excommunication, since he who is
censured in one Church, cannot be received in another, neither with you, nor
us, Whereas in the Congregational way, he that is Excommunicated in one
Congregation may remove to another, or set up one for himself, if he pleases;
At the worst if he should, it would be counted but an irregularity. These
Principles are destructive to the Peace and Unity of the Church, as well as to
our common Cause.

Answ. For the Congregational Divines I see no difficulty in clearing their
Principles from these invidious consequences he draws from 'em; for all of 'em
assert that he who is justly Excommunicated in one Church ought to be received
by no other whatever. But for my own, which I am only here concerned to defend,
I would desire his Lp. to review his Arguments and tell me where the force of
'em lies, What Unity of the Church are those Principles laid down in the
Reflections destructive of? Is it destructive to the Churches Unity to assert,
That the Light of Nature and general Rules of Scripture oblige the Pastors of
the Church to associate for it is preservation by their mutual Consultations;
And that the Judgment of such associated Pastors should be submitted to
whenever it is not repugnant to the Word of God? Nor do I disallow, but approve
of Associations in those lesser or larger Districts, and the regular
Subordination of the lesser to the greater. What then can he find in my
Principles destructive of the Churches Unity, unless he imagines it to be so,
That I assert, That the People do not owe a blind Obedience to such Synods, and
that such associated Pastors have their power for Edification and not
Destruction. And dare he pretend the contrary? Dos not the Church of England
declare, That all Councills may err, and will he assign an absolute Authority
in the Church to those that are but fallible? Nay is not the pretense of the
People's being absolutely obliged to receive and submit to the Decisions of
General Synods, the very foundation of Popery, and the chief source of all
those monstrous corruptions in Doctrine and Worship which have been established
in it by the pretended decisive Authority of such Councills? Have not all those
Councills that have claimed such unlimited Authority been the fatal Engines of
Tearing and corrupting the Christian Church instead of preserving it is Purity
or Peace? As he may see proved with uncontrolable Evidence in Mr. Baxters
History of Bp's and their Councills and in the defense of it.

Again, How do these Principles of mine hinder the keeping up a just value for
Excommunication or any other censures of the Church? For it no way follows from
'em That he who is censured in one Church may remove to another, or set up one
for himself if he pleases. For he that is justly censured in one Church, should
not be received by any other whatsoever; And where the Pastors of particular
Churches are associated, as I suppose they ought to be, this is always one
necessary Rule for the preservation of Unity. It Is true, If the person
Excommunicated complain of wrong done him, he may refer his Case to the
Judgment of the Classical or Provincial Synod for redress of it. But, if it
appear that he is justly Excommunicated; For any other Pastor to receive him,
it is such an irregular practice, as if persisted in may justify his Brethren in
excluding him from being a Member of their Association. And for a justly
Excommunicated Person to set up a Congregation for himself, is so heinous an
Addition to the crime for which he was Excommunicated, that such associated
Pastors may justly warn the People against the danger of encouraging him in so
impudent an Usurpation of Authority in the Church, when he is not fit to be so
much as a Member in it. Nor would this Usurpation of the sacred Office by such
a justly Excommunicated Person be only an irregularity (if he means by that a
disorder that is culpable indeed, but yet tolerable, and inconsiderable.) For he
is incapable of the Sacred Office, because destitute of the qualifications
necessary thereto, 1 Timothy 3.

So that upon the whole the Bishop is grossly mistaken in supposing that any
Principles of mine are more different from those of the Presbyterians then
those of the Prelatists are. For I have asserted none but what any Presbyterian
will grant; tho they may assert more then my Subject then led me to: Whereas
the Principles of those Prelatists, that approve our present Constitution, are
not only very different from theirs, but truly lessen the value of
Excommunication, and render Church Discipline impracticable. For what can more
effectually pour Contempt on the Censures of the Church, then to have the most
solemn of 'em, I mean Excommunication, decreed by a Lay-Chancellor, and what is
worse decreed usually upon so frivolous causes, in so rash and precipitant a
manner, and made merely an engine to squeeze the purses of men, rather then
reform their manners. And what can more effectually render true Church
Discipline impracticable then for one man to engross the whole exercise of it
in a large Diocese, containing many score or hundred Churches, (whereas every
Pastor finds it a work hard enough to perform it aright in his single
Congregation) and to exclude those particular Pastors entirely from it, to
whose office it dos belong and without whose concurrence it can never be
rightly administered.

I shall only add, That what any Conforming Divines have wrote, in answer to
any Principles of mine, I know not. And for such Books as Mr. Baxter has wrote
in defense of the Non Conformist's Cause, such as his Nonconformity stated and
argued, and his Treatise of Episcopacy. If he think 'em carefully answered, I
wish he would direct us to the Answerers: For I know of no such Answerers,
unless he take railing or nibling at Books to be answering 'em. But if he
refers to the Debates between Mr. Baxter and Dr. Stillingfleet, and to the
vindication of the latter against M. Humfrey's and Mr. Baxter, he may easily
see how little that vindication signifies in the first part of Mr. Baxter's
Catholic Communion, which is a survey of the Vindication. And by the way,
that judicious Divine was so far from entertaining Principles so destructive to
those of the Northern Presbyterians, (as the Bishop here groundlessly imagines)
that he commends those in Scotland for their National Church-confederacy, and
the happy concord produced by it. Nation. Churches p. 5.

6. For his last Request to the Presbyterian Ministers of his Diocese, That
they would concur with him in beating down such Vices and Immoralities as are
opposite to our common Christianity; such as Adultery, Fornication, Blasphemy,
Profanatian of the Lord's day, etc. I doubt not he will find their most ready
compliance, and have both their hearts and hands to concur with him in so
necessary a work. And I may I think venture to assure him, they will receive no
Persons Excommunicated for such Vices into their Congregations, nor give 'em
the least countenance. But I hope his Lordship will not reckon those guilty of
Fornication who are Married by Non-Conformist-Ministers upon due publication of
the Banes of Matrimony, nor expect that they should reject their own Members,
when the Spiritul Courts for want of other prey, on that score draw 'em into
their Churches, and bring 'em under their Lash, Nay as they have very little
hope of any great Reformation of manners, from either the Persons that compose
those Courts, or their manner of proceeding in 'em, both which they think
greatly need to be reformed, so I hope his Lordship dos not expect that they
should turn Informers to bring Grist to their Mill.

And if complying thus far with his Lordship's forementioned requests will
contribute so much to his living more easily with the Dissenters, and to the
taking off that uncharitableness which the differences that remain are apt to
cause, I hope those of his Diocese will herein give him all the reasonable
Satisfaction he can desire, And then I hope his Lordship will not continue the
feud on his part, by putting such uncharitable Sour Covenants into his new
Leases, as plainly imply his Intentions and endeavors to expel them, and
suppress their meetings wherever his power and Interest can reach. For
otherwise he will give 'em too great occasion to apply to these obliging
expressions when compared with his Actions, that unhappy Remark, The voice is
the voice of Jacob, but the hands (those rough and hairy ones) are the hands of
Esau.

III. For his Lordship's Advice to the Conforming Laity of Derry.
I Shall take no farther notice of it, then to express my great satisfaction,

1. In his recommending to 'em the Worship of God in their Familys. The general
neglect of this has been one great source of the deplorable degeneracy and
corruption of our Youth. And I heartily wish the Clergy were herein more
exemplary to the Laity, by making their Houses lesser Churches and fruitful
Seminarys of Religion. I hope the Dissenters of that Diocese, as well as in
other parts of the Kingdom, set 'em herein a Pattern worthy their imitation.
But why his Lordship should in their Family-Prayers seem to confine 'em to the
words of the Church, I see no reason; unless he supposes those Forms such a
Catholicon in Devotion, as some boast their Recipe's to be in Physic, that
will suit all particular Diseases.

2. In his exhorting 'em not only to Innocence of life but to Christian
moderation too.

For certainly when our Zeal, instead of being laid out to promote the great
and important Interests of our common Christianity, is chiefly spent about
lesser matters disputable among truly good men, It turns into a praeternatural
and feavourish heat that preys on the Vitals of Religion. But I must add, That
I understand not, Why Innocence of Life and moderation in the Conforming Laity,
should any more convince the Non Conformists of the unreasonableness of
separation from them, then the like Innocence and moderation of the Non
Conformists should convince their Conforming brethren of the unreasonableness
of separation from them. And no doubt but all good men on both sides enjoy that
Communion of Saints which our Creed speaks of; And where their difference of
Judgment about some modes of Worship unavoydably occasions that difference of
Practice (which some improperly call difference of Communion) yet there is no
reason it should disunite their Affections. They retain Communion in the
Essentials of Belief, Worship and Holiness and are cemented by those common
bands of Christian Unity mentioned, 4. Ephesians. 4, 5, 6. (One Body, one Spirit, one
Hope of their Calling, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father);
And so far as they are acted by the genuine Spirit of Christianity they will
endeavor to preserve this Unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, by mutual
Forbearance as to that diversity of external Rites and Modes, about which it
cannot be Expected but that the different apprehensions of pious men will
occasion diversity in their practice, especially where any unnecessary or
suspected Rites are imposed.

IV. For his Advice to the Dissenting Laity of Derry.
I Shall only offer the following Remarks,

1. His Lp. dos well to refer 'em to their Bibles as I have also done in this
Discourse, and I hope they will herein imitate those noble Beraeans by
examining what is said according to that unerring Standard and Test of Divine
Truth.

2. That Men are more fond of their own Inventions then of God's Commands is a
Truth that Experience puts out of all doubt.

But that all those Popish Corruptions of Image Worship, Prayers for the dead,
Purgatory, the Intercession of Saints, Half Comunion, and Worshipping the Host,
were merely, introduc't by the violent fondness of the People for 'em, against
the will of the Church Governors who generally opposed and condemned 'em, is
an Observation that I can see little ground for in Church History. As to some
of 'em, I think it far more probable that they had their rise either from the
imprudent Zeal, or the politic Contrivance of the Clergy who found 'em
Serviceable to squeeze the Purses as well as enslave the Consciences of the
People. It Is certain that when those corruptions were once entertained, the
Clergy were generally the most violent defenders of 'em, and the most cruel
persecutors of all that made any Attempts toward Reformation.

But the Bp. applys this Observation to Extemporary Prayers, which as he
supposes to be an human Invention, so he tells us. The People have brought 'em
into practice against the Opinion and Constitution of the Church Covernours,
and of the first Reformers, who all did settle Liturgys in the Churches which
they reformed; This Knox did in Scotland, whose Liturgy we have ready to
produce to the Conviction of those who pretend to be his Successors, and yet
condemn Forms of Prayer as unlawful. This Luther did for Germany, and Calvin
for Geneva, and for the French-Church, whose Liturgys are still used by 'em.

Answ. I hope I have already sufficiently proved, That Praying without Forms is
as much of Divine Institution as Praying with 'em, and consequently the Bishop
has no more reason to call the one a Human Invention then the other. Nay, since
there is not the least evidence of any stinted Liturgy prescribed or
recommended to the Christian Church by Christ or his Apostles, but so strong
presumption to the contrary; that in the Apostolical, and I may add in the two
or three following Ages, even ordinary Pastors used free-prayer, or prayed in
the exercise of their own Abilities; There is much more reason to rank such
stinted Liturgies among the Bishop's sort of Human Inventions. For they have
certainly neither precept nor pattern for 'em in the New Testament, as used in
the Christian Church, and we do in the use of 'em vary from Apostolical
pattern. And I take this account he has given us of the Original of what he
calls Extempore-Prayers to be a very lame and untrue one. For if free-prayer,
unconfined to a stinted Liturgy was the practice of the three first Centuries,
(and Dr. Comber's proofs to the contrary are I think invalidated by his modest
and learned Examinator to the full satisfaction of an unprejudiced Reader.)
Then the Bp. is first concerned to acquaint us how such stinted Liturgies were
brought into general use; And if he will take the Opinion of the learned
Capellus in this matter, (even in that very Disputation in which he so severely
censures the Compilers of the Directory) prescribed Liturgies were unknown to
the Apostolical and succeeding Ages, and were not introduced till those
Persecutions ceased which kept alive the Zeal of the Primitive Christians, and
till through the favor of Christian Emperors, the Number of Christians
Increased, but the Fervor of true Piety and Devotion was Allayed. And then
they were gradually introduced for the use of simple and unlearned Ministers;
who through their Sloth were unfurnished with Gifts, and through their
Ignorance in danger of venting such unsound Notions as subtle Heretics might
instill into 'em. See These. Sal. p. 657.


But it was much later before stinted Liturgies came into general use, even in
those Ages (the Fifth, Sixth, etc.) in which the Clergy gradually degenerated
into Laziness and Ignorance, as well as Worldliness and Pride, and true
Devotion sunk into Formality and Superstition. And hereby the ruling part of
the Clergy had the easier opportunity to propagate all their gainful Errors and
Superstitions among the People, by infusing the poison of 'em into the Public
Offices of Devotion. For such prescribed Liturgies were first set up in
Patriarchal and Metropolitan Churches, such as Rome, Alexandria, Antioch,
Constantinople, etc. And there was very great diversity of 'em in the Western,
as well as Eastern Churches, for some Ages, till by the Artifices and Tyranny
of the Popes, all or most of the Western Churches were reduced to a Conformity
herein to that of Rome, whose Public Offices had frequent Additions to 'em,
and Changes in 'em.

And therefore it is no wonder that when our first Reformers began to oppose the
Corruptions of Popery, they should yet retain the use of Liturgies. For the
Clergy were at that time so generally overspread with deplorable Ignorance,
that it was not to be expected that those of 'em that embraced the Reformation
should be immediately qualified to pray without Forms, to which they had never
been accustomed. They were so far from being capable of that, that they were
judged generally unfit to instruct the People, and therefore Homilies were
composed for their use as well as Liturgies. But as when by the Revival and
Increase of Learning, the Clergy generally acquired better Abilities, and so
Homilies were gradually laid aside, (the strong having no more need of such
Crutches) so the same might have been expected in reference to Prayer as well
as Preaching. And accordingly the Dissenters in England, and the Presbyterians
in Scotland, did gradually revive the practice of praying without a stinted
Liturgy. And those in France and Holland that retain some few short Forms, yet
leave their 2Ministers at liberty to exercise their Gifts in
free-occasional-Prayer, and look on such stinted Liturgies as exclude this
Exercise of the Ministers Abilities as too great an Encouragement to Sloth and
Ignorance in 'em. Insomuch as the foresaid Capellus, when upon the like mistake
with our Author, he so sharply chides the N. C's in England, for condemning
Forms of Prayer as Unlawful, yet does he warmly censure the rigor of such as
under pretense of certain and prescribed Forms of Liturgies, study to banish
out of the Church all use of Prayers conceived by particular Ministers
Themselves, and disowns this from being his Design.

So that the main Reason why our first Reformers retained Liturgies, does not
extend to such a state of the Church wherein the Learning and Abilities of
Ministers are or should be so improved as to set 'em as much above the need of
stinted Forms of Prayer, as of Preaching. And accordingly, those Churches whose
Reformation was carried to the greatest height, did not by any Forms of Prayer
they retained (to express their Concord in that Duty) exclude the use of
free-Prayer. Nor do any Dissenters condemn all public use of Forms, but only
such as tempts Ministers to a neglect of the Gift of Prayer, and hinders 'em
from suiting all the Exigencies and Occasions of their Flocks in that part of
their Public Devotions.

For the Bishop's Reason why the generality of the People are better pleased
with Extemporary Prayers, than with such Forms, viz. Because the Novelty of the
one gratifies more Men's carnal and itching Ears with a kind of sensual
delight, and requires less pains to strain up their Minds to true Devotion, p.
184, 185. -- It Is a very confused one, wherein there is something of Truth,
mixed with weak and censorious Mistakes. It Is true indeed, that considering the
general temper of Mankind, the Variety of Matter, as well as of Expression in
free Prayer, tends more to raise Men's Devotion, than the constant Repetition of
the same Forms. Nor can the People so readily believe that a Minister prays
from his heart, when he reads a prescribed Form, as when he delivers a free
Prayer, that is the result of his previous meditation. So that in this respect
free Prayer has much the Advantage above Forms, that it is a greater Help to
inward Devotion; which is sufficient to recommend this mode of praying, as in
general, far preferrable to the other. There is something of Truth in those
Expressions of Sir W. C. Character of a Whig and Tory, p. 20.
(though perhaps there is too much of the Air of a Gentleman in 'em) When a Man
qualified endu'd with Learning too, and adorned with a good Life, breaks out
into a warm and well-deliver'd Prayer before a Sermon, it has the appearance of
a Divine Rapture; He raises and leads the Hearts of the Assembly in another
manner than the most composed and best studied Forms can do. And the Pray-we's
would look like so many Statues, or Men of Straw in the Pulpit, compared with
those who speak with so powerful Zeal, that men are tempted to believe Heaven
it self has directed their Words to 'em. But why the Bp. should make it a
carnal temper in the People to desire the best Helps that can be given 'em to
excite their Devotions in Prayer, and cure their natural indisposition to that
Duty, I cannot conceive. It looks rather like a carnal temper in the Clergy to
deny 'em this excellent Help, to indulge their own Sloth and Ease. Nor do I see
why the People must be accused of itching Ears, because they are prone to be
more dull under the constant Repetition of the same Forms, than under the
Variety of Matter and Expression that occurs in free Prayer. He might as well
upbraid 'em with itching Ears because they would be more dull in singing, if
the same Psalm and Tune were constantly used, than when Variety of both is
allowed 'em; or because they would be more dull if the same Homilies were
constantly read, than under that more grateful variety of Instructions that
Sermons contain.

But I wonder most why his Lordship should in this respect compare free Prayer
to Images, and Relics, and Mediatory Saints, p. 185. unless he fancies that
the use of Images, Relics, and Mediatory Saints, does as much more contribute
to raise true Devotion in the Worship of God, than the simplicity of his own
Uncorrupted Institutions; as the use of free Prayer contributes more to it than
stinted Forms. And if he truly think so, the Papists are greatly obliged to his
Lordship, for this favorable Character of the tendency and effects of these
Superstitions. But if his Lordship had duly considered, that while free-Prayer
continued in the Church, these Superstitions were unknown in it, and that they
were gradually introduced in the same Ages in which stinted Liturgies gradually
came into general use, it might have prevented this invidious but groundless
comparison between the influence of free Prayer, and that of those gross
Corruptions. I am sure such stinted Forms, when read out of a Book, look more
like lifeless Images of Devotion, than those Prayers that are the result of the
serious Meditations and Affections of him that delivers 'em.

And if the fondness of Ill People for any way of Devotion, be an Argument that
it is not of God, (as the Bishop farther insinuates, p. 185.) I am apt to think
it will make much more against stinted Liturgies, than against free Prayer. For
he will hardly be able to persuade us that the Debauchee's of the Age dote on
Extempore Prayers (as he calls 'em) and that the most serious and religious
have the same violent passion for prescribed Forms.

3. We must beg his Lordships pardon, if we cannot easily believe, it is only
Conscience that makes the Conforming Clergy so generally decline Extemporary
Prayers. For if by Extempore Prayers, he means such as are free and unconfined
to any prescribed Forms, he seems himself to own, p. 54. That there are some
occasions that require it even in public, p. 54. and I see no ground to doubt
but that they are ordinarily more convenient then set Forms, if those Prayers
be most convenient that tend most to raise true Devotion in the minds of the
People.

But we must much more beg his Lp's pardon for not believing what he adds for
Confirmation of this account of their disusing free Prayer. For it seems a very
surprising Discovery that he has made to us, when he tells us, p. 186. It Is
manifest that Extemporary Prayers would be much more easy to most of us, and
less burthensom then the service we use. You may think otherwise, but assure
your selves that you are mistaken. And I dare appeal to those that have tried
both, whether is most easy. There are such, both amongst you and us, that have
made the experiment. And I dare refer it to 'em to declare on their Consciences
which of the two Services they look on to be the greater burden to him that
performs 'em. Whatever you may think if we would indulg our selves, It were no
hard matter for the meanest of us to pass an Extemporary Prayer on our
Auditory, or turn the heads of our Sermon into one.

Ans. We pay a great deference to his Lp's Judgment, but we cannot, without
offering great violence to our own understandings, bring 'em to assent to so
incredible a Paradox, merely because it is delivered with so extraordinary an
Air of assurance; much less can we entertain that as a manifest Truth, which to
us seems so contrary to common sense. For we cannot imagine what unsupportable
burden it should be for a man to read the Service of the Church when he has
the Book before him; unless when he is pained with sore eyes; or terribly
hoarse with a great Cold; For then it may possibly be some considerable Trouble
to him. But for a Minister to deliver a free Prayer in a Public Assembly (And
the Bp. knows the Dissenters are seldom accused for theirs being too short)
requires both serious Meditation before hand to suit it to the occasion, and to
the state of his People, and the Laborious Exercise of his Judgment, his
Invention and Memory, which is a real burden and difficulty to those that are
not by deep Study and frequent Exercise habituated to it. Nay tho the
Dissenters should Pray in that new way his Lp. has contrived for 'em, by
patching together several pieces of old Forms to make a new dress of it, yet
this would require some Exercise of their Judgment and Memory, to tack 'em
right together, and to repeat 'em without hesitation. And this sure is not so
easy a matter as what he cannot deny every Schoolboy to be capable of, viz.
to turn over the leaves and Read what is usually in a fair and large Print. His
Lp. may if he please, appeal from common sense to Experience; but by all that I
have yet conversed with on this Subject, his assertion seems as strange to them
as it does to us. Nor can I meet with any of these Vertuoso's in Devotion, that
pretend upon any Experiments they have made, to give their suffrage to his new
Observation. We do not indeed doubt of his Lp's Abilities, but he must allow us
to doubt of those of the body of the inferior Clergy, who I fear would think it
a severe imposition upon 'em, if their Diocesans should oblige 'em to the
frequent Exercise of their Talents this way. For I have heard several
Clergymen of no mean parts, complain of the unhappy inability for free Prayer,
that general disuse had brought upon 'em, and I believe I might herein with
much better reason appeal to Experience. But since his Lp's hand is in for
Paradoxes, I think he should have added one more, viz. That it is manifest that
it is a far greater burden for the Clergy to Read the Homilies of the Church, or
other Men's Sermons, than to Preach Sermons of their own; and I doubt not he may
with as much reason appeal to the Experience of those that have tried both, to
attest the Truth of it. And if he can make good the Truth of these two
Paradoxes, the N.C. Ministers will hence forward pass for lazy Drones, while
the poor Readers of the Church are accounted the truest Laborers. But to give
the latter their due, the most of 'em take too much pains for that sorry hire
that is allowed 'em by such of their Brethren as are laborious enough to engross
Church Livings, but too far consult their ease to make the Duties of their
Function any burden to 'em.

Lastly, For his Request to the Dissenting Laiety, That they would believe he
heartily desires and studies the good of their Souls, I hope they are willing
to gratify him herein as far as rational Charity can allow. Only it would
greatly facilitate their Belief of it, if they found him more tender of their
good Name and just Reputation; And they are sorry to find that notwithstanding
all his professions of good will, he should show so little regard to that, not
only in a continued Series of unjust Accusations through his whole Book, but
especially in the following words, in which he has drawn up a comprehensive
Summary charge, sufficient to render 'em odious if it be believed, but they are
confident too apparently groundless to gain credit with any that will pass a
Righteous and Impartial Judgment on these matters.

His Lp's words are. For how is it possible that any Man that has a Zeal for
the Purity of God's worship, should not have his Spirit moved within him, to
see a well meaning People so strangely misled, as to content themselves to
meet together perhaps for some years with a design to worship God, and yet
hardly ever see any thing of God's Immediate Appointment in their Meetings? Now
to my thoughts this is manifestly the case of many of you, since a Man may
frequent some Meetings among you for some years, and never hear a Prayer, a
Psalm or Chapter, which has been imediately dictated by God, and never be
called on to bow his knee to God, or see either Minister or People Address
themselves to him in that humble posture; Lastly, never see any body offer to
Administer, or desire to Receive the Food of Life in the Lord's Supper. These
are melancholy Reflections to me, who believe that God has required these in
his Worship; And therefore I hope you will take it in good part that I
Endeavor to Restore them to you.

Ans. If the Case of the Dissenters be truly such as the Bp. Represents it, His
Zeal to recover the Purity of Divine Worship among 'em, is highly commendable;
and would deserve their thankful acknowledgments. But if the whole of this
heavy Charge be so far from being manifestly true, that it is rather apparently
groundless and unjust; There will be some occasion to suspect, that his
Lordships Zeal has more of heat then light in it, and is but the Zeal of a
Party, that often transports Men beyond all bounds of Truth, when it is their
design to render those odious whom they account their Adversaries. And whether
this charge be not so apparently groundless and unjust will appear upon the
Review of it.

For do the Dissenters content themselves to meet together for some years, and
yet hardly ever see any thing of God's immediate Appointment among 'em, when
they have every Lord's Day Prayer, Praise, Reading, and Expounding, and Applying
the Word of God, and frequently Baptism and the Lord's Supper, which are all
Duties of God's immediate Appointment? Or can he tell us of any other parts of
Divine Worship besides these, that are instituted by God? But his Lordship
perhaps does not speak so much of these parts of Divine worship themselves, as
of the manner of performing 'em. For when he comes to make good his charge, he
tells us, A Man may frequent your Meeting some years, and never hear a Prayer,
a Psalm, or a Chapter which has been immediately dictated by God etc. But why
does he charge the Dissenters for never using a Prayer immediately dictated by
God? If he speak of Psalm Prayers, what he says is notoriously untrue.

If he speak of Prose-Prayers, why does he make it our Crime to use no such
Prayers immediately dictated by God, when he cannot produce any shadow of
proof of any such Prayers immediately dictated by God, for the use of the
Christian Church, unless the Lords Prayer? Nor is there any clear Evidence of
its being dictated as a Form to be used in our Public Assemblies: Or does he
think their Collects any more immediately dictated by God, than our free Prayers
are? I hope he may from the foregoing Discourse find, that the latter are more
agreeable to the Precepts of the New Testament, and much more to the Pattern of
the Apostolic Church, than stinted Liturgies.

Again why dos he tell us, that the Dissenters may in several years never hear
a Psalm immediately dictated by God? When Psalms are constantly sung in their
Meetings much more than in the Parish-Churches. And can he find any other use
of 'em prescribed to the Christian Church? (except that of their being read for
instruction, as they are among us equally with other parts of the Old
Testament). Or is he so weak as to imagine that a Prose Version of the Psalms is
immediately dictated by God, but a Metre-version is not; when God has immediately
dictated neither, and when the true sense of the original is as much the word
of God, when in meter as when in prose? Again, why should he tell us of our not
hearing a Chapter immedialy dictated by God, when he never immediately dictated
any such division of the Scriptures into Chapters at all, nay when an entire
portion of Scripture, and usually a whole Chapter, and sometimes more, is so
constantly read and expounded, besides the reading so many parallel Texts to
explain and urge some doctrine or precept of the Christian Religion? ( i. e.
when the Scriptures are read all the several ways we have any pattern for in
the Christian Church?) Again, why dos he make it a Crime that we do not bow our
knees to God, when we either use that posture, or that other of standing, which
is as much a scriptural posture, and equally expressive of our religious
reverence in all our immediate addresses to God? Again why should he accuse
those as never seeing one offering to administer, or desiring to receive the
food of life in the Lord's Supper, who (tho they communicate seldomer than
other Dissenters, yet) ordinarily do it oftener then the Conforming Laity in
most parts of the Kingdom? One would think his Lp. might have spared 'em the
labor of so obvious and easy an Apology, by forbearing such accusations as
have not so much as an appearance of Truth or Justice. But if he cannot
perceive things that are so clear and plain, the Dissenters will, in requital
of his prayer for 'em, bag of G^d, that he may open the eyes of his
understanding; And they hope when those scales are fallen off, (I mean those
unhappy prejudices that hinder him from discerning these things in their true
light,) then these melancholy reflections will quickly vanish, with which his
mind has been so much disturbed on this occasion. For now, if he please, he may
clearly see the Dissenters enjoy already all those divine Appointments which he
is so sollicitous to restore to 'em, and (whatever others do) free from any
mixture of sinful human Inventions.

And as they thank him for his endeavor to instruct 'em, so they humbly
request he would calmly and impartially consider what is here offered for their
necessary vindication; Which if he do, they do not despair, but it may recover
him to a more favorable opinion of his Brethren, and a more charitable temper
toward 'em; and may oblige him, as an evidence thereof, not only to retract
his former uncharitable exclusion of 'em from the Catholic Church, but this
super-added injury, in charging their Worship with human Inventions, and so
frequently misrepresenting their opinions and practices contrary to plain
evidence, in order to the countenancing that groundless Accusation. For such
Justice and Charity toward our Fellow Christians, is most becoming those that
profess to expect that great day when the universal Shepherd will appear, and
call both Pastors and their Flocks to a strict account at that general and
final Visitation.

APPENDIX.
To the Remarks I have already made on the Bishop's Discourse, I think it
necessary to subjoyn these two Additional ones.

I. THat his Lordship has omitted one material part of Divine Worship, about
the manner of performing which, the Contest between the Established Church and
the Dissenters dos most directly concern this charge of human Inventions in the
Worship of God.

For of those two Sacraments which are the two parts of positive instituted
Worship peculiar to the Christian Religion, he has only considered that of the
Lord's Supper, but has said nothing concerning the other, which is as undoubted
a part of Divine Worship, and the very Sacrament of our initiation into the
Christian Church, viz. Baptism. I confess his prudence and foresight seems very
commendable in this wary silence and omission. (For it is easier to answer such
objections as he himself makes for the Dissenters, than those they make for
themselves). But I cannot so much commend his candor and ingenuity in it. For
he could not be ignorant that here the Dissenters particularly used to fix
their charge of human Inventions in the Worship of God, which the Bp. has been
so far from endeavoring to clear their way of administering this Ordinance
from, that he has rather furnished us with an invincible argument ad hominem to
make it good. There are two things which the Dissenters object against the way
of celebrating this part of Divine Worship in the Established Church; The one is
the use of the Cross as a dedicating sign; The other is, the making Godfathers
and Godmothers Sponsors for the religious Education of those children whose
Parents are living, to the exclusion of the Parents themselves.

Now let us examine each of these Practices by the Bp's own Principle. Those
ways of Worship (says he, p. 3) are displeasing to God which are not expressly
contained in the holy Scriptures, or warranted by the examples of holy men
therein. But neither of these ways of celebrating Baptism can plead any such
express command, or so much as example in the holy Scriptures; none that I know
of, having so much as pretended to produce either for 'em. So that unless the
Bp. retract his own Principle, he must discard both these practices as sinful
human Inventions. But as I lay no great stress on an argument founded on so
ambiguous a Principle, so I shall add, That I fear these two things will prove
human Inventions, according to the juster notion of 'em given in the Remarks on
the Introduction.

For the Cross in Baptism, I see not how it can be cleared from being a New
human Sacrament. For there wants nothing but Divine Institution to make it as
much a Sacrament as Baptism it self. For what more can be required to the
nature of such a Sacrament of the New Covenant, in reference to both the parts
of it, than to be a visible sign, whereby God's promise of the blessings of
that Covenant is confirmed to us, and we brought under solemn obligation to the
dutys of it. For if such an external sign be appointed by God for these ends,
it is a Divine Sacrament; If by Men, it is a Human Sacrament, or a part of
positive Worship of human Invention. Now that the Establ^sht Church has
appointed this visible sign of the Cross for both these purposes I mentioned
before, is, I think, sufficiently evident from her own express declaration
concerning it. For these are her words in the 30th Canon of the Church of
England.

The Holy Ghost by the mouth of the Apostle did honor the name of the Cross so
far, that under it he comprehended not only Christ crucified, but the force,
effect and merit of his death and passion, with all the comforts, fruits and
promises which we receive or expect thereby. -- And afterward, -- the Church
of England has retained still the sign of it in Baptism, following therein the
Primitive and Apostolical Churches, and accounting it a lawful outward
Ceremony, and honorable Badg, whereby the Infant is dedicated to the service
of him that died on the Cross, as by the words of the Common Prayer Book may
appear. The words in the Service Book, to which the Canons refer, are also
these; We receive this child into the Congregation of Christ's Flock, and do
sign him with the Sign of the Cross, in token that he shall not be ashamed to
confess the Faith of Christ crucified, and manfully to fight under his banner
against Sin, the World, and the Devil, and to continue Christ's faithful
Soldier and Servant to his lives end.

Here is the Sign of the Cross set up to represent Christ crucified, and all
the comforts, fruits and promises which we receive or expect as the force,
effect and merit of his death and passion. And sure Baptism can represent no
more to be either received or expected by us. It Is also advanced as an
honorable Badg, by which the person Baptized is dedicated to the service of
him that died on the Cross, and consequently brought under solemn obligation to
all the dutys of the New Covenant, to confess the Faith of Christ crucified,
and manfully to fight under his banner against Sin, the World, and the Devil,
and to continue Christ's faithful Soldier and Servant to his live's end; And
what more peculiar dutys of the Covenant of Grace can Baptism oblige us to?

Nay, as those Sacraments of Divine Institution are intended by their
signification to excite us to our duty by way of moral causality, or influence,
so the same is ascribed to this Ceremony aamong the rest appointed by the
Established Church, that it is apt to stir up the dull mind of man to the
remembrance of his duty to God by such a notable and spiritual signification,
whereby he may be edified. See Pref. to the Cerem.

So that Crossing in Baptism is as much a Sacrament as any thing can be that is
not divinely instituted, i. e. It Is a Sacrament which men have presumed to
Institute to the like purpose, and use as our Blessed Savior has Instituted
Baptism it self.

Nor do any of those Excuses I have yet met with, signify any thing to take
off this charge.

We are sometimes told, That Baptism is perfect without it. See the 30th Canon.

Answ. Not to insist on what might be justly said, that the Canon enjoins the
use of it in Baptism; And that a great part of the Office of Baptism is
continued after the crossing is over, which seem to imply the quite contrary to
what the excuse insinuates; I do not see that this signifies any thing to
remove our Objection. For Baptism is perfect without the Lord's Supper, and yet
that is a distinct Sacrament, and so will crossing prove no less a human
Sacrament, tho it were administered in public worship at a different time from
that of Baptism. Only it looks the more presumptuous to join it with Baptism,
as if we would supyly our Lord's defects in that Institution which he has made
the initiating symbol and badg of our Christian Profession.

We are also told, That the Minister Baptizes in the name of Christ, but Signs
with the Sign of the Cross in the name of the Church, who by that Rite receives
the Infant into the number of her particular members.

Answ. I might content my self with replying, That there is no such thing
suggested in the Office of Baptism, nor in the Canon that relates to the Cross.
The words used by the Minister when he crosses the child, rather relate to it is
being received into the universal Church, For that is the Congregation of
Christ's Flock; nor is there the least syllable in the words following, of the
person Baptized being signed with the sign of the Cross, in token of his being
received into this National Church. But I add, It Is no way true that the Cross
is only used as a rite, by which the Established Church admits the Baptized into
the number of her members; For the 36th Canon expressly asserts it to be an
honorable badg, whereby the person Baptized is dedicated to the service of him
that died on the Cross, and refers to the words of the Common Prayer Book,
which are plain to that purpose. And therefore the difficulty still remains, By
what Authority the Church can appoint Ministers in her name to dedicate men to
the service of a crucified Savior, by a Rite or Ceremony of their own, when
Christ has already appointed one of his own choosing for that end and purpose?
For if she could, why do we quarrel with the Roman Church for adding so many
new Sacraments to those two which Christ has Instituted already? Nay, why do we
blame the Romish Church for their additional rites, of oil, and salt, and
spittle, and annexing such spiritual signification and use to 'em?

And it is yet more inexcusable to make such a human Invention a necessary
condition of Christian Communion in this part of the Worship of God. For that
is to deny men the benefit of God's Institution, to which all credible
Professors of the Christian Religion, and their posterity, have a right, by the
charter of our common Lord, because they dare not comply with a mere human
Invention, for which there is as little (if not less) to be said, than for any
of those other rites practiced by the Roman Church in the celebration of this
Ordinance. And for the custom of Crossing themselves in common conversation,
practiced by the Primitive Christians, to distinguish themselves from Infidels,
we see not what pretense it can afford, for this Religious use of the Cross, as
a dedicating sign in the public worship of God, especially as conjoined with
his own, viz. Baptism.

For the use of Godfathers and Godmothers, as exclusive of the Parents
public promise of the religious Education of their children, there are these
two objections lie against it.

1. When the 6th Canon of the Church of Ireland ordains, that no Parent shall
be urged to be present, nor admitted to stand as Godfather for his own Child,
it plainly discharges the Parents from any public engagement to a duty which
God has most expressly enjoined 'em, 6 Deuteronomy. 6, 7.6 Ephesians. 4. And can any thing be
more unreasonable, than to forbid them to bind themselves by a solemn public
prom^se to a duty, which God has so strictly bound 'em to by his own Authority,
when one great design of Baptism, wherein we dedicate our selves, or our
offspring to God, is to bring us and them under such external public bonds to
the dutys of God's Covenant.

2. God-fa^hers and God-moth^rs absolutely undertake a work that dos not belong
to 'em, unless upon supposition of the Parents dying, and their adopting the
child. And what is far worse, hereby the generality of such Sponsors are
commonly involved in the guilt of heinous perjury, by undertaking positively to
do that themselves, which not one of many ever performs. For besides their
Vowing in the child's name, to renounce the Devil and all his works, etc. To
believe the Articles of the Christian Faith, and obediently to keep God's holy
Commands. (As if such actual Faith and Repentance were requisite to the claim
of Infants, to the promises of God's Covenant, and the Seal of 'em). They are
also told by the Priest, what is their part and duty in pursuance of their
promise, viz. To see that the Infant be taught, so soon as he shall be able to
learn, what solemn vow, promise and profession he has made by them; they are to
call upon him to hear Sermons, and chiefly to provide that he may learn the
Creed, the Lord's-Prayer and ten Commandments in the vulgar Tongue, and all
other things which a Christian ought to know and believe to his soul's health;
and that the child may be virtuously brought up to lead a godly and a christian
life, etc. Now we may safely herein appeal to common experience, how few make
any more of this than a matter of mere Ceremony and Form. And alas, how few
that seriously consider how hard it is to discharge these dutys aright for
their own children, would willingly entangle themselves in such solemn
engagements, to do all this for other men's. And yet Parents must have their
children excluded from Baptism, if they cannot prevail with others to enter
into such unreasonable and rash Vows, in which, the most only trifle with the
Almighty God, and dissemble with men in so awful a transaction.

If indeed either these Sponsors were only engaged conditionally to take care
of the child's holy education in case of the Parent's dying, or were only made
witnesses of the credibility of the Parent's profession of Christianity, as
some would pretend to salve the matter, There were something to be said as an
excuse for this practice. But it is evident from what I have already quoted,
that they enter into a solemn promise of all the dutys forementioned.

I might have objected farther, that the 14th Canon of the Church of Ireland
forbids the Minister to refuse or delay to Christen any child brought to him on
Sundays or Holy Days, without any exception, whereas he should in all reason
enquire, whether the Parent be a Professed Christian, unless it be supposed
that the children of professed Infidels have a right to this mark of God's
Covenant.

II. The Bishop has taken no notice of human Inventions in the Discipline of
the Church, about which he knows the Contest between the Established Church and
the Dissenters chiefly lies.

I speak not here of any lawful determinations of human prudence that relate to
the exercise of that sacred discipline that Christ has instituted, but of
sinful corruptions of it, by instituting such new Officers in the Church
without any warrant, as deprive his undoubted Officers of part of that Pastoral
power he has invested 'em with, and render true Church Government
impracticable; and by variety of Canons and Constitutions, not only unknown to
the Scripture, but contrary to the Rules there laid down for the preservation
of order, unity and peace in the Church. But since his Lp's discourse dos not
lead me to enter on the particular examination of this subject, and he may find
these matters largely treated, in Mr. Baxter's Treatise of Episcopacy, the
Terms of Christian Concord, the Search for the English Schismatic, and the
Case of Non conformity stated and argued. I shall not, without greater
occasion, engage my self in a Controversy I have so little fondness for, and
expect so little good from any polemical debates about. Only, since his Lp. is
pleased to request several things from the Diss^nting Ministers of Derry,
relating to their Discipline as well as Worship, in order to the facilitating
an Accommodation, and begetting a more amicable correspondence; I hope his Lp.
cannot take it amiss, if we use the like freedom, in offering, with all
humility, the following Requests to our Reverend Conforming Brethren,
especially those whose Authority renders 'em most capable to promote the
Reformation desired in 'em.

1. Since, as we humbly conceive, it was the most generally received Opinion of
the first Reformers in England, in K. Henry the 8th's, K. Edward the 6th's, and
of the Conforming Divines in Q. Elizabeth's Reigns, that a Bishop and Presbyter
differ only in degree, not in Order or Office, (as Mr. Humphreys has largely
proved in a late Book called the Healing Attempt). We would humbly desire 'em
to use their interest, that that unhappy Clause may be ras't out of the Preface
to the present Book of Ordination, in which it is so peremptorily asserted,
[That it is evident to all men diligently reading the H. Scriptures, and ancient
Authors, that from the Apostles time there have been these three Orders in
Christ's Church, Bishops, Priests, and Deacons.] That by three Orders they mean
three Offices, is plain from the very following words, which Offices were
evermore had in such Reverend Estimation, etc. Now it seems to us very
unreasonable that all Ministers should be by the Act of Uniformity obliged to
profess their Assent to this proposition, when it is so contrary to the current
judgment of the generality of the most Eminent Protestant Conforming Divines in
those 3 forementioned Reigns, (to whom we might add several very learned ones
in the Reign of K. James the first, and K. Charles the first and 2d), but
especially when it is a Proposition at best disputable, both among learned
Protestants and Papists; and, as far as we can judge, rather evidently contrary
to the holy Scriptures, and to the first and purest ages of Christianity. So
that we fear that few Ministers can sincerely profess their Assent to this
Assertion, who have taken the pains to make any impartial enquiry into this
matter. And we are the more desirous of having this Clause ras't out, because
this new Opinion of Episcopacy being a distinct Order and Office from
Presbytery, is the ground of that uncharitable practice of the Established
Church, in requiring Reordination in all such at home, as have been ordained by
Presbyters, (i. e. true Scriptural Bishops and Pastors) as a necessary
condition of being admitted to the exercise of their Ministerial Function, nay
in urging Reordination too on all the Ministers of Reformed Churches abroad,
who never had Diocesan Bishops among 'em. As if all the administrations of
those Eminent Ministers in France, who are now so honorable Confessors in the
cause of Reformed Christianity, were mere Nullitys till Prelatical Hands were
laid upon 'em.

2. Since the Archbishops and Bishops claim the Government of the Church as
their Province, we humbly wish they would endeavor to recover the spiritual
part of their Authority out of their Chancellor's hands, who have so long
usurpt the keys of sacred Discipline, and have hitherto so scandalously managed
'em, as to bring the solemn censures of the Church into general contempt. And
no wonder, when they are prostituted to so vile a purpose as that of filthy
lucre, and thereby the Temple of God is turned into a House of Merchandise. We
do not speak this against the power of the Spiritual Courts in those Civil
Causes, or in those Ecclesiastical ones which their Majesty's in pursuance of
their just power circa sacra, may authorize 'em to determine; but only their
assuming the cognizance of all cases of scandal, so far as they subject men to
the censures of the Church, and being entrusted with the infliction of those
censures even in reference to all the numerous causes that come before 'em, so
few of which properly belong to an Ecclesiastical Judicatory. For besides that,
we think, That the power of inflicting those censures belongs to Pastors, and
cannot be delegated by 'em to a Layman, it seems a certain and unavoidable, tho
pernicious consequence of such Spiritual Courts being entrusted with the
sentence of Excommunication, to enforce all their Decrees, that the most awful
judgment on earth is like (to use my Ld Bacon's expressions) to be made an
ordinary process to lacquey up and down for fees Consider: for the better
establishing the Chapter of Engl.
. We doubt not their Lp's have read Bp Bedel's Life wrote by the present Bp. of
Sarum, wherein there is so loud and just a complaint of the gross abuses of
this kind, and so noble an example set 'em of zeal for the Reformation of 'em.
And no doubt, if they would concur in their imitation of it, they might do it
with rational prospect of greater success; and be happily instrumental to wipe
off some part of that stain brought on the Church by her tolerating these
corruptions, which (as the forementioned Bp of Sarum relates) pious Archbishop
Usher so greatly lamented, and apprehended it would bring a curse and ruin
upon the whole Constitution. See Bp. Bedel's Life, p. 86, 87,

3. We could heartily wish that when their Lp's have recovered their own
Authority out of their Chancellors hands, they would exercise it in concurrence
with the Presbyters of their several Dioceses.

And herein also the forementioned Bp. Bedel set 'em an excellent pattern, Ib.
p. 90. And we hope the Bp of Derry will urge 'em to an imitation thereof, since
he has laid it down as their common Opinion and Judgment, p 175. That the
Government of the Church in such districts as those of our Dioceses, ought to
be in a Presbytery with a Bishop, as President and Governor by Christ's
Appointment.

4. We would also humbly desire 'em to restore that Godly discipline which the
Common Prayer Book tells us was in the primitive Church, for bringing such as
were convicted of notorious sin, to public profession of their Repentance. For
since the Church in the Office of Commination, yearly declares, that the
Restoration of the said Discipline is much to be wished, It will look like a
mocking of Heaven, yearly to repeat such lazy wishes of it, when there are no
serious attempts made toward it; And we can seee no reason why the Curses
peculiar to the Mosaical Dispensation, should be substituted instead of it.

5. We could wish that part of the Office for Visiting the Sick might be
reviewed, which concerns Absolution.

For since there is no other Absolution owned in the Reformed Churches, but
either publishing the conditional offers of pardon in the Gospel, or a
ministerial releasing those from the Censures of the Church, on whom they had
been inflicted before. We think it dos too much countenance the judicial power
of Absolution claimed by the Romish Priests, for the Minister to absolve the
uncensur'd in so peremptory terms; I absolve thee from all thy sins, in the
name of the Father, etc. For they seem to make the Minister pass a more
positive judgment of the sick man's Repentance, than he is capable to do.

6. In order to the more effectual exercise of that godly discipline
forementioned, We would earnestly request that the Parish-Ministers may be
restored to that Pastoral power which Archbishop Usher in his model of
Episcopacy shows that they were invested in according to the former Book of
Ordination; but of which they seem now deprived, by the many changes made in
the new. See the Healing Attempt, p. 57, 58, 59, etc.
It Is certain they are most capable of a personal inspection of the lives of
their Flock, and consequently of enquiring into any scandalous miscarriages
among 'em, and suiting their admonitions to the case of such Offenders, and
judging whether there be, or be not, a credible profession of Repentance made
by 'em. Nor can there be any danger of their abusing that sacred censure of
Excommunication, by being too rash in it; for that danger is fully obviated by
the method proposed in the forementioned model of AB Usher, which refers the
decreeing that sentence to the monthly Synod of the Ministers in that Precinct,
or part of the Diocese, of which the Suffragan or Chorepiscopus is the
Moderator. In the mean time, we could wish that Parish-Ministers were more
effectually urged to observe the 20th Canon, which charges 'em not to admit to
the holy Cammunion any of their Cure or Flock, which ^e openly known to live in
notorious sin without Repentance, tho we can expect no very considerable
effects of such a temporary suspension, when it obliges the Minister to turn
Informer against such Offenders in the Spiritual Court, where they are sure to
be put to great charges; by which method he is but like to alienate their
hearts from him, and frustrate the success of all those admonitions, by which
he should endeavor to recover 'em to Repentance.

7. They would farther humbly desire, that some more effectual care may be
taken for the trial of those that are to be admitted into Holy Orders.

For the 32d Canon enjoins the Bishop to examine 'em in the presence of those
Ministers that shall assist at the Imposition of hands, or at least take care
that those Ministers shall examine them; yet we understand this is too often put
off to an Archdeacon, or one of his Chaplains, and at best but too
superficially performed. And we humbly conceive the Canon it self is very
defective, in not recommending such particular Trials as are fit for such
Candidates of the Ministerial Function to undergo in order to their giving a
sufficient specimen of their proficiency in the study of Divinity, and in the
knowledge of the holy Scriptures. And herein we would humbly recommend to 'em
the excellent method proposed by the Westminster-Assembly in their Propositions
relating to Church Government and Ordination, viz. That such Candidates be
examined touching their skill in The Original Languages, by Reading the Hebrew
and Greek Testaments, and rendering some portion of 'em into Latin. They are to
be examined also, what Authors in Divinity they have read, and trial shall be
made of their knowledge of the grounds of Religion, and ability to defend the
Orthodox Doctrine in 'em against all unsound and erroneous Opinions, especially
those of the present Age; of their skill and sense in the meaning of such
places of Scripture as shall be proposed to 'em, in cases of Conscience, and in
the chronology of the Scripture, and in the Ecclesiastical History. They are to
expound some difficult place of Scripture; they are to frame a discourse in
Latin upon some commonplace or controversy in Divinity, and maintain a Dispute
upon it; and they are to Preach a practical Sermon before the people, those
concerned in their Ordination being present.

This method is so exactly followed among the Dissenters, that those they
ordain commonly pass twice through these Trials, both when they are first allowed
to Preach as Candidates, and at their Ordination. And as it is the most
effectual that can be proposed for preventing an ignorant and insufficient
Ministry, so it is the more requisite that the like care should be taken in the
Established Church, where so many are tempted to crowd into the Sacred Office by
the lure of secular interest; and so many Parents, from the prospect of
preferment thrust those of their Children upon the service of the Church, whom
they are at a loss how to dispose otherwise of.

8. We could heartily desire some more effectual course were taken for the
Reformation of such of the Clergy, whose scandalous lives stain the honor of
their profession.

For the infectious examples of such Clergymen are far more powerful to spread
the contagion of wickedness and vice among their Flock, than their doctrine to
propagate piety and holiness. And it is no wonder, that either the offerings of
the Lord are abhorred by the people, when they see 'em presented by so
unhallowed hands, or that they run without restraint into all excess of Riot,
when they do but herein follow their spiritual Guides. It Is great pity
therefore that the 42d Canon which threatens such scandalous Clergymen with
Ecclesiastical censures, is not more faithfully executed. And it seems
unaccountable, why it should not as expressly order the suspension and
deposition of such as are found incorrigible, as other Canons of the Church of
England, order their suspension and deposition for no greater faults, than
Omitting the use of any form of Prayer, or any other Rite or Ceremony
prescribed by the Service Book, or appointing or keeping Fasts either in
public or in private houses without the Bp's leave. For this is to lay greater
stress on the Churches Injunctions, than on God's commands; and to punish
nonconformity to the former, more strictly than disobedience to the latter. We
shall only add, that if the Law of Moses so carefully provided that its Priests
should have no blemish or deformity on their bodies, sure much greater care
should be taken, that those who serve at the Christian Altar, should not be
persons of deformed souls, and of a tainted conversation. And we are heartily
glad, that their Majesty's, by their Royal Commission, have begun so necessary
a work in this Kingdom, as the purging the Church from such scandalous
Clergymen, as have too long been the blemishes of their holy profession, and
hope it may extend to all other parts where there is the like necessity for it,
as there appears to have been in the Diocese of Down and Connor.

9. They would also earnestly desire that so gross a corruption as that of
Pluralitys and Non-Residence so universally complained of, may be at last
effectually reformed.

In order whereto, they desire it may be seriously considered, whether our
Canons themselves do not rather confirm than reform these Abuses. For by the
36th Canon every Master of Arts, that is a public and sufficient Preacher, is
capable of Pluralitys. The Time which he that enjoys 'em is to reside in each
of his Benefices, is not determined. And by the 41 Canon of the Church of
England, I find no other bounds set to the number of Benefices, than that they
must not be more than thirty miles asunder. And tho every such Bluralist be
required to have under him in the Benefices where he dos not reside, a lawful
and sufficient Preacher; yet it is both unreasonable in it self, that such a
sufficient Preacher should sacrifice his painful labors to pamper the avarice
and ease of another; And it is too notorious, that such Pluralists, for the most
part, give so despicable and stingy allowance to their poor Curates, that it
cannot reasonably be expected, any man of tolerable abilitys should be
contented with it; and so to feed the covetous humor of such mercenary Pastors
(as the Council of Trent it self calls Pluralists) their Flocks must be
betrayed, by being committed to the care of such, whom their ignorance renders
the Reproach of their profession, and who indeed are fit for no other sort of
Preaching, than this new one the Bp. of Derry has found out, viz. The Reading a
Chapter out of the Bible. Nor do we think the Canons about the Clergy's
Residence less exceptionable. For the 37th Canon supposes some persons to be
Benefic't that are not allowed to be Preachers (tho, contrary to the soresaid
Bp's notion, they are allowed by the English Canons, to read plainly and aptly,
without glozing, or adding, both the Scripture and Homilys). And of these
Incumbents that are unlicenst to Preach, no more is required, than that they
procure Sermons to be Preached once a month in their Cures, and that too, if
the Living will bear it. And the same Canon only requires every Benefic't man
that is licenst, to provide for the Benefice he resides not on, a Preaching
Curat, on the same condition that the worth of the Benefice will bear it. As if
the souls of the people were of so little value, that they must rather perish
for lack of knowledge and instruction, than such a Pluralist's avarice be crossed
by resigning the Benefice to one that will take care of the people's souls,
provided he may enjoy the Stipend the Law has assigned for the encouragement
and subsistence of such a one.

10. They would humbly desire that the Bp's would use their interest and
endeavors, that the rigor of the Act of Uniformity may be abated, in its
requiring so express a Declaration from every Minister of his Assent and
Consent to all things c^ntain'd in, and prescribed by the Book of
Common Prayer, and the form and manner of making and ordaining Bishops, Priests
and Deacons. For as far we can judge, there are many things in those Books,
which the more judicious and charitable of our Conforming Brethren do not
heartily assent and consent to, but wish the alteration of; And therefore such
cannot make the said Declaration without doing it in in fo lax a sense as too
much countenances Equivocation in such important matters as these are.

11. They would also earnestly entreat their Conforming Brethren to use their
endeavors to restore to their people that right of choosing their own
Ministers, which the Canons of so many Councils celebrated in the purest ages
of Christianity have so fully and frequently confirmed to 'em; At least, we
would desire that some effectual provision may be made against Pastors being
imposed on 'em without their own consent. For we would not in this request
entrench on the power of Patrons any farther, than to desire it may be rendered
consistent with this undoubted privilege and right of the people, which no
human Laws can justly deprive 'em of. For since the people have souls, whose
welfare so greatly depends on the helps and advantages that a judicious and
serious Ministry dos furnish 'em with to promote it, it is most reasonable that
their Votes and Suffrage should be allowed in the choice of the person, to
whose Pastoral care they entrust the conduct of 'em. If it would be a very
unjust thing to impose Physicians, Lawyers or Tutors on others, where far
lesser interests are concerned, how much more unjust were it for the people to
have their Salvation so far put into the Patrons hands, as to be obliged to
acquiesce in whomsoever they present, tho the choice be never so apparently
prejudicial to their eternal interest. A negative voice is the least that can
in this case be allowed to the people, unless the Patron that presents were to
be responsible for their souls at the day of Judgment, or could secure 'em from
all the pernicious effects that an ill choice is attended with to their
irreparable loss and detriment.

12. We would also humbly request, that that incapacity for Communion with the
Established Church may be taken off, which their own Canons lay the Dissenters
under.

There has been occasion given already in this Discourse, to take notice of one
of 'em, viz. the 5th. which excommunicates ipso facto all that shall affirm, or
maintain, that there are within this Realm, other Meetings, Assemblys, or
Congregations, than such as by the Laws of this Land are held and allowed,
which may rightly challenge to themselves the name of true and lawful Churches.
And sure they cannot expect we should forbear to vindicate our own Innocence,
to escape this unjust censure; or that we should voluntarily condemn so many
Excellent Churches to avoid the Condemnation of this uncharitable Canon. But
our Incapacity for communion with 'em is encreast by the 3d Canon, which also
Excommunicates ipso facto not only all that shall preach, but all that shall by
other open words declare or speak any thing in derogation, or despising of the
Service Book, or any thing contained therein. For we cannot possibly give to
our Brethren any account of our dissent from 'em either in writing or private
conversation, without speaking open words in derogation from some thing
contained in the Service Book. We cannot complain of the use of the Cross, or
of that sort of Sponsors in Baptism which the Service book requires; nor blame
those uncharitable Rubrics that debar the most serious Christians from those
Sacraments that do but scruple crossing, sponsors, and kneeling; we cannot
mention any of those numerous defects in the Liturgy contained in the
Exceptions given in at the Savoy-conference, without coming under the terrible
sentence of this Canon. In a word, we must either never speak our judgment
concerning that Book, tho our own necessary Vindication never so apparently
require it; Or if we do, we are as far as the power of that unmerciful Canon
can reach, Excomunicated, i. e. in the language of the Established Church, in
her form of Excommunication, cut off, as dead members, from the body of Christ.
Again, we are Excommunicated, if we affirm any of the 39 Articles to be in any
part such as we cannot with a good Conscience subscribe to, tho it is known we
cannot subscribe to the Disciplinary ones, tho in England they have already
done it to the Doctrinal ones. And that our business may be yet more
effectually done, We are again excommunicated by the 4th Canon, if we affirm,
that those who are consecrated according to the Rites of the Ordination-Book,
are not lawfully made, nor ought to be accounted either, Bishops, or Deacons;
(i. e. If this Canon speak of Scriptural Bishops or Deacons) For it is
sufficiently known, we neither account the Office of a modern Diocesan Bishop,
nor that of a Deacon in the sense of the Established Church, to be either of 'em
of Divine Institution.

Now we think it most reasonable, that those who so often urge us to their
Communion, should remove such insuperable Obstacles out of our way. And we
humbly conceive there is that apparent absurdity and uncharitableness in these
Canons, that will justify our desire of their being discarded.

1. They are in our judgment guilty of an apparent Absurdity; For we are
Excommunicated by 'em without any other Admonition of our fault, than what the
Canons themselves give us. Whereas it is not merely the committing an Offense,
that justly subjects men to that terrible censure, but persisting impenitently
in it, according to our Blessed Savior's known Rule, 18 Matthew. 15, 16, etc. So
that the Church in these Canons uses greater severity than our Lord himself,
who in his judgment will not condemn men merely for their sins, but for final
obstinacy in 'em. And indeed, if these Canons be just, we are bound in
conscience, as knowing our selves Excommunicate, to abstain from the Communion
of the Established Church, till we have revok't these Errors, as the Canon calls
our Opinion and Judgment in these matters. Now we think it very hard for men to
be thus peremptorily cut off from Christ without any personal warning, that
might give 'em opportunity to prevent so terrible a doom; For this makes these
spiritual Canons more formidable things than those warlike Engines, that at
least give some notice by their flash before they do execution.

2. They are in our judgment as apparently guilty of gross uncharitableness.

For the Assertions for which we are Excommunicated by these Canons, relate to
matters that are disputable among such as are truly Orthodox and Pious, nay
among Divines of eminent Learning and Judgment. And consequently to
excommunicate men for declaring their Opinion one way or other in these
matters, is so far from being consistent with Christian Charity, that it is the
worst sort of Schism, and plainly tends to confine that Reformed Christianity
among us to a narrow Sect and Party, to which all sober Protestants may justly
lay their claim, as their common Interest. Nay, we think this sort of rigor, in
enforcing all contained in these three Books of human composure, ( viz. The
Book of Articles (inclusive of that of Homilys, Art. 35.) that of Ordination,
and that of Common Prayer) with so peremptory Excommunication of all that
declare their dissent from any thing in 'em, more inexcusable in one respect,
than the rigor of the Council of Trent in their Anathema's, viz. that our
convocations pretend to no such Infallibility in their decisions, as the Romish
Councils; And therefore more of Christian forbearance and charity might
reasonably have been expected from men conscious of the common infirmity of
human nature, which could no more secure themselves then us, fron mistakes in
so dubious matters as these are.

As to all these Requests to our Reverend Brethren, we shall only add, that we
hope they will either show us our Error in judging these things to be
coruptions, which we here beg the Reformation of, or else, that they will not
account it criminal in us to reform 'em amongst our selves, nor urge us to
receive 'em again after we have cast 'em out. For we may well be forgiven, that
we are as unwilling to go backwards, as some seem to be to go forwards in the
desirable work of just and necessary Reformation.

Lastly, There is only one Request more we would offer to our Reverend
Brethren, wherein we hope we may more confidently assure our selves of their
compliance with us, viz. That we may all of us unite our endeavors with
greater zeal and earnestness for reviving that power of practical Christianity
and Holiness that is so visibly declining among us; particularly, by laboring
to promote more of Closet and Family-Religion in those under our care, and to
preserve or reclaim 'em from those heinous sins, (such as swearing, profanation
of the Lord's Day, Intemperance, uncleanness, Pride, Luxury, etc.) that have
again overspread this Land, and the Protestant Inhabitants of it,
notwithstanding all the calamitys they have so lately brought upon us. And we
would farther desire, That as they have greater advantages of access to our
Magistrates than we have, they would use all their interest and influence to
engage 'em to a more vigorous prosecution of that necessary work, the
reformation of manners, by a more strict Execution of the Laws against open
irreligion and wickedness. And we only crave leave to add these two reasons
that urge us to this request; The one is, that our hearty concurrence in
advancing these undoubted and important interests of our common Lord, wherein
we profess to be agreed, will be the most succesful means to cement our
affections; And when our Zeal is warmly laid out this way, we shall find less
of Inclination, as well as leisure, to prosecute our lesser differences: The
other is, that there seems to be an extraordinary necessity of our utmost
efforts to save a perishing People from that ruin that hangs over our heads.
For as the heinous sins that yet appear so barefac't and uncontrolled among us,
are greatly aggravated, both by the former terrible judgments under which we
have so deeply smarted, and by the surprising Deliverance that should have
obliged us to other returns to its blessed Author; so the many late indications
of divine anger in our public losses, and in the ill aspect of our affairs,
plainly tell us, that the Great God is yet pursuing a Controversy against us,
because we have not answered his just expectations by returning to him. And as
these renewed monitary Judgments, if they still prove ineffectual, presage a
stroke of destructive vengeance, so we see nothing short of a National
Repentance and Reformation likely to prevent it, and there appears no
probability of that, till both Magistrates and Ministers in their several
stations do resolutely engage in the design of promoting it, from a deep
conviction of its absolute necessity to prevent our Ruin.

POSTSCRIPT
UPon the Review of these Remarks, I thought it necessary here to deliver my
thoughts more distinctly and fully in reference to the following Passage then
was proper for me to do, in the body of a Plain Discourse.

P. 15, 16. I have asserted, That it is probable that the Psalms of David were
composed in Meter, and produced to that purpose the Testimony of Josephus, to
which I might that of Philo, Origin, Eusebius, St. Hierom and Isidore
Hispalensis,

But I would here add in explication of that passage, that I do not take meter
or verse in the strict sense of the words, as if there were the same kind of
measures and verse in the Psalms of David, that were afterward in use among
the Polite Greeks and Latins; For tho I know Gomarus in his Lyra Davidica has
attempted to prove that the Psalms were composed in meter even in this strict
sense, and his performance was at first greatly applauded by the Elder Buxtorf,
Heinsius L. de Dieu, L'Empereur, Hottinger, and others, yet Lud. Capellus has
so far blasted the Credit of it in his Animadversions on it, that the Attempt
seems given up as by other Learned Men, so by Buxtorf (the Son) himself. But
for such meter or measures in the Hebrew Psalms as did accommodate 'em to Vocal
and Instrumental Music, and thereby gave 'em the denomination of verse as
distinguished from mere prose, I see no reason to doubt of it; And this sort of
meter the Bp. has groundlesly confounded with mere prose, in the passage the
Remarks refer to ( Disc. p. 8,) from which I shall now show it ought to be
carefully distinguished.

And to clear this I shall lay down the following Particulars.

1. Poetry in general was in its first rise vastly different from what it was
afterward.

Praef, ad chron. Eusebius. St. Hierom praefat. in Job Threnos Isaiam and libror.
Regum Eusebius. prop. Evang. l. 1. c. 11. Orig. l. c. 18.
It Is so in all other Arts and Inventions, and no doubt was so in this. See
what Vossius observes to this purpose, de Art. Poet. natura p. 76. when
speaking of the Versus, (...) mentioned by Aristotle, he adds, Interim erant hi
versus rudes and impoliti Mox aliqua cura accessit, and tamen tum quoque solo
constabant Rythmo -- hinc and aliqua metri ratio coepit haberi sed rudior plane
and imperfecta, Tandem and metrica Iex certa fuit and perpetua. See also ib. p.
81, 82. To the same purpose, Quintilian Instit. l. 9. c. 4. Poema nemo
dubitaverit imperito quodam initio fusum, and aurium mensura, and similiter de:
currentium spatiorum observatione esse generatum, mox in eo repertos pedes.

2. The Bible Poetry differs vastly from that of the more polite Greeks and
Latins (such as Homer's Virgi'ls etc.) and of the modern Europeans and Asians,
nay from the modern Jewishones,

And the difference lies chiefly, 1. As to feet of a long or short quantity
artificially disposed.

2. As to a Stated and constantly equal number of Syllables.

As to both these Ingredients of strict meter and verse, the most learned
Rabbis do indeed tell us they are not to be generally found in the Bible
Poetry. See to this purpose Cosri, part 2 p. 133. 136, 137. Dissert.
Rabbinicae, at the end of Cozri p. 408. p. 424. See also Pfeiffer's Dub. vex.
p. 545, 546, and 536.

And indeed tho many learned Authors greatly applaud the observation of Feet
and of ( Rythmus or) a stated number of Syllables. Artificially disposed, as a
thing of admirable use to excite or allay the Passions, and herein think the
later Poetry has the advantage of the Ancient, (See Is. Voss. de Poem. Cantu
and Viribus Rythmi, p. 11, 12, 13.) yet on the other hand, the observation of
'em dos often hamper and cramp the Poet, that he cannot so freely vent himself.
And tho this inconvenience may be tolerably avoided in more Copious Languages,
It must have been great in so narrow a one as the Hebrew Tongue undoubtedly is.

3. As to Rhimes (I speak not here of what the Latins call Rythmus, but take
the word in the modern sense for the ending of the Verse in syllables of the
like found)

Of these there are but few in the Bible Poetry, and it is doubtful whether
designed or by chance. And the general use of these is certainly of a much
later date then of the two former.

3. Yet there are in the Bible Poetry, besides the different Style and Manner
of expression, some measures observed in order to the accommodating the words
to Vocal and Instrumental Music, on the account of which composure they were
Verse, as distinguished from Prose.

The most learned Writers on this Subject of Poetry give us the same Account of
the Aneient Poetry of other Nations. See Ger. Voss. de Art. Poet. not and
constit. p. 11. 81, 82. So Is. Voss. de Poem. Cantu etc. p. 1, 2. Illud quidem
certum omnem Poesin olim Cantatam fuisse -- si itaque primitivam vocabuli
acceptionem spectemus, Poesis vel Poema nil aliud fuerit, quam qualiscunquae
compsitio cantui apta, etc.

And the most learnen Rabbi's give us the same Account of the Bible Poetry.

Thus Abarbinel, Dissert. Rabbin. at the end of Cozri, p. 409 Authors carminum
priscorum necesse habuerunt accommodare numerum literarum ad rationem melodiae
quam composuerunt ad canendum, and ordinem collocationis earum ad formam
sonorum, and hoc ordine unice respexerunt ad proprietates and requisita
melodiae. Again ib. p. 410. speaking of the Song of Deborah, David's Psalms,
etc. he says Omnes hi carminum Authors proposuerunt sibi tale aliqod genus,
numerando literas ut aequaliter respondeant proportioni melodiae ipsorum, and
pro variatione melodiae variant quoque numeri literarum. Non est autem dubium
quin habuerint melodias certas quoe longitudine temporis and captivitatum in
oblivionem venerunt. Again, ib. p. 411. Enquiring what sort of Verse the Song
in Exodus 15. was he says, Certum est non fuisse ex primo genere (i. e. those
verses which had modern feet and rhyme) sed ex secundo (i e* those that had
only such measures as were requisite to accommodate 'em to singing as he had
explained the distinction p. 408) Constat enim ex octonis (...) quorum duo sunt
valde brevia, and duo alia valde longa, quatuor mediocria. And again, ib. p.
412. Vides in isto Cantica quandoque contrahi literas quandoque extendi and
protrahi, per additionem quarundam literarum ad justam faciendam mensuram and
modulationem, prout aliquando etiam una and altera hujus rei causa deficit, of
which he gives several Instances and then adds, Non enim existimandum principem
prophetarum errasse circa accuratam literarum rationem, and ordinem scriptionis
illarum, verum carminis ratio and melodioe necessitas sic postularunt. See also
the judgment of R. Azarias and R. Sam. Arcuvolt; ib. p. 428, 429.

And therefore tho Pfeiffer in his accurate Enquiry into this matter denies the
Psalms to be composed in Meter, taking Meter in the strict sense, yet he owns
such measures or Meter as I here assert, and therefore tells us, Dub. vex. p.
537. Poesis veterum Hebroeorum in selecta Vocum, and quodammodo proportionata
ad Musicam accommodatione constitisse videtur. And accordingly he compares
David's Psalms to the Magnificat in Latin, quod metrice conceptum non facile
dixeris, At ob talem styli conformationem non minus apt cantillari potest quam
Psalmi Davidici: (Of the same sort is the Te Deum ascribed to St. Ambrose, and
yet Dr. Comber, Orig. of Lit. p. 179, tells us that St. Ambrose speaks of that
Hymn, when he owns that he made Hymns in verse and taught 'em to the People,
Comment. in Luc. c. 15. Tom. 3. p. 169.) And again, Concedimus Cantica and
Carmina (...) accepta, cantui ve accommodata. In quibus itaque non est metrica,
neque tamen mere soluta oration, sed Syllabarum atque vocum certo numero, seu
proportione quadam saltem rhetorica ad melodiam adstricta. Where it is evident
he takes Meter in the strict sense, but asserts such Measures as are distinct
from mere Prose. And indeed some such Measures they must have had to conform
their Sentences to Music. In some of 'em (as particularly those Psalms I have
quoted in the Remarks) those Measures are more obvious and are like the
Measures observed in many of the Hymns used in the Romish Church, such as that.

Aeterna Coeli Gloria, Beata spes Mortalium Summi Tonantis unice Castae que
proles Virginis etc.
Or that

Ave maris Stella. Dei matter Alma Atque semper virgo Felix Coeli porta Sumens
illud Ave Gabrielis Ore etc.
But others of 'em we are more at a loss to understand, because we have utterly
lost the Ancient Hebrew Music, even as to Instruments as well as Tunes: yea
the Ancient Music of other Nations is lost. See Is Voss. de Poem. Cantu, etc.
p. 21. and 48.

Upon the whole then, sinee the Psalms were wrote in such sort of Meter and
Verse as was then used; since the knowledge of their particular Musical Tunes
and Instruments is quite lost, we cannot be obliged to an exact imitation of
'em; for that were to suppose us obliged to Impossibilities. The Commands
therefore that enjoin Christian Churches to sing Psalms, necessarily oblige us
to turn 'em into such sort of Meter and Verse, as will accommodate them best to
be sung by the People. Whereas to put 'em into no other Meter than the Pointed
Psalter in the Common Prayer Book, is to exclude the generality of the People
from any capacity of complying with God's own Command for Singing 'em. And as
the Tunes of those pointed Psalms are quite different from the Hebrew ones, so
they are as much a human Invention as the Tunes of the common Metre-Versions.
And therefore to set up that pointed Psalter in the Service Book, whose Tunes
the body of the People cannot follow, to the Exclusion of those Metre-versions,
according to which they can join in singing the Psalms (as the Bp. seems to
design) is in his Language to set up a human Invention to the violation of a
Divine Command, by rendering the Peoples observance of it impracticable.

And whereas the Bp. adds, p. 8. That we cannot find that our Savior and his
Apostles in their time, or those in the Age immediately following, sung any
thing in verse; but we are sure they sung Hymns in Prose.

I shall only subjoyn, That I cannot imagine whence the Bp. should be sure,
That Christ and his Apostles Sung Hymns in Prose. For by the account already
given, It Is no way probable since the Hebrew-Psalms (tho composed when Poetry
was but in its first rise and as it were unfledged and unformed) were in Verse
as distinguished from Prose. Nay that in the Apostles time, and in the
following Ages they Sung in Meter and Verse, seems more probable, from the
Relation that Eusebius gives us from Philo concerning the Therapeutae or
Worshippers in Egypt. Philo flourished in the middle of the Apostolical Age, of
whose Commentary Eusebius tells us, Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 16: That it
contained manifestly the Canons or Rules hitherto conserved in the Church; and
that insomuch as he (i. e. Philo) has curiously described unto us the lives of
our Asseticks or Religious Men, he plainly shows that he not only understood,
but also greatly admired and approved those Apostolical Men; who probably
descending from the Hebrews, did therefore observe the ancient Rites and
Ceremonies of the Jews. Now among other customs of those Therapeutae, Philo
relates Eccl. Hist. l. 2 c. 17. That they made Songs and Hymns to God in grave
and sacred Rhymes ((...)) of every kind of Meter and Verse. It Is true indeed
that Scaliger de Emend. Temp. l. 6. falls foul on Eusebius for making these
Therapeutoe or Worshippers to be Christians, and Valesius, Annot. in Eusebius: p:
34. 35. falls in with him in that, tho he dissent from him that these
Therapeutoe were Essenes and pretends to prove the contrary. But the Arguments
of Scaliger and Valesius on both these heads, are well answered in Bruno's
Dissertatio de Therapeutis, Printed at the end of Colomes's Edition of the
Epistle of Clement ad Corinthios. But however that be, It Is evident that
Eusebius not only asserts such Divine Hymns composed in Meter and Verse to be
in use among Christians in his Age, but to have been a custom derived to 'em
from the Apostolical Age, and continually preserved in the Church, as Philo
supposes such Hymns to have been usual among the Jews. So that we have better
ground to conclude that Christ and his Apostles and the following Ages sung
Hymns in Meter and Verse, then the Bp. has produced for their Singing Hymns in
Prose.

And for the Alternate singing of the Psalms of David, Dr. Comber acknowledges
the truth of what Theodoret asserts, l. 2. c. 24. That this custom was first
brought into the Church of Antioch by Flavianus and Diodorus. and from thence
universally spread, of Lit. p. 87, 88. And Dr. Hammond says, That St. Basil in
the description of a Clergy man officiating. Ad Clerum Caesar. Ep. 63, says,
they go to the House of Prayer, and after the Confession they prepare for the
singing of Psalms, speaking of the first Apostolical times, For now, says he,
we sing the Psalms in parts or by turns, it seems they had not done so before,
but altogether, View of the New Direct. Ed. fol. p. 138 In other Hymns, it is
true we read of Alternate singing more early practiced. And indeed since the
Scripture only requires Singing Psalms, Hymns, etc. in general, without
prescribing the particular mode of it, Christian Charity should make us
cautious of censuring such different modes of others as sinful human
Inventions, except when such an inconvenient mode is chosen as excludes the
main part of the Congregation from joining in this Religious Duty.

FINIS.

