This is for all you the Inhabitants of Whitwell to consider, who deny the
perfect life of Christ to be brought forth in his people here upon earth, and
manifested in their mortal flesh by a ceasing from sin. And to all others whom
it may concern.
BE it known unto you all who name the name of Christ, and would be accounted
Christians, this is it that Christ the Son of the living God and Savior of
mankind requires of you all, To depart from iniquity, sin, and all
ungodliness, and return to him who saves his people from their sins; who is
come to judge all flesh, raising up his true and faithful witness in all
consciences, which shows unto every man upon the face of the whole earth what
is sin, iniquity, and ungodliness, to the end they may return to him and
repent, and their sin may be taken away, and their iniquities blotted out, and
his perfect life brought forth, which does his will on earth, as it is done in
heaven; who witness his kingdom come in great power and glory, which is not of
this world, therefore the world sees it not, Joh. 18.36. but is spiritual,
invisible to the carnal, which stands in outward observations; Lo here, lo
there, where men are doing their own wills, and that which is right in their
own eyes, there the will of God is not known, by which sanctification is
wrought and witnessed to perfection. Now all the world from the head to the
tail, Kings, Princes, Rulers, Magistrates, Idol-shepherds, false prophets,
priests and people all being out from the pure light of Christ in their
consciences, are out of that which gives them the Light of the knowledge of the
glorified in the face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4. and 6. and being in darkness
sees not the treasure that is in the earthen vessels for darkness cannot
comprehend the Light, neither the excellency of the power of God which is able
to save to the utmost all that come to to it; which is Christ the power of God,
the wisdom of God, the strength of God, and the life of God. Now all that are
ignorant of this power of God by denying it, refusing to be led and guided
thereby, can never see nor taste of the life immortal which dwells in the
Light, and in the Light is only seen and revealed. Now all the world being out
of the Light, are out of the sight of the perfect immortal life, pleading for
the life they see, which is sinful and mortal, and not the life of God: for the
pure life is hid from the adulterous eye, and so it appears by Christ's words
speaking to the ungodly children of darkness, who shall answer, saying, When
saw we thee an hungry, or thirsty, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in
prison and did not minister unto thee, Matthew. 25.44. So here all may see that
they that live in sin, and plead for it term of life, are all blind, not one
that could see the perfect life of the Son of God, and brethren of Christ; but
on the contrary, beat, persecute, imprison, and despitefully used them, as the
same generation does at this day, being all from the Light, denying it, are all
blind, beating and imprisoning the sons of God as evildoers: For when the Lord
Jesus himself appeared in flesh upon the earth, not one of that generation
could see him to be a perfect man; but the learned with their learning,
Scribes, Pharisees, Rulers, Priests and People all blind, saying, he was a
sinner, and had a devil, and deceived the people, but were all liars and false
accusers: This was the generation of evildoers which justified themselves,
saying that God was their father, whiles they were doing the devils work; as
the same generation does at this day, who owns his name, but denis his nature;
calling themselves Christians, but persecute his life, where it is made
manifest to destroy the works of the devil. Have the workers of iniquity no
knowledge, who eat up my people as they eat bread, Psalm. 14.4. Nay, they being
from the light of Christ, that which gives the true knowledge of God, how can
they know him, or his Son, or his servants? No man knows the Son but the
Father, neither knows any man the Father save the Son, and he to whom the Son
will reveal him, Mat. 11.27. here you may plainly see there is no true
knowledge of God but by the revelation of the Son; The Father by the call of
his grace which appears to all men, brings salvation to all that are
obedient to his heavenly call, by the revelation of his Son in them, and the
Son being revealed within leads to the Father, which by his grace revealed
him. This grace is a spiritual free-gift that is come upon all men, though all
receive it not, nor believe it, for many turn from it into wantonness, that is
their condemnation; not that it is not come, but because men love it not. Where
that which brings salvation is not received nor known, how can salvation be
witnessed? therefore says the world it is not to be here, but hereafter,
putting the day of salvation far off, which the Lord has brought nigh. Here
the day of the Son of man is not known; but those that hear his voice know his
day, and in his Light see it, and rejoice in God their Savior, the Gentiles
light, and Israel's glory which is spiritual. Mark, the Gentiles Light is
Isreal's glory, which every true Israelite witnesses to be spiritual: and are
not all those blind Priests and false Prophets, that turn people from from the
free-gift of God, Isreal's spiritual glory, the Gentiles Light, the Son of God,
and Savior of the world. Now all that are turned from the spiritual gift, the
Light of the Son of God which shines in the conscience, to give the knowledge
of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, are in darkness, consulting
with flesh and blood, the imaginations of their own hearts, which can never
reveal the Son of God within, Mat. 16 17. for he was first revealed to Peter
within, before he could confess him without; and John was in the spirit when he
saw those great mystery in the Revelations; and it was the Spirit that spoke
to the Churches, and they that have a spiritual ear open, do hear what the
Spirit says; and he only has an ear to hear that is turned to the
manifestation of the Spirit which is given to him to profit withal, and the
manifestation is given to every man, They have ears, but they hear not; eyes,
but they see not; and a measure, or manifestation of the Spirit, but they
profit not; therefore are they unprofitable servants, which are to be cast into
utter darkness, because they loved it, and hated the light, and the
manifestation of the Spirit which thewed them the deeds of darkness, and so
choosing darkness rather then light, it justly became their portion. Therefore
all you professors who are pleading with the darkness of the world, for
darkness and the deeds thereof, I warn you all from the Spirit of the living
God that you cease from so doing, and own his Light, a free-gift which will
lead you, if you obey it, to Repentance, and give you power to put off the
deeds of darkness, and to put on the armor of Light, which is able to save and
defend you from the power of darkness, and give you victory over hell and
death, that you may witness the glorious liberty and freedom of the sons of
God, and have an inheritance into the immortal kingdom with all the children of
Light and heirs of heaven: but on the contrary, if you go on in opposition
against the Light which reproves you in secret, and shows you the deeds of
darkness which you live in, and plead for term of life; then shall darkness be
your inheritance, and the reward of evildoers your portion: remember you were
warned in your lifetime, and the truth of God declared intender love to your
precious souls, which the witness of God in all consciences shall manifest,
that these things belong to your everlasting peace: labor to know them before
they be hid from your eyes; for yet you have a little time, but you know not
how soon time shall be no more. And be it known unto you all, that if you in
the Light of Christ wherewith you are enlightened come to see the truth, and
come not to the obedience of it because it is reproached, reviled, despised,
hated, and even with much tyranny and cruelty persecuted by the prudent of the
world, both Rulers, Priests, and people, but deny him who is the Light, the
Way, the Truth, and the Life, Joh. 8.12. and 12. and 46 and 14.6. or refuse to
confess him as your Forefathers did, because they loved the praise of men more
then the praise of God: know this from the living God, that that shall be your
portion, for you have chosen it and have refused to suffer with the Lord and
his chosen people who suffer tribulation, and shall be brought out with their
robes washed with the blood of the Lamb, to serve him day and night in his
temple, Revel. 7. ver. 14. But he that suffers not with him, shall not reign
with him; though you may think to come in when you perceive the Lord begins
to exalt his chosen ones over the nations without, but you shall know that your
thoughts are vain, for you refusing to suffer with the seed, come not to have
dominion over the nations within, and so the unjust bears rule in you over the
just, which God will not exalt with his Son to rule over men or nations
without; for he will not give his glory to another who refuses to suffer with
him; for by suffering is our salvation made perfect, and the reward is to them
that work: but he that refuses to go into the Vineyard when the Lord requires
him, shall have his portion with the rebellious, even so is the kingdom of
heaven: but all those who refuse to suffer with the body, exclude themselves
from being members, not coming to the fellowship of his sufferings, cannot come
to the fellowship of his reign: for many shall strive to enter, and shall not
be able: Why? they have left the Cross behind which is the power of God: for
whosoever follows him, must take up his cross daily in the denial of himself
and his own will, and the will of God comes thereby to be known and done; and
where his will is done, there his kingdom is come, and they only can say, the
Lord omnipotent reigns: but where the will of another is done, the kingdom of
God is not known; but the prince of the power of darkness rules in the hearts
of those that do his will, who are the children of disobedience: and of these
two sorts are all people upon the face of the whole earth: and here all may
plainly see whose children they are, the light of Christ in their consciences
does show them whose will they do: and if you deal plainly with your own souls,
you need not doubt whose servants you are; for his servants you are to whom you
obey, whether of sin unto daath, or of obedience unto righteousness, Romans 6.16.

If you will not believe the witness of God in your own consciences, nor the
testimony of the holy men of God in the Scriptures, whom will you believe? For
the Scriptures says, Whosoever abides in him sins not, 1 John 3. and 9 and
he that comitteth sin is of the Devil, ver. 8. can you believ these plain words
of Scripture, for whosoever wrests them it is for his destruction; There is no
salvation but in Christ Jesus: Mark, in Christ Jesus, and he that abides in
Christ Jesus, is saved: how does that appear? He sins not: Mark, then as
long as a man sins he is not saved, because he is not in Christ Jesus; for
he that commits sin is of the Devil, and while he is of the Devil he is not
saved. Then are all that sin without salvation? Yea, if they abide in it. But
did not David sin, and Peter sin, and many others who are Saints in Heaven? Yea
they did, but did not abide in it, but repented of it* and were saved from it,
which was recorded for all to beware; for had they abiden in it, salvation they
had not known; Therefore remember these plain words, and let them not slip out
of your minds continually, salvation is not known, but as sin is departed from;
this is truth, and shall stand for ever. And as sin is departed from, the
perfect life of the Son of God is known and witnessed, and all that plead for
sin are seen not to be of God, but in the service of the Devil: Therefore as
you will answer it before the Lord, take warning from his Spirit, plead not
against his kingdom, which stands in righteousness and true holiness: for he
has set his Son upon his holy hill, which is becoming a great mountain in the
earth, and shall be established for ever in the top of the mountains, and shall
be exalted above the hills, and all nations shall flow unto it, Isa. 2. ver. 2.
Therefore cease from that which is evil, and obey the Light within, and then
shall you be delivered from condemnation; for the way of the Lord is peace to
the righteous, but he rewards the wicked with sorrow.

So dear people as you tender the salvation of your precious soul mind the
fear of the Lord, that so ye may be preserved out of the iniquity, and may come
to understand the things that belong to your everlasting peace in this day of
your visitation, before they be hid from your eyes; now while the Light
reproves the Lord calls, and such as turn at his reproof, and answer his
call, shall find mercy, but the Light shall be the condemnation of the
rebellious: So as one that has obtained mercy, and tasted how good the Lord is
to them that fear him, and think upon his name, Malach. 3.16, 17. I exhort you
all to exercise your selves in the law of the Lord, which the Scriptures of
truth say is Light, Prove. 6. and 23. For if ye reject the Light, then ye
reject the Law of God, and cast it behind your backs, and with such God is not
well pleased. And hearken not to the deceivers, who keep you from the Light of
Christ Jesus wherewith he has enlightened every one of you, and tells you it is
natural; whereas you know that sin is natural and the light in your conscience
is contrary to sin, and reproves you for sin: therefore believe them not that
turn you from the light, for they are not Ministers of Christ, his Ministers
turned people from the darkness to the light, and from the power of satan to
God, Acts 26.18. And such also are deceivers who tell you the only way to come
to the knowledge of all truth is by the Scriptures; for the knowledge of all
truth is by the Spirit of truth, which is the Light that convinces you first
of a truth, and then being obeyed, does bring to the knowledge of Christ Jesus,
who said, I am the truth, and his spirit leads into all truth, John 14.17.
and 16.13. and those Priests are deceivers who preach for hire, and those false
Prophets who divine for money or tithes, such cannot lead you out of the
transgression, for they are in the transgression themselves; for Christ said to
his, Freely ye have received, freoly give; and Paul made not the Gospel
chargeable; but these Priests that preach for filthy lucre deceives the people,
and keeps them from believing in the Light, lest by it they should come to see
their abominations and deceits, and with the spirit of the living God this is
seen, and in much plainness and tender love to your precious souls declared,
that the simple honest hearted amongst you may be delivered out of the mouths
of the lying Prophets and false Shepherds, who make merchandise of poor souls
for dishonest gain, and filthy lucre, and if you put not into their mouths they
prepare war against you; but the time is near they shall gape wide but little
shall come into their mouths; when none shall buy their merchandise any more,
it being known to be deceit, and the refuge of lies, and all that come to
witness the teaching of the Lord know it to be truth: therefore we bear our
testimony against them and all other in their nature, though got into a higher
profession, but at one in possession whose deceit is the greater, and to such I
say, What do you profess? do you profess the life of Christ and cannot cease
from sin, but plead for it term of life, as some of you do, and positively
maintain: Is this your profession? then woe is your portion ye hypocrites,
professing one life, and living another; or else will you say there is sin in
the life of Christ, or separate him and his life, which you cannot; for his
life is to do the will of his Father, and the Son of God cannot be separated
from the will of his Father, but from sinners he is, and sin separates from
God, and so it does you, who plead for it, and live in it from the life of
Christ: But if thou say I am a believer, what do thou thou believe? do
thou believe, as many of you who are called believers do, that is, that they
shall not be freed from sin so long as they are in the body? If this be thy
faith, it is like to be so unto thee; then if thou be freed at all it must be
by thy account when thou art out of the body, that is a freedom, but not from
hell; from the act of sin, because thou can sin no longer but not from the
guilt and condemnation Rev. 22.12. 2 Cor. 5. and 10. because there is no place
for repentance: this is not the freedom of the children of God, for their
freedom is by the Son, Joh. 6.36. which is a perfect freedom indeed from the
committing of sin: but thou that committest sin term of life art in bondage,
and a servant of sin, and being a servant of sin, art not redeemed from the
power of Satan, ver. 34. nor out of the vain conversation: but the true
believers come to the purifying of the soul in obeying the truth, which makes
free, Joh. 8.32. through the spirit, 1 Pet. 1.22. and obedience is required in
a man's life time, and not to be put off till the soul departs from the body:
for he that sleights the day of his visitation cannot if he would, then it is
hid from his eyes, though he may seek it carefully with tears, as Esau did
before his death, but could not find it, Hebr. 12.17. therefore take heed you
slight not your day, in harkening to such who plead for sin term of life: for
in the name and fear of the Lord I warn you to depart from such in tender love
and pity to your souls, which have been fed a long time with words, but never
came to taste of the bread of life that satisfies the soul: but as many as
come to taste of that bread, and feel the Word near in the heart, their souls
loathes the Priests husks, and can feed no more on their chaff, nor sit one hour
to hear them tell their dreams: but when we walked in darkness and knew not the
light, but followed those blind guides, and were one with them in their deceit,
we loved them as well as you, pleaded for them and their deceit, not knowing
what we did, for we in that estate knew no other way, no other truth, no other
life, and thought as you do now, there was no other; but when the Lord visited
us, and sent his messengers who came in the power of the spirit of life, and
declared the word of the Lord, it reached the witness of God in our
consciences, to which witness giving heed, it enlightened our understandings,
and the body of sin was seen and felt: then, O wretched man! What shall I do to
be saved from this body of sin and death? Then was the everlasting Gospel which
is the power of God known and preached, saying, Fear God, and give glory to
him, for the hour of his judgment is come: then was the voice of the just
uttered and heard with judgment upon the head of the unjust: then the flesh
trembled, the earth quaked, the rocks rent, the mountains removed, the graves
opened, the dead raised to life, the captive prisoners came forth, salvation
known, and the true worship of God set up, which is in the spirit, and in the
truth: This is the strait gate that leads to life, and few there be that find
it. Now the new and living way is known and witnessed, and they that walk
therein, though fools upon the worlds account, do not err; for it is the way of
holiness, wherein the ransomed and redeemed ones of the Lord walk, who are
returned and come to Sion the city of the living God, into which no unclean or
imperfect thing can enter the heavenly Jerusalem; which comes down from
heaven, wherein dwells this new birth, the regenerate and newborn babes which
sin not, with songs of everlasting joy upon their heads, Isa. 35.8, 9, 10. Heb.
12.22, 23. Rev. 21.27. Now the living praises the living God, and true honor
and glory, everlasting praises and thanks is given to him who lives for
evermore, Halelujah: He that has an ear let him hear what the Spirit says to
him that overcomes, mark, [overcometh] will I give to eat, but not to him that
is overcome; for of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he brought into
bondage: and here is your state who live in sin and plead for it term of life,
and believe you cannot overcome it in this life, and so are servants to it: and
all in this state have no right to eat of the tree of life which is in the
midst of the paradise of God, Rev. 2.7. But blessed and for ever blessed are
they that do his commands, that they may have right to the tree of life, and
may enter in through the gates into the city, Rev 2^. If here all that live in
sin, and plead for it term of life, are shut out with the dogs, ver. 15. All
that enter this city must witness this work of Regeneration, every man in his
own order, and according to his measure; and for the everlasting good of all
that cannot witness this work, do the ministers of Christ Jesus labor night
and day warning every one every where to repent and turn to the light of
Christ, which shows them all that ever they did, and also what they shall do,
and here the true Messiah is found.

Chalfout in the County of Buckingham the 5th. of the 12. mon. 1660. This was I
moved from the Spirit of the Lord to write as a testimony and warning to you
all, who deny the just and perfect one to reign in you, and are pleading for
sin term of life, from one who is a true lover of peace truth, and
righteousness where or in whomsoever it appears, Rich. Bradly

THE END.

