THE Authority of GOD over MEN, In the LAW, CLEARED, Showing that its no
persecution for the Magistrate as JEHOVAH'S Deputy, in JEHOVAH'S Name, to
enforce it on the people, but that he is bound to do the same.

Written by an unworthy witness to the Law and government of God, JOHN BRAIN.

LONDON, Printed for Rich. Moon, and are to be sold at the seven stars in
Paul's Churchyard, near the great north door, 1653.

To the Supreme Authority of the Nation, The Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England.
Right Honorable,
THe fear of God and love of your souls, makes me set before you the words of
Moses, Deuteronomy. 27.27. Cursed be he confirms not all the words of this Law to do
them, and all the people shall say Amen; which signifies, that God will stir up
the people against men, for not confirming the Law, all the Law; and that there
is a curse follows the not confirming of it. I have out of desire of your
satisfaction and encouragement, answered some objections which may beget high
thoughts, exalting themselves against God: the Lord I hope will remove the
hindrances cause delay in his work, and make the way plain before ye, and
deliver you from reasoning with flesh and blood about prudential honors, profit
and pleasure of the world; and the Lord answer all your Questions according to
his counsel upon your Consciences. And first, the Lord season your thoughts
with that of God when the people would be under humane Authority, as the
Gentiles, 1 Samuel 8.7. they have not rejected thee, but me, signifying, that if
men would set up Gods Law by humane Authority, they yet reject God from
reigning over them: the divine Law administered by humane Authority since the
types of Christ (as the Kings of Judah were) are past, and he come, is
abomination, and worse then Deuteronomy. 22.9. sowing the field with diverse seeds,
ver. 10. or plowing with an Ox and an Ass, ver. 11. or wearing a garment of
linen and woolen. O consider, Magistracy ruling under God, is higher and more
honorable then that that is of it self without God. But let us see what are the
hindrances that God should not reign over us.

From the Soak near Winton, October 1653.
The Authority of GOD over MEN, in the LAW, cleared.
Question I.
THe first Question is, whether the now Magistrate may enjoin the people under
his power to Covenant with God in the Law as the Jews did?

To the answering whereof, I shall premise these Queries, it is not whether men
may, but

1 Its whether God may not enforce a people to Covenant with him, and whether
since the fall, all people, before they can be a people to God, are not to
submit to his enforcement.

2 Whether God in giving the Law, has not made use of this enforcement as well
on the Gentiles as the Jews, Romans 3.29. and 7.1. Paul writes to the Romans
Gentiles, showing, that the Law had dominion over them, whiles they lived, as a
husband over a wife, and the Reason (because they knew the Law) the knowledge
of it actually enjoins obedience to it, in Gentiles as well as Jews, Gal. 3.13.
who are Gentiles are said to be under the rule of the Law, v. 23. he says,
They were kept under the Law until Faith came, v. 24. and was their school
master to bring them to Christ, Ephesians. 2.12. the evil estate of the Gentiles was
set out in this, not only that they were without Christ, but that (as we this
day) they were Aliens from the Commonweal of Israel (that is, the government of
God in the Law judicial.) And strangers from the Covenants; (...), not the
Covenant, as of the Gospel Covenant only, but Covenants of Law and Gospel,
Gal. 4.24. Abrams two sons are the two Covenants, the one Ismael by Hagar,
which is Sinai in Arabia, the Law-Covenant; the other the Gospel Covenant,
which is Isaac by the free woman Sarah, which is Jerusalem from above. Now
these Covenants are the Covenants of promise, the promises of the Law being
only made to the people under the Law-Covenant, and those of the Gospel to the
people under the Gospel Covenant; because by the Covenants, they are Gods, and
God is so theirs, as the tenor of the Covenant reveals him. Lastly, hence as we
are without the Covenant this day, so we are without God in the world, that is,
in the world estate; and as without God therein, so without hope, which is no
less true in English men's estate now, then in the Ephesians, when they were
Gentiles, etc. Again, writing to Timothy, whose father was a Greek, 1 Timothy 1.9.
the Law was made for men without Law, viz. the Heathens as well as Jews, (...),
for disobedient, Command 5. for the ungodly, Command 1. for the unholy and
profane, Command 3. for murderers and manslayers, Command 6. for whoremongers,
and them that defile themselves with mankind, Command 7. for men-stealers,
Command 8. for perjured persons, Command 3. for Liars, Command 9. Now that he
speaks of the Law and its rule, is clear, in that he applies himself to the
making of the Law, which was for judgment and rule of the Jewish Nation, and
in them of all that know and own the Law for Gods. Again, he goes but to the
ninth Command, as being only punishable by the Judge, the tenth being reserved
to God to judge the transgressions thereof at last.

That that is remarkable in this Text, is this,

1 That he says indefinitely it was made for such, even for such Gentile
sinners as well as Jews, and no more for the one then for the other, for God is
no respecter of persons.

2 Such offenses are committed among us, and such offenders are abiding with
us, and the Law was made for them, not only to show them their sin, and let
them al^ne in it, but to punish them for it, and judge them by it.

3 By the Law, clearly the Apostle understands not the ten commands only, but
the whole judicial Law, its Statutes and judgments.

Quest. 2. Whether God having thus laid the Law on all that know it, it be not
the duty of the Magistrate, who is Gods vicegerent, to see the people under his
power to submit to the same? As the Law and Covenant enjoin.

1 Not doing it as an act of his own, but as Gods Minister, Rom 13.4.

2 Not subjecting the people to himself, but Gods obedience, Judges 8.22, 23.

3 Not respecting his own will, but Gods command, Romans 13.5. if ever, now men
ought to be subject to such a Magistrate for Conscience, and he that will not
in such a work, let him suffer the execution of Gods wrath, he bears not the
sword in vain, to suffer men to stand out in sin against God and his Law.

4 Shall any plead Conscience whether they will submit to the Law of God in the
outward man, as to a rule of life, or whether they will be Gods people, or
whether they will own the true God under so much knowledge of God and his Law?

Quest. 3. Whether when the people have Covenanted with God in the Law, the
Magistrate be not to put in execution the punishments for the breaches made by
the people of the Covenant, Joshua 7.15.

Resp. 1. Or else he bears the sword in vain, Romans 13.4. Deuteronomy. 17.2.

2 Or else the whole Nation are defiled by the sin, and so the punishment
becomes universal, Deuteronomy. 13.12, 13, 14, 15, 16.

3 The Scriptures require that the soul sins against the Law shall dye, Ezekiel.
18.4.

4 Or the Nation will become abominable, and in stead of being a people of God,
be a people of Satan, for by punishment of sin according to the Law, sin was
said so to be put away from among them, and not else, the sin else remaining,
Deuteronomy. 13.5. one man as pitch defiling another.

5 In Covenant keeping, was great reward, so in Covenant breaking was death,
the wages of sin is death, Romans 6.23. Ezekiel. 18.29. Yet says the house of
Israel, The way of the Lord is not equal: O house of Israel, are not my way
equal? are not your ways unequal? compare Gods with ours, and his ways are
equal, ours unequal.

There are three grounds, by which the Magistrate has warrant to force the Law
of God on a Nation, which are all binding to the now Magistracy.

1. Is the ground that the creature stands bound to God by for his Creation, as
it retains a knowledge of God thereby, so that man is without excuse by the
creation, for making any similitude of God, because in the things are made, the
invisible things of God are seen, Romans 1.19, 20, which inexecusableness is
before God only.

2 The Law being added, sin abounded, Romans 5.20. Gal. 3.19. the Law was added
because of transgression, so that after the receiving and owning of the Law,
sin abounds not in quantity, but in quality also: a man dies more justly for
sinning against Law, then without Law, for offending Gods then man's Laws, for
breaking the Law after the Covenant then before, as Paul says, Romans 7.7. I had
not known sin, but by the Law, and 1 Cor. 15.56. the power of sin is the Law,
and Romans 5.13. where is no Law is no transgression imputed.

3 A people desiring the knowledge of God, and enjoyment of his name, but are
denied by such as rule over them, and after by the outstretched arm of God, are
redeemed from them, are by a special means called to a setting up of Gods Law
and government, as a debt to their Redeemer.

I. Thus Exodus 20.2. I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the house
of bondage, out of the Land of Egypt, etc.

Note, the Antichristian estate is the Land of Egypt to us, as Egypt was to the
Israelites, Rev. 11.8. and the house of bondage in respect of the illegal yoaks
William the bastard laid on this Nation, which were full of tyranny and
oppression, who destroyed the fundamental Law of the Nation, and on all
differences with the Barons, his posterity promised restoration of them, who
then knew no better.

Now God never delivered this Nation from the house of bondage and Land of
Egypt in this kind until now; now there is a freedom from others, and a tie to
God, that he be made king that has delivered them. See how Israel observes
Gedeon, Judges 8.22, 23. The men of Israel said unto Gedeon, Rule thou over us,
and thy sons also, for thou have delivered us from the hand of Midian. And
Gedeon said unto them, I will not rule over you, nor shall my sons rule over
you, the Lord shall rule over you.

It shows, that a people are bound to set up him to rule over them, that
delivered them from their enemies; and I hope the men delivered of this Nation
will say God delivered them, Deuteronomy. 29.16, 17.

Yea the late power could not, this power I know will not say they delivered
the Nation from the bondage on it, spiritual or corporal, but that it was God
delivered it; what now hinders that God, who ought to reign, is not set up in
the Land to rule?

Yea, I believe the very enemy for our deliverance sake will say as
Nebuchadnezzar, seeing his idolatry scorned, and the worshippers of the true
God preserved, as Dan. 3.28. and ver. 29. I make a decree, that every people,
Nation and language which speak any thing amiss against the God of Shadrach,
Meshach and Abednege, shall be cut in pieces, and their houses shall be made a
dunghill, because there is no other God that can deliver in this sort. So that
it appears, Gods deliverance of a people from evil and idolatrous powers, is a
ground by which that people so delivered are bound to own God his rule and Law,
they being therefore freed, that they may honor him and obey him, as in the
deliverance of his people Israel, Luke 1.74, 75. 2 King. 17.35, 36, 37, 38, 39.

Quest. 4. But what are the enforcements God authorizeth the Magistrate with in
setting up his Law?

1 Exodus 19.5. Keep my Covenant, then shall ye be a peculiar treasure to me
above all people, for all the earth is mine: if not, see Lev. 26.15, 25. Deuteronomy.
5.2, 3- mark, the Covenant is no less tied to the keeping of the judgments,
Deuteronomy. 7.12. then to the keeping of the commands, ver. 9.

2 As in 2 King. 11.17. A Covenant is made after general apostasy to Baal, that
the people will be the people of the Lord.

3 All the people small and great, have the words of the Covenant read to them,
and they stand to it, 2 King. 23.2, 3.

4 2 Chronicles. 15.12, 13, they entered into a Covenant to seek the Lord God of
their fathers, and who would not seek the Lord God of their fathers, whether
man or woman, small or great, should be put to death.

2 Chronicles. 34.31, 32. Josia made a Covenant before the Lord, to walk after the
Lord, to keep his Commands, his testimonies and his statutes, and he caused all
that were in Jerusalem and Benjamin to stand to it.

I beseech you consider, if mortal men made Kings, adjudge men to death for
denying their supremacy, does not man more justly dye for denying Gods? was it
Treason to declare any other King in a Nation then he that is Legally such? How
much more does he deserve death, that sets up another King then God over men,
by Idols? Was the counterfeting the Broad-Seal Treason, how then to swear by
the name of the most high falsely, or in a way God owns not?

Object. O but this was in a civil way only that Kings were so honored.

Res. 1 God in the Law as King is only acknowledged as supreme in the State, as
issuing forth all power from himself to men; in which he, not men, reigns: as
of the contrary, not to submit to the rule and authority of God, is as the
Israelites to reject God or Christ, and choose Saul or Barabbas, or the Bramble
to rule over them.

2 The worship of God was not contained in the Law judicial, but in the Law
ceremonial: the Judicial Law held out his authority, power and rule only, as a
Lord over men; which men despising, dye more justly for, then for opposing the
authority of all the men on earth.

3 This of the Law is an honor due to God from his creating man, and from man
as his creature in natures state by created light.

Quest. 5. Whether the first Table belong to the Magistrate now or not, or
only the second Table?

Resp. Jam. 2.10. says, He that breaks the Law in one point, is guilty of all,
and Moses says, Cursed be he confirms not all the words of this Law to do
them, Jam. 2.7, 11.

2 Judgment of things in the second Table is not to be executed without the
use of Commands of the first.

1 A man in difficult cases cannot be satisfied, but by an Oath, Heb. 6.16. an
oath is the end of all strife, Jer. 4 2. Thou shall swear the Lord lives in
righteousness; which shows, the oath of God is not to be ministered to
unrighteous Law, and proceeds again, it must be in judgment, which cannot be,
if the commands of the first Table pertain not to the Magistrate.

2 As an oath is to be ministered in judgment, Command 3. so that oath must be
in the name of God, or the Plaintiff is not to receive his testimony, yea
indeed it can be no oath: Command the first is hence proved to be of necessary
use in judgment.

3 It must not be by the name of an idol God, that the Magistrate professing
Gods word ought not to receive, for God will cut off the name of Idols out of
the Land. Command second, is concerned also in judgment.

4 And whereas it ought to be the Magistrates care, that the people under him
live a godly and sober life in all righteousness and honesty, it proves from 1 Timothy 2.2.

1 A necessity of the seventh day Sabbath to be observed, the fourth Command.

2 And if the Law of Moses, by which the people are to live or be judgeed, be
read to them every Sabbath day, Act. 15.21.

3 That the remembrance of the Creation and Rest, with thanks to the Creator,
be continued, that God may sanctify them, and as a schoolmaster bring men to
Christ.

4 That the servant, the Ox, the Ass, may rest and not be destroyed with
labor and toil, the merciless master otherwise would burden them withal, yea
and destroy them: Christ tells us, The Sabbath was made for man, not man for
the Sabbath, Mark 2.27.

5 Without this, what profanation, wickednesses, and abominations would the
people suddenly run into, and be before God worse then heathens, who observed
days to their idol gods!

6 The seventh day is the sign of the Covenant of God, so that if that be
neglected, the Covenant is not signed, yea God punished the breach of Sabbaths,
the neglect of Sabbaths severely, and blessed in all abundance the observance
of them, and annexed many promises.

If Magistrates now have nothing to do to put in execution the Commands of the
second Table,

1 Then they have naught to do to punish Witches, Sorcerers, or other
Covenanters with Satan, because these sin against the first Command in denying
God, and against the third, in taking the name of God in vain.

2 Gal. 5.19, 20. Idolatry and Witchcraft are numbered together as a work of the
flesh, with adultery, fornication, murder.

Object. Ver. 20. Heresy is expressed, and that pertains not to the civil
Magistrate to punish.

Resp. This Heresy as here a work of the flesh, is limited to a denial of God,
or the rule and the authority of God, indeed, a dividing himself from God and
his Law, under which the natural man ought to be, the Apostle in this Epistle
treating mainly of the Law and the state of man as under the same, or as it
ought to be under the same, for those under the curse ought to be under the
rule of the Law, though the time and opportunity is denied them, and this kind
of heresy concerns the Magistrate, as the punishment of witchcraft or murder
does, and distinct from the heresies 2 Pet. 2.1. speaks of calling them
damnable heresies, that is, denying Christ that bought them, which is brought
into the Church, and come not under the Magistrates cognizance to punish with
the sword.

And thus you see how the four Commands of the first Table concern the
Magistrate, as much as the six last of the second Table, yea so as he that
confirms not all the words of the Law to do them is accursed, and he that
breaks one is guilty of all, for the authority of the Law is in the first
Command acknowledged or made void in the owning or the denial of it, as
containing the Kingship and the supremacy of God as Lawgiver, this begets
obedience.

The power of the Law is from the name of God contained in the third Command,
this begets fear.

The sanctification of the people by the Law, is from the observation of the
fourt Command, this begets holiness.

The second Command is for the preservation of the power and the authority of
the Law, and for preventing unholiness, a not glorifying God as God.

So that the second Table disjoined from the first, in the hand of man, is man's
setting up of himself, and casting down the authority and power of God, and is
the greatest of all abominations, and the greatest of all other violence done
to God, O let not humane power and authority ever come to rule by the divine
Law of God, this is indeed to set themselves in the Throne of God, will not God
hold him guiltless takes his name in vain, and shall he be guiltless takes his
throne, his honor, his name, his law and glory from him?

It is no less dangerous to rule by our authority, then not to rule by Gods
law: Gods law is not to be administered but in his name, and by that authority
is of God, without desperate and high rebellion.

God is to be in the law and judgment, as Kings were in their law and
judgment: shall men have that over you which you think too great to give to
God? How little is God beholding to you who will not admit him his sovereignty
in his own law over his creatures!

Object. But is not an enforcing a Covenant with God, and a putting men to
death for idolatry, persecution, and an oppressing the Consciences of men?

Resp. 1 The enforcement is not of man but God, man is but Gods minister
therein, as in the other parts of his ministry.

2 Conscience is inexcusable before God from the things made, proving the
invisibility of God against Idols and idolatry, as Romans 1.19, 20.

3 The Law has a light more strongly convincing Conscience then the natural
light, by which it is bound to the living God from idols, by which man is
inexcusable before men, and so he that has the law, and yet worships idols,
justly is judged to dye thereby.

Note it is not mental idolatry, but manual or open, such as by two witnesses
is proved before the Judge, is here meant.

4 Conscience is under the light of the law, so that a man cannot plead
Conscience to do any thing against the law, as to steal, commit adultery, lie,
murder, disobey his parents in lawful things, then much less may a man plead
Conscience to be an idolater, a blasphemer, or to depart from the true God.

5 Persecution is from Tyrants afflicting men for doing just and holy things
before God, and not from the Minister of God, doing justice on men actually and
openly offending against the divine Law of God, as evil doers, not as
Christians.

6 Conscience is not to be forced to believe Doctrines of Faith, but to be
informed, when yet a man is to be compelled in his life to live righteously,
soberly, godlily.

7 Conscience is not prejudiced in its liberty, when the man is punished for
idolatry, Conscience having no liberty from God to worship idols. Conscience
agreeing with the Law against the idolater; only man when he knows God, and
glorifies him not as God, becomes vain in his imaginations, and is given up to
act against Conscience to his own condemnation.

8 Conscience, when from some unknownness of the mind of God in some duty
doubts, is not to be forced, because its knowledge of the thing is not
accompanied with Faith, and so what is not of faith is sin: but Consciences
knowledge of God is cleerer then to think that God is a stone, or that the Sun
is God, or the like, or else there is no knowledge of God in that man, either
as he is revealed in the Law or Gospel, or any answerable light to Law or
Gospel, yea or nature it self abiding in him: without some answerableness to
one of which lights in man, it cannot be termed Conscience in man, that
withholds him from submitting to things enjoined by a power.

Now its that answerableness of light in man to the Gospel, is not to be
forced, and comes in the compass of persecution, the civil Magistrate not being
trusted therewith; and not that answerableness of light in man to the Law,
which is agreeable to the natural light, and concerns the natural man; and the
natural life of men in their manners, and so the Magistrate to be trusted with
it. Its not Conscience in a man that desires liberty to be unjust, unhonest,
etc. but unconscionableness and a lack of Conscience.

As for that Queston, Whether the first Table be to be enjoined by the now
Magistrate, O that it might be considered, whether that shall be a Law to us
concerns our neighbors, and not that concerns our God? Shall the Law be law,
and the authority of God evacuated? As Christ, Matt. 23.19. Ye hypocrites,
which is greater the Altar or the gift? so, which is greater, God or the Law? O
is there not such an oneness in the law, that the destruction of one is the
destruction of all?

1 Shall a child dye for disobeying his parents by the fifth Command, and
shall it not be death to them that will not take God for their God by the first
command?

2 Is it death for a man carnally to defile himself with his neighbors wife,
by the seventh Command, and shall spiritual defiling a man's self with whorish
idols by the second Command be much more death?

3 Shall stealing a child from his father be death by the eighth Command, and
shall not stealing men from God by persuading to idolatry, be death by the
second Command? Deuteronomy. 13.6, 7, 8, 9, 10.

4 Shall a child's cursing his father or mother be death by the fifth Command,
and shall not cursing and blaspheming of God be death by the third Command, and
denying his authority?

5 Shall heathens from the light of nature execute death for the like offenses
on men in revenge of wrong done to their idols, and shall we plead a liberty to
those done against the only true God by his enemies?

6 Christ, Matt. 22.38. said, This is the first and the great Command, and the
second is like to this.

Is it the great Command concerned God, and is there no punishment for offenses
against it, but for offenses against the second, that concerns men only?

That in the tenth Command, Thou shall not covet, is by the Apostle clearly
reduced to the second Command, Ephesians. 5.5. or covetous person which is an
idolater.

7 The second is said to be like the first, Matt. 22.39. what is forbid in the
second, is forbid in the first as against God, as in the other, as against man;
the first was a pattern to the second, and love is the fulfilling of both the
Tables.

8 Is not the Conscience enforced, when enjoined obedience to the Law, and
Statutes, and Judgments of God in the second Table? and can it be said to be
enforced, when enjoined obedience to the law, etc. concerns the first Table? In
a word, the Scriptures say that man is shut up under the law until Faith come:
if man, the whole man, then Conscience in man is shut up to it, and has no
freedom from it, nor way to take himself from submitting to it, Gal. 3.22, 23.
Christ himself was made under the Law, and how then are all others in their
very creation? Gal. 4.4.

9 It will not be amiss to show the dependency of the Commandments.

1 The first Command contains the Covenant it self, as it concerns God in his
being to man, who is alone to be honored. 2 Command concerns God on our part,
that we glorify God as God, and not represent in him idols, and worship him in
creatures. 3 Command shows God is to be sanctified of Covenanters in his name
or authority, that might not be impaired. 4 Command has in it a sign of the
Covenant, and is for sanctification of the Covenanters. 5 Command, God sets up
deputies to see the Covenant kept, God authorizing them with authority
thereunto, as under him. 6 Command contains a preservation of the Covenanters
in their being, the Covenant binding one man to preserve another. 7 Forbids
defilement of themselves and neighbors wives, that they may have a holy seed
that are in covenant with God. Hence a bastard seed was not to inherit. 8 A
preservation of men in Covenant in their estates, tying men one to be just to
another. 9 A preservation of them in their names, tying men to be true in
Covenant one to another. 10 To keep our Consciences free from coveting any
thing is another.
1 Kings in their authority, sovereignty, and laws of Treason, had that God
should have, as in Saul, who ruled by Gods authority, and God rejected, and his
Law exercised by humane authority.

2 When God again is made King, he has no more in the four Commands then Kings
had among us by their humane laws over the people.

3 The four Commands contain a kingly authority for bodily rule, the worship of
God being ministered in the Tabernacle, not the gate; by a Priest, not the
Judge, yet we think it hard to grant God what we give to men.

In the first Command the person of the King is specifically enjoined to be
owned alone; men also would not in their kingdoms admit corrivals, as in Caesar
and Pompey: to proclaim another then the lawful King, is Treason by humane
authority against the King, so in that kingdom is Gods, by divine authority it
is Treason against God.

The second Command answers to counterfeiting the King in his coin, his seal,
his authority, his hand; all which by humane Law is Treason.

The third Command answers to the Kings name, all Acts and Edicts are published
in his name, Writs executed in his name, and men (as by the true God) did
corruptly use to swear by their kings lives, as Joseph by the life of Pharaoh.

And was to confirm the kingly authority of God: now authority was so maintaind
by men, in their humane way to themselves, that it was death for any to deny
the Kings authority; how then to deny Gods sovereignty?

The fourth command answers to the Kings Courts, when as in old times in this
very Nation, they had set days, in which the Laws of the Land were publicly
read to the people: so on the Sabbath day Moses is read to the people, which is
better, to which should be attendance, as Tenants at their Lords Court days.

Applic. 1 If the second Table be administered by humane authority, it is not
administered as Gods Law, but man's.

2 Men set themselves in the place of God, and will not have God reign over
them until he destroy them, Psalm. 2.

3 Whiles men scruple whether God should reign from his seeming severity, that
he might exalt the divine glory to man in ways of Tyranny, makes himself great
as Herod; speaking as with the voice of God and not of man, Act. 12.22.

4 Does God require more in his rule of men, then men in theirs? or would men
give less, or shall he take less to be a King among the people which desire to
be a Kingdom to God, then they gave their King before?

5 Tell me how a Kingdom can be Gods, and he not the King: or how he can be a
King without his law and authority: or however God can have a visible authority
among men, as a King in a kingdom, and the four commands of the first Table in
any part of them laid aside or abridged.

6. As Law is nothing without Authority, yea no Law; so the second Table is
nothing without the first, for the inward or outward man.

7 The covenanting of People with God in his Law, answers to our Nations
receiving their King upon the Oath ministered to him at his Coronation, to rule
justly by the Law of the Land, and to maintain our just rights.

I make bold humbly to offer these Queries.
1. Whether it be not the mind of God, that in the fall of Kings, and that
humane authority, that the humane Law shall fall with it.

2 Whether God has not made himself way thereby to set up himself, authority,
and law in the place thereof.

3 Whether or no the people that stand in the way and hinder Gods coming to the
Throne, must not look to be removed and cast down.

4 Whether there be any fitter or better then God to set up, or better
authority and more lawful then Gods? Or a more just Law to be ruled by then
his? if not, why is not he exalted? if God be God, follow him.

5 If the people should be so blind as to say, as Israel to Gedeon, Come thou
and thy sons reign over us, say as he, I will not reign over you, nor shall my
sons, God shall reign over you, he is King. Pilate would not be entreated to
write otherwise.

6 Rev. 6.2. the Crown and kingdom in a war shall be given Christ, O that the
now Magistrates of this Nation had the honor to give it him! he then should
make this Nation the head of the greatest and most glorious Monarchy ever was,
exceeding the golden head or state of the Babylonian, for plenty, as that of
iron for richness and glory, Rev. 21.24.

7 Whether all the men that refuse or lay aside the first Command, reject not
God in himself as King; and in the third God, in his authourity; and in the
fourth, God in his Court, and in the fifth, God in his deputy; and in the rest,
with the Statutes and Judgments, God in his Law and government, and so entail
that sentence on them is written, Luke 19.27. as enemies of Christ to be
destroyed before him, or as Psalm. 2.3. for breaking the bands of God, his Law,
come to be broke in pieces like a potters vessel with a rod of iron; be wise
now therefore, O ye Kings, be instructed ye that are Judges of the earth, kiss
the son; make him your King, and do him homage, as to your only Lord and
Sovereign, for God in despite of all opposition will set him on Sion hill, a
sovereign and king to the people.

8 And whereas under Monarchy, indictments run against men for that against the
peace of the King, his Royal Crown and Dignity, they had feloniously done so
and so, men are now to be indicted thus,

Thou B C. art charged with breaking the Covenant of God, by transgressing
against his Sovereignty, in that thou art a worshipper of Idols, or of false
Gods.

Or against his Name or Authority, in blaspheming him, which was judged with
fasting, 1 King. 21.12, 13. and so of the rest.

Or thus:

Thou A. B. art charged with breaking the Covenant of thy God, by transgressing
his Law, in the unjust or violent taking away the goods or cattle of thy
brother D. E.

Blasphemy in the third Command, what it is, is a curious Question, which
concerns God in his Rule and Authority, when men rose up against it, and spoke
evil of it, vilifying and reproaching it, as is apparent, 1 King. 21.12, 13.
Naboth is accused for blaspheming God and the King, in which, not only God,
but the King his Deputy, was pretended in the same blasphemy to be blasphemed,
or to be evil spoken of: to which that may allude, He that despised Moses Law
dyed without mercy, that is, he that speaks evil of Moses rule, dyed without
mercy. And so David, Psa. 69.9. the reproaches of them that reproached me, fell
on thee; God the only King, was reproached in the reproach of David his Deputy.

To the Synedry or the Council of seventy, to the Judges and Elders, were
Scribes appertaining, who were to be entrusted with Evidences and Covenants, or
contracts of men. Concerning which, note, that one of Baruchs in Jeremiah, is a
form for all other Contracts of the like kind: as under one Command all sins
of that kind are forbid, so under one form all Contracts of that kind are
enjoined, unless the word hold out a particular exception, which is a general
rule for cases, in like kind.

These Scribes were by a public Officer, on complaints, to issue out Summons
to bring in offenders before the Judge, which without Arresting, on warning
given sufficed, for he that despised Moses Law, dyed without mercy, by which, a
thief might lose his life, if he according to the Law would not labor for the
man whose goods he stole, until he had satisfied him according to the Law,
etc. Numb. 10.12. Moses sent to call Dathan.

The form of the Summons take to be this, Numb. 16.16. Moses said to Corah, Be
thou and all thy company before the Lord, thou and they and Aaron to morrow.

1 The place, before the Lord, that is the same with the place of Judgment. 2
The time, To morrow, judgment not to be delayed. 3 Be thou and thy company,
partakers in the act, Complainants and Witnesses. 4 And Aaron, who was
complained against.
To these God instituted for rule in the Commonweal dividers, who allotting
for payment of debts, divide the estate of men dying amongst the children or
right inheriters according to the Law, who also are chosen of the people, and
their acts to be submitted to, if just, as legal, and their authority not to be
opposed or despised. The rule of dividing them, I have set down in my book of
the New Earth.

Now in that I think this, with what I have formerly written of this subject,
is sufficient to answer the Questions propounded, I forbear to enlarge my self
herein, and look to God to appear hereby for his own name and glory, to the now
Magistrate of the Nation, to win and work their wills to the obedience of their
God, that he may be good to the Nation, according to his truth and glory: to
whom be obedience of every soul that hopes in him for salvation, now and ever,
Amen.

FINIS.

