Downfall of Tithes no Sacrilege; OR Certain earnest and important QUERIES,
With their Reasons or Grounds. In answer to the Author of a printed sheet,
entitled, An Item against Sacrilege, or sundry Queries concerning TITHES.
Earnestly tending to a full Result, what ought to be done by the now present
Parliament concerning Tithes. Manifestly proving, that it is no Sacrilege for
the now present Power to remove the Laws and Authority, whereby Tithes, or any
other maintenance for the Ministry, is enforced. Showing also the dangerous
inconveniency that necessarily ensues, upon forcing maintenance for the
Ministry, and the unlawfulness of it in the sight of God. By Ellis Bradshaw.

He that sows to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he that
sows to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting, Gal. 6.
London; Printed for H. Cripps, and L. Lloyd, and are to be sold at their shop
in Pope's Head Alley, 1653.

Certain earnest and important Queries, with their Reasons, or Grounds; in
answer to the Author of a printed sheet, entitled, An Item against Sacrilege,
or sundry Queries concerning Tithes, earnestly tending to a full Result, what
ought to be done by the now present Parliament, concerning Tithes.
YOu demand, Whether the Ministry of England has not as good a propriety in
Tithes, as Noblemen, Gentlemen, and Precholders have in their Lands: the reason
whereof you render is, because Ethelwolph son of King Egbert, who had brought
the Saxon Heptarchy into a Monarchy, had all the Lands of England for his
Demesne, as it acknowledged by Sir Edward Cook in his Commentaries upon
Littletons Tenures, and conferred the Tithes of all the Kingdom upon the
Church by his Royal Charter, dated Anno 855. in these words, to wit;

King Ethelwolph by the consent of Prelates and Princes which ruled in England,
and under him in their several Provinces, did enrich the Church of England with
the Tithes of all his lands and goods by his Charter Royal, etc. adding in the
end, that whose should increase the gift, God would please to prosper and
increase his days, but if any should presume to diminesh the same, that he
should be called to an account for it as Gods Judgment Seat; and this, you
say, he did not only as Lord Paramount, but as Propriator of the whole Land;
the Lords and great men at that time having no propriety or estates of
permanency, but as accountants to the King, whose the whole Land was; and yet
they also gave their free consents; which the King required, that thereby they
might be barred from pleading any Tenantright, as also to oblige them to stand
in maintenance of Tithes against all pretenders.

Upon these premises you conclude, That the people can have no right or
propriety in them, for they never bought or paid for them, neither could they
come by inheritance; for that which was not their Forefathers, could not
descend to them, neither came they to them by Donation, which they can never
show.

I desire therefore, and give me leave in love and meekness first to query.

1. Query. Whether you be in good earnest, yea or no? that upon this guifture
of King Ethelwolph, The Ministry of England have as good a propriety in
Tithes, as Noble men, Gentlemen, and Freeholders have in their Lands.

Reas. Considering first the ground and reason why the King gave them, to wit,
because he accounted them as a due debt owing to God, and not because they were
his own Demesne, and free to be at his own disposing, but he did account them
due unto God, Jure Divino; and therefore expressed himself in such prophetical
words, to wit, That whose should increase the gift, God would please to prosper
and increase his days, but if any should presume to diminish the same, that he
should be called to an account for it at Gods Judgment Seat; upon which
observe, he did not say they should be called to an account before his own
Judgment Seat, nor any other civil Judicators, but before the Judgment Seat of
God, implying, that he did not account it as a matter belonging to him to
punish them, but to the Lord himself, who, in his opinion, required such a part
as due to himself; so that if any should rob him, as Mal. 3.8. he expected that
the Lord should judge him for that himself; as so, no doubt but his Prelates;
that (as you say) consented to the business, had admonished him what was his
duty in that respect, for the doctrine of the Prelates in those days was, That
Tithes were due in every respect, conform, and suitable to the Judaical Law; as
so, you acknowledge and say, that the Text and Body of the Common Law, affirms
Tithes to be due Jure Divino, as Sir Edward Cook testifies in the second part
of his Reports; so that you do acknowledge, and it is the bent and drift of
those Queries, to prove the Tithes due to the Ministry Jure Divino.

Arg. But if Tithes be due Jure Divino to the Christian Ministers,

Conse. Then they were due to the Christian Ministry before the time of the
said King Ethelwolph, and so were never his, nor at his disposing.

Reas. For if Tithes be due Jure Divino, they were the gift of God to the
Christian Ministers, who in all ages have been appointed as his chief receivers
of any thing sanctified, or set apart, or given unto God, the Ministers, I say,
together with the poor, the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow, are his
Substitutes and receivers of what is given to him; and so by consequence they
were either due to God, and so to the Ministry, before that free Donation of
King Ethelwolph, or else they are not due Jure Divino; and so you lose the title
Jure Divino, in pleading the title Jure humano; so that if the Ministers title
Jure humano fall to the ground as unjust, or injurious, then you lose them
both; as so, without all question, if you but derive it from King Ethelwolph,
it will certainly fall.

Reas. For first, if it be examined what he had to do to appropriate the free
Donation of all the Tithes to himself, as if they had been his, and he had
given them to the Church, and as if they had not been Gods own proper dues, and
so due to the Ministry and the poor, etc. by the free Donation of the Lord
himself: I shall leave it to the judgment of whoever accounts them due Jure
Divino, and refer them to a text Levit. 27. ver. 26. whether that which is, or
should be the Lords Jure Divino, may be sanctified by man, or given by him, as
of his own to give, when it is the Lords already? The words are these; to wit,
Only the firstling of the Beasts, which should be the Lords firstling, no man
shall sanctify it, whether it be Ox, or Sheep, it is the Lords; implying,
that it was utterly unlawful for any to ascribe the sanctification or free
Donation of that unto God, which was his already in just propriety, and
sanctified already, as holy to the Lord.

For it is but the same case, as when a man thinks to get favor and credit
amongst men, and sometimes does so, by giving of other men's goods, and by
giving men goods, that are their own already.

For first, if the Tithes of England were due to God, and so to the Ministry
before Ethelwolph gave them, then they were properly also their own already,
and if he had not given them, he had robbed God, and robbed the Church.

And if they were not due before he gave them, then the Lord himself, nor his
faithful Ministers, have now no title at all to the Tithes of England, but
derivative from Ethelwolph, and the succeeding Kings, that have confirmed the
same by Magna Charta, and the Laws of the Land.

Let us then consider how this King Ethelwolph came to be propriate in the
Tithes of England, and it will appear where the just propriety rests now, as
being the same case, in respect of conquest.

For first, let me ask, did the inheritors of Lands sell all their estates to
the King, or give them to the King, so as to make all England his own Demesne,
and themselves but as Stewards, and as accountants to him? he had then indeed a
great Demesne, and in all likelihood many thousand Stewards.

But this I am confident that you will not affirm; to wit, that it came to him
from the occupiers of Lands, either by purchase, or free Donation, to be his
own Demesne: For

Though you say he had brought the Saxon Heptarchy into a Monarchy, yet how he
did it you say nothing, but refer us to Sir Edward Cook, and Sir Henry
Steelmans Counsels, Anno 855.

But because I know beforehand, that he could never bring a Heptarchy into a
Monarchy, but either by policy or force, or both, I shall not take pains to
search the Chronologies, but rather assume, that he brought it to a Monarchy,
and made himself an absolute Monarch, and that by conquest, the which I shall
acknowledge is a lawful title, if on his part the war was just.

But suppose him the first and most absolute Monarch that ever was in England,
yet I cannot see how he could come to be so far propriate in the Tithes, as to
confer them on the Church by his Royal Charter, unless we must conclude, that
they were not due to the Church before to be paid by others, to wit, the owners
and occupiers of land.

Reas. For if they were due to be paid by others before he gave them, what
thanks to him for his Donation? or how can it be said to be his Donation? for
it was not he, but the people that gave them, and that of their own increase,
wherewith the (Lord) and not the (King) had increased them; and if they gave
them freely, as due to God, for the furtherance of the Gospel, they had their
reward from the hand of God, and not from the King for any such duties, nor was
the King able to give them a suitable reward, such as they might expect. See
Gal. 6.6. and Mal. 3.20. and Phil. 4.17. and Prove. 5.10.

Nor could they expect any reward at all, if they did but give them, either to
please the King, or because they durst do no other, fearing his authority, by
the Rod of Power shaken over them in a compulsive way, for God has promised no
reward upon that account.

Neither could the King expect any reward from God for giving other men's goods,
for cutting large, though out of other men's hides; as so it was, unless you
will say, and stand by it, that there was no Tithe due to be paid by them, till
the King had given it, and that his title by Conquest was so large and ample,
as that they had no propriety in the Land at all, but what he freely gave them,
or sold them, etc. all which if you affirm, I desire you to consider the
dangerous consequences that must necessarily follow, if that should be so,
which yet I cannot believe that you will affirm; to wit.

1. Conseq. First, it must necessarily follow, that every Conqueror of Land or
Nation, or every Purchasor of land, where Tithes are not payable by Civil
Right, has the full propriety of the Tithe thereof at his own disposing; and
that as has been said, the Tithes, nor any part thereof are due to God, nor to
his receivers, to be paid by the occupiers of lands, but the Conquerors may
exact them; and it were not a robbing of God, nor his Church, if the Conqueror
do exact and take them to himself.

Reas. For what he may give to another that is not due to be given, he may take
it to himself, if he so pleases, or he may give it to any whom he approves
of, as Ministers of Christ; and so if he give it for maintenance of Jesuits
and Popish Priests, as so in all likelihood he will, if he be a Papist; and so
in like case of whatever opinion a Conqueror is of, all his whole Nation must
be steered by him, and act in Religion according to his conscience; and not
their own, and so in all likelihood should all be enforced to maintain a
Ministry against their consciences, whom they know they ought not to receive
to house, neither bid them Godspeed, least they be partakers of their evil
deeds, See John 2.

And remember for this Queen Mary's days, and others days besides; and so by
that means they may damn their own and their childrens souls, of which you
cannot deny but they are guilty, if they do perish by that means.

2. Conseq. It quite contradicts the very end of these your Queries, which
are chiefly to prove, that Tithes are due to the Ministers Jure Divino, the
which they cannot be, if they were not not due before that King gave them; as
has been proved.

3 Conse. It would also follow (not only) that the Church or Ministry, no nor
the Lord himself had any title to the Tithes, till the King had given it them;
But also that till every King or Conqueror, or Governors whomsoever, have
confirmed also the Laws of the Land, and Magna Charta, all title thereunto Jure
Divino, is as out of date, and so by consequence now for the present, till this
present Power have given them also to the Church; the title Jure Divino is not
in force, but they may dispose of them, as they think best, as to whom they
shall account of as the Lords Receivers, that have the best proprieties in
their opinions for receiving Tithes or Church maintenance, and if they do it
not it is their sin.

4 Conse. It would also follow, that all sorts of Tradesmen and Merchants are
not bound at all, as well as Occupiers of Lands, either to give a tenth, or a
liberal part of that wherewith the Lord has increased them: Because it was
never requirable by the Laws of the Land, and Magna Charta.

Whereas this I am certain, and can make it so appear both from the Moral Law,
and the Gospel also, that a tenth of their increase is as well due, and
paiable, as it is from the occupiers of Lands, and Tenements; as I shall, if
need be, make it to appear, that both are alike, one as the other.

5 Conseq. It would likewise follow, that the now present Power, if they think
it good, may bring Tithes into a common Treasury, and reduce the Ministers to
stipends: against which you have fifteen Queries proposed, as so many Items, or
warnings against such kind of Sacriledg: so that if the Tithes belong to the
Civil Power, to be at their disposing by the Laws of the Land; then they may
use them at their own discretion, and dispose them unto Ministers, as they
think convenient. But if they be but due, by the Law of God; then the Civil
Power has no propriety in them at all, nor any thing at all to do, to take
them in Custody; or the disposal of them, lest they rob God.

6 Conseq. It would likewise follow, that all Impropriations that have been
most sacriledgiously robbed from the Church, in old time, which the Laws of the
Land cannot possibly recover to the Church again, but men and their heirs have
a title to it, by the Laws of the Land, as a just Inheritance, must still so
continue as their own propriety, and the present Power must needs be limited to
the present Laws, and must not adventure to take away their proprieties, no
more then the Ministers, which are both confirmed by the Laws of the Land, one
as well as the other: Whereas it is not unlawful even to Break the jaws of
the wicked, and pull the spoil out of their teeth: See Job 29, 17.

And therefore I demand, in case where Tithes are Impropriate, what ought to be
done by the present Power? to wit:

Query. Whether they ought not to take off that compulsive Power, whereby
Impropriators enforce the payment of Tithes to them, that are due by the Law of
God, to the Ministry, that so the Christian people may have their own at their
own disposing; that they might be in their own Power, as in the primitive
times, Act. 5.4.

1. Considering that some hold Tithes by the Laws of the Land, as their own
Inheritance, being purchased for them, by their predecessors, and left to them
as good, and lawful, and proper Inheritance, by the Laws of the Land; so that
whiles the Laws are in force, they cannot possibly be taken from them, but are
their legal right:

And, 2. Considering, that what ever Lands are subject to Tything, they were
first of all subjected thereunto under the notion of duties required by the
Gospel, as due to their Ministers, who claimed and received them in the Name of
Christ, as due to him, and so by consequence to them his Ministers; and that in
every respect conform and suitable to what the Lord required of the Jewish
people, to be given to the Levites: Which Tithes might not be changed, nor
redeemed, but they must add the fifth part to it, for all the Tyths of the Land,
whether of the seed of the Land, or of the fruit of the Tree, was the Lords,
holy unto the Lord: See Levit. 27, 30, 31, 32, 33.

And so being none of there own, they had nothing to do to sell it away, nor to
eat it within their Gates, but must bring it to the place which the Lord should
choose to put his Name there, and there they might eat it together, with the
Priests, and their Households before the Lord: Though in case they live too
remote, they might turn it into money, and bring it in their hands: See Deuteronomy.
14.22, 23, 24, 25, 26. But then they must bestow so much money upon Ox, or
sheep, or Wine, or strong Drink, to eat there, etc. From whence I argue, That.

If the owners might not sell them, nor alien them, or change or pervert them
to any other use, but such as the Lord appointed them;

And if the first paying of Tithes in England, was upon this account, as has
been said;

Querie. Is it not a certain consequence, that whoever sold them, or perverted
the use of them, contrary to the Doctrine which they had then received, were
certainly no better then Thieves, and Robbers; and that of the Lord himself:
nor were no better accounted of by the Ministers and generality of Christians
in those times, who did account them sacrilidgeous Thieves:

And without all question there was never any of the owners of Lands, that ever
sold the Tithe of their Land to their Lords or Patrons: But it was the Patrons
of Tithes that were entrusted, and empowered for installment of Ministers, that
sold them, or perverted them to their own use, as it pleased themselves, having
Power in their hands, and neither fearing God, nor reverencing man, they
exercised tyranny: and so their posterities after them, have done the like by
their example: And this being so, let all men judge whether this was not
Robbery: and whether such who bought them as an Inheritance; and such, who kept
them, or keep them yet, are not as bad as they; Seeing receivers in Law, and
Justice both, are as bad as Thieves: And they that have made Laws whereby they
hold them, and pleaded their causes in suits of Law, to enforce their Payment,
were little better.

And it being an approved maxim, both in Law, and reason; That whatsoever is
stolen, or wrongfully wrested, from the right owners, can never be justly, and
honestly kept, by any posterity, or successive heir, that shall succeed, though
never so many Generations after: For they are no better then were receivers of
Robbed Inheritance.

Query. I therefore desire to know, if any can show that either Kings, or
Patrons, or Landlords whomsoever, had ever any right or proper title, to any
Tithes in England, such as to sell them from the Church; or give them either,
or take them to themselves: And then I shall confess, that if such King or
Patron, or Land lord whomsoever, gave them to the Church; It is proper
sacrilege in who ever takes them from the Church again by force, or falsehood,
But if they cannot, I desire to know whether they would desire the now present
Power, to confirm such Laws whereby Thieves and Robbers may force the payment
of such Impropriate Tithes, yea, or no: And I shall desire to know upon

Query. What Scripture ground the now present Power may build their Faith, to
compel any man to pay his Tithes, though to the very Ministers of Christ
themselves; such who are known by their Fruits, to be his Ministers: Yea
though the present Power should acknowledge them to be due, and that they ought
to be paid; considering these ensuing reasons;

1. Because they cannot prove that Civil Power has any title to them, or any
propriety in them, as has been said;

1 Reas. For how can Kings, or Landlords be so far propriate in them as to sell
them to men, or give them to God, when it is not denied but that Tithes were
all due unto God before, if they be due? unless we should say, they had
conquered the Land from the Lord himself, and given him a Tenth to live on, and
to maintain his Ministers; which were blasphemy to affirm:

2 Reas. For this would be the result, whereas whoever conquered it, or
obtained any just propriety to any of the Lands, it was by his Providence, or
as a free Donation, as I hope none will deny; For the Earth is the Lords, and
the fullness thereof, Psalm.

3 Reas. For then by consequence the Kings and Landlords, or any civil Power,
may expect all the rewards, and they that give them, must expect nothing at
all, by way of rewards from the hand of God; in regard they give but that which
was another man's, and not in their Power to withhold; Whereas God has
promised, they that communicate liberally, and make them that teach them
partakers with them in all good things; they shall reap liberally. See Gal.
6.6. etc.

2. In regard of the evil consequences, that must necessarily follow, to wit;

1. First, Because, If the Rod of Power be generally held forth, for
inforcement of all, to pay their Tithes, to such as procure installment, by the
civil Power, especially in case when such prove bad, and enemies of God;

Conseq. They may force them to pay them to Thieves and Robbers, and such as
enter not by the Door, (which is Christ himself:) See John 10.1, 7. And such as
are Hirelings, and care not for the Sheep, but come purposely to steal, and to
kill, and to destroy you; such as will not strengthen the diseased, nor heal
the sick, nor bind up that which was broken, nor bring again that which was
lost; but with force and violence, they will seek to rule them. See Ezekiel. 34.4.
They will not, like Paul, nourish them with meekness, as a nurse cherishes her
children; they will not become all things, unto all men, that by all means they
might save some:

As I might largely instance in many other particulars; whereby they may easily
be discerned, as Christ has promised, and given us notice how to know them by
their, fruits, as so the sheep of Christ for the most part do.

Arg. But if evil shepherds, and Thieves, and Wolves, may be known by their
fruits: And if we ought to beware of, and not maintain them, lest we be
partakers of there evil deeds; See 2 John 10.11.

1 Conseq. Then it necessarily follows, that such compulsion to the paying of
Tithes in such cases, is an absolute compulsion, to the doing that which is
absolutely forbidden by the holy Ghost;

2 Conseq. And they that thus compel them, are chiefly guilty of that very sin,
though the people that obey them cannot be clear, but they are partakers of
their evil deeds. See

John 10.11.

Reas. For if it be unlawful to receive them to house, or bid them Godspeed
lest we be partakers of their evil deeds;

Conseq. Then it is much more unlawful, to give them constant maintenance as
Ministers of Christ; and as acknowledging them such, when it may be we know
them to be Ministers of Satan, and Antichrist; unholy men, and such as turn the
grace of God into wantonness, etc. See Jude. 4. to 20.

Conclu. Whom we ought not to maintain either by Tithes or any other portion,
or part of maintenance in any kind: No, nor to bid them so much as Godspeed, or
the least countenance in there evil deed; So that all forecd maintenance,
either by Tithes, or otherways, produces this great inconveniency, to the
people of God, and is therefore unlawful to be thus appointed by the civil
State.

2 Conseq. And again, of how dangerous a consequence were it in case the civil
State, or Patrons, or Landlords, or Impropriators, prove so bad, and oppressive
as, many have done, to wit, to take all to themselves, and never care (at all)
to provide Ministers either good or bad, yet exact the Tithes to a penny as due
to them; So that the poor Husbandman has nothing left him to give to these
that are Ministers indeed, as it is said concerning Widows. See 1 Timothy 5.3, 16,
17.18.

3 Conseq. And again, another very great and evil consequence will certainly
follow, by such compulsion, the which I believe has never yet been taken
notice of by any opposer of Tithes, or forced maintenance; and that is this, to
wit, It is a great scandal, yea shame, and reproach to any Christian Nation, or
to any Christian Church, or particular person, that professes Christianity, to
be so unrighteous, or show themselves so manifestly covetous, and so cold in
love, and so absolutely disobedient to the Law of God, and the Lord Jesus
Christ, (which is the law of love,) and so unsubmissive to the Gospel of
Christ; yea so unfaithful in believing his promises; in case they be obedient,
that they shall receive a reward suitable to their sowing to the Spirit: See
Gal. 6.6. etc. 2 Cor. 10.11, 12, 13. That there can hardly be a greater
reproach and scandal cast upon them; then that it should appear, that they need
compulsion in such a case; for of all other sins, Coveteousness is the most
odious in the sight of God, and men; in so much, that it is spoken of by the
Holy Ghost, as a note of absolute wickedness, to bless the Covetous, whom,
says the Scripture, the Lord abhors: See Psalm 10.3.

So that it is a just ground for all other Churches, and Christian Nations, to
abhor us for it, if we appear to be so covetous; and they do but follow the
Lords own example in so doing; And they ought not to be accounted of, nor
received as Christians; but as Heathens, and Publicans; nor to be communicated
with as Christians that appear to be such: See 1 Cor. 5.11. But to be acounted
of as yet without: See Verse. 12.

Arg. But if a general compulsion, or constraint, be used, so as none dares
deny; how can it appear, that any does it freely, but are, together with the
rest of the wickedly covetous, constrained also: for whiles the Rod of Power,
and humane Authority, is held over all in general, and all alike, so as none
dares deny, but does it readily, how can it appear that any does it freely, and
as a fruit of love, and obedience unto God and dutiful respect to the Ministers
of Christ, in truth and verity?

And Solomon has a wise saying, to wit, Righteousness excels a Nation, but
sin is a shame unto any people, Prove. 14.24.

Conseq. Therefore it follows, that it is a shame for any Christian people,
to sin so injuriously against God himself, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and his
express commands by his word, and Spirit, to neglect such duties of love and
Honor to his faithful Ambassadors: And more especially (now) when we make
profession of a full Reformation, and have covenanted so to do: And therefore
whosoever is accessory, or has any hand either in petitioning for, or in
giving his hands or voice for continuance or establishment of such compulsive
means for Ministers maintenance, is without all question an efficient cause,
both of a general sin, yea a National sin: And of a general, National, and
particular reproach, and shame, and dishonor to all our Christian Nations,
Churches, and persons, that by Authority and Power are so engaged; as has been
clearly proved from the Word of truth, sufficiently to convince any rational
creatures that will consider it, if he believes the Scriptures.

Ob. But it will yet be objected, that there will greater sins, and worse
consequences, and greater shame and reproach follow, if the compulsive Power be
taken away; for then it will follow, that Ministers shall want maintenance, for
few will give any thing, if they may but choose.

1 Ans. I answer, If it should so fall, that were not the fault of the Civil
Power, but of their own selves, that did neglect their duty:

Reas. For it is no where required, in all the whole Scriptures, that the
Magistrate should compel men, to any such duties; but only command, and exhort
them, and then the charge lies at there own door, and the Magistrate is clear:

2 Ans. It is an uncharitable censure, to conclude so far as that the faithful
Ministers of Christ shall want, and that few will give them any thing, if they
may but choose;

Reas. For first, I nothing doubt, but such who are sent of God, the Lord
himself will care for, that they shall either not want any outward maintenance,
or be content to want as well as to abound, when he sees it good so to
exercise their faith, as so the Apostle had learned.

2. And secondly, I cannot believe but that all True-hearted, and faithful
Christians, that either fear God, or reverence men, will be the more liberal
when the Compulsive Power is taken away; and that according likewise as they
abound in liberality, God will bless them so much the more abundantly; so that
they shall still be increased, and the more able, by how much more they are
more abundantly liberal. 2 Cer. 9.10, 11, 12. and Gal. 6.

3. And thirdly, As the duty lies not only upon Husbandmen but upon all sorts
of Christians to communicate liberally as the Lord increases them; I make no
doubt but when they know their duty, they will be the more liberal by how much
the more slack they shall find others that are not yet Christianized, nor have
attained as yet, either to the love or honor of God or man, nor to believe the
Scriptures, to wit, Gal. 6. and 2 Cor. 9, etc.

4. And fourthly, why shall such men be compeled to communicate, when the case
is so with them, as that they neither believe nor can expect a reward from the
hands of God, for such communicating, as so they cannot if they do it not
freely, but be merely compeled, and so that such communicating is utterly lost,
and therefore is wrongfully taken, and wrested from them.

5. It is a gross disparagment to the true Christians of any Church, or Nation
that either they are too few, to maintain a Ministry, or too spairing, if all
they have will serve the turn, seeing Christ has promised to increase them
accordingly and that they shall not want, if they be but obedient to do their
dutys liberally, as he has appointed them, in communicating Carnals, to the
Ministers of Spirituals: Gal. 6.6.

6. It is a disparagment to their faith in that they dare not trust God, but
their own Providence: (to the faith of people) if they do not communicate; and
(to the faith of Ministers) if they use any force.

7. It is a great dishonor to Ministers, if they either enforce them, or
receive them of such who need inforcement: Abraham, would have scorned it, lest
they should say they had made him rich.

8. It is a great dishonor to Christianity, for they lose the Honor of doing
it freely, if compulsion be used in a general way, for they that are Christians
indeed, and can do it freely, and faithfully also; trusting in God, as so he
requires of them: yet they cannot in that be distinguished from others, that
are merely enforced, I mean in the sight of men, who cannot know their hearts;
in such a case when allare alike under compulsive Power, so that men may
account them as covetous, and unfaithful as those who are compeled.

9. It is a great dishonor, and a manifest afront to the wisdom of God; and
the Lord Jesus Christ: For those in Authority to use any inforcement for the
maintenance of his Ministers without commission from him: It is as much as to
say they are wiser then God:

Reas. For he never appointed them any other maintenance but what was given
freely, no not in the time of the Law; but told them their duties, if they
would be blessed what they must do by way of Gratitude unto him, for his free
donation both of Land it self, and of the increase thereof which was by his
blessing, and providence and that they should give it to the Priests as his
special substitutes that so they might cause the blessing to rest upon their
House, and all that they had.

But he never required the Magistrate to compel them unto these duties which
are properly to himself, no more then to pray, or to offer Sacrifice; all of
which were always left to their free wills, to do, or not do, after they were
once informed that it was their duties, save only by incitements in the Name of
God, which was all the inforcements that ever was used, or commanded to be
used, in the name of men by the Jewish Nation.

However, I grant, that what the Lord commands, it is likewise Lawful for the
Magistrate to command in the name of the Lord; as so Abraham did, and other
Rulers also: but not to compel without his commission any such duty, for in so
doing we both dishonor his Name, and disparage his wisdom, and take his Name
in vain; and likewise so cause others to do the like:

Reas. For he that inforceth any thing to be given unto God without his
commission; he forces it properly to be given to himself, whom they only obey
in such Donation and only give it for his sake; so that no rewards can be
expective from God, for such Donations but from him only. And so the case is
the same in point of Worship: for the Worship tendered, or offered unto God,
either for fear of men, or for favor, respect, or praise of men: Is offered
unto men, and not to God; and so is an Idolizing of the Creature, and fearing,
or honoring, or respecting of it: more then the Creator himself, who is
eternally blessed, and that for evermore.

Nay any such compulsion, is a manifest, and wilful inforcement to the practice
of Hypocrisy, which is an odious sin, in the sight of God, and a manifest
breach of the negative part of the third Commandment. See Exodus 20.7. 1 Pet.
2.1. and 5.23. Let such look to it, who are forward to compel unto such duties:
For the Lord our God, will not hold them guiltless, that either take
themselves, or force others to take his Name in vain.

These are words, as I suppose, both of truth and faithfulness; whether men
will hear, or whether they will forbear that are of the rebelious house. See
Ezekiel. 2.5, 6, 7. and 3.7, 8, 9.

Ob. But because I am not ignorant but that some of those who are eminent in
profession, will account me their enemy because I write these things, and
because they fear the event and success will be evil for the Ministers, if it
should be thus.

Ans. I Answer, in the words of Christ, fear not little flock, it is your
Fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom; if you be of that little flock
for whom the Kingdom is provided, what need you fear, though you fear the
burden of maintenance for the Ministry, shall all be laid upon your shoulders?
Nay though it should be so indeed.

Reas. For was it not so in the Primitive times, and yet there was none that
lacked; And when the Apostles were sent forth without bag, or scrip, or money;
they lacked nothing; Nor when they were sent into all the world, into all
Nations amongst heathens, and strangers, and of strange languages, yet God
provided for them.

And so he will do for you, if you can but trust in him; for it is he that has
said, I will not fail thee, neither forsake thee; and this Promise is yours,
therefore you need not fear, if you be his.

And besides, those who are of the sheep of Christ, whether they be Ministers
or of the meanest of his flock they may justly say with David, Psalm. 23.1. The
Lord is my shepard: And then if they can believe as David did, they may thence
conclude with David, to wit, I shall not want: which is a conclusion that the
greatest Monarch in all the World cannot possibly make from any worldly estate
be it what it can. And the promise is clear and large, that he that sows
liberally, shall also reap liberally; and that not only Temporals, but
Eternals. See 2 Cor. 9. throughout. and Gal. 6.6, to 11. And there is a reason
rendered, to wit, both because God is able to make all grace to abound to
themwards, that are Richly liberal; to give them an all sufficient store of all
things needful, that so they may abound in every good work. See 2 Cor. 9.8.9.
And he is likewise willing, for he that Ministers seed to the sower, will
likewise Minister bread for food, and multiply their seed sown, and increase
the fruits of their Righteousness. See Verse. 10.11.

From all which it is manifest, that giving to the poor, and communicating to
the Ministry, are both held forth, and taught by the Apostle by the same
similitude of sowing, and reaping; And the promise, and threatening is alike
for both; for they are both accounted under the same notion as don, or not don,
to the Lord himself; who is both able, and will certainly reward us liberally,
or sparingly, as we sow this way, so that we need not fear if we can but claim,
and apply his promises, and repose therein, but we shall reap as liberally, as
we can possibly sow, if we do it freely, for the case is so in this as it was
with the Apostle in respect of preaching: If (says he) I do this thing
willingly, I have a reward; but if against my will, a dispensation of the
Gospel is committed unto me. 1 Cor. 9.17.

For if we sow liberally, and do it willingly, we have a reward; but if against
our wills there is none promised, though it lies as a duty Incumbent upon us;
to do it however: and woe unto us if we do it not.

For it is easy to prove that liberal distribution, and communication is a
morral duty that God requires of us: And that he will most certainly, and
severely punish us if we do neglect it;

Though I dare not undertake to prove it moral that we are stinted to a tenth
part, as some have endeavored.

For I can sooner prove, that all that we have is a morral duty, to give unto
God, when need requires; and that he calls for it, then any can prove that a
tenth is requires as his stinted due.

But the rule is this, either, to wit, Every man according as he purposes or
(wishes) in his heart, so let him give not grudgingly nor of necessity for God
loves a cheerful giver. See 2 Cor. 9.7. The Apostle would neither have them
necessitated to it by compulsion, nor to give it so much as grudgingly but in a
free loving, and cheerful manner so as the Lord may love them in so doing, and
bless them abundantly for it; yea that in so doing, they might show the
sincericy of their love. See 2 Cor. 8.8. the which they could not do if they
should be compelled: For what show can be made of love by doing that whereto we
are compeled.

But I must not enlarge any further at present either to prove the morrality of
liberal communication, and distribution as I hope God willing to do ere long;
nor yet to answer oblections of which there is many; and many devices to
propriate Tithes in the hands of the Incumbent: some pleading it from the Law
of God; But others only from the Laws of the Land; as a Civil right; By which
they do so lumble the titles together, that they lose them both, as to the
stating of incumbents in propriety of them, or Impropriators either; and so I
hope they will fall into the proper hands of the Land holders; that so they may
have their own at their own disposing, which will be very much; If it pleases
God to incline the hearts of the now present Power, to abrogate such Laws
whereby Tithes are enforced, either to be paid to the Ministry, or to
Impropriators; who have too long enjoyed sacriligious Inheritance; And too much
likewise, if it be true as some affirm, to wit, That Impropriations are judged
to be twice so much in value, as all the Personages, and Vicarages that are in
Ministers hands; And that the value of them after ten years purchase would
amount to eight Millions:

All which if justly propriate in the hands of the owners would enable them
sufficiently to maintain the Ministry, and the poor besides; and to supply the
wants of all poor places that in barren Countries are not able to maintain them;
Some rich Parishes being valued to be worth two Thousand a Year: The Lord grant
our now present Parliament, corrage, and wisdom to abrogate all Laws whereby
Iniquity is established. See Psalm. 94.20.

For it has long time layne as a shame, and dishonor upon the supreme Power,
and Authority of this Nation, that such manifest Robbery has been not only
tolerated but maintained by Law against justice, and Righteousness; which is
above the Laws as being the end of the Laws: and therefore ought to be the ends
of all that are in Autnority: So that if they cannot by Laws accomplish
justice, so as to break the laws of the wicked, and pull the prey out of their
Teeth, they ought to do it by Power. See Job 29.17.

The Lord grant that our present Power may put on Righteousness, and be clothed
with it: and that there Judgment may be as a Robe, and a Diamond: That so the
God of justice may bless, and prosper them in their great affairs that concern
this life, and may establish their Souls in the full propriety of eternal
happiness in the life to come. See Job. 29.14.

FINIS.

