A SUPPLEMENT TO THE Bibliotheca Parochialis: OR, THE Country Curates Library.
BEING AN ESSAY Toward providing all the Parishes of England, Endowed with not
above Ten Pounds per Annum, with a Study of Useful BOOKS, to enable the
Ministers thereof to Instruct the People in all things necessary to SALVATION.

By THOMAS BRAY, D.D.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Clavel, at the Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard,
MDCXCVII.

To All who are Lovers of the Souls of those for whom Christ Dyed.
THAT there are such even in this Frozen Age and Country, and who being of a
Public Spirit, are not only Able but Willing, to do any thing they can be made
sensible will be for a Common Good, is to be hoped, or at leastwise to be
wished. But that which is the chiefest of all Goods, the Cultivating the Minds
and Manners of Men with Divine Knowledge, and Christian Virtues, seems not to
be thought of, however not to be promoted by such proper and immediate Methods
as it easily might. Schools and Colleges (God be praised) we have sufficient to
send us out Laborers for the Vineyard; and from thence there come more than
enough to supply all the Cures of the Kingdom. But alas, when they are come
Abroad, there are scarce one Third of our Parochial Preferments which can
enable our Clergy to furnish themselves with those necessary helps, whereby
they may be serviceable in any tolerable measure to the good of Souls: And yet
I find few do cast their Eyes upon this sort of Charity, the raising of
Libraries for this End and Purpose.

But whatever others may think of it, to me this seems to be a prime part of
Christian Charity; and the most wanted too in this Kingdom; And I doubt not but
it will in like manner appear to all others, who will but consider these
following Particulars; namely,

I. That as the Soul of Man is Infinitely more valuable than the Body, so that
Charity which goes toward the Cultivating the Minds and Manners of Men with
Divine Knowledge, and Christian Graces, whereby they may be made meet to be
Partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light, must needs be of a far
more exalted Nature, than that which Terminates only upon the welfare of this
Mortal Life.

II. That by an exact Scrutiny into the Value of our Livings, it will be found,
that there are 200 Parishes, and upwards, in England, Wales, and the Isle of
Dan, Endowed with not above Ten Pounds per Annum for the maintenance of a
Minister, with which Provision it is utterly Impossible he should furnish
himself with Books, whereby he might be able to give those Souls, committed to
his Charge, due Instructions in all the mere Necessaries to Salvation.

III. It will therefore follow, that those Persons who abound in this World's
Goods, and especially whom Providence seems in a more peculiar manner to have
designed to be Public Benefactors to Mankind, by giving 'em good Estates,
without Heirs to enjoy their Riches; it will therefore follow, I say, that such
will approve themselves both to God and Man, most Divinely Charitable, who
shall bestow some of the forementioned Libraries for the perpetual Use of the
Ministers of such Places, in order to Capacitate them to save the Souls of Men.

IV. As by this means such Charitable Persons will become at a second hand, and
in an Inferior degree, as it were, Apostles to the World, by Preaching through
the Mouths of these Ministers to the People, and will have a share in all the
Conversions which shall be made in such places to all succeeding Generations;
so to induce 'em thereunto they need no more than to meditate upon those words
of the Prophet, Dan. 12.3. They that are wise, or, Teachers, as it is in the
Original, shall shine as the Brightness of the Firmament, and they that turn
many to Righteousness, as the Stars for ever and ever.

I shall not enlarge on these Particulars, I think they carry their own
Evidence along with 'em, all of 'em, except the second, and a little Insight
into the present State of the Clergy, will make that appear to be matter of
Fact. And the rest need no Illustration. And now if the Case of the Church in
this Nation be really so, I conjure all those who love to see the Image of God,
Imprinted upon the Souls of Men, to furnish, as our Plantations abroad, so our
poor Vicaridges at home, with what may enable us to erace that Ignorance, and
Barbarity, those Brutish Manners, and Paganish Vices and Customs, which do to
this day so hideously deform the greatest part of Mankind. We cannot now work
Miracles, nor is Inspiration any part of our Talent; but we are left to the
ordinary Means to fit our selves for this great Work of Converting the World;
namely, the common measures of God's Holy Spirit, accompanying our hard Study.
But how can they Study who have not Books to read? Those who were never pinched
with narrow Preferments may not be sensible of this want, because they have
been able to furnish themselves sufficiently with Books. But those whose Incoms
from the Church never enabled 'em to purchase the fourth part of the Authors
they have occasion to peruse, in order to discharge the ordinary Duties of
their Ministry, can speak feelingly in this matter.

I know there is nothing a more a common Jest than the Poverty, and Ignorance
of the Poor Clergy in Wales, and the Northern parts of this Kingdom; but this
Jest in my Opinion, is the Nations shame, who provide not better for 'em. And
provide 'em but with Books, and they would be neither Ignorant, Poor, nor
Scandalous; not Ignorant, for Books do by an immediate Causality remove that
Imputation; not so very Poor as now, for I have known Good Men, and Lovers of
Learning kept under hatches all their life time, chiefly by their being
Bookishly given, and indebted to Booksellers; nor Scandalous, for I know that
many whose Immoralities are said to be a Reproach to their Function, who yet in
all probability had never become such Men, if they had been possessed of Good
Books, wherewith they might have employed their time in reading; for want of
which it is, that some perhaps may have sought their Diversion in Alehouses,
and in a Santring way of Life.

But alas! The want of Books is not of the tenth part of that ill Consequence,
as it affects the Minister, to what it is, as it affects the People. If it
could only be considered as affecting the former, it would be but a Private,
and Single Misfortune; but since it cannot but extremely much affect the
latter, it is a Public Calamity. For why? Where the Priests Lips cannot
preserve, cannot procure Knowledge, how should the People seek the Law at his
Mouth? And alas where Ignorance, and Darkness Universally Reign in any part of
the World, and the People are destitute of Divine Knowledge, innumerable are
the Miseries, and dreadful are the Sins, which Reign in such places; Between
Superstition, and Atheism such People are equally divided. Fornications, and
Adulteries are accounted but the common Infirmities of their great ones, and
Perjuries in the Courts of Judicature are^ part of the Services they exact of
their Inferiors: And to be Sons of Violence is common to all; for as was seen
in our former Ages of Ignorance in this Nation, and is still the Constitution
of Barbarous Countries elsewhere, the Great Ones with their Followers are no
better than Public Robbers, ever and anon making Ravages upon some Neghbouring
Petty Lord, and his Vassals, and all of 'em a sort of tolerated Banditty
continually Preying, and being Preyed upon by each other. Such, and many others
are the Violations of Just and Right, of God's Laws, yea and of the very Laws
of Nature, which arise from this bitter Fountain of Ignorance of the true
Nature of God, and of Religion; whereas on the other side, unspeakable are the
Benefits consisting in Justice, Mercy and Peace; in Piety toward God, and well
ordered Affections as to our selves, where, by means of an Intelligent, Pious,
and Industrious Clergy (those great Benefactors to Mankind) the People are
thoroughly enlightened with the Knowledge of God, and the true Nature of Pure and
Undefiled Religion, as it is in James 1.27.

I say, of Pure and Undefiled Religion, a Religion that is unmixt with the
Alloys of mere Systematical, and Precarious Tenets on the one hand, or
Superstitious, and Idolatrous Usages on the other. And such is the
Constitution, as near as can be, of this little Catalogue, which follows. It is
Composed of such Pious Men's Works, who have Imbibed their Principles from our
Church Catechism, and in writing consonantly to that, I am sure they cannot Err
either to the Right, or to the Left in Religion. And because I would rather
desire to see such Libraries fixed in those Poor places for which I am so
Zealous, than any one Good I can wish for the Church, I have made up the
Catalogue of such Books for the most part, as have their Authors now living, or
are at leastwise most easily acquirable, being Common, and in our English
Tongue.

And since I have assumed to my self to be an Advocate in the behalf of my Poor
Brethren, and their respective Flocks; let me entreat such of our Dignified
Authors, who have written so Piously, and Devotionally, to exemplify the
sincerity of that Spirit, which does appear in their Writings, by bestowing of
their Books to the ptrposes for which I here Solicit 'em. And also I do
earnestly request our Richer Citizens, who by many, and repeated Providential
Hitts have been advanced to great Fortunes; and do therefore peculiarly owe
grateful Returns to God, to think upon this of Bestowing Little Libraries
Instructive in the Essentials of Christianity, as the most Natural, and Adapted
way whereby they can testify such their Gratitude: But above all, I must
desire those, Whom Providence, as I said before, seems in a more peculiar
manner to have designed to be Public Benefactors to Mankind, by giving 'em
good Estates without Heirs to enjoy their Riches; particularly I desire them to
consider this matter, and that by this means they would make to themselves
Friends in Heaven of the Mammon of Unrighteousness, rather than like David's
Fool, heap to themselves Riches, not knowing who shall gather them. And that
instead of being foolishly Solicitous to find out some one, from they might
call their Lands after own Name (fondly thinking that by this means, their
Houses shall continue for ever, and their Dwelling-places to all Generations)
that they would rather by such Charity to the Souls of Men, as is here
proposed, provide that their Names may be written in the Book of Life, thence
never to be obliterated. And indeed I must not pass by any of those, whose
ample Fortunes shall enable 'em, or Pious Souls shall incline 'em to imitate
their Great Master in doing good, without minding 'em of the Excellency and
Usefulness of this sort of Charity.

Now our Ancient Founders of Colleges, those Brave, Large, and Elevated Souls!
Generally expressed their peculiar Tenderness to their Native Country, or to
those places of abode, to which they owed most, by qualifying Persons of such
Diocesses, or Counties respectively, for the benefit of their Foundations. And
the same Method of Charity I shall here adventure to recommend to those, I do
now Address. Let such whose Conditions shall enable 'em to bestow one, two, or
more of these Diminutive Libraries, cast their Pitying Eyes upon those Ten
Pound Curacies, whether Parishes or Chappelries, near unto 'em, and extend
their Benefactions in this way to as many of 'em, as their Circumstances shall
enable 'em. But as for those whose Worldly Acquisitions are very great, and can
render themselves a Blessing to whole Provinces; let them look toward Wales,
the Isle of Man, and other Northern parts of this Kingdom. And indeed it is a
matter of sad Consideration to see how Barbarous, and Ignorant those places now
mentioned, do still remain, notwithstanding that the Gospel shines in other
parts of the Nation with a Meridian Brightness; the reason is the small
Provision made for its Encouragement in those Parts, whereas in all reason the
greatest Encouragement ought to be given there, where Nature is most unkind,
and uninviting, to Balance the Inconveniences thereof. And I am verily
persuaded, that if Books were fixed in those parts, as ungrateful as is the
Climate, Men of Worth would follow them, it being natural for Persons who are
Lovers of Knowledge and Religion, to value all Places alike where Religion and
Learning do flourish.

Nor let any be discouraged from bestowing these Books, out of fear they should
be Imbezel'd, Lost, or Converted to a Private Use, for there may be sufficient
Care taken to secure them through all the Succession of Ministers in such
Places; 1st. By Lettering 'em on the Covers to what Parish they belong. 2dly,
By making Registers of 'em to be left with the Bishop, and his Archdeacons, in
whose Jurisdictions such Places shall happen to be. And 3dly, By the Yearly
Visitation of the Archdeacon, or of such of the Clergy whom he shall Depute to
see that they be not Imbezel'd, Lost, or Spoiled. After all these Precautions,
there seems no place for the least fear they should be ever Lost. But if they
should be any wise Alienated, by the mere Lettering of them, they may as easily
be discovered, and owned, as any Living Creature by its Ear-mark.

And now I only desire such to whom I Apply, to consider, how Comfortable, how
Joyful it will be to those Pious and Charitable Persons we have already found
upon this occasion; and to those who shall add themselves to the number; I
desire such to consider what a Jubilee it will be to them, when the Judge of all
the World shall sit upon his August Tribunal, surrounded with Angels; and when
the Register of all Men's Actions shall be opened, to hear the Record of this
their Love to God, and Pity to the Souls of Men publicly read, Angels and
Saints applauding them.

And indeed if any are Piously Ambitious of the Highest Stations in the Kingdom
of Glory, of becoming Courtiers, and Favorites to King of kings; it is
Professedly and Sincerely my Oppinion, that next to what the Apostles did to
Evangelize the World.; Such Charities as these, which have the most Immediate,
and Direct Tendency to Convert Mankind to God, will be the most ready way to
Recommend, and Qualify a Pious Soul for such a Dignity: And I think I have the
Authority of an Infallible Testimony for what I say, for which reason I must
again repeat it, They that are wise, or Teachers, shall shine as the Brightness
of the Firmament, and they that turn many to Righteousness, as the Stars for
ever and ever.

A Catalogue of Books Fitted to the Condition and Circumstances OF A Country
Curate; AND Disposed into that Order, in which, if an Initiate in Theology, he
may most Profitably read them.
I. FIrst, For the better understanding of the Text, Heideggeri Enchiridion
Biblicum, Analysi Generali singulorum Vet. and N. Test. Librorum, and Capitum
Argumento, unice inserviens. 8o. N. Hic Liber in quotidianis Sacrarum
Scripturarum Lectionibus, ut mibi videtur, apprime utilis. Bishop Patrick's
Paraphrases on Job, Psalms, Proverbs, and Ecclesiastes, 5 Vol. 8o. Dr.
Hammond's Annotations on the New Testament, Fol. Oxford Paraphrase on St.
Paul's Epistles. 8o. Bishop Patrick's Search the Scriptures. A Treatise showing
that all Christians ought to read the Holy Books, with Directions to them
therein. The Word of God the best Guide to all Persons. Being a Collection of
Scripture Texts, showing such things as are necessary for every Christians
Knowledge and Practice, 8o.


II. For a General Catechetical Body. First, By way of Comment upon our
Articles and Church Catechism. Dris. Ellis 39 Articuli. Bishop William's Brief
Exposition of the Church Catechism, with Proofs from Scripture, 8o. Or, Dr.
Isham's Scriptural Catechism, 8o. Dr. Barrow on the Creed, Ten Commandments,
and Doctrine of the Sacraments, 8o. Mr. Rawlet on the Creed, Ten Commandments,
and Lord's-Prayer, 8o.
Secondly, In a more voluntary and Arbitrary Method. Dr. Hammond's Practical
Catechism, 8o. Sir Matthew Hale's Knowledge of God and our selves, 8o. Gouge's
Explanation of the Principles of the Christian Religion, with Practical
Applications to each Head, 8o. Dr. Scot's Works, 4 Vol.



III. Upon the Covenant of Grace, and Baptismal Covenant in General. Mr.
Allen's Discourse on the two Covenants, 8o. Catechetical Lectures, First Vol.
Fol. Mr. Rawlet on Sacramental Covenanting with God.


IV. Upon the Particular Articles of the Covenant of Grace, both on God's part,
and on Man's. First, The Mercies on God's Part. 1. Justification, or Pardon of
Sin. Mr. W. Allen on Justification. Dr. Bates's Sermons on Forgiveness, 8o.
2. On Divine Assistance. Mr. Allen on Divine Assistance.
3. Upon Everlasting Life and Happiness. Bishop Taylor's Contemplations on the
State of Man, 8o.

Secondly, The Conditions to be performed on our part. 1. The whole body of
Christian Faith, or some of its Great Articles. Bishop Pearson on the Creed,
Fol. Mr. Kettlewel's Christian Believer, 8o. Bishop Ken's Exposition of the
Creed. Dr. Barrow's Discourse on the Trinity. Or, Bishop Stilling fleet on the
Doctrine of the Holy Trinity. -- On the Satisfaction of Christ. Dr. Bates's
Harmony of Divine Attributes in the Great Business of Man's Salvation, 8o. Dr.
Sherlock on Death, 8o. -- On Judgment, 8o.
2. On the Commandments and Christian Duties. Bishop Hopkins on the
Commandments, 4o. Mr. Rawlet's Christian Monitor. 8o. Whole Duty of Man, 8o.
Mr. Kettlewel's measures of Christian Obedience. 8o.
3. On Repentance. Dr. Ingelo on Repentance, 8o. Dr. Goodman's
Penitent-Pardon'd, 8o. Mr. Ellis of the Necessity of serious Consideration, and
speedy Repentance, as the only way to be safe both Living and Dying, 8o. Bishop
Patrick on Repentance, and the Lent-Fast, 8o.




V. Upon the Means of performing the Covenant, viz. Prayer, and the Sacrament.
First, Upon Prayer. Bishop Hopkins upon the Lord's-Prayer, 4o. Bishop Patrick's
Discourse on Prayer, 12o. -- Devout Christian, 12o. Dr. Pelling's Discourse on
Prayer, 8o. Dr. Comber's Discourses on the whole Common Prayer, 8o.
Secondly, On the Sacraments. Bishop Patrick's Aqua genitalis, at the end of
his Mensa mystica, with the Mensa mystica, 8o. -- Christian Sacrifice, 12o. --
Of frequent Communion, 8o. Mr. Kettlewel on the Sacrament, 8o.



VI. Sermons. Archbishop Tillotson's Sermons, Fol. -- His Posthumous Sermons,
4 Vol. 8o. Dorrington's Sermons, 2 Vol. 8o. Kettlewel's Posthumous Discourses,
8o. Sir Matthew Hales Contemplations, 3 Parts 8o.


VII. Directions and helps in visiting the Sick. Dr. Wake upon Death, 12o.
Kettlewel's Companion to the Penitent, 12o. -- Death made comfortable, 12o.


VIII. Ministerial Instructions. Herbert's Country Parson, 12o. Bishop Burnet's
Pastoral Care, 8o. Bibliotheca Parochialis, 4o.


IX. Preservatives. First, Of our Church Communion against Dissenters. Mr. W.
Allen's Works. Bishop King's Inventions of Men in the Worship of God, 8o.
Secondly, Against the vulgar Deism, and the manifold, and desperate Heresies of
the Quakers. Snake in the Grass, 8o. Satan Disrobed, 4o.


X. History. Eusebius's Ecclesiastical History, Translated by Dr. Shorten, Or,
Ellies Du Pin's Ecclesiastical History, 3 Vol. Fol. Or, Bishop Burnet's
Abstract of the History of the Reformation, 8o.



