INNOCENCE AND THE Blood of the slain Soldiers, and People, mightily
complaining, and crying out to the Lord, and the People of the Land, Against
those Forty Knights and Burgesses, or thereabouts, that sit in the House of
COMMONS.

For the violation of our Capital Fundamental Laws and Liberties, and those
Capital Obligations mentioned in this my Letter, in capital Letters.

Or a LETTER to an Eight years SPEAKER of the House of COMMONS.

By Cap. William Bray, from his indurance, illegal, un-Christian, and cruel
Gaol in Windsor Castle.

Exodus 5.21. And Pharaoh said, Who is the Lord, that I should obey his voice to
let Israel go? I know not the Lord (I know my unrighteous power and force)
neither will I let Israel go. London, Printed in the Year 1649.

A LETTER To an Eight years SPEAKER OF THE House of Commons.
Master Speaker,
I Did determine in resignation to the will of the Lord, not to write unto your
House any more; but the Lord does make it free, to make you the more
inexcusable, and also with this peradventure in my own reason, That God may
change your spirits; and sithence, I have intelligence, as if there were an Act
styled, Grace coming forth from your House, unto the Levellers and Prisoners;
therefore, now I am free beyond my own expectations from you, and intentions in
my self.

It is said in Scripture, Isaiah 14.20 That the seed of evil doers shall never
be renowned; the good people of the Land had certainly reason to expect, That
you that have destroyed, and dishonored others for injustice, should walk in
the path of renown your selves; whether you have done so, let the whole world
judge; yea, whether you have done so since you have cut off the King, let the
world judge.

I have read, That there was a Temple of Honor among the Romans, and before it
a stately Porch, dedicated to Virtue; to notify, That in that Commonwealth,
there was no hope of Dignity, but to tread in the path of desert. And Aristotle
discoursing of Honor, makes four parts thereof; the first of Rich^s, the second
of Blood, the third of Learning, the fourth of Virtue; and to the two last, he
does describe the first place of true Gentry, and one speaking thereof, says,
Because Boors may be rich, and Rakebels may be of ancient blood; but Virtue and
Knowledge cannot harbor, but where God and Nature has left their Noble
endowments; but you would have the world think you are Christians, which is a
name, that has its denomination from that unction of the Spirit, and yet you
walk beneath the Law of Nature: Are you honorable then?

And Aristotle discoursing of Temperance and Fortitude, says, That Temperance
is a Virtue whereby a man governs himself according to Law, and that Fortitude
is a Virtue by which a man carries himself honorably, and according to the Laws
in time of danger.

And I remember that the Parliament always told the King, that if h^ would
subscribe to the L^ws and Liberties of the peoples peace and safety, they would
make him a most glorious King by which I do infer, there is no true honor but
in that way, yet what occasion do you give to the Kings party to say, would
these have been faithful ^o the King, that are perfidious to their own friends,
and destroy them in their Liberties contrary to the Laws of God, Nature, and
the Nation? the King had ground to suspect them, they will say.

Magistracy when they act by the rules of th ir own wills, they do not act as
Magistrates but as Tyrants so King James his Speech to the Parliament at White
H^ll 1609 and the first part of the ^arliaments Declarations, 150. And Dr.
Stoughton in his Bo^k of Sermons Preached before King James, speaking of wicked
Magistrates, says, They ^ill by Autho^ity, and yet ask^ the peoples money for
their pains.

God never constituted Au^hority, but gave precepts and bounds to that
authority, I^a. 30 18. Is^. 6^ 8. Psalm. 82.61. Exodus 18.21. and 23 26.8. Deuteronomy.
1.16.17. and 16 19. and 25.1. 2 Chronicles. 19.6.7. I^a. 1.23, 24. J^r 5.28, 29 and
22.16, 17, 18. Amos 5 12. and 6.12, 14 M^ca. 3.9.11 Z^c. 8.16, 17.
as I declared to you in my Letter, D^ut. 16 17. and in nine other places of
Scripture there recited, but they that care not for one, will not care for
nine; b^sid^s, there a^e many more that I could recite; Personal Authority or
Magistracy are ^sp^cially bounded by just Laws, and they are to do unto
others, as they would have others to do unto them, for this is the Law and the
Prophets, as Christ says not to deal unjustly, as they would not be dealt
unjustly with; not to commit murder, as they themselves would not be murdered:
Adomb^z k found the righteteous God, a just executioner of the Law of like for
like upon him, th^eescore and t^n Kings having their thumbs and great to^s cut
off, ga^hered their meat und r my table; As I have done, so God (says the
Pag^n) has requited me, and Jam. 2 13.

And Mr. Solicitor St. John said in Parliament, (of King, Lords, and Commons)
against the Earl of Strafford, That an Arbitrary man is an Achan, a miserable
accursed thing, etc. And my Lords, says he, Frustra legis auxilium inv^cat qui
in leg^m committit; ^or he that will not suffer others to have Law, why should
he have any himself? why should not that be done to him that h^ would have done
to others, and calls Arbitrary men V^^^mine, Polcats, Foxes, Wolves, B^asts of
Prey; (Personal Gov rnment is to k^ep Vermin, Polcats, Foxes, Wolves, Lions,
etc. from d^vouring, but not to b^ such th^ms^lves) and, says he, it was never
accounted cruelty or foul play to knock Foxes and Wolves on the head as th y
may be found, because, says he, they be beasts of pr^y: O Lord, what a
thundering zealous Common wealths man was this then to preserve the people from
spoil?

Mr. Pym said against the Earl of Straffo^d, Th^re A^bit^ary and unlimited
power is let up, a way is open f^r the security, adv^ncem^nt, and encourag^ment
of evil, and those that will be instrument^ of any unjust commands, and that
those that make a conscience of the Laws and Liberties of the people are
unpassible for imploy^^nt and subject to much jealousy and danger.

And the Army in their Declarations and Grandees, peculiarly when they ^end and
ear a Parliament to pieces, they bring Justice and Righteousness in the mou^h,
page 10. complained, That the friends to the Nation and them, were dragged to
Goales, [but now a Goal, and an illegal one too, is my por^ion] That the
Commanders that did not stand fast in their integrity should be marked with a
brand of infamy for ever, as traitors to their Country, and enemies to the Army
[but now they have the power, no Traitors] June 9 p. 14. The, glorious
administration of Justic^; without Justice no comfort of life [or so much as
life it self but according unto the pleasure of some men, ruling merely
according to will and power, but now power in them used worse, is not the same]
Page 39 40.41.42 That Justice and Righteousness then was one of the witnesses
of God [then it is now the same] That they were no Emissary A^my, h^red to
serve any Arbitrary power of State [but their Arbitrary power of State] That
they were sensible of complaints, Arbitrariness, Oppressions, and Injustice
[but now a man cannot have Justice from these they have left in the House [for
them] That they would not have an absolute or Arbitrary power f^und in any]
could not wish to have it in any whom they most confided in, or who should
appear most of their opinion and Principles [is this truth?] That they were for
Parliamentary authority rightly constituted [when will it be performed, when
they please, or when the people please?] and that they should not be during
pleasure, or have an unlimited power, and so an advantage to perpetuate
injustice without end or remedy [but now the party they left, must] Page 61.
that a liberty of d^ss^nt^ should be in the House of Commons, that the people
might see who was fa^th^ul [I wish we had the Grandees Speeches Printed to the
Nation since they made such a purge^ that the Privledges of Parliament should
not be extended to private wrong, or public ras^h^^ [but their power and
privilege may extend to private and public wrong without controul] because
Parliament Privileges as well as r^yall Prerogative may be perverted and
^bused [but theirs not] Charged several Memb rs, that they inv^ded, infring^d,
and indeavour^d to overthrow the rights of the people, and obstructed Justice,
to the damage of many Commoners [if so then, is it not much more now?] And
their last Remonstrance from St A^bans, page 10. Cried out the people were mad^
to depend main^y upon the King for all [and are not the people made to depend
upon them for all, whether Justice or no Justice] that his Interest was made
necessary to all, that other pretenses were but made use of to serve his ends,
end to make an easy way to set up him and his Interest above all [let rational
m^n judge whether their practice is not so.] Page 16 17. That no Common C^un^ l
or Parliaments should check him; [Dare the Parliament check him when I cannot
have a hearing against him?] that all orbitrary powers might be exercised at
pleasure by himself, and such as he pleased to d r^v^ the same unto [do not the
Grandees tread in the same steps aboundingly?] that snares and chains were laid
upon conscienci^us and z^alous men to countenanc^ blind reverence of persons
sit for Popery and Slav^ry [is not the Generals etc. end the same according to
his works?] p. 21. rend ing it a b^and of d^shonor and infamy in him, to pr^f^r
such a^ had a mixture of ambition and v^in g^o^y, ^^ndring them fit to (...)
and greatn^ss for the enjoying some share t^erein to th^mselv^s [are not such m
n ^hei^ only d^rling^* witness their actions;] for me to spe^k to these more
then golden woe ds, is but A^ram in^o ma^^ are.

Oh then ^igh and mighty God and Judge! Judge thou the cause of thy people,
remember the blood that has been spilt for our Laws and Liberties to purchase
our peace and safety And ^ir. Solicitor ^eok, your Orator, in his bo^k st lled
K^^g Charles his Case, which will be an everlasting monument against you, if you
continue to walk unjustly, p^g* 3^ says he, the King deported himself as a
God, and says he, innocent blood will aff ight more then twelve legions of
Devils, (do not they deport themselves as Gods when they act as living above
Law?) Do you do justice that you might live unjustly? did you cut him off to
send him to be accountable to God, that would not be accountable unto man, that
you might live here in the same principle and practice as unaccountable unto
men? would it not be just with God if you tread in the same paths, to inflame
and raise up the spirits of your brethren the Commoners, to make you
accountable unto God also, Are not the Lords ways past finding out, and is not
he just in all his Judgments? page 38. that an accursed principle of Tyranny
lodged within him (viz.) to be accountable to none but to God, which have
turned our waters of LAW into blood; have not the fruits of the same principles
(though they have pretended other principles, as the King did, (viz.) (That his
Monarchy was not an absolute, but a well bounded Monarchy, by Law) been
actually seen in them? and are not they in a leading way to turn water of Law
into blood and blood, page 38. that he had been of Counsel against felons and
prisoners, but that he never moved the Court to Judgment against any felon, or
to keep any man in prison, but he trembled at it in his thoughts, as thinking
it would be easier to give an account of mercy and indulgence, then of any
thing that might look like rigor: but now my spirits says he, are of another
temper; but you imp^ison the innocent against Law, Reason, Christian
Principles, your own Declarations, the Vows, Covenants, Engagements, and
imprecations of ^arliament, and you have proceeded higher then any to engage
you to Justice: viz. the blood of the King to b^ot, page 42. that sentence was
not only against one Tyrant, but tyranny it self; therefore says he, if any of
them shall turn Tyrants, or consent to set up any kind of Tyranny by a Law, or
suffer any unmercifull domineering over the persons, Consciences, or estates of
the free people of this Land, They have pronounced sentence against themselves;
But do not they endeavor to secure themselves against the Laws of heaven and
nature; and to act by unreasonableness, mere power and force? by which accursed
principle the Lord Jesus, and all Christians have been murdered formerly by
corrupt Authority.

Oh Lord arise, and judge, and behold, how they make v^yd the blood of thy
people, and what is their declared zeal, and impartial Justice upon the blood
of the King come unto.

You have imprecated the wrath and vengeance of Heaven and Earth to light upon
you, if you did not maintain the Fundamental Laws and Liberties of the people,
and call upon the people to say AMEN; and that you had no aims at your selves,
but wholly at the public; see and compare together the first part of the
book, Dec. page 17. 18. 214. 264. 266. 267 400. 462. 464. 466. 673. 588. 666
573. 692. Is not God just? I am troubled at your condition, though I rejoice in
my own.

Again, you have revoked one Fast day, and made another; and declared that
there was much guilt in taking Gods name in vain; And that there was a
proneness to relapse into the former condition of Tyranny and superstition; But
I hope you did not resolve it when you said you were prone to it; And you
desire that God would heal the division of your Land; But do you go the way of
God? And do not you divide, if you deal unjustly? The Kings Fast was on a
Friday, and he dealt unjustly; the Parliaments Fast on a Wednesday; and now you
have changed the Fast a day nearer to the Kings; If your injustice be the same,
what material difference between a Thursday, and a Friday Fast? Does not
Arbitrariness and injustice cause division? The Psalmist says, Ps. 85.10.
Righteousness and Peace does kiss each other; and not Tyranny and peace, or
policy and peace, Z^ch. 8 16, 17, 19 Execute ye the Judgment of truth and
peace, love the truth and peace, Isay 58 4, 5, 6. Zach. 7 5, 6. When ye fasted
and mourned the fifth and s v^n^h mon^th even those s^venty years, did ye at
all fast unto me? and when ye d^d ^at, and when y^ did d^ink, d^d you not eat
for your selves, and drink to your selves? Oh Lord arise, and judge between thy
people and the Grandees of the peoples Army and Parliament, and oh Lord convert
them if it be thy will; and let them not be any longer as if they were supreme
to Justice and Freedom, and let them be that in deed which they have been
often in word.

Sir, Let me tell you, I have observed your Ordinance for observation of the
Sabbath also, but this is also delusive to the people; if you do not rest from
wickedness, arbitrariness and cruelty, according to the constitution and end of
authority, both by God and the people; for the Sabbath signifies a rest to the
people of God; What is a Magistrates keeping a Fast or a Sabbath once a month,
or a seventh day of a week, if he acts arbit^ariness illegally and cruelly,
contrary to the Laws of God, Nature, and the Land, six of the seven?

Those three Students, and only three that I have read of Trinity College in
Cambridge that writ in your justification of your proceedings against the King,
say, That when any man, or men, through depraved principles of tyranny usurp
over Conscience, natural or civil Rights, he loses the notion of a
Magistrate, because he goes contrary to the end of Government, of the
fundamental Laws of safety to the people; and when Res Publica comes to be Res
Privata, it cease to be a Commonwealth, and is then tyranny.

Again, I desire you to consider that the part of the Solemn Oath and Covenant,
which you have taken which relates to the Rights, Freedoms, and Laws of the
people, is just, unanswerable, irrevokable, essential, substantial, and
binding; though the person of the King and Lords be taken away by you: do you
intend to King it, and Lord it over our Laws and Liberties? Psalm. 15.1.4. Lord
who shall abide in thy Tabernacl^? he that swoareth to his own hurt, and
changes not.

But you have sworn the good (and not hurt) of the people, and your own good
(and not hurt) in it, but if you leave the good of the people, and consequently
your own true honor and good, and act Arbitrarily and unfaithfully, you leave
peace of conscience to your selves, and peace and satisfaction to the people. I
should be glad for the peoples sakes and your sakes if you can be free from the
guilt of Perjury in the sight of the Lord and the people that are impartial;
Good Josiah rent his clothes when the Book of the Law was found, and when the
Ordinances were not kept; and it was the Wisdom, Justice, and Honor of the
Parliament, in their Primitive constitutions, for which they had the
incomparable love of the people, before they did divide, and subdivide into
faction and parties, to inquire into the just Laws of the Nation, and into the
highest Reason for enlargement of our freedoms, and complained against the King
for exceeding the just limits of Honor and Law: but how shall the people be
assured of the perfection of Freedom by these men, when those just and
righteous Laws of God and Nature, and the Nation formerly and already made as
Laws, and wrung from Politicians, Tyrants, Conquerors, Usurpers, and contended
for this eight or nine years unto precious blood, are so much violated?

Truly Mr. Speaker, let me tell you, we shall never have peace until Authority
come to lay down Interest, and to act as Magistracy, as Authority; What do
Interests tend to, and mere power, but to murder and destruction, and to make a
Nation miserable, though one man great, full of war, and to make a second
Germany of England? Interests tend to nothing but to this (viz.) Suppose an
Independent, it may be murdered to day, or unjustly dealt withal to his ruin,
and the Inquisition for the Innocent blood may be is secured by an Interest; A
Presbyterian, it may be murdered to morrow, and the murder it may be secured by
an Interest; had an Episcopal also, who though he has, it may be justly paid
his Fine and Composition for his Delinquencie, and is in Law and Reason
excluded as to matter of Power, according to the Judgments of Parliaments, and
a just Agreement of the people, because he has used it against the peoples
Laws and Liberties, yet he cannot have personal Justice in futurity according
to Law and Reason, because of Interests, and so a Nation is in the rode way to
destruction; and then every Interest it may be endevors (being enraged) to
revenge the murder and injustice, because they cannot have legal or judicial
Judgment, and so all Interests are slaves to one Interest; and all are engaged
against one (as well as may be) one against another; if any such thing is up,
called Interest, and act above, contrary unto, and without LAW.

And truly Mr Speak^r, let me tell you* as I have already proved, and shall
prove by Law, Reason* and Ch^istianity, Those forty Gentlemen in the House, or
thereabouts, have committed me illegally, partially, and interessedly, contrary
to CAPITAL Obligations of God to man, man to God, and mankind, common,
undeniable, indisput^ble, and binding Principles of NATURE, LAW, REASON,
SCRIPTU^ES, DECLARATIONS upon DECLARATIONS, IMPRECATIONS, OATHS, COVENANTS,
CONSCIENCE, ENGAGEMENTS, VICTORIES, VICTORIES, AGREEMENTS, FASTS, HONOR, the
very name of PARLIAMENTS Sabbaths, Magistrates, Gov^^nment, Wounds, Bloodshed.
, BLOOD, BLOOD, both of friends and enemies; rendering a PARLIAMENT out of zeal
for Justice. The blood of the KING declared to stand in the way of the peoples
RIGHTS, FREEDOM, JUSTICE, MERCY.

Just Laws are made to batter down all the walls of unmercifulness,
arbitrariness, and cruelty, and to justify Freedom; and the force of a Nation
should be to maintain the just Laws and Liberties of the people; the contrary
is Cruelty and Murder.

You have made the late KING a notable spectacle amongst the rarest examples of
worldly fragility; and this was declared and pretended to be, for acting
contrary to the R^ghts of the people, which engaged him unto abundance of blood
for his own safety, though his extravagancies in Government and Arbitrariness
amongst the people, might have been composed certainly, if his end had not been
to carry on an absolute domination over the peoples Laws, Liberties, and
persons: And the corruptions of his heart, and Government, and of his evil
Counselors, caused jealousies and fear of his own life and honor; whereas he
might have had both, if he would have stooped to the Laws, and Liberties of the
people, and the peoples Representatives, and free Parliament; but his heart was
hardened, as Pharaohs, for judgment. It is a sad thing, when a man has
committed injustice, or murder, contrary to the plain inbred Light of Nature,
and the Laws of Scripture, and Nations, and goes on to commit more and more
murder, and injustice, for his personal safety; whereas, a Christian had
rather die in his innocence, then commit murder, or out of design, to do
injustice.

The Law of England is said to be extreme tender, and favorable of a man's
liberty and freedom. See Sir Edward Cooks 29. Chapter of Magna Charta, 2 part.
Instit. sol. 42. also 189 515. Because the Gaol in the eye of the Law, is a bad
or hard mansion or dweling, 4 Edw. 3. cap. 3. They that will unjustly and
arbitrarily imprison, they are in a forward way to add to their impiety, and
to commit murder upon the people. Injustice is a Tyrants rode way to murder,
and the harbenger of Tyrants in all ages: And I shall desire you for your own
sakes, to avoid that Rock of Injustice and Oppression, for there are many eyes
upon you, besides the eyes of the eternal Majesty of God.

And the sin of blood is of a Skarlet Dye, and of a crying Nature, Gen 49.6, 7.
O my soul, join not thou into their secret; unto their assembly, mine honor, be
not thou united; for in their anger they slew a man, and in their self will
they dug down a wall. Cursed be their anger, for it was since; and their
wrath, for it was cruel. I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in
Israel: Though David's wound was healed by remission, yet the blemish remained;
that blood should never depart from his house, for the blood of one Vriah. Number
35.31, 33* Moreover, ye shall take no satisfaction for the life of a murderer,
that is guilty of death, but he shall surely be put to death. Blood defiles
the Land; and the Land cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shed therein,
but by the blood of him that shed it. 1 Kings 2.5, 6. Moreover, thou know
what Joab the son of Zerviah did to me, and what he did to the two Captain, of
the Hosts of Israel, unto Abner the son of Ner, and unto Amasa the son of
Jether, whom he sl w, and sh^d the blood of war in peace, and put the blood of
war upon his girdle that was about his loins, and in his shoes that were on
his feet. Do therefore according to thy wisdom, and let not his hoary head go
to the grave in peace. Exodus 21.14. If a man come presumptuously upon his
neighbor, to slay him with guile; thou shall take him from mine altar, that he
may die. And Doctor Stoughton, or Doctor Sibbs, as I partly remember I have
read, speaking of it, says, How sweet is life to those that have been prod^gal
of the blood of others! No subject, says he, had murdered more then Joab. When
Proclamation was made in Israel. That who ever should smite the Jebusites
first* should be the chief, and Captain, Joab was the man; no man was more
constant to the Weal of Israel; non so successful in victories; yet he was
called to reckon for his old sins, and must repay blood to Amasa and Abner.
Murder in Authority, is the greatest murder; and the violation of Laws and
Liberties, by Authority, is the greatest violation.

But concerning the Act of Grace and Favor. Forgiveness and favor is good in
its due place; and in truth, is acceptable to God and men; but out of its
place, its a delusion of Antichrist and a lie. An Act of favor and grace, is
indeed shown, when a man is an offender in the eye of the Law, Reason, and
Christianity; but surely, a man is not an offender in the same thing, wherein
he is offended, and destroyed in his Liberty, or Right, contrary to Law,
Reason, or Christianity; when he is denied the benefit of Justice, a Hearing or
Trial, as I have been: and how destructive this is to the Rights of the Nation,
let the world Judge. If a Law had been made to that end, it had been unjust in
it self, and void; but no Law being made, its supersuperlatively Tyrannical,
contrary to Law and Scripture, Deuteronomy. 11.3, 8 Numb 15 30. Romans 4.15. and
contrary to the pretended Agreement of the General, and General Council of
Officers, page 23. in four or five particulars by the Law of England, The faith
and reputation of the General is violated that I have not Justice.
any Act or Agreement against the Laws of God, or Nature, is a mere nullity.
Master Solicitor Cook in King Charles his Case, citing also E. L^ci^sters Case,
Page 23. and 1 part of the Book D^clarations, page 207, 690. Those things that
are evil in their own nature, cannot be the subject of any command, or order
any obligation of obedience upon them, by any Authority whatsoever. When you
should do a man Justice, you wrong him; and to hinder Justice, and hide the
wrong in the peoples eyes, you pretend a Politic Act of Grace and Favor. Is
not this Politic Tyranny in grain?

Mercy and Justice are two glorious attributes of God, and they ought to be
truly imitated and resembled by men that are true Governors (or pretended
ones.) And the not walking up to it, makes a man guilty of profaning the
attributes of God, and his Ministrations to men; and for a man to have an Act
of favor or grace, before he is legally and judicially convicted of a crime; If
I were an offender indeed, yet unless I was an offender in Law and Reason, it
would be but Injustice to grant an Act of Pardon; for an offender must die in
Law and Judgment, before he can be said to be capable of Mercy. But I am in Law
a freeman, as I have showed you, though I am by force and arbitrariness a
prisoner; and I am a prisoner, in walking in an undeniable, Christian,
warrantable, legal, and fundamental Right of the people, and of just
Government. How improper is it, and contrary to the Nature of just Judgment and
Reason? And how contrary to the nature, trust, and very name of a Parliament;
which very name does hold forth, That it ought to do things according to the
rational, unbiassed, and deliberative discourse of the Mind, without fear,
favor, or affection. Fabritius and Cato would not swa^ve from the Rules of
Justice and Virtue. You profess your selves Christian Commonwealths men.

But as for the Act of Favor and Mercy, I wish those had it that stand in need
of it: And let me tell you, in my oppression, Honor would t^uly be seen in
that. But indeed, there is no honor but dishonor, in falsely stiling the
glorious attributes of God, viz. Justice and Mercy; both which Ministrations
amongst men, are the foundations of Peace, and not Tyranny and Policy. If the
two last kiss each other, (contrary to the Ordinances, and Scripture of God,
and good will and peace amongst men, with Laws and Liberti^s of a Nation) they
commonly fall together.

But as for the Act of Favor and Mercy; Do you think it good to have the
National Fundamental Right of the People strangled, in claiming of Justice
against any person or persons, and to be unjustly unreasonably, and
un^Christianlike imprisoned, and then cover injustice with an Act of Grace,
Favor, or Mercy? Are the attributes of God, given unto men, for no other use,
but to be abused and converted into such sinister and politic ends?

It is indeed an honor to have the conduct of an Army of 20000. men, to obey
the Commands of Justice, to defend the Innocent; but the contrary is most
ignonimious. It is more honorable to have an Army to preserve the blood of one
innocent from cruelty and arbitrariness, then to destroy many nocents; though
indeed, the principle of the great Infidel Turk is to destroy twenty innocents,
rather then one nocent; thereby thinking to terrify the people, th ugh he
oftentimes misses his aim thereby. The Scripture does manifest the attributes
of Gods favor and mercy to sinners, above the attributes of justice to
offenders. How much more, should you care for the liberty, and blood of the
innocent of a Nation, especially seeing so many capital obligations do lie upon
you?

Contrary to the second part of the Lord Cooks Instit. fol. 52. 53. 315. 318
391. 615. 616. 1 Part of the Book Declar. of Parl. 38. 37. 201. 845. And the
Votes upon the Impeachment of the ten Members, The Petition of Right, the third
of King Charles, The Act that abolished the Star Chamber, The deliberate and
resolved opinion of all the Judges of England, the third year of Kings James,
in answer to the twenty and two Objections of Archbishop Bancroft, and the
whole Clergy.
But Sir, I am imprisoned contra^y to the Laws of God, Nature, and the Land, and
the legal Birthright of the people, and sent unto the Military Jurisdiction of
him that I have appealed against; c^ntrary to Reason or Christianity. Generals
are no crimes in Law; the Warrant by which I am committed, is in General terms.

Verse. 14.29. Cap. of Magna Charta, and the Exposition upon them. The second
part of Inst. fol. 29. 46. and Rot. Parl. 5. R. 2. n. 45. and Rot. Parl. 1. H.
4. n. 14, 79. and 5. H 4. cap 6. and 11. H. 6 c. 11. and 15. and 4. H. 8. c. 8.
and 1. and 2. Ph. and Ma. c. 10. and 4. part. Instit. fol. 25. and 1. part.
Book. Declar. p. 48. 278.
Again Sir, Lawmakers are not to be Law-executors, because the benefit of all
Appeals, would be then destroyed, and the people left without all remedy; which
the Law of Love, Justice, and safety abhor (though they ought to question the
male Administrators of Justice or corrupters thereof) which is my Case, and
therefore they are not to male-administer, as the Apostle says, Thou that
teach another, teach thou not thy self? all power judicial is committed
to diverse Courts; in the judgment of Gascoign* Chief Justice, and therefore the
King could not command but by matter of Record according unto Law; Sir Edw.
Cook upon the 3. Ed. 1. cap 15. but especially upon these words or commandment
of the King; and says, Mr. St. John against the Earl of Strafford, it is of
higher jurisdiction dare leges, then to judge by them, and it is beneath the
glory and honor of Legislators to be executors of the Law.

And now I shall declare unto your House more ful^y then I have yet done in my
Appeal; the Reasons why I did Appeal against the General, as also his
injustice toward me: First, that I might give some stops to the cu^rant of
Injustice to the people; and secondly, that I might have redress of my own
wrongs and insupportable injuries, but you shall see how the General has
walked and acted against me, (viz) When I was committed at Ware R^nd^zvous, and
when my Adversaries could not produce any thing material against me, as Mr. S
xb^y told me was confessed by Commis. General I^eton, he having viewed the
Charge against me, and my Answer, but there being nothing against me, the
det^rmination was it should seem, to make a composure with the p^isoners, and
to make a unity under the notion of a Fast: the next day after the Fast, the
prisoners were sent for, and a^ the time there was a seeming contending*
betwixt Li^u^. Genesis Cromwell, and Commis. General I^^ton, who should speak to
us, Of Ware Randezvous at that time there was a report by Lieutenant Colonel
Henry Lilburn, that the Levell^rs int^nded to murder the King; which blemish
seemingly l^y upon u^ that were Prisoners, chiefly because we were wel-named
so, and Colonel Eyers, my self, and others, petitioned the General, that Lieut.
Genesis Henry Lilburn might discover the person that used these words, such
principles being an abomimination to our spirits, and we should rejoice to have
such a one known, but it was never done; Our Petition was Printed in Lieut.
Col. John Lilburns Book, but this report was only to g^t the CAVALRIE to join
to destroy the Levellers so called, by whomsoeever it was designed, the Lord
knows and judges.
though Master Quarterm^n afterward told me (though I wished he had told me
before) that Commis. General had polickly predetermined to speak, and what to
say; but the words he used with much demureness, solemness of countenance (the
Emblem of a Saint or Hypocrite) as many can witness, were these (viz) That God
did incline the hearts of the General, and General Counsel to desire a union
and embracing one another in love with many circumlocutions according to his
politic intentions: but the sum and substance of my Answer was, that I wa^
confident in my cause, yet I would not deny unity, if God had wrought the
spirit of condiscending in them, for I told them, I looked upon the
condiscending to be of their party, I would be glad that the glory of love
might be reciprocal; but yet I spoke a little in justification of my self as to
my principles against the common enemy (which did endeavor to Court the
Regiment) the Engagements and Declarations of the Army, and the agreement of
the people, and the just authority of the General, at which Lieut. Ge^eral
smote his h^nd to his heart, which should demonstrate the Christianity,
Sincerity, and unfraudulency of a man, and professed that he believed that I
was a godly man, and that I was iustinable; I told him I wondered that there
had been such Calumniating Papers Printed concerning me: he made it strange,
and could have had something drawn up to my vindication against Calumny in
Print, and would have had me drawn it my self there, I told him, for my part, I
did not so much value Calumny, or unjust aspersions, and so I was appointed my
Command; whereupon I pr^sently determined to go to New Castle, and had Lieut.
Colonel Cromwels Letter: Wherein I did desire him to certify the loving
composure at the head quarters, and also to write to Lieut. Col. Hen. Lilburn
to deliver me some moneys that he owed me, and my cousen in a friendly manner to
avoid contention, he having in the busin^ss of war, appeared a very impl^cable
enemy of mine, and broken open my trunk, and took my Commission out and st^uck
m^ out of the Musters Role whilst I was a prisoner, before hearing or Judgment
of my Cause, and so I went to New Castle, and when I came there, I was
presently suspended my ^ommand; I did desire him to let Lieu^. Genesis Cromwels
Letter be seen before the Governor, and that I might have my Commission, but he
refused it me; then I writ unto the General diverse times concerning it, that he
might certify the Governor as the Lieut. General had certified; but in stead
of that, a Commission (after some few weeks suspension) come from the General
to another to enter upon my Command, without any cause in the world showed, so
that I was in the midst of my Enemies, as it were: I had rid two hundred and
ten miles in as great a Frost as ever I saw, lost a horse by the way besides my
charges, I was fain to return to London again, for it was to no purpose for me
to stay there, for power and subtilty was master over me and my unjealous
spirit: when I came from New Castle to London to m^ke it up four hundred and
twenty miles, which was no small trouble to me for their sakes as well as my
own; I made my appeal, directed to the General and his Council of War for
Justice, which I delivered him, but I could not get so much Justice of him; I
offered to refer it to some Parliament men, that would not be granted; I
offered to refer it to some conscientious Officers of the Army, that would not
be granted neither: Wh^t could be more Arbitrary and more absolute? pray Sir
return back and view their Declarations: I should sc^rce have used the General
so as he has used the Generals faithful servant.

Then I had drawn up an Appeal in Parliament against the General, and told
Colonel Fleetwood thereof, and I took his persuasion for p^ace sake and did not
proceed in it; and when Lieut. General Cromwell told me that he heard I intended
to appeal in Parliament for revenge; I told him I was not of that spirit, but
indeed I had drawn up an appeal in Parliament for Justice, which I could not
see might be entitled Revenge, but Temperance and Moderation, but I did stop my
intentions, and was resolved to pass it by, and to see whether they would
change, and be more just in time to come; to which purpose I told you, being
Speaker, at the Bar, a little before my commitment: and notwithstanding all my
discouragements on the on hand, and subtle endeavors to encourage me on the
other hand to oppose the Grandees, and to shake hands with the common Enemy,
yet the Lord kept me firm in my affections to this House, and Army, in
expectation of righteous principles of Justice at last to the people, as in my
Appeal is expressed, and neither Honor nor Revenge I praise the Lord could take
place in my thoughts, though Lieut. Colonel Henry Lilburn (my implacable enemy
had influence in the General by himself and his creatures against me) that
pretended much zeal to the General and his authority, played the traitor to the
Nation in betraying Tinmouth; but engaged against the new and horrid
Insurrections, and had a command of a Troop of horse in Kent under Sir Michael
Lovisey, and after our dismission it being just at the time of the Treaty
between the King and Parliament, Major Reynolds spoke to me to engage my Troop
to march them into some other County, and told me he had order from Commissary
General Ireton, unto whom the General had left the disposal of things to
quarter in the County, in order to the Treaty betwixt the King and Parliament,
and told me that the Commissary General was resolved to oppose the Treaty,
supposing, as Mayor Reynolds said, that King, Parliament, City and Scots would
ioyn against the Army, and that then he was promised an Establishment in the
Army, and that then there would be fighting enough; and used these words to me,
viz. That if men of such principles left him now, he would never trust men
again; and that they intended to declare for justice, as to the Soldiers, and
people. And truly, for my part, it was an abomination to my thoughts, to think
that there should be any intention, to destroy the Army, and my fellow
Soldiers that had fought for the peoples rights, with whom I was resolved to
live or perish, though now I am in the high way to pe^ish, by the highest
friends, and pretenders to God, and Righteousness. And Major Reynolds told one
Captain Chaplain, as he declared unto me, That Commissary General Ireton, was
as right, as any man in the world, for all those principles of righteousness,
and freedom, that were contended for; though it does since appear, That
Reynolds had no other design, but by our blood, and ruin, to exalt himself,
and wring the Regiment out of Sir Michael Leviseyes hands, and to make himself
a Colonel. And indeed, the Gentleman has performed what he said, whilst he
was a prisoner formerly, for the Rights of the people, as it was reported unto
me, by a Captain of this Garrison, in the presence of Master Bacon, viz. That
he would set them together by the ears, that he might come in, and have the
plunder. And Major R^ynolds also told me, That he had a private hint from
Lieutenant General C^omwel what to do; and I had an order from Sir Michael
L^visey to ma^ch, viz.

Wh^reas I have received ord^rs from Commissa^y General Ireton, That those
three Troops which the Committee of Kent could spare, to march into the North,
unto Lieutenant General Cromwell, there being much want of Horse there: You are
forthwith to march accordingly, th^re to remain till further orders. Dated at
Sevenoke, the twentieth fifth of September, 1648.

M. Levisey.
To Major Reynolds, Captain Chaplain, and Captain Bray.




Another Letter I had in Kent from Major Reynolds to go for Orders for
quarters, because his Troop was not ready to march, and he read the same unto
me, a Copy whereof I after took viz.

SIR, There are two Troops of Sir Michael Leviseyes R giment marching under the
command of Captain Bray, and Captain Chaplin, by his Excellencies Order, into
the No^th; but in reg^rd my own Troop cannot be disp^tched out of the County
until Saturday next, I entreat you to be pleased, to giv^ them an Assignment
for Quarters, near the Northe^n Rode, about Hartfordshire or Bedfordshire, till
I can ma^ch up to them. By this necessary favor, you will, if possibly, much
further oblige,

Sir, your affectionate friend, to serve you, J. Reynolds.
Roch^ster, 27. 1648. To the truly honorable Commissary General Ireton, or
Quarter Master General Gravener, these present.




And accordingly I had orders by a Soldier of my Troop (that I sent to Saint
Albans) from Quarter Master General Gravener, for I rid to Windsor my self, to
speak with the Commissary General, and mist of him. Not long after, Major
Reynolds his Troop came up, and then we had orders to march further North from
Major R^yno^ds; and at length having kept up my Troop, near half a year, at
length the Army had seized upon the King, by order from the General, Lieutenant
General, and Commissary General (as I was informed, by a very good hand) and
the King being at Hurst, I was commanded by the Authority of the Army from
Commissary General I^eton, to Major Reynolds to Hurst Castle, for the security
of the King, and had the gua^d of him two nights my self, with part of my
Troop, not longer after that, the King was commanded by order from our
Regiment, and we resigned up our Guard of him, according to command and order,
unto Colonel Harrison. After that, we were designed to quarter in Hampshire,
and then after in Worcest^rshir^, and the Regiment of Col^n^l R^ynolds was
voted to be of the establishment of the Army by the house. And the Officers and
the Soldiers of the three Troops that were together, desired me to carry an
assurance in writing to the General, That in order to righteousness, freedom,
and justice, and the establishment thereof to the people; our blood should not
be precious in our eyes; but we would adventure it under his conduct against
all Tyrants whatsoev^r. I know not what (one styled a Christian General) could
desire more: I s^e no re^s^n, bu^ that he should eminently desire that, as his
glory and honor; and soon after discoursing wi h some, and they telling me,
That it was the principles of some, to cu^ off the King out of mere policy. I
had an exceeding great astonishment in my spirit, and wond^red what this would
tend unto; for I look upon mere policy, to be a des uctive principle, and a
great dependency upon a man's own wit, and which is more agreeable to the
principles of the unnatural, and unholy Turks, (then of Christians) who destroy
one another out of mere power and policy, and to exalt themselves above those
capital Obligations before expressed; and I looked, that Righteousness and
Justice should be pe^formed out of sincerity, and purity of principles,
according to Law, Scripture, Reason, and Christianity: Next of all, I looked,
That the Laws, Freedoms, and Rights of the people, so much spoken of in the
Declarations of the Army, did ov^r-ballance the blood of the King, because that
was the occasion of the late War, and would always occasion misery and blood,
both of innocent and nocent, in the defect thereof; and so I had much
affliction upon my spirit: And next of all* I looked upon many conscientious
men, as to the Rights of the people, as Master Sprig. Mr. B^con, etc. were for
the preservation of his person, though they were for the life, blood, and
condemnation of him in Law, Christianity, and Reason (as guilty of the River of
blood in the Nation) which was most suitable to my particular judgment, (mercy
exalting it self over judgment) but being only my particular judgment, I would
not discover it to many, because I would not be an occasion of division: I
having heard, that the resolution of the Grandees was to cut off the King,
(before they did go through with the eminent Freedoms and Rights of the people)
and that the King stood in the way of them: And next of all I c^nsidered. That
the blood of his person could not be compared or recompense the river of blood
that has been shed for the Laws and Liberties of the people. And I looked upon
the Rights of the people, to be that which would most of all satisfy all
Interests, in Peace, in Law, Love, Freedom, Honor, and Justice. I do not speak
this neither to encourage any to a personal revenge, nor yet against the
execution of the King; for I do abhor it, no more, th^n I indeed can speak
against the Justice of the Lord, executed by J^hu, upon the blood of Ahab, and
J^zebels family, for the blood of Naboth; but I would have a better use made of
the declared execution of the King, as guilty of the pre^ious blood and
violation of the Freedoms of the people, viz. In the supremacy of the Rights of
the people, and in the ministration of the Laws of Love, Justice, and Freedom,
and then your blood should be as precious as my own, in any contest against
such spirits; and the Laws of Freedom and Justice, was the only declared
substance of the Remonstrance from Saint Albans, against the King and House,
which was most part thereof penned (as I was informed by an Officer) by
Commissary General Ireton.

Not long after the death of the King, I went to London, out of Worcestershire,
and was willing to take a view of things impartially* and being soon after at a
general Council one day, where there was a Letter delivered to the General,
and it being read in the Council, it was so disliked, that it was presently
put to the question, whether it should be owned at all, or no? Many said that
they did abominate it, others said, that they did disown, detest, and abhor it;
some others said, they did own the good was in it, but because there were many
expressions in it that tended to offense and division, they did disown it; At
length it came to my Vote, and the General looking upon me steadfastly, I told
him I was against the expressions in the Letter that gave offense, as much as
any man; but I did perceive that by the Letter there was a complaint, as if
they had reason to be offended, and that it related to the right of
Petitioning, which they conceived themselves abridged and molested in, in a
^etition that was presented in Parliament, and I so owned the Letter, and
desired that they might be called in: I do not know what I c uld have said more
or l^sse, if I had respect to my own conscience not to offend it, as well as
unwillingnesse in my spirit, not to give any just occasion of offense to them;
and I am not s^nsible that I gave any just occasion at all to Christians,
rational, or incor^upt men in the least punctilio, and moreover, it was my
judgment and opinion, delivered in Council: but suddenly aft^r that Col
R^ynolds was ^elling me, that there was a Civil impl^yment in the Common
wealth provided for me, in lieu of my Troop; To whom I answered, That I thought
I had liberty to act according to my own freedom, and no man has power to
dispose of my person as he please, contrary to Reason, Law, Justice and R^ght.
By that I saw the conspiracy; not long after that I was turned out of the
Council, and was not so much as admitted liberty to speak (only this very
little after expressed) though I did desire it often (which barbarous, and
unchristian dealing, Inhumanity, and Incivility, I was much offended at) for
what could be done more by a Star Ch^mb^r-Councell, and High Commission-Court
of Prelates and Lords, against the rights of ^he People, and a harmless, and
undeniable liberty of conscience, unless humane society, as we^l as pure
Religion be subverted? and in the Council, before I was turned out, the
General told me I was none of the Army, because I had no new Commission; to
whom I answered, as I remember, to this purpose, That I was of the Army as much
as Col Reynolds* that t^ld you in the C^uncell, before all, that he h^d no new
Commission, yet he gave his Vote; and also that I was of the Army, according to
Common Engagement, special engagements, Christianity and reason: Next of all,
I wondered that my Vote was then demanded in Counsel if not of the Army: Next
of all, by the Vote of the House, for the establishment of the Regiment then in
being, and not for Col. Reynolds to raise a Regiment; next of all, my
employment for the guard of the King, by the authority of the Army, and my
faithfulness, charges, and troubles, as to the public, but out I must, per fas
nefasque: I profess Sir, I could see no safety at all in their Laws, and
Liberties; and I saw that the conscientious Officers and Soldiers of the Army,
were ready to be destroyed in their Liberties, Freedoms, and persons at
pleasure, by such practices, which they eminently condemned in the King. I saw
also, that it might extend to those Members, that are left in Parliament, to
make them absolute slaves to such particular Interested, parties, and designs,
and to make them to act timorously, dishonorably, and guiltily, contrary to
those capital Obligations that I have recited in capital Letters in my Books,
and that they might serve them also, as they had served me, when they had
served their ends. I saw also, that it might extend to the embasing of future
Representatives and Parliaments, and to make them to act ignobly, dishonorably,
illegally, and unconscionably to the dishonor of the Lord, and ruin of humane
society; and according to the rules of some men, that have corrupted their
ways, and walked contrary to Law, Reason, and Christianity, and that divine
anointment, that does give the name, and a describe a Christian. And I saw
also, that if I did not speak, I should encourage the General and Grandees, in
evil practice against their own bodies and souls, as well as against the
peoples liberties, and safety; though the sweetness, and the deliciousness of
their then present power, and their extreme, and abundant causeless enmity, and
prejudice toward me, and private insinuations, and influence upon the General,
for their own advantage, to the peoples, as well as my ruin; which course and
practice is extreme prejudicial to Commonwealths, and destructive to humane
society, and Christian principles, would not permit them to consider. And truly
Sir, let me tell you, and let me appeal to the Lord, and the people, that are
rational, godly, and conscientious, whether I could have done less, then I did.

Truly Sir, I may say, Si crimen erat, crimen amoris erat; but I have committed
no c i am at all, and you may keep your favor and grace, I will not accept of
any such thing (falsely called favor) tending to the betraying of the rights of
my native Country, and to justify you in those things that you must answer
for before the Lord and the people; and also seeing I am persuaded in my own
conscience, that neither the greater friend or enemy to the Nation can blemish
me in my proceedings herein, for before I did walk in an undeniable and,
peaceable Parliamentary Appeal against the General; I went unto his Quarters,
because I had an order from Colonel R^ynolds to wait upon him, expressing an
order as from the General Counsel, and so I told him (as I remember) I was come
to wai^e upon his Excellency to know his pleasure; he told me he wondered that
the General Council did not secure me for speaking tending to division: I
answered That they might have done it if they had pleased, and that I thought
it would have been very harsh, and that I did not know who could question my
fidelity, and that what I had said was just, and spoken in temperance,
moderation and conscience as might be spoken without offense to any godly and
conscientious man, told him I was for unity in righteousness as much as any man
(but if I had spoken of unity, and left out righteousness it would it may be
have been more pleasing) and that by my conversation, it should appear, and
that I had been strangely dealt with as to my former business, as that though I
was justifiable and declared so to be by Lieut. General Cromwell, yet I was
deluded under the notion of a Fast, yet I engaged against the Insurrection when
courted to far greater honor on the other hand, which Hen^y Li^bu^n that
traitor that had influence upon him (to my prejudice) did embrace to the
Nations prejudice and danger; and since I told him I had been at near two
hundred pound charges and damages in my last cause, as to the keeping up of my
Troop near half a year, and to be dealt with so twice together, I thought it
not just, he told me I might make my charges appear in private and have
satisfaction; I answered, that was nothing as to the nature of Right or
Justice; he told me that a civil employment in the Commonwealth would be more
advantageous for me and wherein I might do the Commonwealth more service; I
told him I was not free to accept of any such place, or so to employ my self
until the Nation was more settled, and in a way of enjoyment of their Rights,
and I could not in my conscience be satisfied, that I could do the Nation more
service then in that way, and therefore I did desire him to suspend the giving
out of any Commission unto another, until the business was determined in
Parliament; he asked me whether I would offer to trouble the Parliament with
it; I told him I did not think the Parliament would account Justice a trouble
to them, that had manifested to the world as if they had so much zeal for
Justice; and for my part I did intend to bring both businesses upon the Stage,
because in my conscience I did look upon it to be a business of a public
Nature: so I did desire his Excellency again to suspend the giving out of any
Commission till the business was determined in Parliament; he told me he had
given out a Commission already: I answered he might better recall or suspend it
then give away another right (as Mr. Soliciter Cook says in King Charles his
Case, page 21 Possession is a vain plea when the matter of Right is in Question)
for right can never die.

And so, Mr. Speak^r, I have discharged my conscience to the people, to your
selves, and the Army, and I have a cruel Goal for it, contrary to those capital
principles and obligations upon the House and Army that are written in Capital
Letters in this my Testimony; and having been damnified by the Genenal in my
two Causes, to the value of three hundred pound, besides the violent and
unreasonable taking away of my Troop, and my unnatural imp^isonment, and
having been almost seven years in the Service of the Commonwealth with much
love, affection, and loss beyond my own ability, yet I have not had any
allowance from you since my arbitrary, unnatural and unholy Commitment, from
the nineteenth of March last, nor any part of my own Arrears sent me, nor
admi^ted a hearing of my Cause, which Pagans have acted up unto; contrary to
those capital obligations, by which the Officers and Soldiers of the Army,
and other the good people of the Nation, may see how their condition may be as
well as mine. Mr. Speaker, my principle is, (and I would not willingly offend
against my principles) to suffer much hurt, rather then to do any, and to do
good rather then receive (though I am under hideous and loathsome tyranny) as to
that, and cannot; which is more blessed, as the Apostle says, and to do good
for evil, and not to discover the infirmities of my neighbor, unless I see it
is his design to act to a Nations prejudice, as I have perceived in the
transactions of things, by the Gene^all, by that evil and private influence I
am not Judge of, but the Lord: and as for any evil or prejudice that I shall do
unto my neighbor, whether willingly or unwillingly, through my own weakness
or corruption, I desire to be accountable by just Laws National, which is the
badge of our freedom, and the way to our peace, and the only way that my reason
can present unto me, and unto you, is by way of an Agreement of the People,
presented by the Nations friends in the Tower, and by an actual walking up to
the just Laws of a Nation, tending to the beginning of, cherishing and
nourishing of peace, and good will amongst men; and as to the other part of my
Appeal, in relation to my self, as a member of the Commonwealth, I could
willingly (for the obligement of righteousness and peace, and that these two
might be inseparable companions according to the Scriptures) Forgive, or grant
an act of Pardon to you, and the General, under hand and seal, if I thought
you and he were unable, and could not give me satisfaction, and if I were not
unwilling to have such a dishonor and ignominy fastened upon you; and also if
I did no^ think he and you would scorn it in words, though he has acted, and
yet acts by you, in unlawful and unchristian deeds, so as that it might be
truly styled something of that name from me; but seeing he and you have such
vast sums and Lands of the Commonwealths (as well as many of you great
Estates of your own) as witness your giving the General ten thousand pound,
and four thousand pound a year, and therefore I shall expect satisfaction for
my wrongs, according to Honor, Conscience and Law, and those Capital
Obligations, in Capital Letters recited; but if I cannot have Justice of you,
and if the General, and you continue to deal unjustly with me, or to murder me,
for you have gone the ready way; for I had been inhumanely murdered and starved
long since (I refer it to all the Soldiers and people of the Nation, that are
for Righteousness and Freedom) if I had not had a little of my own left, for my
support in my barbarous, illegal, and inhumane prison; and if I had not had
some Christian friends to manifest affection to my cause and person; which
kindness, I did refuse, (for some time) because I would wait and see, whether
you would walk justly and honorably. But I considered with my self (after many
fruitless Addresses to you) That though my principle was to do good, rather
then receive, and my imperfection and sin, not to do good when I am able, yet I
was not in a capacity so to do, being under the hand of TYRANNY: And also, I
considered it was Ten thousand times more righteous, unblameable, honorable,
and just, for me to receive the manifestations of my friends affections; then
it may for you to force the Nations riches, and persons, to enrich your selves,
and act against their Laws and Liberties, contrary to the capital obligations
before recited; and also I considered, That it did evidently appear to me by
your actions, and the will and pleasure of the Grandees, that it might be your
design to force me to necessities, which is very un-Christian, Cruel,
Ravenous, Tyrannous, and insatiable; thereby thinking to make me stab my
precious Conscience (which I hope the strength of the most high, will still
keep me in) and deny my precious Cause, which is the cause of the Officers and
Soldiers of the Army, and the people of the Nation. And you, or the Steermen,
and Grandees for you, thought that necessity might make me to do, that which
you do out of unholy fear of them (for whilst my Appeal was in the House, a
Letter came from the General, or other Grandees to some Member or Members,
which was condemned, and abhorred in the King, as a pe^verting of Justice, as
in my Appeal is related out of King Charles his Case; or else out of manifest,
unwarrantable love unto your self, viz. To the denying of all those obligations
of God, Law, Nature, and Justice for the glories of the world; which un^ust
kind of actings, have wilfully destroyed persons, Families, and Nations, and
is the ground of the consumption of civil Wars, as Master Pym said in
Parliament, against the Earl of Strafford. And therefore Sir, let me tell you
in my ^yrannical, Illegal, and Injurious imprisonment, That all those capital
Obligations, are injuriously perverted, and abused, to the dishonor of the
Nation and your selves; and instead of the Just, viz. Principles of NATURE, I
must put Acting up to Principles of UNNATURALNES, Jude 10. But what things they
know (and have declared) naturally, as bruit Beasts, in those things they do
corrupt themselves, Ver. 19. Separating themselves (from other Members of
Parliament) as if they were holier, and juster then they; whereas you are more
unjust, because you have more obligations upon you to justice, viz. The blood
of the King, and Lords, instead of Law, I must put LAWLESSNESS; instead of
Reason, I must put UNREASONABLENESS; instead of Acting up to the Commands. In
plain, and undeniable Scriptures, I must put ANTISCRIPTURISTS, not in words,
but in oppressing power, and conversation; instead of Declarations upon
Declarations, I must put VIOLATION of them; instead of Imprecations, I must put
PERFIDIOUSNESS to Conscience, and people; and the judgments of God hovering
over your heads, according to your solemn desires, that the people might say
Amen: Instead of Acting up to the nature of Oaths, I must put UNFAITHNESS;
instead of Acting up to Covenants, I must put TRUCE-BREAKINGS; instead of
Acting up to principles of Conscience, I must put UNCONSCIONABLENESS; instead
of principles of serious Engagement, I must put walking up to principles of
DISHONESTY; instead of VICTORIES, and POWER to do good, I must put walking, as
if you had no power at all, and so denying the glory of God; instead of walking
up to principles of Agreement of the people, I must put DELUSION and VARIANCE;
instead of walking up to principles of a true Fast, I must put OPPRESSION and
CRUELTY; instead of walking up to principles of true honor, I must put
DISHONOR; instead of acting up to the name of Parliaments, I must put acting up
like Corrupt minded men; instead of acting up to principles of observation of a
Sabbath, I must put case and rest in wickedness, and profaneness of the Lords
holiness; instead of Magistracy, I must put as God and Nature, K. James and
your selves have said, Tyranny; instead of Government, according to the
institution of God, and the incorrupt order of Nature, I must say according to
principles of DISORDER; instead of walking up to a conscientious respect of the
wounds of the Nation, I must put walking unjustly, causing more wounds,
inflammations, and distempers, both of friends and enemies, and so to lay
foundation for blood and cruelty; instead of your rending a Parliament, out of
declared zeal for Justice, I must put your rending a Parliament, to carry on
your own corrupt, ambitious Interest, tending to exalt your selves, above the
persons of your Brethren the Laws of God and Nature, the Scriptures, and all
the Capital Obligations of Justice and Mercy; instead of your true declared
Nature of doing justice upon the King, I must put, you have cut him off to make
your selves Kings and Lords over the peoples Laws and Liberties, though not
Titularly so; instead of principles of Freedom, I must put SLAVERY; instead of
Justice, I put INJUSTICE; instead of Mercy, I must put UNMERCIFULNESS. Hear O
Heavens, and judge O Earth! O Lord hear, and have mercy upon thy people; and if
it be thy will, change the hearts of those that pretend to Righteousness, and
act contrary to as high Obligations, as ever have been expressed by thy Self in
Scriptu^^, by thy Saints and Servants.

And therefore, Master Speaker, Let me desire your House in all seriousness and
sincerity of Conscience, to consider and weigh, and turn from your iniquities,
and be a president to the Nation, of Judgment and Justice, and look upon the
cruelty exercised toward me, from first to last, contrary to the Freedoms of
the Nation (and i^ may be any man's case as well as mine.) And that it does
exhaust such Language from me, contrary to my own temper, and disposition of
spirit. And truly Sir, though the General, Lieutenant General, and Commissary
General (they being men whom I have formerly honored much, in subordination
unto my God, and the Freedoms of my Country) may, it may be, thirst after my
blood (which is the Nations blood) (as Mr. St. John said against the Earl of
Strafford, A Nation is to be accounted unto for the loss of the meanest member)
as the Heart thirsts after the Riv^rs of waters; though it were a more worthy
thirst after the performance of those glorious Obligations in themselves and
others; which would cause peace of Conscience to themselves, and joy, peace,
and unity to all the well-affected in the Nation. But truly, as for my life or
blood, I know that is the most they can take away; and if the Lord should give
them so much power, I can use the former part of Christ's prayer, viz. Father,
forgive them; but not the latter, viz. For they know not what they do. For
their glorious splendid Declarations declare their knowledge; and if it were not
my Fathers will, or the Ordinance of the Eternal GOD, That innocent blood,
under the Altar, should cry out, I should desire. That there might be no
Vengeance taken for me, for it shall suffice me that I go unto God, and shall
cease in imperfection and sin, and be out of the race of the new, glorious,
ambitious tyranny, and perfideousness of the Earth; the tyranny of Death is but
short, and I hope the Lord will m^ke it sweet unto me, to give testimony to
himself for the land of my nativity; And to add unto the former Tyrannies, and
bondages exercised toward me: A pretty while after my first coming, I was
denied the free and just access of many of my friends unto me (to give me a
visit) by the Tyrannical Governor Whitchcock, contrary to Law, Reason, or
Christianity, for which thing he had no Warrant at all from the House, but your
Arbritrariness made him also (to ingratiate himself, for it is well known he is
but a friend to the Army and you for his own ends) stretch beyond the bounds
that indeed you had set him, and so he has acted as if he were Lord and Master
of you, as well as of our supreme Laws, Liberties, and safeties, and for ought
I know, he intends to be the Janizary to murder me under his illegal
jurisdiction; and indeed I heard that L.G Cromwell himself should call him a
Sot, or some such like name, whereas he is made a Justice of the Peace and
Qu^rum: and furthermore, I could not have so much leave of him to have the
Christian society of Mr. Bacon here in the Castle, but I must be fain to hear
their Priests here in the Castle or none, concerning whom I hear abundance of
hypocrisy and dissimulation; and also though Lieut. General Cromwell gave order
to Whitchcock the Governor to use Mr. Bacon with all civility and respect; and
though he is also convinced in his conscience, as he has declared to some,
that I will not stir, yet he maliciously, and unrighteously, has not given me
that liberty and freedom that he might, though he has given many of the late
Kings party far greater (viz.) Parol^, etc.

But Sir let me tell you, if I had never so much liberty and freedom* I would
not for millions of the gold of Ophir betray the Cause of my Country, so as to
flinch; and indeed you may imprison and destroy my body, but my spirit you
cannot, and the lively appearance of my blood may rise in others when you think
it may be forgotten; if I am murdered, butchered, massacred starved, or
poisoned, or what not, by the enemies of the Lord and my Countries just Laws*
Liberty and safeties (for they may do one as well as any thing else they have
done) and if you mean by liberty of Conscience to take such large liberty of
conscience to your selves, farwell all manner of Justice and Peace; and the
dealings with me, are contrary to the prime undeniable Laws of Nature and
capital obligations of mankind, and which Presbyterians, Episcopals,
Independents, etc. that have had any unbiased reason in them, have granted
before the blood of War, and by such actions as these, all the blood that has
been shed (which is also of ten thousand times and unexpressibly of more value
then all the treasure that has been spent) is not worth a farthing: and truly
Sir, as one says, writing against the cruelty of the Spaniards to the Native
people of Mercico (as I remember, calling themselves Christians as you do) That
it is not good to measure the God of the Christians by the actions of those
that are called his servants. If there be any sparks of God, or humanity in
you, it may be you may consider a bleeding Nation.

Sir, I pray read this to the House; and ^ further desire, That the names of
those men may be certified to the Nation, that committed me contrary to those
capital Obligations, in capital Letters; that the Nation may know their
Friends, and that the Christians, and good Common-wealths-men in the House, may
clear themselves to the Nation, from such abominable Facts, tending to the
total subversion of humane society, and consequently, all Ch^istianity, if they
please; for I believe the hearts of true Christians will be truly pierced with
such usage. When Paul reasoned of Temperance and Judgment to come, Felix
trembled. And I have read as I remember, when Tully pleaded for Liggurius,
Caesar trembled, and the Bills of Accusation sell out of his hands. And Master
Solicitor Cook says in King Charles his Case, page 38. There are but two things
desirable to make a dumb man eloquent, namely, a good Cause, and good Judges,
(the former I have sufficiently, and the later I want:) The first procures
justice of Heaven; the second justice upon Earth: So in great haste I remain,

The Lords and the Peoples, William Bray.
July 17. 1649.
FINIS.

