THE CIRCLE: OR CONVERSATIONS ON LOVE and GALLANTRY; Originally in French: Now
Englished.

And since Augmented with several New Songs, Illustrated with Musical Notes,
both Treble and Base.

By Nath. Noel, Gent.

Licensed May the 5th. 1675. R. L'Estrange.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1675.

To her GRACE, ANNE, DUCHESS of MONMOUTH.
May it please your Grace,
THough I cannot but acknowledge my presumption to be great (since heing a
stranger to your Grace, I should thus aspire to a Favor I may have reason to
fear the obtaining; yet when I give ear to fame, methinks I find my self not
altogether a stranger to what is most Noble in so Noble a person; and as
glittering Stars by reason of their glorious luster are looked upon with
wonder, and even worshipped by us mortals in several parts of the Universe;
even so (dread Madam) your worth, perfections, and virtues shine so clearly and
untaintedly, and strike such an awe into my amazed spirit, that I cannot but
think how justly I have deserved your frowns for my Arrogance in presenting to
your Grace a thing so Inconsiderable, as is this ensuing Translation; yet with
the same Reverence as the Ancient Heathens did offer up their Sacrifices at the
shrines of the Deities they Adored with the same affectionate Ardor and
trembling Zeal do I offer up this to your Grace, upon which if you are pleased
to dart down a benign influence, you give both it and me life; the very Name of
so Illustrious a Person (illustrious in blood, and also in parts) is of it self
sufficient to strike the most severe Crittcks dumb. The Author had he made you
his Copy, he had doubt less framed his Character of his person of Quality far
more perfect than he has done in the ensuing Treatise; but none but happy
England is blessed with such Treasures as you are; therefore we must needs
imagine his misfortune (in being a stranger to this Island) occasioned him the
making him ignorant of many more qualities and perfections which are only to be
seen in You; it is You are the true Character of a person of Quality; You have
a Soul that knows both how to value Glory, to prize Honor, and cherish
Virtue; You need not the false luster of others to adorn You, when Fame sends
her loud Eccho's into the world in praise of Virtue and Honor, she seldom
appears in disguize; she is a lover of truth, which in nothing can be plainer
understood than by observing what she says of You.

If your Grace shall vouchsafe a favorable Acceptance of these my first
fruits, my happiness is completed in having obtained the honor of bearing the
unfeigned Title of

Your Grace's Most Humble, most Obedient, and most Zealous Servant, Nathaniel
Noel.

THE EPISTLE To the READER.
READER:
THough to Ape-custome I should pass a Complement upon you, (it being usual in
such Epistles) to mollify your Critical humor, as thinking it may cause you to
be less severe, yet I (who believe Complements in this case to be like the
Schoolboyes Prayers to his severe Master when he is resolved to give him the
lash in a cold morning for his Recreation) hope you will not take snuff that I
don't say Gentle, Courteous, or Candid Reader; I do it not, because if I should
perhaps I might abuse You, for you may take a Resolution to be contrary to the
Title; I may give you as soon as you have heard that such a Book is published,
and Damn it (as I have known many do the like by others) as soon, nay sometimes
before they have seen the Title; not that I Will judge all to be enviously
considerate; but you know every Body that will take the pains to read it, is
my Reader, and therefore it were as great a folly to term them all Courteous,
as it is to imagine it possible to find them so: I may as well term them all
Honorable and Worshipful, though a Porter or Cobbler may have it for his money
as well as a Gentleman; finding the world then to be thus stuss'd with so many
abominable Critics, and profound Judges of Wit; and experience having made it
evident by the ingratitude of the Public in their usual requital of such kind
of Presents, I cannot but admire at the liberality of so many brave men in
almost all Ages that have freely appeared in the world, and exposed themselves
to the most injust Censures of its disagreeing thoughts: I shall instance for
one that famous man Sir Walter Rawleigh, whose History of the world (a work as
famous as ever was) has been sufficiently censured, nay the World was so rigid
in his time, that it took not as he expected it would have done, for he burnt a
second Volume of the same Subject, because the Bookseller (to whom he Sold the
Copy of his Former, and would have Sold this) told him he had Lost by it. That
Learned Scholar, and Valiant Soldier Sir Philip Sidney in his Countess of
Pembrook's Arcadia, as well as in other of his Works is used severely to this
day by some. Nor Quarles that ingenious Poet has not escaped censure, and many
more, which to mention here would be needless, and numerous. If then such
excellent men as these (whose Works excel this as the Sun does all inferior
Bodies) have run in danger of shipwreck (by which we may judge of the worlds
inconstancy (must this Little thing think to escape Foul-weather? and the
danger of being blasted? No, it shall expect all with patience.

It oftentimes happens that he that sets out a Book does justly draw injuries
upon himself without any Reason, and gives cause of being told what he is by
People that are sometimes worse Sots than he: But however I shall be as little
concerned for what the Public shall say of this as Socrates, who when he was
told one that one railed at him behind his back, his answer was, let him beat
me too so I am absent.

I have taken no small care in the Traduction of this Treatise, for having found
the discourse of the first Chapter something tedious in the Original in
flourishing discourses, and little matter according to the French way of
writing, (a method generally disapproved by all English Authors) I have in such
manner abbreviated it (though without diminishing the Matter) that it is now
pleasant enough. But however give me Leave to tell you that this Chapter I
speak of is but an introduction to what follows: I give you this item because I
know some to be so squeamish, that as soon as they have read the first two or
three Pages of a Book, if that please them not, they turn to Finis, and in
their judgment they have read it out, which done, they throw it aside to mould,
and curse the Author: Some may perhaps wonder to see the Songs herein set to
Music, because it is not customary in such Books: To which I answer, that
custom is not always to be followed, and that which does not concur with
custom, may sometimes be esteemed the greater rarity because not common; it is
true the word Song I have seen in many Books over a few Verses, but what does
it imply without the Musical-notes? put but (to the Tune of Captain Digby's
Farewell over it, or some other of the like nature) and then it is not much
unlike a Ballad: if some people do not understand the Notes, I doubt not but
there are also some that do, especially Persons of Quality, and Gentlemen, for
whom they are chiefly here inserted; the Music was set by several good
understanding Masters of that Science, and the Songs have been added to it
since it was Englished. The words of the Song in page 47. I mnh confess were
borrowed, and it was placed here at a particular Friends request: But for the
rest, I am certain they are not. The Female Readers I have reason to think may
find cause of being less severe than others, especially when they shall
consider with what civility they are used here; wherefore I need say no more,
but shall invite them to what follows, as I do you; who am

Yours, N: N.

THE CIRCLE, OR CONVERSATIONS ON Love and Gallantry, etc.
THe departure of the Grand Theodat (whom the Belgic Pride had caused to take
up Arms to bring them to Reason) gave to the most part of his Courtiers, (who
could not follow him to the War) the liberty of retiring into the Country; The
Duke of Albane a person both for Birth and Merit, known of all the Court, being
dispensed with from going with the King by reason of some incommodity, was one
of the first that by this happy occasion desired to advantage himself by the
enjoyment of repose and solitude; he had a dwelling about two leagues distant
from Paris, very proper for rural Pastimes, wherein were seen in abundance of
all things that might well contribute to the sweetning of a Country life.
Madam, the Duchess remained not long behind him, who brought with her two
Ladies her Friends, one whereof was the Countess d'A^^^re, the other
Madamoisele a'Armand, bo^^ persons of incomperable spirit; and to finish a part
so well begun, there was yet wanting the Lady Sindals presence, a Lady the most
accomplished that ever was, and who in two or three days failed not to render
her self with the Duchess, who had invited her. I swerve not from truth when I
say that there were none in this House but persons well-chosen, and
well-deserving, upon whose Visages one might discern to sparkle that mirth that
produces the greatest Charm in a Company. 1. The first thing done, was to
banish Constraint and Ceremonies, and to establish for a general Law, that
every one should live after his own mode; in the mean time they were of such an
accord in all things, that it seemed as though one Will governed all; the men
had a free and civil commerce with the Women, they ever beguiled the time with
naught but mirth, taking the fresh air, and dancing each as they pleased, and
with whom they pleased; excepting a certain particular respect they had for the
Duchess, all the rest accompanied each other as Shepherds and Sheperdesses:
The Duke by reason of his ordinary indisposition, was constrained to take
himself to his rest something early, which toward the Evening gave the company
more cause of freedom, not that he loved constraint, for his humor was so sweet
and obliging, that it carried him rather to render himself familiar and
complaisant to persons far beneath him: Nevertheless his illustrious Guests who
were not ignorant in the art of civil Behavior, could not forbear the
manifesting of some Respect for his person; however, freedom waxing at least
more general, he being retired, the custom was to walk in the garden, where
with the Music and Dancing, were proposed some delightful Questions, witty
Pastimes were played which were invented ex tempore, and which being intermixed
with pleasing raillery, caused by Jocose contradictions, would produce such
fits of Laughter, and such pleasures as are seldom tasted in all companies, and
which augmented, daily the Cavaleer d'Estapes was most acceptably received with
Monsieur de Armenton, both very well esteemed among Persons of Honor, and very
well known in the sphere of Gallantry. Madam d'Elus came also, with many other
persons of the same disposition, which indeed did but pass by; but for the time
they stayed, would be of the Conversations that were held; one Evening when the
Guests of this charming Mansion were in number above the ordinary, and when
they were all wearied with having spent the whole afternoon in dancing, the
Duchess after a small turn in the Garden, invited the company to go and repose
themselves under a green Arbor, where the Conversations were kept, and which
was called the Circle; where after she had performed the usual Ceremonies to
oblige them all to sit down, she desired Mademoiselle d'Armand to be the first
to invent some pastime, which after she had excused herself, she did, which she
said, was, that every one in the company should invent a several Pastime, and
we will afterward make choice of that Person said she, whose merit shall claim
the greatest right in Diverting us, and who shall be judged the most
acceptable; there is already mine added she, and turning to the Abbot d'Arvuty,
one of the best Humored Persons in the World, and who stood just by her, she
entreated him to begin to tell his Pastime; but the Abbot refused, as thinking
she had not told hers, she avouched the contrary, saying what she had now done
was we^l worcester ha pastime. But you (Madam, said she, in directing her Speech to
the Duchess) who sees that Mr. Abbot will already not do what he is bid, be so
good to us your self as to command him to range him to his duty: The Duchess
smiled, and told her she should be her Lieutenant, and that she should put all
the Authority she had into her hands, to the end that her Orders may be the
better obeyed; whereby the Lady prevailing, something better commanded him a
second time to find out some subject of diversion; which after a long debate he
did, raising his discourse upon the qualities of a Mistress, and upon the
blindness of Lovers in not discerning any defect or blemish in them: He would
therefore have the Pastime that Evening be, that every one should relate which
of all the Qualities he could principally wish that person to be endued with
which he dearly loved? and since it is a kind of necessity to have some
failing, what then should that be he would give her? After Mr. Abbot had done,
Mademoiselle d'Armand as Lieutenant to the Duchess, made a sign with her Busk
to the Marchioness of Sindal, to let her know that it was now her turn: But the
Duchess replied, that since she would not give her self the trouble of
inventing some pastime; it were but Justice to let the other Ladies enjoy the
same privilege; besides, that there were on the men's side persons so proper to
relate any thing Curious and VVitty, that they had no need to fear the want of
Diversion. I am far Madam, (answered her Mademoiselle d' Armond) with a little
subtle smile from opposing any thing you shall find good; but if you will
consider the wrong this silence will do the company, and the advantage these
Gentlemen will reap thereby (who believe that none but they can recount any
thing pleasant) you will find that for a small trouble from which you pretend
to deliver these Ladies, you deprive us of the Honor we should get by
confounding all those great and rattling VVitts, with thousands of conceits
which you should see us produce I say not (replied the Duchess) that the
Ladies should keep silence, I only desire that the men furnish the conversation
with matter, and we support it when we see it decay, or touch us any thing.
Mademoiselle d'Armand without making any further answer, left Madam Sindal, and
desired the Cavaleer to propose some pleasing pastimes, and he obeyed. And his
discourse was altogether concerning the Follies all people are inclined to
inaffecting some one particular thing or other; some he esteems Fools, for
affecting Poesy above all other things; others he says are Fools in Music,
in Dancing, in Playing, in Arms, in Dogs, in Horses, and in Clothes; and
therefore said he, it would be a very pleasant pastime to tell us every one our
Follies, and let them begin with me first, and sincerely tell me in what manner
I am fool, and the reasons they have to believe me so. This sort of pastime
caused mirth enough, and there was no body but presently related after what
manner he was believed to be fool; so that every ones discourse was of his
folly: But in fine, the Baron d'Exort who was a most gallant Person, and who
had a pleasing Wit for Conversation, said, that this Pastime would last
something too long, and that if they would make use of another, he would
propose something that should be more Recreative, and less injurious; and he
was just about relating something to make them merry, when Mademoiselle
d'Armond im^osed him silence, and entreated the Count de Lorme to teach them
some pastime more diversive than the former, which without giving them cause to
speak to him twice, he did, and his discourse was altogether touching Lovers,
and the several sorts of them, and their Comportment with a cruel Mistress;
which after he had a ^ittle enlarged upon, his Proposition was to relate,
whether it may be possible to sweeten the Rigors of a Cruel Mistress; if it be,
in what manner it must be done? But Mademoiselle d' Ernand, without whose
permission none had right to speak, not fixing upon this pastime (though they
were going to speak their thoughts of it) spoke to Monsieur d'Armenton to
propose another, telling him it was now his turn: So many Sports said he have
been already proposed, that I will beg the permission of you to remain at some
one that has even now been named; for there are enough not only for this
Evenings diversion, but for a whole week, and if you please I am for that of
the Court: No, no, said Mademoiselle d' Armand, we can exempt none but the
Ladies from that trouble; tell us then if you please what your mind conceives;
since said he, I am condemned, I should do what you would have me do? The Count
with his Question has furnished me with another design, which may serve us as
a pastime. He would know if there be any thing can sweeten the rigors of a
cruel Mistress. I think that order and reason does first require that a
Mistress be described, and that every one relate the qualities they could wish
to be in a person by them loved, it will be the means of knowing every ones
inclination: nd I believe that the Count who is so particular and delicate in
Love-matters, will doubtless give us pleasure enough to hear him, for he will
delineate the Picture of an admirable Mistress; the Count was going to answer
him, but Mademoiselle d'Armand who instantly had a mind that this Pastime
should pass, prevented him, and told the Duchess that if she pleased, it
should be by this they would begin, and that it was too gallant not to be
preferred before any other. Hereupon the Duchess took the advice of all the
company, who were of the same mind, and without delaying any more, they desired
Mademoiselle d'Armond to command some body to begin, which turning her self to
the Count de Lorme, she did, saying, it shall be you then Sir that must begin;
and tell us after what manner you would have a Lady made and qualified if you
had one that might be for your own appetite: I know not continued she how
succesful you will be, but I imagine that you having Opinions so different from
the rest of the world, especially in this, will assuredly give some cause of
contradiction: There was already begun a hot dispute; but the Lady Sindal
interrupted them, and told them it was already late, and that they must in good
earnest either begin then, or defer it till the next mornning that the Count
might also have the more time to prepare himself: I said the Count pleasantly,)
shall not do like these Leapers who leap yet worse when they are naked, than
when they are clothed: If it be too late, it is so much the better for me
because not having much time, I shall not have much to re ate; and what I shall
then say, ex tempore, will be much more excusable than what I might have
studied for, though it were better. I will without waiting till to morrow, give
you my thoughts upon this subject, which you will discern to be without either
method or choice; yea must grant (continued he) that the matter is altogether
delicate, which you have put into my hands. Nevertheless, since my business is
not to form a Lady to the mind of the whole world, but two make one after my
mind, I will tell you in few words how I would have her adorned and beautified,
to esteem her perfectly; imagine it not to be one of those fine Women, which
these Gentlemen would doubtless lay before you if they were in my place, that
is not my design; that with which I shall entertain you shall be a Lady of
Honor, whose principallest Qualities shall be grounded on the merit of her
person. The first thing she must have, is a good Birth, and not to ignorize the
maintaining of her Rank as she ought, without being too much affected, as most
Women are; my meaning is, that her whole person, and all her actions may
witness her to be a person of Quality, she should have some of that modesty,
which mingled with Majesty as does give a glorious luster to Noble persons, for
her Wit let it flow naturally, and let her Body be well shaped; but let her
have more especially a particular Grace in all her actions, that may render her
Amicable at the first view, that it may be an Ornament to accompany all her
actions; that is rare said Mademoiselle d'Armand, but methinks if you a^^ not
in too great haste to make an end, you pa^^ over but lightly qualities that
well enough merit a larger delineation. Tell me yet continued she, what this
Grace is of which you speak? It is answered her the Count presently, what may
be seen in you Madam; and if you please, I will not make any other Explication,
since it is but to regard you to divine what it is. This answer caused
Mademoiselle d'Armand to blush, and she was doubtless going to answer him, if
the Duchess had not made a sign to her not to interrupt him any more, and the
Count continued his discourse in this manner; since I am desired to draw the
Picture of my Heroine at large, I will prepare my self to let you see her
altogether. I have already said that her Body should be well shaped, I mean of
a just and well composed height, free and without affectation, though something
above the mean, yet without the excess of being too Great; the Opinions are
very different between the Brown and the Fair; for my part I am for the Brown,
because they have commonly most Wit: As to what concerns the figure of the
Visage, I have ever heard say, that those who have it Oval, promise most
Friendship; as for the Eyes, they are yet disputable: but the Black are in my
mind the most beautiful, if they are full and well divided, such a fair one
whose Picture I draw, ought especially to have her Teeth white, and well
ranked: the mouth small and rosy colored, the forehead and chin
proportionable to the Poriphyre of her Visage; and for her Qualities (proceeded
he) I will not speak of those Virtues so common for all Women, it is to be
supposed that a Lady so well made as I make her, wants not those Virtues, but
to distinguish her from the Vulgar sort, she ought to have some particular
Qualities, as much civility, much sweetness in all her words, but in
conversation especially; together with a certain ready way of never saying any
thing but to the purpose, according to the place wherein she is, and according
to the humors of the persons to whom she speaks, her actions ought to be very
obliging, and she should have a good nature so charming as might surprise an
esteem in the hearts of persons of Honor; she must have a lively Wit that may
cause her to be admired, but a sprightliness accompanied with something of
gravity, that may show in her as much soundness in judgment, as promptness of
wit: She must beware praising her self, for there is ever too much vanity and
indiscretion in doing of it in what manner soever, she ought to have the same
regard in speaking, which must be but little and to the purpose, and let
affectation be avoided in discourse as well as carriage, and in all things
else, such qualities will cause her to be considertd, wherever she is, while
others fall more or less into the opposite Errors. Let her not neglect
Instruments, Music, and Dancing; let her also make some esteem of Poetry,
History, and of that we call Literature.

There the Count made a stand, as if he would have made an end, or taken
breath, which having done, the Abbot said that the Count had drawn the Picture
of so rare a Lady, that he could scarce believe there were any like her in the
World. Nevertheless said he, if we comprehend what he has said, his discourse
was of things altogether in general, and notwithstanding a few Lessons will he
give the Ladies. I cannot believe that his has yet all she should have. I
could answer you said the Count, that I am not obliged to do more than the
order of the pastime, which required me to describe a Lady to my liking. But
you Mr. Abbot continued he who imag nes what I have said to be so
extraordinary, that you cannot believe there are many such in the World,
although I have not yet done: You have said methinks something too much be ore
a Company where there is not a Lady but may be compared to her; I have
described, and I may truly say that they were my pattern. I see your design
replied the Abbot to him smiling, you would make a difference between me and
this Sex, and cause these Ladies to be my adversaries, while you in the mean
time intrude your self by your flatteries to obtain their good wills; but they
are so just, that they love truth better (though it might seem to be against
them) than the false praises that you give them. Nevertheless if my misfortune
should cause it to happen otherwise, I cannot but say that it is not only rare
to find all these qualities in one only Woman, but that the like can be said
but of few men, notwithstanding that they are capable of a far greater
perfection than Women, to hear Mr. Abbot discourse, said Monsieur d' Arwenton
one would imagine that he has a mind to speak against the Women: but if the
Count will give me leave to answer him, I will have the honor to serve him as
second on the behalf of these Ladies. You oblige me said the Count, for I
likewise think that I have already done what I was obliged to do; and the
Ladies quarrel cannot be ill in the management of so gallant a man as you. Mr.
Abbot was going to speak, but the Duchess prevented him, and bid him keep
those injuries he had to say against them, till the day following, that it was
now too late to have time enough to relate them; that she would give him the
whole Night to consider on it if he dare be so bold to expose himself to so
great a hazard; all the Company smiled upon the Duchess, who had turned the
subject of this new dispute in so gallant a manner, it was referred till the
next day.

Here the Pastime ended, and the Violins (that were placed round about the
Arbor) having begun to play, at a sign the Duchess made them, they all arose,
and daunced as they went till they came to the House, whereafter some
Civilities the Duchess made the Company, and which is usual on such occasions,
they all walked to their Chambers, and gave the remainder of the night over to
sleep.

CHAP. II.
THree hours had the Suns beams enlightened the whole House, when none of this
illustrious company were stirring but Mr. Abbot, who was walking alone in one
of the Garden VValks. Mademoiselle de Armand (the windows of whose chamber were
situated on that side, she called to her Madam d'Elus) with whom she lay and
beginning to laugh, do you not see (said she a loud to the end the Abbot might
hear) Mr. Abbot, who is preparing his Talons to tear us to pieces this Evening,
he is up very early; but I hope before the day ends, he may recant, or that
he will repent; Ladies, answered the Abbot, if you have no greater an adversary
than me, you have no reason to fear. I shall (perhaps) be obliged to keep my
word if I am urged to it: Rut it shall be to say naught against you, than what
I cannot forbear to relate: We shall see that said Madam d' Elus to him;
however it is not of so small a Consequence, as not to deserve the pains to
think a little upon it. I counsel you (proceeded she) as a Friend, to betake
your self to a place of safety in time, for you know it is natural to us to
love revenge. As the Abbot was going to answer her, a great dog that crossed the
Walk, chacing a Fowl, run against him with such violence, that the fright of
it had like to have made him fall all along: it is to be imagined how the
Ladies laughed, the Lady Sindal, whose Lodging was not far, came at this noise,
and asked what the matter was? see you not (an^wered Mademoiselle d'Armand,
(still laughing without measure) Mr. Abbot there against whom the whole
Universe is set since he has declared himself against us; a dog but even now
had like to have devoured him; and I believe that it was upon out account that
he has spared him; for my part said the Lady Sindal, I am pleased that Mr.
Abbot is still of one mind, and to see him resolute; for in lieu of a few
injuries which he will invent against us, we shall receive from Monsieur
d'Armenton a thousand praises; and I die with desire already to hear this
dispute. The Chevalier d'Estapes, and the Baron d'Erare upon this came to the
Abbot, and added to the conversation. But it continued not long, because the
Duke sent to them to know if they would be for Hunting, that the weather was
fair, and that they had naught to do, but to get themselves ready. The Ladies
had a desire to be of the number; they were most agreeably received; naught
else was thought on but breakfast; the Horses and Hounds were soon in a
readiness: insomuch that in less than two hours, breakfast was done; they
mounted on Horseback, and into the spacious Fields they went. Days are not
always fortunate, nor always proper for Hunting: however this was, and they
relished the pleasure so well, that they returned not till the Evening to
Supper; our Hunters were almost starved: The Ladys had good stomachs, and there
wanted not wherewith to content them; for the Table was so sumptuously adorned,
that I can hardly believe Paris can show better cheer; they begun with little
or no discourse, because every one did his endeavor to feed well; about the
middle of Supper some discourse passed concerning Hunting: But at the last they
fell upon the dispute that should serve for the conversation this Evening;
Madtmoiselle d'Armaud failed not to set hpon Mr Abbot, nor he to defend himself
well. The Duke took extreme delight in it, and observing, that not only the
Ladys were against the Abbot; but some of the men, also he told him that he
must needs have a good opinion of his own strength to hope to resist so many
Enemies. It is not now Sir, (answered him the Abbot) that the Women have
seduced the men, and that these unfortunate Creatures have turned their own
Weapons against themselves to please their Enemies, for so it is (continued he)
we should call the Women since truth makes it appear, that they bring upon us
the greatest part of our misfortunes. But when by their allurements they should
get the whole Universe to themselves, none should never persuade me but that
the men are far more perfect than the Women, and that he had that says
(Woman) does but ^ame a work which Nature had forgot to finish. The Duke which
had a desire to see how the dispute would pass upon so gallant a subject;
between two persons that had as much wit as any in the world beside, entreated
the company for this time to continue with him, you may believe that there was
none but who did willingly consent to the Dukes desire: so that when the Table
was taken up, they sat round him as in the form of a Circle, and Mademoiselle
d'Armand (who had ever the Office of Lieutenant to the Duchess) told Mr. Abbot
tha^ it was time to begin if he had any thing to say against them, and that
Monsieur d' Armen^on was prepared for their defense, the advantage is already
large enough on my side (answered her the Abbot) and I Will willingly resign that
privilege to Monsieur d'Armenton, if I once begin I shall be troubled to make
an end; and there is too much to be said in favor of my party, that he will
not know what to say, nor answer Triumph not so much beforehand (replye^ his
Adversary) lest you be overcome two manner of ways: I am to make it appear,
that the men are not more perfect that the women, as you pretend they are, and
without amusing my self with any more Ceremonies. Since you will have me begin,
I am going to set upon, see it; and will place the Women, and carry their
Glories even to a degree of perfection, which the men shall hardly be able to
attain to.

This perfection (continued he) that you will give the Men above the Women,
must be remarkable either in body or mind; and I ^^nd that in either, the
Women at least do equalize the Men; they have in truth the Body more strong,
more light, more expert, and more capa^ble of hardship than the Women; but you
your self will own that this quality is no perfection, since among men
themselves, they who have strength in a higher degree than others are not the
more esteemed for that; as to what touche^h the mind, it is constant that what
a man understands, a woman understands, or can understand, and that the
apprehension is equal in both. After he had said this, he kept silence, to hear
Mr. Abbot's answer; but because he made none, he proceeded in this manner: You
know said he, that there is an argument maintained in Philosophy, that these
are the delicatest bodies who are looked upon to have the promptest Wits, and
in this manner the Women ought to have the most esteem wi h their delicacy,
since it is a ma^k of heir liveliness. But let us forbear Philosophy, and hold
in (if you will) with experience. I know there have been Philosophers enemies
to women who said that Nature ever endeavoring to make things more perfect, if
she could produce none but men; and that i^ was through e^ror she brought
Women into the World; but you must confess that there were poor Philosophers,
and that Nature will bring forth a Woman, when she produces something,
because it is a subject so necessary to the end she tends to, which is to
conserve the kind. We need not read any History, either ancient or modern, to
know that there have been Women that have waged War, and that have obtained
Victories; that they had been seated upon Throans, and governed States and
Kingdoms with an admirable prudence, and administer Justice with as much rigor
and wisdom as the first Judges of the world. I dare say more, and I Will maintain
that the men have not done any thing worthy commendation, but what the Women
have done also; they have made it evident enough, that Sciences were not
secrets for the men alone; they have penetrated as far as possible into them;
and you are not ignorant that there have been of them that have understood
Philosophy very well, and that have instructed men therein: Others that have
been very expert in Poesy; yea they have gone even to the knowledge of the
Laws, of which Study they have rendered themselves very capable; it would be
something tedious to relate all that may be said upon this Subject, and to
report that which an infinity of Authors have said for the VVomens advantage.
It is true said the Abbot, that if you once enter into History, and when I am
not permitted to interrupt you, these Ladies will doubtless believe you have
conquered; but you are not yet where (perhaps) you think you are; believe it
sometimes a dangerous consequence to pursue an Enemy, that makes a feigned
Retreat. It would be no difficult matter for me to answer to what you have
said; but I will only bring one Reason in opposition to this pretended Female
perfection, which is, that the man resembling the Form, and the woman the
matter; and that as the form is more perfect than the matter, the Man is also
more perfect than the Woman; but there is one thing which all the world knows,
and which makes the advantage that we have above the Woman evident; it is that
there are but few Women but would gladly be men; and very few Men that desire
to be Women. If you have no better Reasons replied Monsieur d' Armenton
smiling, my glory will be but small in having vanquished you, they are such
cold ones (continued he) that they are capable of freezing our understandings
in the hotter weather of this season. This unhappy Sex have reason to have
these desires, not for their being more perfect, but to deliver themselves from
the unsupportable Yoke of men; and for the enjoyment of Liberty, which their
only Tyranny has ravished from them. But I pray tell me what comparison is
there of the matter and form with the Man and the Woman? the matter has its
essence from the form, and cannot be without it; whereas the man and the Woman
receive from each other an equal perfection; and if the Woman cannot be without
the Man, the Man also cannot be without the Woman. I pray Gentleman
(interrupted them Madam d'E^us, I leave these terms of matter and f rm, which
make us sick at heart, and speak us in a more intelligible manner, since it is
our process that is in action. I must necessarily defend my self (answered
Monsieur d'Armenton) in the ^^^e manner I am set upon, and fight with e^ual
arms; but let it not seem te ious to you, I Will not leave of before I have made
my self well un erstood: What you say here (said the Abbot) is not because you
judge your cause so good, that in justice you should come to what you say; but
i^ is the good Opinion you have of your own understanding, that causes you to
promise your self success in things the most difficult; you may notwithstanding
be deceived: in ^he mean while I pray tell me, if through their natural
qualities the man is not already mo e perfect than the Woman, since he is hot
of comple ion, whereas she is cold: You see said Monsieur d'Armenton, turning
to Mademoiselle d'Armand, how Mr. Abbot returns again ^o Philosophy? Answer me
only (interrupted him the Abbot inconsiderately to what I a^k you, if the heat
that acts of it self, and which is capable of production, is not more noble han
he cold, which can do nothing wi hou the heat? I Women who are hardly composed
of any humor but this, can do any thing, where feebleness and timidity be not?
I I know not (said the Lady Sindal) whether Mr. Abbot uses Philosophy or no?
but I apprehend that what he says is not to our advantage: I tell you said
Monsieur d'Armenton, that he uses his strongest Arguments, and in a small time
you will see where he will he will be reduced. I agree (proceeded Monsieur
d'Armenton,) that Heat in it self is more perfect than Cold: but it is not the
same in things composed, and which we call mixed, as Men and Women are for then
it would fall out, that the hottest bodies should be the most perfect, which is
false, since there is nothing but what is temperate has a true perfection. Let
us add, that Women are in effect of a cold Temperature, in comparison of Men,
who for being too hot, stray from perfection, which is not found but in things
that are temperate; but Women as to themselves are not too cold; and they
approach nearer to that perfect state we speak of than men; for they have in
them this moisture which is proportionable to the natural heat, that the too
great dryness in men dissipates and consumes too soon: but if timorousness in
Women be as you say, a mark of imperfection, it is not from their constitution
that it comes, but from a too great liveliness of wit, which instantly
representing them the objects in the understanding, is the cause that they are
so easily terrified; because they have not the leisure to consult their reason
upon that which strikes them so suddenly; and this cannot be termed
imperfection, since it proceeds from so fair a cause.

You may see many men that have neither fear of death, nor any thing else; and
yet they may not be termed Valiant men, because they know not dangers, and go
amazedly where the Career is open; These actions proceed from a fiery
Brutality, and from a cloudy Understanding; and without knowledge fools are not
people of a great courage. True valor depends upon a man's proper resolution,
and upon a will determinately bent to do something; and to esteem Glory and his
Duty above all things in the world; besides, a man like this will meet death in
necessary occasions, although he knows the peril to be evident; his mind will
be constant, and heart-couragious to pursue (without trouble) an enterprise
even to the end. We have seen many Women act with this force and courage. We
know that they have done actions so full of Glory, that the Men have been
nothing comparable to them, and I believe I shall not say so much, when I say,
that antiquity cannot show us any of considerable merit. But it may be made
appear that his Wife, his Daughters, or his Sisters Fame has equalized this.
Will you have more? The Company shall see when they please, that there have
been a great number of Women that have brought Honor to their Families, and
that have withdrawn men from their faults. All those Reasons (answered him the
Abbot) which experience contradicts, me thinks are not good: and certainly if I
asked you who these admirable Women were from whom the Men have received some
Honor: I believe I should entrap you if there be any thing (said Monsieur d
Armenton) that might entangle me; it would be the too great number of Examples
that there are of what I say; and if I feared not to say those things which the
company already knows, I would begin with the History of Octavia Wife to
Mark Anthony, Sister to Augustus; there is no Body her-but knows this History,
as well as that of Porcia, the Daughter of Cato, and Wife of Brutus: Who has
not heard of Caja Cecilia the Wife of Tarquin Prisens of Cornelia, Daughter to
Scipio, and of I know not how many others, that are not only known among our
Ladies, but among the strangest and most barbarous Nations. Was there ever a
worthier action seen, than that of Alexandra Wise to Alexander King of the
Jews? how she saved two Children she had of this King from the fury of the
People, and in the same moment delivered the body of her dead Husband from the
most calumnious outrages that enraged people are capable of committing upon the
Body of a Tyrant.

You will oblige us extremely Sir, (said the Countess ^' Ancyre interrupting
him) if you would take the pains to recite this History to me; for I believe
that it is not come to the knowledge of these Ladies, no more than it is to
mine. This Queen, replied Monsieur de Acmenton, seeing all the people in an
uproar, and ready to fall upon her two Children to sacrifice them to bondage,
where they had kept their Father: She caused the Body of her Husband her self
to be brought into the middle of the place, where the Citizens being
tumultuously assembled to see what she would do; this great Queen spoke to them
after this sort.

I know but too well, O ye Jews! the Reasons that you have to be thus animated
against my Husband: I know how much your Cause is just, and that he has used
you too il^y while he lived, not to be punished by You in his death. I entreat
you only to call to mind what I have done for you; if I have not taken your
parts as much as I could possible; if I have not endeavored to withdraw him
from his Tyrannick Humor: and how many Evils have my tears and prayers saved
you from? and yet all this is nothing in comparison of what I would have done
for you, had Heaven seconded my designs, I believe you doubt it not: But to
give You more certain tokens of it, I Will be the first that will revenge your
Cause for the injustice and tyranny which you have suffered; here is the Body
upon which You must pour your Choler and Revenge. Let us exercise all sorts of
Cruelties upon him; only if it can be, let us pardon the innocen^e of two poor
Creatures, whose crime is no other than in being the Unfortunate O^^-springs of
too cruel a Father. These tender Babes never did you any harm. It would be a
strange injustice to make them suffer for their Fathers Crimes, and methinks
you should owe some mercy to the tears of a Mother, who has so often obtained
it for you.

These words proceeding from the mouth of this wise and generous Queen, wrought
such effect upon the peoples spirits, that their fury was converted into Love;
the same men that should have been these Childrens executioners, became humble
and affectionate Subjects. The Mothers tears of sorrow were changed into tears
of joy; and the respect which she inspired into all this people, was so great,
that for her sake they Erected a Famous Sepulcher, for the same Body that
should have served for matter to satisfy their hatred upon.

Monsieur d'Armenton because he would give the company leisure to speak their
thoughts, upon this action made a small pause, and afterward proceeding again
in his discourse: Who can be ignorant (said he) how ^he Wife and Sister of
Mithridates out-braved or at least welcomed death, more generously than
Mithridates himself; and how the Wife of Asdrubal had less fear of it than
Asdrubal: You know too that the Daughter of Hierom of Siracusa would have no
other Tomb than the incendiary of her Native Soil. Who contradicts you
Monsieur d' Armenton (said Mr. Abbot, interrupting him) where does his
obstinacy lead him? don't you imagine you see this Woman, who not knowing how
to reproach her Husband with more injuries (who plunged her in a Well, that
the water covered her head, yet made a sign to him with her hands, to let him
know what he was.

This explication gave the Company cause enough of Laughter, insomuch that
Monsieur d' Armenton took up the word, as a man ever ready for an answer.
Obstinacy says he, merits praise, and may pass for Virtue when it is to
maintain the truth; the Women have given us a thousand Examples of this rare
Obstinacy; or to give it its proper Name of this Constancy, which in my Opinion
is the most difficult of all Virtues. What do you think (Mr. Abbot) of
Epicaris that famous Courtizan of Rome, who knew of the Conspiracy against
Nero, and who had the force and courage to endure the cruellest Torments that
this Monster of Nature could invent against her, rather than she would reveal
any of the Conspirators, wherees so many Great men, as well Noblemen as
Senators at the sight only of what (...) is had suffered, accused even their
own Parents, Brethren and Children. Who is it yet that will not admire the
virtue of Lyonida, to whom the Athenians dedicated a Lion of massy Copper,
without a tongue, to honor the Secret that she had kept at the sight of all
the Torments imaginable; and which she likewise endured rather than she would
reveal the conspiracy in hand against the Tyrants. Methinks (said Madam
d'Elus) that Monsieur d'Armenton passes but lightly over such Heroical actions
as these are, especially before such an Enemy as we have here, who would
perhaps rejoice that no Body knew them. In effect added the Lady Sindal,
Monsieur d'Armenton should relate these Histories something more at large: That
our Glory may shine the brighter, for there are in the world a great many women
slanderers; it shall be none of my fault (answered her Monsieur d'Armenton)
that you are not saitsfied, so that you will but lend me a patient ear. It was
(continued he) a custom at Marseilles, (which it is thought was brought from
Greece to keep publicly a certain sort of Poison made with Kex, purposely for
those that could prove to the Senate, that they had lawful means to quit this
life, and so to give themselves death: Some because they were too unfortunate,
would seek by death to deliver themselves out of trouble; Others being in the
height of Prosperity, for fear their Fortune should happen to change if they
lived long; it happened in the time that Sextus Pompeius. -- Here (said the Abbot
interrupting him) is the beginning or a fine Fable: You see Ladies said
Monsieur d' Armenton how Mr. Abbot does always endeavor to interrupt me; if
you were not a party concerned, I would entreat you to inflict some punishment
upon him; but the greatest prejudice that I can do him (I believe) is to
continue my Story without amusing my self with what he says. In the time
thereof Sextus Pompeius a very beautiful Lady presented her self before the
Senate of Marseilles, to obtain this Tragical Grace, and having made them see
^he necessity there was for her Repose, to be delive ed from the miseries of
Life, she took the Cup where the Poison was, and spoke so resolutely, and with
so little fear of death, that Sextus Pompeius himself was troubled to the
heart, and the w ole Senate could not forbear weeping after they had agreed
that she should die. If this story be true, said Mr. Abbot; alas! how many poor
Husbands have there been at Marseilles that have gone to demand of the Senate
permission to die, to be delivered from their Wives. Alas! (replied the
Countess d'Ancyre to him, instantly in the same note) how many unhappy women
are there would drink this Poison now were it the custom, for to deliver
themselves from the cruel bondage wherein their Husbands keep them. What can a
miserable woman do (added Madam d' Elus) where this must not remedy; when as
the weakness of women obliges them to suffer all without murmuring: It is true
replied the Abbot to them, that the men are nota little obliged to this
weakness, without which the women (who lova them but little) would put more
weight upon their shoulders than they could be able to bear. The Duke was the
first that laughed heartily at this Reply; and the Ladies laughed so, that the
dispute was some time delayed; after which Monsieur d' Armenton who had a
desire to give the Abbot an answer to what he had said, viz. that the women's
love was but small to the men: when is it (Mr. Abbot said he) that you heard or
read of a Husbands testimony of his love to his wife, like to that of Camma for
her Husband Sinnatus I know no more answered him the Abbot abruptly) what you
mean by Camma than I do by Sinatus, and all that I c n say to you is, that if I
would here recite the lamentation of poor Husbands, you would soon confess that
the women were Female-devils: There was not one Lady of the company but was set
against him, and each did their endeavor to evil-treat him, one with her Busk,
another with het ^an, the third with a Cane, that the poor Abbot cried out like
one in despair and complained that he was martyred for the Truths sake. He
would notwithstanding this, not revoak what he had said, only to sweeten it;
and for ^e^aration of Honor he Named them charming Devils. The Ladies at last
let him be at quitt; the Noise ceased, and they gave ear to Monsieur d'
Armenton, who went on with his discourse as follows.

Camma (said he) was a very beautiful woman, and there was nothing did equal it
but her virtue; her duty was, that she esteemed above all things Signorix a
principal man of the City where she lived, became in Love with her, and he used
all the means he could to endeavor to persuade her to yield to his desire,
and to give his Love content: but it was all to no purpose, nothing could shake
the fidelity of so discreet a woman. Signorix believed that Sinnatus her
Husband was the only obstacle that spoiled his pretensions, and that if he
caused him to be killed, he should overcome half the resistance his Mistress
made. It was easy for him to find the means, but it made him not the happier;
and all his addresses after this Homicide gave him less encouragement than
before, which caused him at last to resolve to demand her of her Parents in
marriage, who fearing the power of Signorix, used all their Arguments to
persuade Camma to it; and they importuned her so much, that she condiscended,
or rather seemed to do it, they conducted her to the Temple of Diana, where
Signorix waited to do the Ceremonies of Marriage. You know I suppose what these
Ceremonies were, and that a Cup is presented to them, out of which the married
Couple drink in token of Alliance and Friendship; Camma had prepared a drink
which she had by her, which was no other thing than a violent poison that she
had given her Mayds with order to bring it to the Temple to her; and having
demanded it, when she came to drink, she drank half, and presented the rest to
Signorix, who drank it without difficulty, not imagining that the Ceremonies of
his Marriage would be those of his death. After which this Woman was so
transported wi^h Joy, that her design had so good effect, she cast her self at
the feet of the Statue, and pronounced these words.

Great Goddess thou know my heart; thou know how often I would have dyed
to follow my dear Siwnatus! Thou know with what grief I have outlived him,
and that the only hope of revenge has kept me alive till now; and now I have
done my duty, I dye contentedly, and will go to the only man I loved while I
lived, and will love after my death if the Gods will give me leave; and then
wicked wretch (continued she in addressing her self to Signorix) who thought to
have supplied the place of him whom thou have murdered, thou shall go to the
Sepulcher after thou have sacrificed to the shadow of my dearest Spouse.

Signorix furiously amazed at their words, and being already cruelly tormented
with the effect of this Poison, presently commanded remedies to be brought to
him; but they came too late; and Camma was so happy, that as she lay upon a
bed expecting death, she understood that the Tyrant was departed; then was it
that her joy redoubled, and that lifting up her eyes to Heaven, she thus
invoked her dear Sinnatus; Dear Spouse (said she) now since I have given thee
the last tokens of my Love and Fidelity, and that thou have received my tears
and the revenge I owed thee, not having any thing else to do for thee in this
world, I avoid it, and bid adieu with a sincere heart to this life, which
without thee is insupportable. Come my dear Sinnatus! O come to my Soul! that
denres nothing more than to embrace thee.

In ending these words, she ended her Life, and spread her arms abroad, as if
she would really have embraced her Sinnatus: I believe said the Abbot to him,
that you have a mind to make these Ladies weep; What I say to this is, that if
this History be true, I know very well, that there are no more Camma's now in
the world; but if there were such to be found, yet these Examples do not prove
that which you did say, that there should be women from whom the men have
received great advantages. Is it possible (answered him Monsieur d'Armenton, to
relate all at one time I was to let you see first, that the women loved their
Husbands better than the Husbands loved their Wives; and the example of Camma
makes it plain enough; never did man show the like love for a Woman. It
remains now to make appear that the men have received Honor, and great
preferments by means of Women, nay and that they have themselves corrected
them for their defects. It will be as little trouble (proceeded he) for me to
maintain this Second Proposition, as it was for the first ancient times (said
he) furnish us with matter ample enough, and these modern times do no less;
there are none of you I suppose but know what the Sibills were formerly, by
whose mouth God did reveal many things that must and are come to pass. You know
how many of them have had for their Desciples men of great Authority; as
Aspatia Diotima, and so many others which we cannot be ignorant of: The last of
those which I named caused the Pestilence to cease for ten Years which should
have raged in Athens, by means of her Sacrifices which she Offered. I could
recite to you the Story of Nicostrata Mother to Evandra, who taught the Latins
the knowledge of Letters: and of another woman whose Name I have forgot, who was
Mistress to the famous Poet Pindorus. How many have there been that were very
well skilled in Poesy, as Corinna and Sappho; but we need not go far, we shall
(...) find if we will but give our selves the trouble, to examine things more
nearly, that the Women have been the original cause of the Greatness of Rome.
This (said the Abbot to him) I knew not before, and you will oblige me
extremely to tell me how: You shall hear replied Monsieur d'Armenton; you know
that the City of Troy being taken, many of the Trojans left their Country to
seek a better Fortune elsewhere. They embarked in Ships, a great many of
which after they had been beaten with the tempests, and ran a thousand dangers
upon this terrible Element; they came at last to take Port in Italy, upon the
Coasts where the River Tiber glides into the Sea; they landed, plundered the
Country, and by the management of their weapons they got wherewithal to keep
them from want. While they were busied with these actions, their Wives, who
feared nothing so much than that they would to Sea again, being one day
gathered together in a field by the Seaside, determined by the persuasions of
one of the principal of them whose Name was Roma, to put an end to their
troubles, and in good time to deliver themselves from those hazards they should
venture upon the Seas, and from all those incommodities that are to be endured
in that wandering Life that they lead, since they had left their Country to
follow their Husbands.

They as soon found out the means as the design, which was to set fire to their
ships, which they did after they had taken all those things out of them that
were necessary for them: It was to be feared that this strange action would
cause their Husbands displeasure, as being a considerable loss for them; they
prepared themselves to appease them, and presented themselves before them to
prevent them; they made them so many Feasts, showed them so much Friendship and
used so many Caresses and Dalliances, that in the end they disposed them to
receive this News with mildness. These unhappy Fugitives seeing no other
refuge, after the destruction of their vessels, were obliged to make themselves
an abode. The Land where they were appeared very pleasant; they found the
Natives to be of a good and civil behavior, and they believed that after all,
it was not the worst part their wives had constrained them to take; they built
them a City then which was afterward called Roma; the name of her that first
gave the counsel beforementioned: I need not add to this the History of the
Sabines, since it is too well known. Thus far said (Mr. Abbot) you have done
very well; but You tell us nothing of that woman that betrayed Rome, and who
showed the Enemies the way to the Capitol; which thing was enough to have
destroyed the City and all the Romans together. Is it not unseemly done of you
(answered him Monsieur d'Armenton) thus to allege one only action of a Naughty
woman, among such an infinite number of Glorious ones, which I could yet
mention besides those I have already spoken of. Do you know why continued he,
that Temples have been E^ected to Venus, armed to Venus the bald head. Do you
know why a Feast was ordained for the Goddess Anno, and celebrated by none but
Maids. You see where I am, and how I could entertain you thus a great while, if
I would make use of all that I know in favor of the part I have taken; but I
must leave that to some other that may do it better than I, and to whom it
would be no difficult matter if they would, to let you see that the women have
not only corrected the men for their sailings; but that they have conducted
them the way to their duty. What! (Monsieur d' Armenton said Madam the
Duchess) after you have gone thus far, would you leave the victory to the
power of your Enemy; you have it in your Hands, and it will be your fault if it
be not wholly obtained. It is true Sir, (added Madam Sindal) that you should
consider that if Mr. Abbot, or any other of the Company think it troublesome to
give you attention, there is never a Lady present but will keep silence to hear
you with extreme delight, and will give you those praises you merit: His
Generositie is the greater (added Mademoiselle d'Armand) to fight thus for us
against himself. What you say there, Ladies (replied Monsieur d'Armenton) is
doubtless very obliging on my behalf; but you will pardon me if I tell you,
that the truth nearer looked into, will make it seem otherwise because methinks
a man deserves but little praise for doing what his duty required; and when he
Combats for that Sex that Honor and Glory obliges him to serve: Although the
Scales may be equally balanced in the maintaining either your party or mine,
when the price of both is known: It is easy (said the Lady Sindal) for a
Person of your knowledge to turn things how you please. But as Generous and
witty as you are, you cannot forbear praising your self extremely. I Will assure
you Madam (answered her Monsieur d' Armenton) that being far from any such
design, I should rejoice to have you always continue in the same belief, and
that the little service I have done you, were altogether worthy of your esteem.
With all our esteem (said the Duchess) I can scarce believe, that we can
sufficiently require the Obligation we owe you; but if you will persuade us that
our esteem is worth esteeming; make an end I pray to merit all that which we
are capable of giving you. After such Obliging words (Monsieur d' Armenton)
could no longer defend himself from going on with the rest of his discourse;
insomuch that looking upon the Abbot, and beginning to laugh, it was not my
design Sir; (said he to him) to draw all your hatred upon me. But since I am
engaged by these Ladies, Honor obliges me to serve them to death i^ self.
Philip (continued he without giving the Abbot time to answer him) Lieutenant to
Demetrius, lying before the City Cio, which he had long Besieged, caused his
Herau d to proclaim under the walls of this City, that he would give liberty to
the woman, and slaves that would come and take refuge in his Army.

The women of Cio were so en^aged at such a shameful Proposition, that was so
much against their Courage and Honor, that they took up Arms, made a sally out
upon them, and fought with so much valor, resolution, and good Fortune, that
they constrained Phillip to retire from under their Townwalls where they lay
encamped, and from whence their Husbands could never drive them. The same women
did another Action no less considerable, than that I have already told you, it
is that Philip at last becoming master of Cio: The Inhabitants were permitted
to retire where they pleased. The woman would accompany the men in this
voluntary exile, and the greatest part took up their dwellings in Leuernia;
they were not long before they were troublesomly engaged in a new war, which
the Critheans their Allies raised against them, and who besieged them in their
City; and they were in such great constraint, that they were reduced to the
point of accepting an infamous composition; it was that they should march out
of the City only in shirt and breeches: their wives had no soone^ heard the
Articles of this unworthy composition; but they began to reproach the men with
their barreness of spirit. The poor unfortunate men answered that it was now no
time to revoak what they had said, that the Treaty was signed, and that they
could not violate their Oath. Nevertheless the women learnt them their duty,
without breaking their word. You have sworn said one of these Heroines to them)
to march out of the Town in your shirt and breeches; but you promised them not
that you would carry no arms with you; let them see then if you are men, that
your hearts are not below ours; take up your weapons, and at least follow us;
for we will show to our enemies, that we were not capable of the composition
which you have accepted. These men remained confused, and knew truly to their
shame, that their women were far above them; they took (at their example) a
etter resolution, they put themselves in Arm, went forth of the Town in shirt
and breeches, followed by their women, and fought with so much valor, that
although the Enemies number was extraordinary, they failed not to sell the
victory at a very dear rate; these feeble-hearted men became Lions at the sight
of their valiant Women, who did actions worthy of Heroes: and if they
triumphed not, it may at least be said that they glo^iously repaired the shame
of that infamous composition. Let us come said Monsieur d'Armenton to another
action, in which we may yet see that the women have caused the men to return
from their errors, and that they have showed them the way to Glory. Cyrus
having met the Persian Army, against whom he had war, and being willing to make
use of the advantage he had over them, gave them battle, and put them all to
the rout; these unhappy Run-awaies were returning with all possible speed to
their City, when their women (who from the walls did spy them thus basely to
fly) came forth before them to ask them whether they went? and if they would
like Infamous Creatures hide themselves in the same Intrails out of which they
sprung. These reproaches, which the men to their confusion heard, wrought so
much rigor upon their spirits, and so much power in their hearts, that they
rallied, turned their faces, and pouring upon the Enemy (whom they found
scattered in the pursuit) overcame them. After these two Histories, Monsieur
d'Armenton entreated Madam the Duchess, and the rest of the Company, that they
would give him the permission to leave the party for another.

It is (said the Abbot) because he has no more to say: do not urge me
(answered him Monsieur d'Armenton) I am so much upon this matter, that you will
run the danger of hearing me longer then you may desire, I shall find
(proceeded he) in the only City of Sparta more examples of the Heroical virtue
of Women, than what I have yet mentioned; Saguntum that famous City which was
destroyed by Hannibal; the women bore arms, and fought more valiantly than the
men did: Some time after Marius made war against them, and overcame them; the
women demanded the liberty of him to retire to Rome to the Vestalls which they
had a desire to serve. Marius who was a proud and haughty Conqueror, refused
them this Grace, for which the Women were so heartily grieved, that having no
other remedy but despair, they began with the Massacre of their own Infants,
and afterward to kill one another: You see (said Mons^eur d' Armenton to the
Abbot) whether I have no more to say. It is so long ago (replied the Abbot)
since these Ages, that there being so many Fables to relate, you need not fear
my doing my endeavor to answer, nor contradict you. If you will take the
pains (answered him Monsieur d'Armenton) to measure the merit and valor of
women in all Ages, you will find that they are nothing inferior to the men; and
not seek into past Ages to hold to those things which we are not permitted to
doubt of: Consider but the prudence and courage of Amalazonca Queen of the
Goths: the Generositie and Courage of Theodelenda Queen of the Lombards; the
wisdom and piety of Theodora Empress of Greece: If you will yet come to Ages
better known, without departing out of Europe, only tell me, I pray you! what
may not be said of so many great Queens that have Ruled in France; so many
others that have Governed Spain, as this incomperable Isabella, whom Gonsalvo
Fernando (one of the worlds greatest Captains) esteemed so greatly, that he was
accustomed to say, that there was nothing mo e praiseworthy, than by the hand
of this illustrious Queen to have him chosen for to be General of her Armies.
Queen Elizabeth of England may well eranked with this Spanish Queen; she who in
her time disputed for the Glory with two of the greatest Monarchs of the Earth,
I mean Henry le Grand, and Philip the Second: I know you are not ignorant of
the merit of these two migh y Queens; he must be Enemy to Truth that will not
yield to such ra e examples, for Letters, Music, Limning, and Sculpture it
self: Who can say that the Women have not excelled in our Times, or at least
been equal to the Men. But once more Mr. Abbot do not urge me where you may see
me in a humor to entertain the company afresh. If suffices that you are
convinced in your mind, maugre all your subtleties, that the women are capable
of as much perfection as the men. That they have done them Honor, and that the
advantages they have reaped by them are considerable: If there are now none of
these Queens that went formerly to Conquer strange Countries, that build Towns,
that raise Piramids, and who busied themselves about other works of the like
nature, as a Thomyris Queen of Scytia, Artemisa, Zenobia, Semiramis, Cleopatra;
there are also but few men like Caesar, Alexander, Scipio, Lucullus, and so many
other Famous Romans, Say not (said Mr. Abbot to him smiling) that there are now
no more like Cleopatra and Semiramis; it is true that they have not
Commonwealths nor Kingdoms as these Illustrious Queens had; but they are not
less bent to their pleasure. The Ladies who heard Mr. Abbot speak in this
manner, and who immediately comprehended his meaning; and that he might go no
farther, they put themselves in a posture to assault him for the second time:
Mr. Abbot was terribly amazed, and said (with an air not a little pleasant)
that if Monsieur d' Armenton overcame him, it was not with reason, but because
he had more force; and that they used weapons against him which were forbidden
in conversation. The fear and the manner that Mr. Abbot turned these words,
made the Duke laugh heartitily. (Monsieur d'Armenton answered him) that if
there were women like unto a Cleopatra and Semiramis, there were
notwithstanding many more Sardanapales, whose character was much more infamous.
What you say there (replied the Abbot) is doubtless contrary to what you think;
for there is no Body but knows that the women have ever been less reserved
than the men; but if that were not, who can say that there is not an extreme
difference: You know that by the miscarriage of one woman, a thousand
misfortunes follow; whereas by the disorder of one man, thete happens nothing,
or very little. These are very strong arguments (said Monsieur d'Armenton to
him in raillery.) I wonder you have been so long on thinking of nothing else
but that to say to me. But yet I pray, why would not you have Vice to be as
much and more condemnable in men than women; since it is from them that most
Virtue is expected. Let us us speak the truth (continued he) and confess that
this Tyrannical Empire which we have usurped over them, authorizeth our Crimes,
and that the same actions which in us are esteemed Honorable, were they in
them, we would condemn them to death, or at least to an Eternal Infamy. The
Abbot answered him nothing, because he feared that if he should adventure to
say any thing too bitter against these Ladies, he should bring some new
misfortune upon him: but they discerned in his face the violence he did, to
hinder him from speaking his thoughts, which gave a very pleasant subject of
Laughter: At length when they had done their mirth, the Company entreated
Mademoiselle d' Armand to give them a Song, which she did in the ensuing words
with much skill and judgment.

SONG.
^ O Love how all the World's inclined,
^ by love how led a -- stray,
^ that though the God himself be blind
^ we dare not dis -- o -- bey.
^ Laws for our hearts to be betrayed,
^ the God of Passions gave
^ that such a set a Fancy made,
^ and Reason such a slave.
Where resolution is forgot
To struggle with the flame,
It does the judgment quite besot,
And makes the reason tame:
For when our blind desires have sped,
And to ill fate we are given,
It will at last be poorly said,
It was decreed in Heaven.
Thrice happy he, whom conquering Love
Has eased his very Soul,
And in that Agony can prove
His power to control.
That Mortal did I once but know,
I Would more than Love admire,
That could as easily forgo,
As entertain the fire.
Mr. Turner
After which, (and the due applauses, the company gave Mademoiselle d'Armond
for the same) it being late, and the Duchess fearing the Dukes sitting up too
long, the Conversation ended; the Company parted with the usual Ceremonies, and
each took their way to their Lodging.

CHAP. III.
THis day passed no less pleasantly than the others; there were Plays, Dances,
and many other Diversions to entertain the Company with from the morning that
they were dressed, till eight of the clock in the Evening that they went to
Supper; after Supper they failed not to go into the Garden, where they fetched
some turns in the walks, and afterward resorted to the Arbor, where the
Circle was kept. The Abbot had been so evil treated the day before, that he had
no mind to renew the dispute. It was the Duchess that began the discourse, and
who said to the Count de Lorme, that the Lady whose Picture he had given, was a
perfectly fair and civil Woman; but that there were notwithstanding persons in
the company, who think that for a Court-Lady as he would have made her, there
was something yet wanting; and that he should make an end. I know not said the
Baron d'Epare what may be said of the Counts Lady; but in my opinion a Lady
cannot be made better qualified; and that is all can be desired in a Woman.
However you shall see (answered him the Duchess) that if he pleases, he will
give her new perfections; and that he will add to this piece some Features
above the rest that shall not spoil her: I know not Madam, said the Count, what
there yet is wanting in this work; but for my part I confess that a Lady like
her would please me very well; and he that is not contented with her, let him
leave her to me, I know very well where to bestow her: The pleasant Air with
which the Count pronounced these words, made the Company to laugh. But what
(said the Countess d' Ancyre) would you not teach a person so accomplished, how
she ought to behave her self in matters of Love? for I imagine you would not
have her incapable of those sentiments; and beautiful as you have made her, it
is at least impossible for her not to inspire it. Tell us then (continued this
Lady) how she ought to comport her self with a Gallant Person that does
sincerely love her. It is true (said the Lady Sindal) that these are two things
which a Court-Lady ought not to be ignorant of, especially the last, because it
oftener happens that the men make show of Love, than to Love in reality; he must
first tell us (said Mademoiselle d'Armond) with what Air a Woman must receive a
declaration of Love, and whether she must not dissemble with all Lovers, or
answer some of them? We must first (said the Count) rather learn a Lady to know
Lovers, to know how to distinguish the true from the false: As for answering or
not answering their Love, I believe in that she ought to take her own counsel;
this then (added the Duchess) is wanting in your Heroine, in which if you
please you must instruct her, or I will be the first my self that will say she
has failings, since she is not yet skilled in Lovers; you must tell us
(continued she) what are the most certain marks to know true Love, and what it
is can convince your Lady to persuade her to love; for in fine it has been a
saying a great while, that a Woman begins to love when she believes her
self loved; if her Lover be endued with these Perfections that may deserve
Love. What you ask of me Madam (answered her the Count) is cumbersome enough;
for if we must speak the truth, the men are now such Cheats in this, that the
prudentest Women are the first that are deceived; we see them sometimes
complain, weep, and sigh when they have a mind to laugh and the most part are
so accustomed to it, that in one and the same day they will let fall Tears at
at the feet of two or three Mistresses, and will promise them a fidelity not to
be paralleled; and if I might be believed, they should make an example of these
false-hearted sighers, and a good part of them should be sent into some desert
Island. However to the end the Lady whose Picture I have given you, and of whom
I must take a particular protection) may not be deceived in the choice she
shall make of a Lover; I am obliged to give her some counsel, by which she may
regulate her Carriage.

When the Count had gone thus far, a Lacquey belonging to the Duchess (who had
been sent to Paris to fetch some Letters which he was to take at the
Post House) brought some for many persons of the Company, and put them all into
the hands of his Mistress: There was at first a little confusion in the Circle:
the impatience which they all had about the Letters, occasioned them to rise
from their places, and every one endeavored to know if there was none for
them. The Duchess who had a mind to engage her self from the trouble, put them
all into the Lady Sindals hand to take care to deliver them; but this Lady who
had a desire to partake of some mirth, desired them immediately all to betake
themselves to their places again, and that she would give chem all
satisfaction. I see well said the Duchess, that how gallant soever the subject
was which we even now proposed, the curiosity of Letters will carry it, and
that there will be given but little attention to what the Count shall tell us;
wherefore Madam continued the Duchess, in addressing her self to the Lady
Sindal; if you will believe me, you must quit your self of these Letters as
soon as you can, and deliver them to the Owners; we will afterward begin the
Conversation. If you desire so answered the Lady Sindal, I consent; but it is
certain that we shall have but little time left for a matter so gallant as is
that which we have given the Count; and besides, you will see that they will be
prevented after they have read these Le^ters, that they will scarcely answer
the discourse; and the Count will have the discourtesie done him of relating
curious things to persons that will not hear him: For my part added she, if I
may be believed, a Conversation might be made even from these Letters, and the
Count might retain his for another time; I may have some here as well as the
rest, for truly I expect some that are witty enough too; if you please we will
make choice of some of the company that shall read them out; but without naming
from whence, nor from whom they come, except the persons interessed order
otherwise. There was no Body but approved the design of the Lady Sindal, no
body would oppose it, for fear of giving the company leave to think they had
some private Intelligence. The Duchess nevertheless, according to her ordinary
prudence would have some order kept, and that they who should be chosen to read
these Letters, should first let the persons see them to whom they belonged, to
ask them whether they might be exposed, or whether they would give them
permission. This reservedness served for little; there was nothing in these
Letters that might not be communicated to so judicious and reasonable a company
as this was; however it was judged necessary to do thus to avoid troublesome
inconveniences. Madam d'Elus who was a Woman noted for wisdom and discretion
through all the world, was the person chosen to take this care. The first
Letter which came to her hand, (for it was through hazard she took them,) was
for the Cavaleer d'Estapes, and without naming from whom, nor from whence it
came; after she had showed it him, and asked him the permission to read it, she
found it as follows: SIR,
IN two months time I have received none of your Letters; Why so? am I by you
so much forgot? or is there some misfortune come upon you? how cruel are you?
tell me if there be any one more interessed in your Concerns than my self; and
if you ought to neglect me so far, as to believe you owe me not at least so
feeble a satisfaction, in truth you love me not; since you can let so much time
pass away in silence: I perceive very well that all those marks of tenderness
which you have given me, were but a mere effect of your spirit, your heart had
no part; there was at least more of complaisance than amity; it was through
Exchange, and not through inclination; for I know not how one can love after
the manner as I mean, and live as you do: You know what you promised me when
you parted hence, and how you would render me an account every eight days as
long as you lived: I did let my self be flattered so patiently, that the only
hope of this caused me to endure the first days of your absence with patience;
there is nothing easier than to abuse the credulity of a heart that loves us;
but there is nothing more base or more black neither. I endeavored to comfort
my self for the Regret that I had of your absence after I had been so well
accustomed to it through the pleasure I hoped to have had by a small commerce
of Letters which we should read together: You have not let me enjoy this
pleasure but a small time. What have you done? Why did you not tell me that
absence with you was an unavoidable adversary to all sorts of friendship: I
should (it may be) have prepared my self, and I should not have found my self
in that strange necessity wherein I am driven, to make Complaints to you. If
you can, endeavor to justify your self, or deceive me by some false Arguments.
I am in despair to find you guilty, and not to see any thing whereby you can
justify your ingratitude. Farewell. Omit nothing to make me believe you
innocent, and that I have done you Wrong. Adieu.




The Cavalier said Madam d'Elus (after she had read this Letter) need not fear
that I will tell from whom it came, for there is neither Date, nor Name: I
believe said Madam de Armand that I could guess if I would. You cannot answered
her the Cavalier; and I aver more, that none of the company know the person
that writ to me, and that she is above fifty leagues from this place: be it
what it will said the Duchess, methinks this Letter is very tender and
passionate, and that the Cavalier is the unjustest of all men if he can forget
a person that has such inclinations for him; it is also Madam, answered her
the Cavalier what I have never done, and which is beyond my power to do, for it
is truth (...) that the esteem and tenderness which I have for this person is
of a Character never to be effaced. Into that (said the Countess d'Ancyre to
him) we will not penetrate; but however you show your self strangely cruel; and
it may be said, that you do not act gallantly in maintaining the sentiments you
say you have for her so illy; it is not, (answered her the Cavalier) for having
failed in doing my duty. And if this Lady received none of those Letters I
writ, it is not me she must blame, but some naughty Demon that endeavors to
cross us. See said the Lady Sindal how these Traitors of men cover their
seditiousness so soon as they have got at a small distance from their
Mistresses; all they endeavor is but to make Love at new costs: besides a
relic of goodness that there is yet remains in them, will not permit them to
write them Treasons, no, they will rather forbearall correspondence with them,
and at the first reproaches they shall receive from them, they have presently
recourse to that commanding, pretense that their Letters were miscarried: for
my part (I doubt not continued she) but the Cavalier is one of these, I have
known him long for a person very wavering in the greatest engagements. Perhaps
(answered her the Cavalier) that if you knew. -- Alas, (replied the same Lady
presently interrupting him) I know but too well of your infidelities, and if my
advice might be followed or to punish you for the injustice which you have done
this Fair-one that writes to you, the company shall oblige you to recite to us
presently all the particulars of this story. This sentence was approved of by
all; the Cavalier was condemned without appeal: he did well to excuse himself,
all his Arguments were misunderstood: at length he obeyed his Judges, and in
this manner.

It is some time since (said he) I traveled in a Province that is none of the
farthest from Paris, and where some certain affairs called me, it being the
first time I had been there; it was not very difficult for me to loose my way:
this misfortune happened to me late in the evening, and when I least thought of
it, I conceived my error, when it was too late to seek a remedy. I found my
self upon the closing up of the night in the middle of a wood, where the
farther I went, the more I found my self encumbered, and there was no hope of
getting out; it was in the winterseason, the weather was very rough, and the
ways very bad, and that time of night, it was as impossible for me to turn
back again, as it was for me to pass further in, but I armed my self with
resolution, and comforted my self with patience, waiting under a Tree for the
break of day, which I thought better than a thousand hazards that there is in
crossing the ditches, which we should every moment meet with: I forbear telling
you the small pleasure there is to be reduced to this extremity: but this I
thought should be the last adventure of a Knight-errand that should happen to
me any more. I entertained my self with these and the like melancholy thoughts,
when by good Fortune I espied a peysant not far off of us, who was going
homeward: I sent my Valtet to him to bid him come to me, and who followed him
only by the noise, for we could not see the night was so obscure; he overtook
him, and engaged him with fair words and promises to conduct us to some
shelter; at first he told us that we were at least two leagues from the right
road, and that he knew no place nearer to lodge in than a league from thence,
where we went the most detestable way that is possible to be imagine; at length
we came to a small Village, in which was but one Cabaret to drink a pint of
Wine in. God knows how we were treated, after we had knocked at the door an
hour to oblige the Host to let us in, who would not, but upon the Faith of our
Guide, who swore to him we were honest people. The Peysant stayed with us, eat,
drank, and lay in the same Cabaret; for my part who had for my be nothing but a
miserable Pallat, and two thin Ruggs; I passed not the night so well as he, but
better nevertheless than I should have done in the middle of the wood. The
trouble, melancholy, and weariness that I had had, served me at length in lieu
of a pillow, insomuch that about the break of day, I fell asleep. I had not
reposed two hours, but this Peasant enters my chamber, and waking me very
rudely, tells me, that Madam the Abbess waited to speak with me in the
Parlor. I received this Compliment with a very bad air; I knew not what he
meant by Madam l' Abbess, and thought in the same instant to have forgot all
the obligation I owed him for the last night; the poor man knew very well by my
reception of him, that he had done me no very good Office, although he believed
he had done me service: he departed, and went to carry the answer I gave him,
to the party that sent him. On my side it was not possible for me to recover my
sleep again, and I thought only upon what this man had told me, that an Abbess
asked for me: I knew no body in the Country, and I did truly imagine that there
might be (some abiss of Religious persons at the turning, but I could not
divine why I should be sent for; I did effectively believe that they took me
for another: Be it how it could, I was troubled that I had so illy answered
this Civility; and if the Peysant would faithfully report the unpleasant manner
of my sending him back, this Abbess had as much reason to blame me, as I had to
praise her. This reflection made me something sad; but it happened very well to
the purpose to deliver me: This Ladies Millar came (after this Peasant) to tell
me with an air a little more ceremoniously, that Madam l' Abbess (since this
Village belonged to her) having understood by her Shepherd that a perspn of
Quality having mistook his way, had been constrained to lie in a miserable
Cabaret, did send him to entreat me to accept of a place less incommodious then
that wherein I was. This Compliment banished all my melancholy, and I would no
harm to my Peasant now, because it was he that procured me the Honor this
Abbess did me. I answered him with as much Gallantry as it was possible for me,
and prayed him to assure his Lady that I had the most acknowledging resentments
in the world for the Grace she did me, and that I would not be long to come and
testify them my self to her, which I did after the manner I am going to tell
you.

My man being already up, I caused him to give me an indifferent handsome Suit
of Apparel, and I put me into an Equipage Cavalierlike, enough for this Visit:
The Peasant who served me as my Guide, conducted me also to Madam the Abbess. I
went first into the Parlor, where she made me not to stay long for her.

I believe before I proceed, it will be better for me to make a description of
this Abbess to you, which it may be will not displease you.

Imagine it to be a Maid of about 28 Years of Age, of an indifferent height,
but well shaped in her Growth; she had a good head of hair, and flaxen
colored, the Eyes black and fair, the mouth admirable handsome, the Teeth
passable, the Nose well shaped, and the turn of her Visage round, and so
pretty, that for to speak the truth, she was fitter to inspire Love, than
Devotion: she had likewise an air so Sweet and Modest, that in charming did
imprint I know not what respect, which did abate the Courage; her very Voice
had something of particular; and one cannot say how much without affectation;
she had the Countenance of an Abbess.

I saw this person, and if I must disguise nothing, I Will confess I loved her
from the very first moment I saw her; I thought no more on the night I had
passed with so much trouble; nay I forgot my self so far, as to surrender my
self Prisoner to this fair one. It is true that the knots were not so strong as
not to be broak, or at least to stretch; but however, in such manner that it
would cause one to feel them when one has a desire to serve a person that
pleases one extremely. This fair Abbess Conquered all that Country; at my
first Visit she told me very obligingly at first, that she could have desired
that I had passed my time less incommodiously than I did in that Cabaret, and
that she would pray me to abide this day with her, that I might repose my self
for the last nights weariness: the prayer was obliging; and as in civility, I
could not but refuse her proffer; I did it with so much constraint, that it was
easy for her to discern that I had yet no mind to be going. But as she had a
gallant piercing wit, she made use of this pretense, in telling me, that if she
had not the power over me she would have to cause my stay, she was certain that
two or three of her Friends would engage me at my first view of them, and that
I should not have force enough perhaps to refuse their request as I had hers,
which said, she as soon called the Ladies she spoke of: But I that pretended
the Honor wholly due to her, assured her that she should tempt me in vain on
her Friends parts, in a thing which she her self could not obtain of me; and
that I believed there was nothing in the world had so much power over a
rational spirit as she, nor that could cause themselves to be better obeyed
when they desired any thing; the Abbess gave attention to what I said, and
received my Caresses as I desired, she was endued with virtue intermixed with
modesty: Nevertheless flattery always would find resistance, and seldom would
she stand upon her defense, but with much violence and passion; she knew she
was fair, and although she would not make use of her Beauty to captivate hearts
as a person of the world, yet would not she be so negligent of it, but that she
would rejoice in private that she was not esteemed unhandsome: the other three
Nuns her Friends, whose company she had sent for, came just in the instant as
she was going to answer me; but her mind presently changing, here is said she
(turning her self about) that will make you revoak what you said but even now.
I shall leave you with them for an hour. I have some small business, and I hope
by the time of my return we shall see you in another opinion. I swear to you
Madam (answered I softly, because I would not be heard by the other) that this
shall be the last opinion I Will carry from hence; and that if I could imagine
the least cause of alteration, I would instantly depart. She answered but with
a smile, which was doubtless for fear she should explain her self too far
before persons that would not have been suspicious, had they not been
interessed in what she said to me. I began a something freer conversation with
these Ladies than I did with the Abbess. I knew already that it was not illy
taken by them that I was not over serious, and that they used it only to those
from whom they fear envious reports, and causeless censure: But with me who was
but a Young man, and a lover of mirth, and who only was there for sometime, and
who delighted in nothing more than rejoicing; it were time lost to use
formalities in a first Visit; in effect they received my airy humor not illy,
and ranged themselves to it in a most agreeable manner: In my life I did never
see more wit than were in those three Ladies; all that they spoke sparkled,
banishing that Monacal Humor, hat poysoneth all the best of a Religious Ladies
discourse that is infected with it. I believe it will not seem tedious to you
if I delineate the Pictures of those I speak of, as I did that of the Abbess,
especially one of them which was her Sister, who is she that has the greatest
part in this History, and who writ the Letter you just now heard.

It was a Virgin of an admirable stature, whose skin was extreme white, and the
turn of her face Oval, the eyes fair and fiery; if she was defective in any
thing, it was that she had too much perfection; her voice was very sweet, and
she would sing divinely; never was anything better shaped, nor any thing of a
purer Vermillion red than her lips; the whiteness of her ivory teeth did answer
admirable well to that rare Carnation; and the air which proceeded from that
amiable mouth was something of such sweetness, that there could not breathe a
purer; we must add to these lovely Features, that she had as much wit as any
could have, and an understanding that knew always what to say; and that would
say nothing but what was worthy admiration; her Soul was the fairest that ever
virtue had a hand in forming.

The piece shall here end: they are grown troublesome since they are not
A-la-mode; I Will only say, that this Lady had nothing common in her, and that
all was rare and perfected in her: The other two Ladies were two persons very
witty and handsome, the one had something more of luster and fire than the
othea; but this in exchange had something more of sincerity, which thing has
rendered her also a more particular Friend to the Abbess her Sister. I
discoursed for sometime with these three Nuns upon matters almost indifferent,
where I endeavored to produce what wit I could; they for their parts did
miracles to sustain the Conversation, especially the Abbess her Sister; this
charming Maid said nothing but what I thought so particular and clear, that I
believed there was but her in the world that had so much wit, and that knew how
to turn it in so admirable a manner; the Abbess at length re-entred: and truly
in good time if she had the least desire to conserve what she had won of me,
for to tell you the things as they happened; the merit of her Sister seemed too
great to me than to dare to give her less than a heart; and I was just upon
changing my mind as she foretold me: I had been perjured indeed if her
presence had not re-kindled the fire, that the first sight of her had excited
in my Soul: Her Sister did nevertheless prevent the farther progress; and I
confess to you were it not for her, I should have loved the Abbess very well;
all my esteem was in her divided, and tenderness had followed this esteem if I
had seen her first; and if her Sister had not seized upon the better part of my
heart. I left not the Parlour almost all that day, but conversed sometimes with
one, and sometimes with the other of these two aimable persons: insomuch that
these beginnings of acquaintance increased so much in tenderness through the
succession of time, that I may in truth say, that I never loved any thing like
them. I believe the company don't desire that I should make too long a
rehearsal of this adventure, nor that I should recite every small circumstance:
Go on with your story answered the Lady Sindal, who spoke for all the company;
we will not have you omit any particular that may be of any small consequence;
and you must use as much fidelity in your relation, as gallantry. We may permit
him (added the Duchess) to omit a great many small circumstances which he may
relate to us at other times, for we have now no remainder of time. I would
continued the said Lady in speaking to the Cavalier) have a little knowledge how
and with what air you managed your affairs with these two Ladies, and being as
you say, in what manner they could suffer this division; for I have ever
thought it a thing very difficult to deceive two Mistresses, with much more
reason two Sisters, which you almost always see together. I Will tell you
(answered the Cavalier) what has happened to me in a Year and a halfs time, in
which I had the honor of their acquaintance; for the first time of my seeing
them was but a day and a half; but there was cause enough left behind for my
speedy return; and to tell you in a word, all the time of my abode in this
Province, I ever left them the later, but it was to return the sooner: At first
I would consult with my self about the different sentiments I had for the one
and the other; and I found (at least it seemed to me) that I loved the Abbess,
and that I had a very great esteem, and a very tender Friendship for the other;
and although it be not ordinary, yet it is true, that being charmed with the
Beauty and Mildness of the first, I was in the same instant powerfully
concerned at the rare merit of the other, and had for her a strange longing to
see her even in the presence of the Abbess. I needed not to have over-studied
my actions yet, if there were any one of them remarkable in favor of the
Elder, the Younger would attribute it to the Quality she had above her; and the
Elder wou d take for gallantry of wit all the obliging language I passed upon
her Sister: it is true, that this simple Error could not long continue; the
more we love, the clearer is our eyesight: insomuch that both of them having
taken a little esteem for me which before they had not, they then began to
mistrust one another, and to regard my actions, and examine my words with a
deeper consideration then before they did; sometimes one would tell me that I
praised her Sister with a certain Exageration proper to nothing but love; the
other would reproach me that I always sought the company of the Abbess, and
that I was seldom in a good humor, but in her Conversation. All these usual
complaints are but the Overtures of a clearing Evidence; it must appear after a
great many windings, and you shall hear in what manner. The Abbess her Sister,
who if you please we will call Egidia was the last that put the question, who
prospered the better; however she sought the opportunity of a particular
converse with me, which she found in a time when her Sister was busied about
some affairs elsewhere, from which she knew she could not be dispensed; and
looking upon me with the tenderest look that Love could paint out, or delineate
in a Visage apt to receive its impression.

Sir, Cavalier said she; it is no longer time now to dissemble with you in any
thing: you want not wit, and you know but too well that you are not indifferent
to me, these five or six months have I seen you? I never was yet so positive
with you upon this matter, but now I Will do more for you than you can expect
from a Maid of my humor. It is to assure you that the esteem and tenderness
buried in the Cabinet of my Breast for your sake is none of the smallest; if
you know me you will find that a declaration in this manner is no trifle; and
if you do owe me any small Obligation, it is for having told you what I might
have layen hid in the obscurity of my heart all my life.

In these joyful Raptures, where the effects of the Grace she did me did lift
me her hand I saluted, (not knowing how to forbear) a thousand times, and
testifying by the access of my joy, even to what point of happiness, I
considered a declaration so charming and favorable had brought me. But she
interrupting me, bid me in retiring her hand let her make an end, saying it was
yet no time for me to answer.

If you believe, said she, that the favor I did you in opening my heart to you
meriteth any acknowledgment from you, let me know in permitting me to look into
yours, what I am going to demand of you: You are a person of Honor, and it
would be too low-spirited a thing of you to deceive people, especially those
that have both esteem and friendship for you. It is not now that I perceive
Madam the Abbess to have some inclinations for you, she does not hide her
thoughts from me, because she knows not that I have the like Sore: But she
imagines not that you love another person besides her, and if I may believe
your eyes, your heart has not a little Intelligence with hers; tell me, and
tell me truly; Do you sincerely love her? to the end that without making any
further progress, I may Sacrifice to her in the moment I now speak to You. All
that I have that tends toward You.

I have still so much reason in me as to render Justice to my Rival, if you
would have me call her so; and to acknowledge that she does very well merit your
whole heart; she is too mistrustful, and too well persuaded of her own worth,
to permit you to divide your heart with another; and to speak the truth,
although I am her youngest Sister, I am so jealous of these sort of Treasures
when I have them once in my possession, that it would be no little trouble to
me to surrender up that place to her wherein I should be established. Consult a
little, and -- Madam, (said I to her interrupting her) not being able to
contain my self any longer from not answering her, I had not need to consult
any more It is not two days since I explained my intents to your Sister, would
the hand understand me. I acknowledge that her good Nature and Civility has
engaged me in many things which I rob from you; but if I must pay these
Obligations I owe her with a heart, believe me, I were the most ungrateful of
all men: and that I have given it to you in such manner, never to be separated
be it for who it will: it was on Thursday in the evening when you were in the
Garden, that she took occasion to tell me there was no more then one step
wanting to gain the entire possession of her heart, which was to break with
you. What mean you by this Proposition Madam (said I) being surprised at what
she said: Will you be so unjust as to make me buy your heart with such
baseness. Can I my self be so weak as to obey you? you will pardon me if you
please: But I believe it is not in earnest you would make me thus criminal. I
understand you answered she presently, and I perceived the fault that my
imprudence had made me commit; you do not esteem my heart at such a rate as to
engage you in a loss like that of my Sisters; but however, do you know the
sentiments she has for you, and is there any one that possesses what you may
pretend of her esteem? I know not Madam, (answered I) what passes in your
Sisters heart; but in sine, I never received any thing from her but Honor; and
I should be the sorrowfullest man alive if I had given her the least occasion
of repentance; however you must resolve replied she with a coy and disdainful
look, or think never to pretend any thing in my heart, I Will not resign it, but
on those terms; after these words I endeavored to explain my self to her all
at length, because I would not give her any more cause to doubt of the inward
passages of my heart; but she left me without so much as giving me the leisure
to answer her in giving me the longer time of thinking. Thus continued I in
speaking to Egidia: this Conversation passed, whether it be that She would find
me alone, or that she ^^^rehended me too soon, knowing of what she would be
ignorant of. The Lady Abbess has not spoke any more to me of any thing, to
tell you the truth, I thought her Fair; her charms surprised my tenderness in
the beginning, and what for her I suffer, a true friend is not unworthy of,
that rank I cannot refuse her; and if you should order me to the contrary, I
could not do otherwise. This charming Lady did so rejoice at the sincerity with
which I spoke to her, and at what had passed between her Sister and me, that
she willingly consented at that part of my Friendship I bestowed upon her
Eldest Sister, and believed that being assured of enjoying my heart entirely,
it would but ill become her to ask more: We left one another with much content,
and more love, at least on my behalf. This sweet tenderness I had for her at
first, had already taken the form of a very strong passion; and this passion
increased daily, while the love in which I first scorched, for the Abbess was
half diminished unexpectedly; this so obliging and tender confirmation which
Egidia had manifested to me of her love I thought so charming, that by this
means she finished her Conquest in subduing the remainder of my heart, and has
left for her Sister only so much as could make me say I I did not hate her,
neither did I look upon her more than as a Friend whom I had a desire to
conserve, and to whom I owed some Obligation; she perceived it presently, and
whether she found out some alteration in me by my behavior toward her, or
whether she apprehended her Sister since the time I had told her; I perceived
that she took very great notice of all my actions, and that she had not that
confidence in me as formerly she had been accustomed to have, she took pleasure
even not to believe me any more in whatever I said to her; but with her Sister
it was not so: However, jealous she was of her, nothing was visible, and she
would mention me to her as one whose heart she feared not the loss of; she
would sometimes cause her self to cast Jests upon her, when she would endeavor
to do any thing for her sake, in telling her the care she took was
unprofitable: So that at last one day when Egidia was troubled that her Sister
would by all outward circumstances bear the Conquest from her, when she knew
she had no reason for it, told her that it signified little to her to make a
Trophy of a heart which she so illy kept, and that others perhaps possessed in
a better ma ner than she. I believe answered her the Abbess with a voice no
less scornful, than full of disdain, to have so good a part in it, that it were
folly for any one to dispute it with me, or if they did, it were in vain if
they dared to do it. Egidia wanted no reply: And this difference went so far,
that they not being capable of being Judges where they were parties, they were
content with a common consent, since they could not read those Characters that
are writ upon the heart to refer themselves to what I should say, and to engage
me to explain my self before them in such manner, that she that found the
hardest usage, would willingly sacrifice her interest in me to the other. I
imagine that this conversation had something very singular in it, and that
there was pleasure great enough for one to have heard them: this resolution
being made, Egidia, who was a prudent Lady, and who saw in what she had engaged
her self, would have been glad to have revoked it, and would rather have
renounced all the Joy she could have promised her self in such a Victory, for
she was in very good hopes of obtaining it, than to expose me to the trouble
than this Declaration would cause; wherefore the same day she writ these Lines
to me.

SIR,
I Have laid a Wager, which whether I loose or win, I am furiously interessed:
We are to demand of You an Explanation of your mind, where it is pretended that
you must, and before Witnesses you may have reason to fear; after Dinner
declare toward which side your heart leans; if I consult with my self well,
I know what is due to me from you; but alas how know I what may happen! I cannot
renounce my Wager, since I was urged to it, the Glory had been too great for my
Rival had I refused; I consent, rendering Justice to me in your heart, that you
speak in favor of my Sister. Adieu; tell her You love her better than me; but
however love me better than her.


This Note bred some small disturbance in me; however, since I was to take one
part, I took a resolution without any more ballancing the matter in what I had
to do, and answered this Note if I remember to this effect.

MADAM,
I Beg your pardon that I am constrained to be disobedient when I am obliged
to it, the passages of my heart shall be open to You, and Your Generositie
shall not be paid with infidelity. It is true, by outward appearance it may:
Nevertheless since it is You that is engaged, I will even in appearance do all
things on Your behalf; but after such a proof of my Love, will You be persuaded
that I love You as I ought. I beg the permission of You after I have
undeceived Your Sister, to let me retreat at some distance for a small time,
for there is no doubt but Your Wager will breed evil Consequences: it lies in
your power Madam, to cause a remedy, and so in my place to bear the ill-luck
that may ensue, since it hdth been Your pleasure to trouble your self hitherto.
Adieu.


I gave this answer to the Lacquey that brought me the Note, and in the same
instant bid my Valett do all things in such good order, and without any noise,
that we might if it were necessary be ready to depart just after Dinner. I
passed the rest of the morning in the Garden, where while I waited for Dinner,
I was meditating on the Question they were preparing to ask me. I omitted
telling of you in the beginning, that this is one of those Covents where the
Religious enjoy a civil Liberty, and where their Parents or particular Friends
have the permission to enter, and see them in their Lodgings, which is a most
sweet Commodity for Gallants to pass for particular Friends, it being indecent
for the Religious to permit declared Lovers without a scruple I dined with the
Abbess as I ordinarily did, and appeared very much cast down and Melancholy at
the Table, contrary to my usual custom; for commonly I used to divert the
company with much delight, and seldom failed of that heat that gives the best
relish to a Re-past: The two interessed Ladies were the first that observed me.
The Abbess began to discourse very obligingly to me, to put me into a better
humor; and seeing I made her no answer, she at last asked me what I ailed that
I appeared so dull? I told her it was a great pain in my head that I had been
taken with ever since the morning; she had neglected nothing this day to set
her off, and although the Ornaments of the Religious are almost all alike, I
acknowledge that something I found in her so particular and so pleasing to me,
that with her sweet and winning carriage which she used, the resolution I had
taken to break off quite with her, began to perplex me; and had not her Sister
been present, she might perhaps have been enough to have made me revoke it:
There was ever two or three more Religious her Friends that commonly dined with
us, but after Dinner they absented themselves. We needed no body to witness the
Scene that was to pass among us three, I mean the Abbess, her Sister, and me;
for in the humor I was in, it was almost a trouble to me to keep my Teeth
asunder. The Abbess touched again upon the Melancholy she saw in my Visage, and
told me that she never see me in so ill an humor before; and that if I would do
her a pleasure, I should tell her the cause of it: I answered her as before,
that I was troubled with a great pain in my head; but such a small
Indisposition would not pass with her, judging by my eyes that there was
something more in it; and she prayed me to relate the truth to he, adding
withal with an air full of assurance that I was not before suspicious persons,
and that if there was any thing tha^ could cure my distemper, that I would
oblige he^ so far as to relate it, that I might be assured that she was a
partaker, and that I wronged her in denying her so small a satisfaction: I
believe not said her Sister (to hinder me from answering her) that he has any
thing troubles him more than what he has said: It is often seen said she, that
persons endewed with Wit as is the Cavalier, are subject to these terrible
pains of the Head; and they pass by these evil moments from one extremity to
another, I mean from evcessive Joy to excessive Melancholy. You believe Sister
then replied the Abbess very coldly, that You know very well the Gentleman's
distemper, because You take upon You to answer for him; in the mean time I Will
not imagine it to be what You say, but I Will believe no otherwise than what he
will say: However said Egidia if he would be advised by me, he should not
discover his pain to any; I know it, and it is so much the worse for people
that know not how to judge of it. Believe me said the Abbess with a malicious
smile, that if I should ask the knowledge of him, it is not that I am ignorant
of it; but it is to disabuse some body; and I wonder they will make difficulty
of understanding the truth now which methinks they have so much desired to
know; I was in the right too much continued she, since I see some repent for
being engaged so far. By your leave Ladies said I interrupting them on a
sudden, let me alone as I am, let my pain be what it will, and from whence it
will, I neither will nor can be cured; if it could be, I would only desire to
suffer less; for my part said the Abbess who meddle not with Divination, and
who do not penetrate so deeply into Hearts as my Sister. I would fain desire
him to explain to us the Nature of this pain; and for my part since I am not
infected with the Vice of insensibility as many people are. I might give him
some ease if it lay in the Circuit of my power. Nothing could be more gallantly
and favorably said on my behalf than this was; and I was just now going to
answer her according to her desire, had not a sudden look which Egidia cast
upon me put me in mind of my promise, which made me silent, not knowing what to
say: This admirable Lady perceived my trouble, and took up the word very well
for the purpose: it is true said she, that there are certain sorts of
Distempers that for their recovery the parties afflicted must have Recourse to
those persons that caused them; but the Cavaleer is not sick in such manner;
however it is continued she, I acknowledge my self so sensible of all that
concerns him, that I hold not willingly suffer him to relate his pain before
me, nay though I might be capable of giving him ease. For your part Madam said
she in speaking to her Sister, if you are in that mind you may give your self
that content; but you shall give me leave to retire then if you please: And
after she had said these words, she went away; insomuch that I remained alone
with the Abbess, who thinking she had triumphed, told me with a Joy she had
much to do to conceal that she saw well that her Sister had resigned up my
heart since she quitted the party, and that it was she that must cure my
Distemper; but that this was not yet all, she would know of my own self after
what manner she was established in this heart, and how much beyond her Sister,
that she had given me time enough to consider on it, and that one part I must
take, which was either to despair the obtaining any thing of tenderness from me
or else to resolve not to divide a thing which she desired the entire
possession of, that she would grant me a small tender esteem for her Youngest
Sister, but for the heart she only must have it, and that she knew how to use
it; after she had said all these things with much Gallantry, she was silent to
hear my answer; but I answered nothing, and I believe that my silence alone
spoke enough to be understood by her, and that she took it as an evil Omen:
some moments after she seeing me prepare to speak as one that had been musing
what to speak, she did it before me to hinder me from explaining my meaning,
thinking it would not have been very favorable on her behalf: Oh Heaven! said
she, how little reason have I to be satisfied now? Were I not in an Humor to
forgive you every thing, and had I not some pity to see you thus melancholy: Go
into your Chamber, and there repose your self, that is all the headake requires:
Ill take care that none shall trouble you: I retired with this permission, but
confused like a man that knew not what to say; but I was no sooner got to her
Chamber door then she called me back again, and said with an air full of
sweetness, Sir Cavaleer, hark you, I will meet you this Evening at Eight in the
Arbor that is in the last Walk, I shall expect you there with one of my
Friends; if you love me you will not fail. What do I say replied she presently;
if you did not love me you are too gallant to miss a Rendezvous that I appoint
you; there is nothing that I know of can make you dispense with it; Adieu and do
not fail then; in ending these words she smiled and entered into her Closet,
there to hide from me a small blush which did instantly ascend her Visage, but
for what I Will not tell you, but in this manner said the Cavaleer, endrd this
conversation which I so much dreaded. I believed nevertheless that I was rid of
this encumbrance better than I did think I should, and that I had avoided very
much trouble in not being constrained to explain my mind before these two
Ladies upon the choice my Heart should have made of them. But yet I could not
forbear to fear the Evening-meeting I apprehended her design by it, and to be
the last act of Grace; however since I must, and since I was resolved to hide
nothing from her, through unworthy Equivocations; I thought it better to make
use of this occasion when I should see her alone, to disabuse her wholly, than
to stay any longer. The Honors and Favors I received from her augmented daily
and rendered my ingratitude the greater. I determined than upon this
Declaration, and was the remainder of the day; after Dinner preparing my self
for it in my Chamber; they went to Supper a little after six of the clock, that
they might have the more time to walk in the fresh air; I seemed less
Melancholy at the Table than I did in the morning. Egidia took notice of it,
and she who had sought me a very great while with extreme patience, for to
demand of me how the case stood with me, and her Sister judged not well on her
own behalf, seeing me in another humor; and did effectively believe that I had
betrayed her. I took notice how discomposed she seemed, and how little she eat;
this thought so perplexed her, she had ever her eyes upon the Abbess or me, to
endeavor to surprise our looks, and penetrate into our hearts, to see whether
we had no intelligence one with another to deceive her; she had not the
patience to rise from the Table with the rest, but at length upon a light
pretense she left us, and retired into her Chamber, from whence she sent one of
her Friends (who quitted her self very handsomely of that Commission) to tell me
that she stayed to speak with me as soon as I had supped, I failed not, and
took so good a time that the Abbess who was entertaining two or three Ladies
that came to Visit her, did not in the least perceive it: I found this Lady in
a very melancholy posture leaving upon a Table, who presently told me that I
was not a little obliged to her for having helped me out of trouble at her
Cost, and that she doubted not but her Sister had reaped the advantage, but
that for my sake she would not repent it; and when it was for my Repose, she
would sacrifice all things, even to her heart it self, and afterward suddenly
changing her discourse; but by what Charm said She? or to speak better,
through what engagement has Madam the Abbess rendered You your Jovial humor;
for methinks you seem to be very pleasant this afternoon: Alas! you were so
melancholy this morning, have You some gage of her heart that gives You so much
Joy, speak Cavaleer, and conceal nothing from me! You have betrayed me, and
doubtless You knew not how to save your self from the hands of my Adversary,
but in this manner. What do You say (Madam answered I) that I have betrayed
You? Is it possible that You can have such a suspicion? pray vouchsafe to tell
me what grounds You have for it? believe if You please that far from having
thought it; I -- No, no Cavaleer said she interrupting me, I see well that You
know me not: I know better how to Love than You think I do, Your heart I aimed
at, and I have sometimes doubted whether I should come to the end of my aim in
the manner I desired or no. My Sister I confess has given me many causes of
trouble upon this Enterprise, and I have been allarumed at the smallest cast of
her eye, and a continual trouble has not let me enjoy in quiet the pleasure
there is to believe when one loves that one is loved again; but after all
these assaults I begin to be now something persuaded that it might perhaps
endure thus a great while, were it not for the resolution I have taken to make
You change: You must then Cavaleer (continued she) settle your Love wholly upon
the Abbess, and endeavor to please none but her; perhaps it will not be so
troublesome to you as to me; but however she must take this as an Obligation
from my hands, and let her know that I was the first that spoke of it to You,
and that entreated you to it. I acknowledge said she (in making a sign to me
that I should not interrupt her) that I find it troublesome enough to me to
lose you, and that what I do now lies heavier upon me than death it self;
however I Will conquer it, and if I have any power over You, You will do as I
say, and will look upon me as no more than one of your good Friends. As she was
proceeding to persuade me to this alteration, some few Tears which fell from
her Eyes maugre he betrayed her; and I saw her so strnngely burdened with
grief, that my heart was ready to bu^st with pity; neither had I power to
answer her but with a tender embrace. I admired in my self at the Generosity of
this Lady, and to what extent the Love she had for me would reach that tender
passion which I discovered through the midst of her Tears, pierced the very
bottom of my heart, and made me with facility to determine rather to lose the
light, than to make an alteration. I also made a thousand Oaths to her, and in
the condition wherein I was, not being capable of any cold Expression; I
expressed my self so tenderly, that she had no longer a mind to loose me. I
entreated her that this might be the last time of her speaking to me of a thing
which she neither must nor could ever obtain of me, that my heart should
always tend toward her, and that I would break off with Madam the Abbess, she
endeavored to dissuade me, and assured me that it would but precipitate my se
f and her too; but it was all said to no purpose; and with this design in my
head I quitted the Chamber, excusing my self upon some small business I had,
for that I stayed no longer with her, and told her before I slept I would Visit
her again. I would not give her any Notice of my private meeting, lest knowing
the Resolution I had taken she had not took a Fancy to detain me, and done her
endeavor to hinder this meeting; it was already past the time that I was to
meet her; and the tears of charming Egidia had so well disposed me to do all
things on her behalf, that I died with impatience to render that testimony of
my Love, after she had given me that of the tenderness and goodness of her
heart. I was then at the place the Abbess appointed, and found her where she
expected me with one of her Friends who left us by our selves; as soon as I
came, she told me she began to be weary with staying for me, and that if I had
tarried a minute longer, she would scarce have pardoned me. I believe Madam
said I (coldly enough) that I should come at any time in time enough for what
you may have to command me: she was very much surprised at this answer after
those obliging words with which she accosted me; she endeavored to dissemble
it, and without sticking at my unjust coldness, she used me the sweet lie in
the world, there was no engaging art which she did not use, no charm with
which she served not her self: it is easy if a Woman be but fair, and not
indifferent to You, to find a thousand charms in her if she have a desire to
please. This of whom I speak did presently present to my view the power of her
Beauty: This great resolution which I had taken against her, became by little
and little if not unprofitable to me, at least very weak; she did rend a
thousand tokens of inward tenderness from me without knowing from whence I drew
them: it was no more the person I would forsake, she had such full possession
of me in that moment, that I had scarce any room left in my thoughts for the
idea of amiable Egidia: To speak the truth, this Abbess was well skilled in the
art of rewarming a heart when she pleased; it was impossible to defend ones
self from her: One would think that she had employed her whole Life in the
study of Charms; the most faithful Lovers deserve to be excused at those
infidelities she causes them to commit, for it lies not in the power of man to
do his duty when she pleases to seduce him. But not to keep you longer in a
place where there are too many things to relate: I acknowledge that she is the
only person that has made me know my self best no one can be assured of any
thing against a Woman that uses complaisance. If this Fair-one was not fully
satisfied with me, she had also but little reason to complain. There is one
thing which perhaps may some hing surprise you; after the design I had taken,
and which might cause your il^ opinion of me, had I not told you that this
Abbess had Charms, against which there was no resistance; it is that I prayed
her my self not to press me to declare to her what she desired to know of me,
and that she would content her self with the power she saw she had over me, it
was such (that to speak the truth, she might if she had pleased have made me
commit the blackest perjury in the world but by good chance she was glad to go
no farther, because she perhaps feared the not prospering, neither was it a
time convenient for her; she had had advice by those she constantly kept, to
spy me with her Sister of the Conversation I had with her, and how the tears
were seen in her eyes; she cast some railleries upon me concerning it, and told
me that she knew when I first accosted her, that those Tears had made strange
havoc in my mind; but however she would pardon me, hoping that in the end I
would be accustomed to see Folks weep; she spoke all this, and many other
things, with so winning a Behavior, that it was impossible for me to be moved;
in the mean while it grew late, which I hinted to her; but she took it not
well, and told me I was the impertinentest Gallant that might be in the the
world; but yet I was constrained to retire, and a tender farewell which we
took each of other made up the business as well as ever; all that sweetness
with which she had loaded me with could not resist those smoaks of repentance
which charged my heart with a horrible Gall when I was from her presence; this
is yet nothing* I deserved it for a punishment for those minutes I stole from
Egidia, and with whom I had so failed in my duty: The Abbess met her, and
maliciously asked her where I was; I know not answered her Egidia, but I
believe that being a little indisposed, he is retired some^hing early to his
Chamber: You are mistaken Sister, answered her the Abbess, and I told you but
now that I knew his distemper better than you, I have advised him to come and
take the Air in the Garden and told him that would cure him, as indeed I
believe he finds himself now better: You may know of himself it is not a
minute since I left him: Egidia was the most surprised of any in the world, and
so confused that she knew not what to answer her, she knew not how to hide a
part of her resentment from her, with which the Abbess triumphed with
unspeakable Joy, and so left her in that cruel condition. This poor Lady knew
not what to imagine after what I said to her not two hours since, and the Oaths
I made to her, she had to good an opinion of me to have lightly believed what
her Sister might have old her on another occasion to my disadvantage; but in
this e could neither doubt nor excuse me. The Treason was too manifest, and all
things stood against me; she was at first shaken with a thousand different
passions, so much oppression lay upon her at once, that she was no more the
same person, we soonest believe what we fear most: The first thing she had a
mind too was to see me, and presently sent for me by her Lacquey. I came to
her, and by the eagerness I perceived she had to speak to me, I suspected the
truth; I imagined that this meeting had not been kept so secret but she must
have had notice of of it, but not that the Abbess would have revealed it, -- my
Curiosity invited me to dive into the truth of it; I found her by her self in a
small Parlour, and where in approaching her I saw her so troubled and changed,
that I no more doubted her knowledge of my being in the Garden with her Sister;
at first she did not speak to me, and for my part the grie^ in which I was to
know my self culpable, caused the same effect in me, as anger and jealousy did
in her; so that we continued some moments without speaking one to the other;
bu^ at length she broke silence; where have you been said she with a low Voice
(without so much as casting her eyes upon me?) I answered her that her man had
met me as I was retiring to my Chamber. Why would you commit (replied she
raising her Voice a little, and looking upon me with eyes fuller of pity than
Choler) a new Treason: Did you make so many promises to me this Evening but to
deceive me with the less difficulty? what have I done? -- After these words
excess of grief stopped her Voice, and she was going into a Swound. I am not able
to represent to you the condition wherein I found my self to see the person I
so dearly loved lie a dying. How cruel are these moments? what happiness were
it for me to dye also, if Heaven would but hear me, and not smile at those
Evils which Love makes me suffer: I looked upon this Lady as a man immovable,
not having the power to help her, nor to cry out: This weakness which took her,
and which was no formal Swound in giving her the liberty though but dimly) of
her sight, she saw upon my Face a grief, which spoke to her on my behalf, and
nothing (as she told me since) did raise her from this her cruel displeasure,
than to see how much I was concerned. This silence and my condition made my
peace with her, and all her grief had not the power to resist the satisfaction
she received from mine. By good Fortune there passed by in the mean time two
Nuns, who seeing her in the condieion I before told you, they ran toward us,
believing that some one of those Accidents had happened to her, which the Nuns
are frequently subject to, there came more people; and this News raised a
disturbance in the Covent; Madam the Abbess was one of the first that heard it,
nevertheless she endeavored nor to run and see: for my part I retired as soon
as I saw there was people enough to assist her, and although the Abbess sent
twice or thrice to speak with me; I desired her to excuse me, and to stay till
the next morning to tell me her pleasure. Egidia whom they had carried to her
Chamber, and who was already come to her self, not seeing me by her bedside, in
a time wherein she believed that if I loved, I would be least absent from her,
softly asked a Maid that waited on her if she knew not where I was: This Maid
who saw me go into my Chamber at the same time that I left her Mistress, and
who had seen the Tears run down my eyes, made her a faithful description of it,
which did extremely trouble her; and she entreated her Sister who was set down
by her to send for me, but she refusing, said, that she had done it twice
already to no purpose, and that she should make no more unprofitable entreaties
to me. Egidia who had a great desire to see me, and who could not endure that I
should continue all the Night in the sorrowful condition wherein I was, had a
mind to try whether I would come sooner for her, she believed she should not
venture too far nor that it would not signify much to her, though she could
not obtain more from me than I had granted her Sister. She sent then the same
Maid to me, in whom she had no small confidence, to tell me that if I had the
lea^ ^esire of her amendment, I should see he^ before she slept, and that she
would expect me i^ I had any small love for her: I am not able to tell you how
ready I was to Obey her Commands, those that have loved may with ease imagine.
I entered her Chamber, where was no Body with her but the Abbess, and who waited
with impatience to see how this scene would pass; they both presently perceived
how my countenance changed: I know not what the Eldest thought, but I know that
I raised pity from the other; and this poor ^ady beheld me with an air so
tender and piercing, that I could not forbear though in the presence of her
Sister to cast my self at her feet, and to take her by, the hand and Kiss it
with innumerable Kisses, which I also bathed with Tears which I could not
retain: I doubt not but the Abbess saw such sensibilities with an unwilling
aspect, they were cruel strokes, for which she could not forbear declaring her
resentments, though she used her utmost endeavors to hide a part: sure Sister
said she (with a Note which surprised us) the Cavaleer must have committed some
great injury against you, by the manner of his craving your pardon; you cannot
refuse such speaking Tears. Nevertheless, if you will take my advice continued
she in rising to be gone, you should do nothing before he has promised you,
that he will never fall again into the like Crime. I Will assure you he cannot
promise it, but he will be perjured; make this soft peace; I will retire to
leave you by your selves, for I imagine you do not desire me here for a
witness: I turned my head to answer her, but she was already gone out of the
door, and she spared me the displeasure I should have had in wandering by some
words from the respect I owed her. I remained alone then with Egidia, and more
perplexed than if the Abbess had been present, for although I had many things
to tell her, I knew not how nor which way to take, and silence was the any
Language I used. But she who suffered to see me afflicted, although it was for
her sake, after she had endeavored to re-assure me with her looks she brake
silence, well Cavaleer said she in clasping my hand, don't you repent that you
have betrayed your best of Friends! think well upon what you said to me just
now! how had you the heart then to deceive me? Speak, are you not the injustest
man living? She made a great many more reproaches to me; to which she added a
hundred of things which I cannot repeat to you in the manner she spoke to me.
In a word, to come the sooner to a subject which in the very relation of it to
you does mollify my inclination: I justified my self to her as well as I
possibly could, and I confessed to her the Rendezvous, and what had obliged me
to meet her, and the reason I had to conceal it from her, that at length she
became well satisfied with me, and mhre courteous than ever before; and she
showed me more tokens of tenderness than ever I received from her before; and
thus we most agreably acquitted each other from the pain and trouble which we
had had this Evening, we never loved better; and this small intervale of time
served for nothing but to kindle the fire the more that devoured us; the time
was already past in which Civility should constrain me to retire. I desired not
to enjoy the displeasure of staying till the Abbess sent to me, which she might
do: But my ill luck would have it, that all the doors of the Convent being
shut, except that of her Chamber which I must of necessity pass through to go
to mine: It Is true that in the condition wherein I was, being fortified with
the powerful Charms of her Sister, I made but very little reflection upon what
I had to fear: I examined not the danger that might be, and I felt Egidia so
firmly seated in my breast, that I was even glad (at least i^ seemed so to me)
to find an occasion to out-brave all the Enchantments of this fair Abbess. I
guided my steps, than since I could not avoid it that way, and went into the
middle of the Chamber, where I saw her alone and undressed; she at first
desired me to stay a moment with her: I excused my self, pretending that it was
something too late, and that I might incommode her; she answered me that she
knew very well how much I was persuaded that I should never trouble her at what
hour soever; but to avoid the Ceremonies which I might have made her; upon this
she commanded me to take a seat and sit down by her, that she had something to
say to me, and would be obeyed: if Madam (answered I) you will be pleased but
to stay till to morrow. I tell you no replied she abruptly: I will once more
have it now: and know said she, that to punish you for the smalness of your
Complaisance, it is not so much to oblige You as to trouble You. I turned this
Constraint into Raillery, which I termed a sweet Violence, because it was also
impossible for me ^o disobey her, for she had shut to the door, out of which I
should go: I told her then because I would not seem uncivil, not having a mind
to break off in this manner with her, that the Violence she used to cause my
stay, was exceeding charming, and that there was no man living but would take
it for a favor at that Hour: I do believe answered she that it would be
esteemed one in the thoughts of many civil people, but not with You, and unless
one swounded away, it were in vain for one to endeavor to Oblige You, and to
let You see that one has an affection for You: we must expect in requital
nothing but indifferency and disdain it self: I believe it were unnecessary to
make a longer Relation of what the Abbess said to me, and of those things which
I answered her: it suffices that You know in brief that it is but my seeing of
her that must shake me in my strongest resolutions. Once again I know not what
feebleness I received in her presence, but it is certain that she rendered me
quite different from what I was before, and that I remembered no more the design
I had made to forsake her, she was so full of Charms that Evening without her
Ornaments of Apparel, that in her negligent Garb appeared a thousand Artifices.
I must say no more to You, except I have a desire You should think me the
greatest Deceiver and Traitor of all men. I stayed more than two full hours
with this Fair Enchanteress, and left her like a man that had hardly the power
to go: How great was her Joy? and how pleasing her triumph? it was no more one
indifferent that despised her Favors, it was a reconquered Lover that left her
with regret; it is nevertheless certain that I passed the rest of the Night
with much sorrow, and that I made my self all the reproaches imaginable the
Charms of that Fair-one had this in them, that they never possessed me but in
the time I saw her; but a moment afterward, when I was deprived of her sight,
I would come to my self, and would see my Crime, and could not repent enough:
in the first Visit I gave her Sister, I rendered her a faithful account of all
that had passed between the Abbess and my self, confessing to her part of my
Perfidiousness toward her, which seeing with what air I confessed them, she
did in truth but laugh at it; Nevertheless she had a mind to be revenged, and
to render the like to her Sister: I shall tell you what she did, I have already
made You to understand that the apartments of these two Ladies are not f r
asunder, which was the reason that they would be almost always together
although they loved each other but little. Egidia knew how her Sister had a
great mind to seize upon a Picture she had of me, and which I had gave her, she
kept it close lo^ked up in her Closet for fear she should be deprived of it;
and as in effect the Abbess waited but the moment to find an occasion, Egidia
gave her a fair one, but it was after she had taken this with her; she left her
Closet open, and went to walk in the Garden, and gave her Sister time enough to
satisfy her self if she had found what she looked for, and had not that which
for her Repose she would have desired not to have seen: The poor Abbess
perceived not the malice her Sister designed her: She went as soon as she came
in to search for the Picture, but in vain; but hhwever she thought she had not
altogether lost her labor, having found her Sisters Casket open, which was
full of Notes and Letters which he had Writ to her; she locked her self in her
Closet to take leisure to Read them; and to prevent a surprizal, she made even
Coppies of two or three of the Chiefest, where I mentioned her, of which this
is one; by which you may judge of the other.

MADAM,
I Am in despair when I hear you say I Love You not, and that the Abbess has
the possession of my heart; render me justice if You know Your self well, think
that there is nothing to balance between You; if could divide my heart as You
say, I would at this instant deprive You of one half of it to punish You for
Your incredulity; fear nothing, possess this poor heart in Repose, and let the
appearances alone for Your Sister, which I cannot refuse her withou passing for
the most ungrateful of all men as I am in effect. Adieu.


You may perceive that this Letter was not over-obliging for the Abbess, and I
suppose it is not necessary for me to tell You how much she was enraged, the
shame, despite, and jealousy to see her self so slighted by one to whom she
had showed so many Tokens of her Goodness, did at first inspire her with the
cruellest designs that ever any Woman was capable of; she forsook the Closet
in a Fury, having first torn all these Letters in a thousand pieces as she
would have done my heart; and were it not for a Lady who was one of her
Friends, and her Confident in all things, I know not to what point she had
brought this her resentment.

This Lady who was altogether endued with prudence, advised her on this account
with good intentions, and endeavored to bring her to her self again: She told
her that she should be careful of her behavior, and that the noise which she
might make upon such a business could never turn but to her disadvantage, and
that she should manage her Conduct according to the rank she held; and that it
would be no good example for the other Nuns. But what means is there to digest
so cruel an affront? All that this good Lady could obtain of her was, that she
would not see me all that day for to have the more time to consider what she
had best to do. Egidia returned after her Walk, and entering into her Closet,
she found all things disordered, and the Letters in the condition
beforementioned; the pleasure of Revenge which in a VVomans mind is the
greatest living, made her to taste (upon this occasion) contentments, which to
comprehend, you must be Woman and Lover together, she could not long continue
before she had declared to me all this Adventure, for which she rejoiced, as
thinking it a good part she had played, she endeavored however to prepare my
self to hear the News without anger, and calling me into her Chamber, she asked
me my Opinion, and whether she had spoiled my designs with her Sister? I
answered her that on condition she was not too much concerned her self, I took
it not illy. At length she related to me the effects of her Sisters Jealousy
and showed me in what condition my Letters and Notes were; I seemed to take
little notice of any thing, but in truth I approved not her Conduct, and when I
came to make reflection upon all that I had writ to her, I could have been glad
if she had made use of another means, and that her revenge had taken up other
weapons: I doubted not but that the Abbess was in a strange passion, and that
this business would produce some ill consequence, in which Egidia would be the
first that should suffer. I could not refrain from saying something to her, and
assured her nevertheless that I would not in any-wise contradict her pleasure,
because her will was so bent, but that knowing so well as I did her Sisters
humor, all I feared was from her behavior, and that she sought not some way to
revenge this upon me. I spoke this to her in a way tender enough; however
Egidia did not take it so, but looking on me with a spiteful smile, I see said
she what it is that allarms you, and that I have not used you well: Go Sir
Cavaleee said she in rising from her place to be gone, go cast your self at her
feet, and swear to her that you adore her, and ask her pardon for all that you
have writ to me. I Madam (answered I her!) will you forsake me thus! and thus
disown my Heart! Ah give me leave if you please to tell you, that you know me
but too illy, and that I am ready to avouch to her all that I have of passion
in my breast for you. Observe, if you please require of me the greatest token
of my Love, You may, and I will give You the whole day for You to take this
pleasure in, for to morrow I shall be gone, and you shall see how little I will
be concerned whether I be well or ill with the Lady your Sister; this
resolution so suddenly taken, did a little surprise Egidia, and she was
troubled that she had proceeded thus far, she embraced me tenderly, and did
what she could to cause me to change my design, but with much trouble, and I
left her at length without promising her any thing very sure: The rest of the
day I spent in considering what I should resolve upon; all things perplexed me,
and I could discern no better way than to be gone. But one thing which I found
very difficult was, how I should take my leave of the Abbess, which was a duty
I could not well omit: I must do it, and I took my time when she had most
company with her, to avoid a number of evil reproaches which I knew she would
not do before witnesses. I went then toward the Evening to her apartment, and
asked the Religious whom I met, and whom doubt ess they had sent before me, if
I could not obtain the Honor as to Visit Madam the Abbess: She presently
answered me no, and that she was something indisposed: But having once again
made me some instance for that; she whispered me softly in the ear, and told me
that this Order was given expressly for me, and that therefore as a Friend she
counseled me to retire. I confess that this adventure did not so much surprise
me as it would have done had I not prepared my self from being kindly received
by her; but yet it is true that I resented some despite in my heart for this
refusal, and that I had not been comforted but by the means I obtained to
acquit my self in another manner of the respect I owed her; it wa by writing I
would take my Farewell; and see here in proper terms the Letter I sent her.

MADAM:
I Know not whether You are truly ill, that we may not be permitted to see You,
or whether it be because I am thought a troublesome Guest here, both the one and
the other would have perplexed me enough; but for fear of being too knowing in
learning what I might be glad to ignorize, and that I might not be more
miserable than I am, I have designed never to urge You more to declare it to
me, and to morrow to be gone. Were You visible, I would enjoy the honor of
taking a Formal Leave of You; and I beg the permission of You if You please to
let me make use of this last way to bid You adieu in Writing, and humbly to
Kiss Your hands.


This Letter as you may see was neither too gallant nor too well fashioned, my
mind was nor very busy when I began to write it, and to speak the truth I must
have seen her to have manifested any testimonies of tenderness; she received
the Letter, and made me no answer. Egidia who saw that I did really intend to
leave her, and who had a desire to try the whole storm entreated me before I
went that I would make some sort of peace with the Abbess, and to give no cause
of talk to the other Religious, who doubtless would upon such a departure; she
added further, that her Sister would infallibly believe that it was her that
had precipitated me to be gone in this manner, and that she would be glad to
make use of this pretense, to find subject to turn all her Resentment upon her
self; for my part who feared this interview more than death, and who
represented to my self all the reproaches that she might make to me to which I
could answer nothing, I knew not how to resolve to see her; but she found a
Medium, and we agreed between us both that I would absent my self for only some
few days, waiting the time only until the Abbess her mind was sweetened, and
that I should return if occasion serve, at the least note she should send me. I
prepared then to be gone the next morning to Visit one of my Friends that lived
in the Neighboring Village; I was just ready to mount on Horseback when a
Lacquey brought me a Letter, wherein I found these words.

SIR:
ANd dare You go and not see me, thou most ungrateful and lowest-spirited of
all men! But no, go! for the favor would be too great to suffer thy sight
after thy perfidious actions: However chose what You think best, to the end I
may see to what extent thy black ingratitude reaches, and if You can, forget
even that you owe me at least this Civility in going from hence.


Never was man more amazed, nor more cast down than I after I had read this
Note: I saw that cost me what it would, I must see her: I asked then the
Lacquey where his Lady was, and he told me that she expected me alone in her
Chamber; I went thither, but in what manner? as a Criminal that was going to
present himself before his Judge: I found this Lady so sorrowful and changed,
that it was enough to move the most barbarous heart. I know not how I found my
self then, but truly I could not enjoy my self, and the confusion wherein the
sight of her put me is not to be expressed. She beheld me some moments without
speaking to me, and breaking at length silence, what do you here said she? and
why are You not already gone? I did not believe Madam answered I her, that I
ought so to have done, since I knew I might have the Honor to see you: I come
to take my leave of You, and beg the favor of You in the same time to tell me
what it is You have aagainst me. What I have against You replied she with a
sigh; ah Traitor! You know but too well. Well Madam, said I to her, since You
will that I know, I come to know what the Crime meriteth I have committed
against You; if it be death, my Life depends wholly upon Your Commands: Death
replied she, alas! You have but too much deserved it, and in that consists my
greatest misery. What do You then desire Madam replied I very eagerly, if a
Sword You want to give it me, see here is mine; and in saying so, I presented
it naked into her hand, and opened my breast to her for her to pierce it; but
she only turned her face another way with these words, which in pronouncing she
something, raised her Voice: Cruel one! You are but illy acquainted with my
heart! if you think that my Revenge extends so far as to bereave you of Life,
I could wish only that my Life were dear enough to you, I would then deprive my
self of it to punish you, but I should miss the joy I should have in my death
to see You breath a deep-fetched sigh. In ending these words, a great number of
Tears covered her face, and the sobs took from her her speech in so sad a
manner, that my heart was choked up with pity. I knew not what to say to her,
I feared that whatever I said she would take for new infidelities in the
trouble I was in to see her in this condition: Nevertheless, since it is no
difficult thing to appease a person that loves us, and desires to be loved, I
brought my self at length to overcome her anger, and left her not till I saw
her in a condition to forgive me all. I will tell You what caused her to be so
soon won; she had a desire to stay me, and it was no policy for her to use me
rigorously, I was not yet so indifferent to her, but that she thought it
troublesome to forsake me quite; she did not so much as doubt (as in Love we
often flatter our selves, but one day to bear away the Conquest from her
Sister, she knew not that my Journey was but for two or three days; she
believed I would be gone in earnest, and I did her an Obligation. I entreated
her to permit me at least to mae a small Jorney into the Neighboring Village;
to which she consented so much the more willingly, because she had no desire to
to have notice taken how easily she was returned to her self again after so
manifest an injury; she was glad to make use of some means whereby to hide her
weakness, and to make the world believe that she was not appeased but in
process of time; she required of me more especially, that I would not acquaint
her Sister with our reconciliation, and that I would in no wise see her in
parting, if I would not give her cause to repent for the too great indulgence
she had over me; I promised to grant her desire, and although Egidia had sent
to tell me that she would speak with me; I begged of her by one of her Friends,
that she would dispense with me for some reasons which I would write her, and
with which I was assured she would rest satisfied; to speak the truth I owed
this satisfaction to a person to whom I was so much Obliged, and who had so
much reason to complain of me: I departed then, and went to see this Friend,
from whence I writ many Letters to these Ladies, and received also many from
them in the last which the Abbess sent me, she entreated me to meet her the day
following in the same Arbor I saw her in before, and that it should be in
private, especially that her Sister might not know it in the least, and that
she would be there at Nine of the Clock, and would stay for me till Eleven a
clock, I clearly saw by this Letter that the Abbess was appeased, and that she
was merrily inclined, I believed I could not handsomely refuse it, and that I
must by Policy in Love advertize her Sister of it, because she might not
complain of me if it came to her knowledge as in the last Rendezvous. I answered
the Abbess then that I would not fail to be there at Nine according to her
appointment; and this is the Letter I wrote to her Sister.

MADAM:
IF You were in my Place, you would doubtless do the same I am now going to do;
notwithstanding I Will assure You it is with all the regret imaginable: I
received Yesterday a Letter from the Lady Your Sister, wherein she prays me
to meet her at nine in the Evening in the Garden, and forbids me above all
things to acquaint you with any thing: I believed You would not take it ill,
and that y^u would counsel me to it your self, if You were here only to appease
her, at least fear nothing, and be persuaded that nothing shall touch You; my
fidelity is proof against all her Charms, and I shall never be better with You
then when I am with her. Adieu.


I gave the Abbesses Lacquey the answer I wrote her, and my man carried this
Letter to Egidia; I sent the Lacquey first, and sent not my man but a while
before me, to the end he might be at the Convent before day; and that he might
give her this Letter privately, he entered the Parlour and no body took notice
of him, and as he heard a noise, and it being too dark to discern any thing, he
asked at a venture if there was no body there would vouchsafe to call Madam N
-- You must note that even then the Abbess her self who was walking alone, and
without light in the Parlor, because nothing might hinder her from this
appointed meeting, she waited in this place with extreme patience till the hour
of her appointment was come; she instantly knew the Voice of him that spoke to
her, and told him that if he would any thing with this Lady, it was she her
self; these two Ladies have the Voice so alike, that their most familiar
Friends are sometimes deceived: My man who knew not what danger there was to be
mistaken, and who effectively believed that this was the party he demanded, he
gave her the Note without scrupling, and did even imagine that he (...) very
justly acquitted himself of this Commission, and that he could not have given
it to her more privately as I had instructed him. The Abbess after she had
taken the Letter, sent my Man away again, and told him that if it were
requisite, she would send an answer. We may with ease imagine how great her
impatience was to see what I had writ to her Sister; but it were hard to tell
you all the trouble she resented after she had satisfied her Curiosity; she was
not naturally of a bad humor; and had not Jealousy intermixed, she might
perhaps have contented her self with converting her Choler into injuries: But
this passion is not accustomed to use such weak sorts of Revenge, it carries
its design even to an extremity, and injured Love is the terriblest of Enemies;
the Abbess went to seek her Sister, whom she found in her Chamber, and as it is
common for them to talk of me, it was easy for her; after a small winding of
their discourse to make me the subject of it: Let us acknowledge after all,
Sister said the Abbess after she had spoken very indifferently of me, that we
are both very much deceived in those advantageous Opinions which we have had of
this Gentleman, who has paid all those tokens of good will he has received
from us both with no hing but Treasons: For my part added she, I am now
undeceived enough; and truly part of this Obligation I owe to you, for had it
not been for those Letters I found in your Cabinet, I might yet have been in so
strange an error: If you desire I should render you in exchange the like
service: But dear Sister, You are so much for his advantage, that you will ever
believe let me say what I will, that there can be nothing more Civil nor
faithful then what he tells you: What is it you will do? answered her Egidia
coldly: I see not the Cavaleer do any thing to be esteemed culpable, but
whereby I may see that he has a great respect for me, and I have even Reasons
for the contrary, I am too just to ever change that good Opinion I have of him.
But suppose I should make you to see said the Abbess to her, that you are
deceived in your Opinion, and that he betrayeth you, and that he is the basest
of men, I should perhaps (proceeded she) not have all that acknowledgment that
such a piece of service meriteth; for not to speak falsely to you, although
common y we take but little pleasure to be deceived; I confess my weakness in
this, that I love better to continue in my error; an evil is no evil before we
feel it and know it; and if in some certain things I might have my choice, the
sweetest for me would be to remain in Ignorance. How you are to be pitied
replied again the Abbess, and how little you deserve to be undeceived: But you
are my Sister, and I must in spite of you your self have pity on You. Know then
that this civil Gentleman, this faithful Friend, how you will be pleased to
call him, gave me notice by a Letter whic he wrote me this day to meet him this
evening in the Garden, and entreated me as much as he could to let it be in
private, and that you might know nothing: If You please You may not believe me
continued she (who saw her Countenance begin to be troubled, and that her
color changed three or four times) or rather it is but your going with me to
give you cause to believe your own eyes. How steadfast soever this amiable Lady
was, this blow caused her to reel; the Infidelity was manifest, and her Rival
assured her of the thing so positively that she could have no cause of doubt,
since she offered to conduct her to the Rendezvous to be her self a witness;
she agrees to walk with her to the Garden, she gives her a Sword to kill
herself, and she will not stay a moment from seeing her death, because it was
now their time to go.

But all this time said the Cavaleer (in breaking his discourse) while I amuse
my self perhaps with too much pleasure to relate to you a story, where the
greatest part of Adventures seem to flatter me; I do not consider that it does
but abuse peoples patience; You ought not to imagine thus said the Lady Sindal,
for till now no Body has taken the liberty to Interrupt You, and the silence
the Company has lent You, is a visible Evidence that they are not yet weary of
hearing you relate all these Gallantries. I acknowledge continued she in
smiling, that I have often said to my self, that there was but one man like you
to whom one might pardon so much vanity, and who might have the confidence to
entertain us with a History of which he is the Hero. You requite but Illy
(answered her the Cavaleer) the Obedience I have shown You in this thing for
whatever You are pleased to say; Madam, never before this time had I the good
Fortune to relate my Adventures; here is no Body here replied the same Lady but
who knows you, and have learned even from your own lips a great part of the
Transactions of your Life. Notwithstanding I doubt very much proceeded she
whether or no all happened as you say. If that be your thought Madam replied the
Cavaleer to her, and if the rest of the Company be no more favorable to me, it
was in vain that I took so much trouble upon me; this Opinion is an advantage
to me, and I hope they will dispense with me from using any more superfluous
discourses, we may find something better for the Conversation. The Duchess who
was laughing with the other Ladies to see the Cavaleer half defeated for what
Madam Sindal had said to him, would have the Raillery go no further when she
heard him speak to that intent, and told him that she pretended not to have
listened to him thus long, but to know this History even to the end: She added
further, that he should not be concerned for what the Lady Sindal said to him,
and that if there was any thing to be blamed in what he had related, it was
assuredly the conduct of these Religious Ladies. But that it is not now known
to be the first time that Love dressed himself in all sorts of fashions, and
was of all conditions, and that a man found no better delight than in the
conversation of these Ladies.

She prayed then the Cavaleer to make an end, the Company also began to urge
him to it; he refused, and told them it was now time to retire, and that he had
yet behind too many things to relate: They judged it then more proper to defer
the rest till the next day, and pass the time away with some Recreation. But
the Cavaleer answered to that, that it were not necessary for them to seek any
thing that could divert them more than the Letters they had proposed to read,
and that they could not without injustice favor others more than they had done
him. Madam the Duchess told him that if all had a History like his, they would
be long a reading; but nevertheless for satisfaction she should have two read,
after which the Conversation should end; and the other Letters should be
returned to their Owners. Madam d'Elus made choice then of two more, and the
first was for Mademoiselle d'Armand who freely consented to have it read, and
said in smiling, that the company might pe^haps be scandalized, but that she
cared not. These are the terms it was expressed in.

SIR,
ALl you have Writ is so gallant and so Wittily expressed, that it would Charm
me if I already knew not that you know better how to Write than love. Love does
not inspire so much art, and the heart speaks much more innocently than the
mind. Those restless hours and Clouds of Grief of which You speak of, and which
You have suffered for my long absence, are but imaginary Evils, and which
molest You not: I know by experience that You pass away the time very well
where You reside; You must not have the pleasure to find me deceived; and if
You desire to know how it is with me in Your absence, You may come hither and
learn. I was perhaps something too soft in the beginning of our Engagement to
let my self be persuaded that You Loved me, You who never knew what Love was;
but it is easy for a Person adorned with so much merit, and so many Charms as
You have to deceive such Credulous persons as I am; however make no abuse of
it: I am not so much Yours, but I may be carried away by some other, more
especially in Your absence by which many persons endeavor to profit, and do
present themselves to take up the place You Occupy in my heart. Neglect nothing
if You have any small esteem for it to think it worth the trouble of some Care;
and if You will believe me, return as soon as You can. Adieu, etc.


There was none of the Company but was surprised at this Letter, and who could
believe that such a Letter might have been writ to a Lady so wise and
reasonable as was Mademoiselle d'Armand; Madam d'Elus who knew her well, would
not believe her eyesight, and asked her twice or thrice if it were to her they
sent this Letter, and whether they were not mistaken? This Lady did but laugh
at their wonder; but however from blushing she could not abstain, because every
ones eyes was on her. I believe said the Cavaleer to her, that there is not so
much subject of Laughter, and that the Gallantries that they write to you,
gives us cause enough of thinking; however it is answered she him, it is from
too gallant a man I receive them to cause my displeasure, and I am at all times
ready to send him more tender ones. If we knew You not said the Countess
d'Ancyce, we would interpret the things literally, and show you little Favor;
but I believe there is a mystery in this Letter, and that You are not willing
to partake of the Honor your self in the manner it is turned; for my part said
the Duchess, I comprehend nothing, and I confess that I want as great an
esteem as I have for Mademoiselle d'Armand not to condemn her, but tell us
however continued she in addressing her self to that Lady what You smile at?
and what there is we understand not in this Letter? for I have no mind to
change the Opinion I have of You. Mademoiselle d'Armand after she had thanked
the Duchess for what she had, thus Obligingly said; related to her, that being
sometime since with one of the chiefest Ladies of the Court, where a great
number of Noble Gentlemen did ordinarily meet: They had proposed a question
which had been very wittily handled, viz. to know whether it was more
troublesome for a Lover to make a Declaration to his Mistress, than for the
Mistress to receive it, and that she had maintained the Lovers part; and that
it was less difficult for a man to say he loved, than for a Lady to suffer it;
and that the Baron d'Estall (who was Author of this Letter) having undertook
the contrary, the company thought fit that for the rarity of the act, that the
Baron should represent the person of a Mistress, and she, that of the Lover,
that they might have the pleasure of seeing how this business would pass; she
assured them that this Gallantry had given way to such witty things as well in
Prose as Verse, that thousands of Persons have been divertized by it, and that
she did also in the like manner; so that this Letter must not be read as coming
from a Gallant, but as from a sensible Mistress, and that the truth was, that
they both of them had ill represented their Pe sonages, because that the Baron
had too soon submitted himself; and that for he part she did not use those
Cares and Endeavors as passionate Lovers use. The Cavaleer would willingly
that Mademoiselle d'Armand had not justified her self so well, and that they
had but doubted of what she said: But the rest of the Company had too good
thoughts of her, not to render her that Justice as was her due: They found this
Gallantry very pleasing and capable of giving much diversion: They enlarged no
further upon this to obtain time for the reading the other Letter, but before
they read them the Duchess pulled this Song out of her pocket, and gave it to
Mademoiselle d'Armond, who she desired to sing the Treble part of it, and the
Cavaleer d'Est^pes she desired to sing the Base with her, which they did in the
manner following.

SONG.
^ Bear witness now
^ you silver streams and pleasing shady groves
^ whose harmony and solitude can sweeten harmless Loves.
^ How loud the Echoes of my sighs do ring
^ for her whose scorns can me no comfort bring:
^ Ye powers above,
^ grant she may love
^ and feel those pangs which I already know.
Chorus.
^ For if Love once dwell in her breast,
^ for if Love once dwell in her breast,
^ such pleasing relief
^ wi^^ drown all my grief,
^ and make me a lover that is blessed
Fly Eccho's fly,
And in your gentle murmuring whispers hear
My languishing and deep Complaints to my de^ Phillis ear:
Tell her, Oh tell her! it is for her I dye,
And ask her when she will leave off cruelty.
Oh powerful Love!
Come from above,
And in her chaste heart go take up thy seat,
Chorus.
For if Love once dwell, etc.
I.^
After this Song had been most harmoniously ^ung by these two Persons, they
returned again to their Letters, and the Second was for the Baron d'Esparc.
with whom Madam d'E^us observed the same Ceremonies as with the rest; and she
had without trouble the permission to let the Company hear it: See here what it
did contain.

SIR:
THe Question You propose me would better have been your Business than mine; I
should have been willing to have heard how You would come off in it; You who
never fail to prosper in these witty sorts of Gallantry: Nevertheless since I
am not permitted to refuse You any thing, and as your Friendship desires of me
a blind Obedience, I shall tell You Ill or Well what my Opinion is in what You
demand of me.

You would know whether ajealous man may be termed a Lover? Whence jealousy
proceeds? and what difference there is in matter of Love between Fear and
Jealousy?

I First must tell You, that I believe not that a Jealous Man Loves; but on
the contrary say, that he hates with a terrible hatred, as it is easy to
discern by his Actions; and therefore it were very improper to give him the
title of Lover, since he deserves it not. I must according to the Order of
things, First tell You whence jealousy springs: For my part it is my Opinion
that a man is not Jealous; but then when he believes himself unworthy to
possess the Esteem of his Mistress: And I dare my Self believe that one that is
Jealous, does not imagine himself Loved, for else he would not afflict himself
as he does: It Is folly to say as many do, that this Viper Love is but a mere
Fear to lose what one Loves; a Jealous man would proceed after another
fashion: Fear is an unproffitatable Passion which truly molesteth the Soul, and
causes it to apprehend the Evils that may disturb him; but it never brings a
man into despair, as does Jealousy; because that it breeds in us thse things
which may come to pass, and yet not happen neither. A fearful man does not
altogether lose his hope he endeavors to prevent by all the means possible
the misfortunes which he apprehends, to the end he may escape the storm. I
say further, that the Fear in Love is a sort of Virtue between the two
extremes; it is easily discerned that Jealous men are not possessed with this
Fear, but rather with a Rage, which causes them to believe that they have
absolutely lost what they adored; let us but take the pains to examine one of
these Fools we shall see that he acts not like a man that fears, nor like a
Lover that desires to be loved, but like a desperate and declared Enemy. Every
one naturally hates that which gives them displeasure; and what greater
displeasure can one imagine than to think ones self forsaken and slighted by
that which one esteems and loves more than Ones life: A Jealous man who is
persuaded that he is thus evilly treated by his Mistress cannot love her more;
hatred must succeed this love, and oftentimes Fury: What trouble to this
unhappy man in the time of this alteration? What Combat is there in his mind? I
believe there is nothing more terrible, and that the least Council his mind
suggests to him, is to have recourse to death. When Love is once departed from
the heart of a Jealous man (which departs as I said before) in the moment
that Jealousy is introduced; this last Passion does wholly Occupy him, rules
him, tyrannizeth over him, and loadeth him with that affliction which always
follows it: If You would yet more clearly see that there is no Love in the
heart of an unfortunate Jealous man, take more special notice, You shall see
nothing in him but high-carried designs, and full of Revenge, he is never
contented, he talks of nothing but death and despair; he will lose all, he
calls her he adored a little before unfaithful and ungrateful, full of
Cruelties and Treacheries; and in fine, the least suspicion he has to the
disadvantage of this Fair-one, he makes a truth of it, and assures it as a
thing that he has seen; he seeks no more to please her by his cares,
discretion, and fidelity, he seeks nothing but her ruin, and acts in such
manner that his Rivals who were perhaps incapable of (Ravishing her from him)
profit by his going astray, and endeavor to establish themselves to destroy
him quite; if his Mistress endeavor to cause his return to her, he takes all
these advancements from her for Treasons, he publishes them to let the World
see that he is not so unwise as to trust her; he commits daily new crimes
against her without giving any Reasons wherefore; for which a moment afterward
he repents a thousand times. Pray tell me how a man of this humor can be
called Lover; and whether it be the fear he has to lose what he loves that
leads him to these Extremities; for my part I believe it not. If he loved he
would use other means; if it was naught but fear that molested him, he would
use some means to re-assure himself, and not to make him despair: I believe
certainly that the first effect of Jealousy is the last sigh of Love; here is
at length my thoughts in the Question You have proposed; let me next know what
Your Opinion is upon which I will govern my self in all things. Adieu.


This Letter pleased all the Company extremely, and I believe they had enlarged
this matter eurther, for the Company thought it handsome, and very proper for a
Conversation; but at the Hour it was they were all for deferring of it for
another time: The Company departed after their leave taken of the Duchess to
go and seek their Repose.

CHAP. IV.
THe Fourth day began by an agreaable surprizal; The Duchess had caused by the
arrival of two of the Fairest Ladies of the Court; the Countess d'E^mond, and
Madam d'Eyrac they had notice that there was a great company at this Ladies;
they owed her a Visit, and were glad to make use of that opportunity while they
were pleasingly at their Diversion: Monsieur d'Arignan was of the party, and
accompanied them in this Visit; he was a brave wit, and who had a gallant way
with him for Conversation, and who fulfilled his duty very well in the Circle;
as the Company enlarged, so the Duchess did augment the expenses; if it were
possible to add any thing to the magnificense with which she treated her
Guests. We must acknowledge that since this day it was but a mere profusion
that appeared in the smallest Collasions which she gave them in Basins full of
Comfits, in most exquisite Wines, in other Liquors, and in all that a man could
wish that was most delicate. A Ball was their diversion for some part of the
afternoon, and if I had undertook to relate all that passed in this House, I
should have somewhat to amuse the Reader from time to time with in particulars
that perhaps might not displease him; but since I am tied only to the
conversations of the Evening, which were kept in the green Arbor, I must (not
to leave my design) refer my self to what they have said. The Duchess who had
taken great delight in the History of these Nuns, and who had a desire that it
might serve for this Evenings Conversation, had entreated Mademoiselle d'Armand
to relate to the two Ladies which were newly come, that which the Cavaleer had
already told them: This Damsel acquitted her self faithfully and wittily of her
Office, and gave much delight to these two Ladies, especially to Madam d'Eyrac,
to whom this History was not unknown, and who consequently told the Countess
d'Ermond that she knew it; they had no sooner took their places in the Circle
according as they came, but the Duchess addressing her self to the Cavaleer,
told him that he must make an end of what he began the day before, and that no
other question should be proposed, nor any other Pastime before he had ended
the recital of this Adventure; the Cavaleer endeavored to refuse it by a
thousand subtleties, and instantly entreated the Duchess that she would
dispense with him, and he would not submit at last but by compulsion; that
which vexed him most of all was, that the Lady Sindal, and Mademoiselle
d'Armand told him that what he did was only because he desired entreaties; but
however they could not do him a greater kindness. Notwithstanding all these
Raileries he must proceed in his History, he had very many Reasons not to
continue it because of Madam d'Eyrac, who was not ignorant of the least
circumstance as he knew very well himself. This Lady smiled in her heart to see
the trouble he was in; she had her Eye on him on purpose to discountenance him;
at length he began his discourse at where he had left off, but with so great a
negligence, and so little regard to all what he said, that it was no more the
same thing, but a weak and light recital, which was nothing like what he had
accounted before; there was no Body but perceived it, the Duchess was the
first that told him that it was pity to hear him relate it in that manner, and
that he had not this day the same wit as formerly: The other Ladies made him
the same reproaches, except the Countess d'Ermond, and Madam d'Eyrac who took
his part; for my part I believe said the first of these two Ladies with an
agreeable smile, that the Cavaleer never wants wit, but that he yet has more
discression, and that is it that obliges him to touch but lightly upon things
which may injure the reputation of a sort of People whom we ought to respect
more than others. And what is this discretion answered the Lady Sindal that he
has not taken care for till to day, and before a company who knows not so
much as of what Countries those are of which he speaks. I ask your pardon
Madam replied the Countess d'Ermond to her if there were none here Yesterday
that were acquainted with these Nuns, there may be to day who can inform you
better than he of the particulars of this History. Ah Madam replied presently
the Lady Sindal, it is you then! I pray tell us what you know in it: The other
Ladies made the same request to her; but she answered that they must address
themselves to Madam d'Eyrac, who was a witness of part of these Adventures: The
Cavaleer was confused; the Ladies laughed, and the Duchess told him that
instead of troubling himself, he ought to be glad of this Rencounter of finding
some body that can relate a History which would not seem so well in his mouth
as in another: she consequently engaged Madam d'Eyrac to take upon her the
trouble of relating it. This Lady did it very obligingly: she first smiling
asked the Cavaleers permission and she afterward began in this manner.

Since the Cavaleer said she has had the discression not to name the persons
of whom he spoke; I believe you will not require more of me than you did of
him, a thousand Reasons forbid it me, and it would be no great addition to the
History, nor augment the pleasure in any thing which you will have to hear that
which I am going to tell you.

There is perhaps no Body here but knows it is now two Years sin e the
misfortune that happened upon my Family, which obliged Monsieur d'Eyrac my
Husband to absent himself from the Court. In this great subject of affliction I
went to one of my Friends who was a Nun in the Monastery of which we speak to
seek such Consolation as I might find by a retreat from the sight of all things
that might cause any trouble.

I Will not tell you whether what the Cavaleer has told you be true or no,
because he had known these Ladies above a Year when I came thither, and to
speak the truth what I have understood is not much unlike what he has related
to You, but I will warrant you for the truth of what I shall relate to you in
what passed in my time.

I was very lovingly received in this Monastery, there was no civility which
the Abbess showed me not, and every day they would strive who could oblige me
most, it was almost a month that the Cavaleer had not been there. I had heard
speak of him sometimes as a very civil Gentleman, for whom the Abbess had a
great esteem, and from whom she often received Letters; he came a few days
after me. I presently perceived that this esteem had something of much
tenderness in it, and that this Friendship had some resemblance of Love. The
Abbess who was endued with much goodness, and who put much confidence in me,
would conceal nothing from me; she would exceedingly commend her Cavaleer to
me; she would rank him above the pitch of all men, and would not only have had
me to applaud him, but to have judged her not indiscreet in these Concerns so
long as things seemed to me not to go too far: I dissembled, but when I came to
know that this friendship wrought the same effects as Love, and that it excited
jealousy in the two Sisters, that it caused sighings and languishings, that
they let fall Tears, I could not forbear declaring my thoughts to the Abbess,
and to represent to her that this Engagement might one day do her a prejudice,
and that an Amorous affair ought not to enter into a Monastery. She outwardly
seemed to take friendly the freedom I used to her, but in truth this good
advise caused her to carry her self but more coldly to me; she could have
desired something more of Complaisance from my Friendship, her Disease being
almost without remedy, she could have desired at least that I would have
supported her in it; this occasioned my having less correspondence with her,
and that I saw her no more than by duty, because I would not altogether break
off with a person who has command where I lived, and to whom I had already
been very much Obliged; her Sister managed it something better, she concealed
appearances, and although she had no less esteem or tenderness for the Cavaleer
than the Abbess, she notwithstanding acted before the world like a Maid almost
indifferent: She had also something more of wit than her Eldest Sister, but not
so much beauty: I Will begin the recital of these Adventures if the Company think
it requisite where the Cavaleer left off Yesterday; for what he has told You
to day is but a feeble Crayon of what You shall now hear; It was when his Man
had taken the Abbess for her Sister, and when he had gave her the Letter which
he should have given to the other, into what a rage and fury did this Fair
Lover enter when she had seen the Treason of this Letter; the least thing her
passion suggested to her was to be revenged on the Traitor to cause him to be
killed, a Maid in whom she trusted most, and who was too Young to take the
liberty to give her advise, would come every evening before she went to her
rest, and repeat to me a part of her Follies, at which in truth I did but
divert myself: The Abbess then as the Cavaleer has told You brought her Sister
with her to this Rendezvous, where the Gentleman sailed not to be at the hour
appointed; his Surprizal was great as we may imagine, to see the two Sisters
together, after what the Abbess had writ to him how she would not have any one
know of this Enterview, more especially her Sister; he also remembered what he
had writ to the other, and the entreaty he made in the Letter he wrote her, she
should not be concerned at this assignation how nothing should prejudice her,
he knew not at length what to believe, and of a thousand thoughts he had
remaining in his Brain in the moment he saw these Ladies, there was not one
which came near the truth, so incredible was it to him to imagine that such an
accident should befall him in the midst of that cruel anguish that despite and
jealousy made the Abbess to suffer, she relished a most extreme joy to see the
Cavaleers trouble; but her Sister was filled with nothing but grief for her
part, the Violence she used to contain her self was the rudest thing a heart
could endure, she could abide no longer there, she must retire, but it was when
she had considered him from head to foot with a look full of disdain, choler,
and indignation, and without speaking to him: the poor Lover who began to waken
out of his first surprizal, fell into a second much more cruel when he had seen
in what manner she looked upon him and had fled from him; I know not said he in
speaking to the Abbess what I have done to your Sister that in my presence
should cause her to flee, I expected not this Rigor; it is because answered him
the Abbess ^oldly, we also expected not to have seen You make so quick a
return, and because we have little occasion for You here. Ha! if it be so as
You say Madam replied the Cavaleer to her presently, I swear to You You shall
not keep me here much longer, for I hate above all to incommode people. But
however Madam added he presently, I hope You will not take it Ill if I go to
know of Your Sister her self if this be the reason that Obliges her to treat
me thus: after that I shall continue with You no longer time than for to bid
You adieu; and in saying that he ran toward the Fair afflicted one whom he
overtook just as she was entering into the Monastery. What Is the matter Madam
(said he to her quite out of breath) that You fly me? say rather perfideous
(answered she him) that I should not see thee; but at length thy Treacheries
are discovered, and thou sha t deceive me no more, for while I live I Will never
see thee more: After these words she went in, shut the door upon her, and left
the sad-hearted Cavaleer in the pittifullest condition a man could be reduced
to; he will tell You himself that he was a hundred times ready to kill himself,
and that he would have said a thousand Injuries against her, could she have
heard them; his Conscience reproached him not of any Infidelity, he though he
had done nothing against his duty in thi^ assignation, since he had given her
notice by a Letter, and he knew very well that his hear toward this Fair-one
did not deserve the name of Perfideous: So rude a treatment mad^ him take a
resolution to be gone, without staying any longer, hoping that time would make
his Mistress know the wrong she was in, o^ that despite and absence would cure
him o^ his Love: The Abbess who had followed him close to have hindered an
explanation, came in the same instant; he accosted her in a manner which
testified his despair, and scarce beholding her; what you told me Madam said he
to her, is more true than ever I thought, and the air with which I am here
treated is so strange, that it makes my wonder so much the greater, for that I
know not the reason of it; there is no other way left for me then not to remain
a minute longer in a place where I am so ill received. Just so (answered him
the Abbess) all Traitors ought to be recompensed for their perfideousness: It
is now no time replied the Cavaleer to her to ask you what reason you have to
call me by this name, because I must now be gone, and deliver you from a man
who is more than importunate to you. I^ is enough for you to remember that it
was You that caused me to come hither to day: I came according to my promise,
and you have permitted, and perhaps also called your Sister to come hither,
whom you charged me so much to keep ignorant of this Enterview. Yes Traitor!
answered she him, all overcome by her passion, and it is in what thy base heart
has failed: Tell me, base one? whether thou did not write what I desired
thee to conceal? The Cavaleer was so strangely surprised at this, that he
remained confused, and did effectively believe that his Mistress had revealed
the Letter he had sent her. Nevertheless not to fall into a greater confusion;
if it should come to a clearer Evidence, he would break off upon this occasion:
I know not very well Madam said he to her very unconcernedly what it is you
mean: but if all these reproaches, and all these injuries tend only to drive me
from hence, I assure you you give your self a trouble without cause, and that
there need not so much to deprive me of the desire of ever setting my foot here
again. I am going to take my leave of You continued he in going to leave her,
and Madam Farewell for ever. The Abbess stayed him, and told him after she had
become something milder, that whatever reason they had to act (although) worse
with him than yet they had done, they would not let him go at the hour it was.
Whether You have reason or not replied the Cavaleer to her abruptly, I am so
little accustomed to be received thus wherever I go, that I very impatiently
can bear all the minutes I abide here to get out of the trouble I am in: I pray
Madam permit me proceeded he in endeavoring to get loose from her, to make use
of the time that yet remains: But I will not let You go to night said the
Abbess to him, and if You think I have yet some power over You to oblige You to
do any thing for my sake, You will make it appear in this I have somewhat to
say to You, and it will be time enough to morrow to do your pleasure. The
Cavaleer prayed her not to stay any longer if she had any thing to say to him,
and that on any other occasion he would testify to her the respect he had for
her, but that he could in no wise stay. We will see that said she, and they
separated the one from the other in this manner. The Abbess was like those
unfortunate Lovers who in their despaires know not what they would have; she
who but a moment before would have been glad not only to banish the Cavaleer
from her presence, but to ruin him, had not the power to see him leave her.
What a weak thing is Choler against an Object that has known how to charm us:
How illy can a heart be revenged on what it loves? It is commonly the Lover
only that suffers, and one seldom punishes that which is loved: She gave
order to stop the Cavaleers Horses, but something too late, for he was ready to
be gone, and he seeing the means they used to hind him, and that he must yet
have some time to make up his baggage, he chose rather to leave his man behind
him, and to go and lie the same Evening about a league from the M^nastery,
where he was to meet him the next morning: The Abbess heard of this departure
with a sensible displeasure; she in words misused those whom she had sent to
stay him, because they let him go; she knew not what to become, nor do; she was
informed that his man was left behind; she sent for him, and by force of
presents pumped out of him all she desired to know; her trouble was half
diminished when she knew that her Lover lay but a mile from her; her passion
which would have made her try all means at this instant, furnished her with a
design which in a Religious Lady was not pardonable, unless one would pardon
all things in Love: This little god is never accustomed to Inspire any thing
too just, nor to consult Reason; there is nothing that he will not make any one
do when he designs any thing: The Maid of whom I have already spoken who was
her particular Confident entered into her Chamber just as she was thinking on
this; and seeing her in a profound study, she believed she was busy, and would
have excused her self for coming to interrupt her privacies: No no my dear
Companion said the Abbess to her, (for thus she called her) You come in a
better time than You think, I wanted You, and I may say that there is but You
only from whom I may hope for relief in the trouble I am in: This Maid answered
her with much acknowledgment for the favor she did her, as to consider her
even to that point, and assured her with a thousand respectful protestations of
fidelity and tenderness, that there was nothing which she would not do for her:
The Abbess embraced her five or six times most tenderly, sighed, wept, and did
in such manner move the heart of her dear Confident, that she saw her in a
condition to undertake all things to serve her; insomuch that this poor Maid
begged of her with the tears in her eyes that she would tell her the cause of
this affliction: You know said the sad-hearted Lover to her, with a look
extremely pitiful (You who know all the passages of my heart) with what
Ingratitude the Cavaleer has of late requited the tenderness I have for him:
This Traitor after all my tokens of Goodness has had yet the baseness to leave
me whether I would or no, and to go without so much as bidding me adieu* You
may see by that Madam answered the Maid to her (wisely) how much unworthy he is
of the favor You show him, and how he me^iteth not any more esteem from You. I
am resolved replied the Abbess to come to where You say, and I see my self
enough disposed to it: But the trouble I am in at present, and which I cannot
overcome, is for not having had the pleasure to reproach him of his perfidious
actions, and for that he perhaps goes with this opinion, that I am not
undeceived in all his Treacheries. I would especially e^ap the joy of making
him blush for the last he showed me, and which I have not yet told You: If thou
love me my dear Companion, added she with her charming mien, thou will find
some means whereby I may at least content my heart, and that I may at length
break off with the most Ungrateful of all men, without which my dear Child I
cannot promise thee to live much longer in the displeasure and Choler I am in,
and thou will lose thy best of Friends: This Maid who in the Intrigues of Love
was not the subtilest in the world, and who yet saw nothing of the Abbesses
design, proposed to her to write a Letter to this Traitor filled with
Injuries: But this satisfaction was too weak for a passionate Lover; I can
never express my self well in writing said she, and upon a subject so full of
Injustice to punish a Criminal as he ought to be, the persons offended should
with their own mouths make those reproaches to him he deserves, that they may
have the advantage of confuting him. Well Madam said her Companion to her, what
will You do then unless it be to wait his return? The innocence of this Maid
did almost make the Abbess smile. Can one replied she to her, contain ones
displeasure so long against a man who is not indifferent to me? No, no, if You
think good proceeded she with a blush that overspread her whole Visage, we will
not differ so much in our revenge on him, thou art enough to execute the
design; if thou have the courage to follow me, we will find out this perfideous
man who is but a small league from hence, and thou shall see to what a height I
will serve the thing, and if a man can be loaded with Injuries and Reproaches,
I protest to You that he shall. So bold a Proposition at first did strangely
surprise this Maid; she who was afraid to walk in the Night about the Monastery
without a light, could not but think this a thing too dangerous and full of
horror, to dare to expose them two alone at that hour to the troublesome
accidents of a great high way: But the Abbess knew how to represent this
Enterprise so sure and easy to her, and so incapable of any ill rencounter in
that little way they were to go, and in so fine a Night, that at length she
over-perswaded her, and made her to Love even a Novelty: The Abbess extremely
rejoicing for having overcome her dear Companion, thought on nothing more than
getting of Horses, she would not use her own because of going forth privately,
she chose rather to have recourse to her Farmer to let her have three Horses,
and not to fail to send them the same Evening; the man went immediately, and
left the Ladies who were preparing themselves to get on Horseback; the first
thing the Abbess did was to give out that she was something indisposed, and
that she would go to her bed; she took her leave of those that served her, and
had none remaining with her but her dear Companion, as she had formerly; as
soon as they were by themselves, they began to undress them to put on their
riding apparel; those of the Abbess were extreme gallant, and in which they
dressed themselves with as much care as if they they had been to go to some
Assembly, more especially the Abbess who was unmindful of nothing she knew
would handsomely a^orn her she was the last that was ready: But however there
could be no Body in a more neater Garb than her self; her Chamber was not far
from the Garden, they might get thither without noise, and without any bodies
seeing them as they did, and as soon took their way toward the back door where
the Servant was to meet them with the Horses; one would have taken them for two
Amazones going to the siege of some place by the manner of their encouraging
one another; they came to the gate of which only the Abbess had the Key, but no
body was yet come; they already grew impatient by reason the man stayed so
long, and that he was not yet returned; at length they heard the noise of some
Horses which encouraged them, and gave them some hope of Joy; but we are
sometimes deceive^, and oftenest when we desire any thing to our advantage; the
greater the noise grew, the greater was their fear that it might not be their
Horses as inde d the man they expected was not to come that way; insomuch that
fear seized upon them so strangely, and perplexed them so much that they hardly
knew what to do; the Abbess who had something more of resolution than her
Companion, endeavored to encourage her upon the small appearance there was that
it should not be her man, and told her that he was doubtless come some other
way, and so mistook his right road, and comes that way, and desired her to go
two or three steps forward to see if what she said was not true: This poor Maid
who was afraid of every Object, could never have the courage to do what the
Abbess commanded her, and did most humbly entreat her not to put her courage to
trial, that she could not go a step from her without she died; and that every
tree gave her a mortal fear: The Abbess could not forbear smiling at the
fearfulness of her Companion, and bid her that she should fear nothing for she
would go with her; these two Fair ones then adventured some steps before those
that were coming; but they had no sooner discovered that they were two
Horsemen coming with great haste toward them, but they fled and got into the
Garden without so much as thinking to shut to the door after them, and never
ceased running as long as they were able; at length they approached the
Monastery; both of them so spent, that they could scarcely breath; when they
came home they in some measure regained their courage, and being something come
to themselves they began to laugh at the fear they had so improperly had for
two men who designed only to proceed in their Journey; they took scourage by
the power of arguing upon the small subject they had to fear, and returned for
the second time to that gate, where they found two Horses tied to the foot of a
Tree, and no body with them; the Abbess after she had taken good notice of
every thing, without discovering who it might be, found her self much concerned
to consider why these two Horses should be there without a servant, and
concluded after all (as it is easy to conclude things to ones advantage) that
they might be her Farmers Horses, and that they must expect her man who was
doubtless gone some-whither hard by, and indeed that was not altogether
unlikely, and it was unlikely that any other would leave two Horses thus;
however this man came not again; the Abbess dyed with impatience, and the time
seemed so tedious that she feared lest the daybreak might come, and that they
might not have not night enough to execute their design closely: It was a
punishment for her to stay, she would have Sworn a thousand times (if Abbesses
swear) that they were her Farmers Horses, that she knew them, and that her man
must either be hindered elsewhere with the other Horse, or that he was fallen
asleep somewhere else, but they might also be the two Horses upon which they
had seen the two men riding; she would not consult upon that, because we
commonly love not to confute our selves upon those subjects that go against our
desire, we rather endeavor to deceive our selves; this Servant appeared not;
the impatient and most truly lovesick Abbess told her faithful Companion that
they must make use of their time, and that the Occasion was too fair to be
neglected: That this Servant was not so necessary but that they may pass
without him, and that he may follow them if he would: Her dear Companion agreed
to all she desi ed, she was willing for any thing if they could have but any to
direct them the way; so that without staying any longer our two Adventurers put
foot in the stirrup, mounted on Horseback without an Esquire, and made so
great diligence, that in less than an hour without any ill Adventure they
arrived to the place where the Cavaleer was: It was the Abbess that knocked at
the door and who asked for a Gentleman that lodged there: They answered her
that truly there had been one that Evening, but that he was gone from thence an
hour ago with a Lacquey that had brought him a Letter; she still persisted in
some questions to the Master of the House concerning the way they went, and the
Livery of the Footman, whether it might be long before this Gentleman would
return? whether he had eaten? and at length even to ask him whether he seemed
melancholy or merry? but the man knew not what to say, all that he knew for
certain was, that he would not return that night, and that he had left no Order
with them; no body could be more sad than was the poor Abbess then; a thousand
thoughts assaulted her at a time, of which there was not one but felt heavily;
what heaps of grief and inquietness? O the cruel Jealousi^s well or ill
grounded! O the rage! the despair! to promise her self so much satisfaction in
coming, and so many sweet Fancies which she had, and to return more
disconsolate than ever: Her Companion who was extremely troubled to see her so
strangely sad, would have given her some consolation. Why do You afflict your
self thus Madam said she to her? it is true that the labor we have taken is a
lost one, but who knows whether it is not better for us that we have not
prospered in our design of seeing the Cavaleer: You know him Madam, and as he
is not the discreetest in the world, perhaps this Visit might have caused some
rumors, we are at least assured that we have gone a Journey without any ones
knowledge: Without any ones knowledge replied sadly this afflicted Lover; see
thou not my Child that wear betrayed, and that my Sister has known our
design, and that it was doubtless her that had sent this Lacquey to the
Cavaleer to let him know what we intended, and to oblige him to shun me: how
can what You say (Madam answered her this Maid) be true, if it be so long since
the Cavaleer went from hence, you then scarce knew of your design: what reason
do thou think then should use him to so sudden a departure (said the Abbess.)
In fine, whatsoever her Companion told her after she had mused upon a great
many reasons, she came always to say again that her Sister had done this
thing, and that nothing had made him depart at that hour but her: This
imaginatien troubled her furiously; her Jealousy increased, and she was
perplexed with so many sorts of grief, that she saw none but subjects of sorrow
no where for her: This entertainment was something different to that she had
had in going to see the Cavaleer; she scarce spoke to her Companion, and
whatsoever the other said to her to cause her to leave these sad mufings, she
would answer her in nothing but profound sighs; they began however to think
when they came home what they should do with heir Horses, which they found not
a little troublesome; but at last the best and surest way they judged was to
let them into the Garden, and to tie them some-where till it was day, that they
might carefully send them home again to the Farmers. After that they had no
more to do but to go to the Monastery; however they were not got to the middle
of the Garden before they found something to stay them, they both thought they
heard people talk. The Confident who walked some steps before the Abbess, and
whose mind was less busied, was the first that took noti^e, and told her in
making a sudden turn, that there assuredly was some body in the Garden; the
Abbess lent an attentive Ear, and found that her Companion was in the right:
Here it was she put a Truce to her Trouble^, so that she was now filled with
naught but curiosity; whatever subject of Grief any person has, if any thing
happens to surprise them, and that may be capable to busy them they feel no
more sorrow, and their troubles are as a sleep in them; her Jealousies were all
allarumed at this noise; she knew that none beside her self but her Sister had
a Key to come out of the Monastery into the Garden, and this only Reason was
more than sufficient to make her think that it was she with the Cavaleer who
were entertaining each other in at Love-commerce, she would at least know the
truth of it. Jealousy breeds courage in Women, and Love leads them every
where; she who on another occasion would perhaps have been afraid for a less
cause was not fearful to go and discover who those were in the Garden, and bid
her Companion who trembled with fear to come softly after her; they walked a
while by the side of a hedge which hid them, for the night was light, and they
might be discerned at a good distance; they approached as near as they could to
an Arbor from whence they heard he noise come, till they began to discern the
Cavaleers voice, but not to discover very well what he said; wherefore they
crept something nearer, and so near that the Abbess did at length hear her
Sister, who spoke thus: But you do not consider to what I expose my self, and
in what you hazard your self, for without making reflection on what has happened
to so many unhappy Women who relying upon the Faith of men, have lightly
forsaken themselves, in which thing they notwithstanding found they were
deceived; I imagine that You have more sincerity and honor in You than all
those people have; consider the noise my flight will make, how furiously we
shall both be sought for by my Parents, and into what strange misfortune I
shall lead you if you fall into their hands: Oh Heaven! once more continued
she, let us not try any thing so full of danger, and let me rather die here in
sorrow, than precipitate our selves into so dangerous a gulf: You will then
Madam replied another to her, whom the Abbess knew to be the Cavaleer, have me
to leave You to all the Cruelties Jealousy is capable of inventing against you
to all the injuries and all the affronts that You will receive from your
Sister, to a hundred other things which I consider, and which will make me
tremble for You: You know I have no more the liberty to see You, that they
refuse it me, and that I have been used too illy here to present my self
without shame, You desire my death then: If You love me Madam -- Alas! If I
love You interrupted she, You know it but too well. If (proceeded the Cavaleer)
You desire I should not doubt of it, and if my love and services have merited
Your doing any thing for me, as You have told me many times, You will leave
considering on it any more and follow me. Let us make our selves happy dear
Lady of my Affections, since we may do it; our flight is easy, my Servant and
Yours are both at the Gardengate who expect us with Horses; all things favor
us, and I promise You in less than three hours to guide You to a place where
not only any Body shall ever imagine where we are, but where You shall not have
cause to fear any thing though it were known. The Cavaleer said no more after
that, to hear the answer his dear Mistress would make him, who beginning to
sigh, be gone said she Cavaleer, for I fear if You urge me much, that You will
obtain of me more than I ought to grant; I pray depart hence before my weakness
overcomes my duty. You your self if you are more reasonable than I (as You
should be) strengthen my heart against your self: I Will not assure you I can
resist You, and the trouble in which I am is so great, that I find my Virtue is
going to forsake me to follow You. Adieu then; but grant I may: After these
words they heard her weep, at which the Cavaleer immediately cried out, no
rather grant you may still continue Conqueror of my heart: Grant you may
believe a Love thus tender and passionate, submit to my services and to my
fidelity which are but too well known to you to doubt it; much more he said
which was very tender and loving, which pierced the heart of the Abbess in the
same time that he won that of her Sister. It were unnecessary to present to You
the different Passions which Occupied these two Ladies at that time, (viz.) the
love, languishing, and tender sighs of the Youngest, and the despite, shame
and rage of the Eldest who had the patience to hear even to the end an
entertainment as cruel for her; as it was charming for her Sister. Imagine then
she saw her disposed to satisfy the Cavaleers desire, and that the Fair-one
was making preparation to go with him, for she wanted clothes more suitable to
travel in than those she then wore, and so went to her Chamber to fetch them:
The Abbess let her pass by her, and came not out from where she was till a
great while after, and then she fetched a great turn, and with her Masque on
her Face came into the Arbor where the Cavaleer was, who as soon as he saw her
he embraced her, with much tenderness, and manifested many tokens of his Love
to her; How charming are You said he to her taking her for his Mistress, in
that You have not made no long stay, for truly I was impatient to see Your
Return: But what Violence did she use to conceal her displeasure, it being not
yet time for her to make her self known, nor discover her self: You need not
wonder at the mistake of the Cavaleer; she seemed not so strange in the
nightime, for besides the little difference there is in the statu^e of these
two Ladies, there was notwithstanding a thousand things which contributed to
deceive him, and he had so little reason to imagine the contrary, that it was
impossible for him even to see his error, unless he had unmasked her and had
taken special notice of her, as this was no place for them to discourse in, he
spoke but little to her, and he thought on nothing but to secure himself in the
place of safety in which he had already designed to be; the Abbess answered him
not a word to all he said to her, upon which he made even no reflection, having
his mind busied about his enterprise; and in this sort they went to the gate,
where he was not a little surprised to find it shut; but she presently eased
him of that trouble, and took the Key she had about her and opened it; by what
means, or rather by what good Fortune said the Cavaleer then to her, (who knew
that none but the Abbess had the Key to that door: Have you had this Key?) she
answered him no more than before, at which he took as little notice as before,
and went forth to get presently on Horseback, but the Horses were gone from
thence, and his man who had been seeking them, told him in a sad note, that he
knew not where they were, and that he had been two hours about them without
hearing of them, that he was come to acqu^int him, and that he was going again
to see if he could find them, because he knew very well that they could not be
lost, and that no Body had been that way. I could never tell the Abbesse's
design, whether what she did was dexterously to confound this Enterprise, or
whether she really desired to supply her Sisters place; but I will tell you
that as soon as she had heard what the man had said concerning the Horses, she
re-entred the Garden, and shut to the door after her: Never was man surprised
like this poor Lover; he could scarce believe what he saw, that his Fair-one
should leave him in this manner, and that which seemed more strange to him,
that she should shut the door upon him: I believe there is none but he that
could truly represent what one might think in an Adventure so cruel, and so
extraordinary: He knocked five or six times at the door, he called his
Mistress, he complained of Love and destiny, ^wore, cursed, threatened to kill
his m n, an in fine there was no rage like his, while the Abbess returned to
her Companion laden with joy for what she had done and to hear the Cavaleer
cry out in that manner; she was not yet come to the Arbor before-men^ioned,
but she heard the noise of some body who walked with much eagerness, and who
according to all likelihood could be none but her Sister as she doubted it not,
and went before her very slowly the same way she came; this poor Lady who had
not all the assurance in the world, and who besides the horror which
accompanies all actions of this nature, walked musing upon a thousand
Obstacles which she might meet in her way, had no sooner cast her eyes upon the
Abbess, but she believed it was a Ghost, and sadly trembling with fear, she
began to make a dreadful shreek, and to run as as she was able toward the
Monastery. The Abbess did most agreeably requite all the cruel displeasures
which her Sister had given her; she let her run to come again to her Companion,
who waited for her with extreme impatience, being furiously troubled to be thus
alone in the middle of a Garden exposed to all the noises she heard, which
assaulted her with fear; she related to her all she had done since she had left
her, and how she had deceived the Cavaleer, and how her Sister was frighted,
which made them both to laugh with much Joy; they stayed a little longer to see
if she would return, but in vain, the fright of this Lady was such that she was
like to dye, and she kept her bed a very long time; at length they retired, and
used good means that no body might go forth of the Monastery in having double
locked the door. Here is said Madam d'Eyrac in concluding this History the
greatest particularities I know of the Adventure of these Ladies with the
Cavaleer; he may now tell you what is not come to my knowledge; I will only add
that it was no sooner day but the Abbess sent for her man, and asked him where
he had been the las^ night? and why he came not to the door where she had
ordered him to wait for her; the Young man told her how her Farmer had had no
Horses at home, and that at his return he found two Cavaleers who were going
into the Garden, and whom he dare not approach for fear of making himself known
that he went away, and that being returned half an hour after to the same
place, he had found the door locked: By the report of this man the Abbess was
well and clearly satisfied in what she desired thoroughly to know; she did not
further doubt but the Horses they used belonged to the Cavaleer, she gave Order
to this Servant to let them out of the Garden, and to let them wander in the
fields, but in such manner however that they may be found: Madam d'Eyrac said
no more, and turning her self to the Cavaleer, it belongs to You said she, to
recount to us what You know more; the rest of the company did likewise entreat
him most obligingly, insomuch that he could not refuse. Mndam d'Eyrac
(proceeded he) has told you so much, that I see my self constrained to
satisfy you to the end; you must know then that after I was separated from the
Abbess, and had left her in the Garden in the manner you have been told, I went
to prepare all things for my departure, but before I writ a Note to Egidia,
which was near these terms.

MADAM:
I Know not what I have done to You to use me thus cruelly as You do. Madam the
Abbess had demanded an Interview with me; and although she had expressly forbid
me to let You know any thing; I did not forbear to give You Intelligence by a
Letter which my Servant should have delivered to You: Is this betraying of You?
I see very well that You desire my death. Madam You shall be contented, but You
shall not have the pleasure of it before Your Eyes, for I am going hence
immediately, and You shall soon learn what success Your unjust proceeding will
have. If the death of the most faithful of Your Servants is capable of moving a
heart like Yours, I can well promise to my self that in a small time You may
repent for having given it me. Adieu thou too cruel Creature! for the last time
Adieu.


When I had done writing, the Abbess Servants came, who after they had
entreated me as from her to stay this Evening, would truly have hindered my
departure. Nevertheless when they saw I began to be angry with them, they made
no more Opposition; but my man carried too long, and I feared that the Abbess
might come herself to Oblige me to stay: So that I saw my self constrained in
the impatience I was to depart this place, and to leave it with my Baggage. I
gave him this Letter with Ordr^ to give it into her own Hands, and to bring me
an answer if she would send one. In this manner then I forsook a place which
since more than a Year was the dear Object of my pleasures, and I abandoned it
so filled with different troubles, that all the way from the Monastery to the
place where I was to Lodge I was without coming to my self immovable and
almost bereft of my Senses, and lost (as I may say) in sorrow. You may think
that when I came there I demanded neither Meat nor Drink. True Love^s at the
time they are reduced to the condition I was in, feed upon nothing but Tears,
and sleep is their mortal Enemy. It was in the strongest of these cruel moments
that I was advertized that a Servant waited to speak with me, I bid them to
send him into my Chamber, and saw that it was my dear Egidia's who I embraced
with my whole heart, and who after having Saluted me as from his Mistress, gave
me a Note she had writ to me, which contained this.

SIR:
DO You think I desire your death? You know me too well, and you may be
persuaded that though You had done me all the Injuries imaginable, You may in
one word as soon make me believe I am deoeived; I know not of what Letter You
speak, it is above three days since I received any from You; come and tell me
what it is You mean, for I should dye with displeasure if fearing that I am in
the wrong You should thus depart; I lately have heard something which I shall
tell you; it is reported that my Sister could never Oblige You to reside here
with us this Evening: But if You love me more than her, would You not do
something more for me; I pray return. I am in a humor to forgive you all, and
if You desire to evidence to me a true testimony of Your love, it must be this
Evening, or I shall not sleep till I have seen You; I shall expect You till two
in the morning in the great Arbor in the Garden; I shall measure the strength
of Your Love by the smalness of time You will give me to wait for You. Adieu.


As soon as I had read this Note, I mounted on Horseback, and in a very little
time came to the Garden wall, where I knew of a place that was not difficult to
climb up, having potwithstanding found the door open, I made use without going
further of so favorable an occasion; it is true it surprised me, and I did
truly believe that Egidia had found out a way to open it: I bid her Lacquey tie
the two Horses to the foot of some Tree, and to make have without any noise to
advertize my man to prepare himself at the time given to depart with me: After
I had given this Order, I went, or to speak better, I flew directly to this
Arbor, where Egidia waited for me; it was at that instant when the Abbess
returned to the Garden-gate that she found my Horses, that she took them for
those her man should have brought, and that she used them to render me that
extraordinary Visit. But not to continue longer in the relation of a small
History which does already begin to seem long: I will only tell You that Egidia
received me in this Arbor with a joy which made me forget all the evil usage I
had received from her, that we both of us passed some moments in very much
tenderness, and that the brightest day that could be, never seemed so pleasant
to me as did this charming night; I spoke to her of the Letter which I had sent
her, she was surprised, and assured me that she had not received it; we
presently thought that it was fallen into the hands of the Abbess, and that my
Servant must have been mistaken, or have betrayed me. In fine, after many
justifications on both sides, after I say many tokens of new Friendships, of
sighs and languishings where Lovers abound in a sweet reconciliation, I
proposed to her to carry her away, as you have heard from Madam d'Eyrac; I
urged her so much and in so many ways, that at length she consented, and
prepared her self to follow me: I confess I was a little surprised to see her
so soon returned; but who had then thought on the Abbess? I saw her Masked, she
was in a riding Garb, she scrupled not to go with me; and in a word, if my
Horses had been ready, there is no doubt but if she was willing, I should have
carried her away for her Sister; I will not stay to tell You the wonder that
seized me when I saw her re-enter the Garden, and shut the door upon me, I
thought at first that she had a mind to jest; but as her railery lasted
something too long for people that had no time to loose, and that she came not
although I called never so loud, I thought to my self that this was no jesting:
I imagined that she feigned to follow me only to put this trick upon me, and
that I had been the most abused of all men; then was it that shame, spite, and
disdain excited terrible tempests in my Soul, which joined to the displeasure
of not knowing what were become of my Horses, nor what might be become of my
self, put me into such despair, that complaints, reproaches, and injuries came
forth of my mouth in multitudes against Egidia; this Offense seemed to me the
greatest that any Gentleman could receive. I considered it every way, and there
was no circumstance but made it plain to me. I retired in this manner into the
Village, for there was no other way for me, and I lodged at my Ancient Host's,
where I passed away a much more cruel night than I did the first time I came
there. I recollected in my mind all the services I had rendered to this
Ungrateful One, all the false promises she had made to me; and wondering that I
had not discovered the lightness of her Humor, I accused my self both of
Imprudence and Blindness; and I joined to the first of my Despairs an
Indignation against all that I had done that concluded my ruin. Oh the
extravagant Discourses I had this night! O the useless designs I made! in
truth those that love extremely are subject to a great many Follies: It was no
sooner day, but I asked my man for Ink and Paper to write to her, but it was
with so much trouble and disorder, that I often blotted out what I had writ to
her, nothing could content me; sometimes it seemed as though I complained too
mildly, and sometimes I was afraid to offend her; I had sometimes a desire to
take an eternal Farewell of her, and a minute afterward I would repent it. This
is the Letter I sent her.

MADAM:
YOu should not have showed me so much favor for to have revoaked it so soon,
nor have come so near the Door to leave me so abruptly; it was my bad Fortune
that my Horses were out of the way, You saw at least that it was not my fault,
and You should rather have given me some Consolation, than to have used me with
that rudeness and cruelty as to forsake me without speaking a word: But why
above all did You shut the door upon me? Why flee away? did You fear any
Violence from me? and why? however did You promise me so much happiness, if You
had no desire to render me happy: I see well what I must imagine by all this,
and that my greatest misfortune was not in having loved You too well, but in
having believed that You loved me, the mask is now taken off, and without
giving You the terms of Ungrateful or Perfideous, I will leave all reproaches
for You to make to Your self, while I pass the rest of a miserable life in a
place happier for me than this, and bid You adieu.


This Letter was given her by a Lacquey who an hour after brought me another
from her, and told me that she was extreme ill, which I plain y saw by her
writing, which I could scarce read, and where I found these words.

SIR,
ALl that You have Writ to me frighteth me in such a manner that I believe I
shall dye. I know not of what Gate You speak, all I can say is, that I saw You
not since I left You in the Arbor, but a Shadow, or rather a Ghost which I met
in my way, and of which I took such a fright, that it will cause my death; it
was assuredly this Fautome of which You speak, and who had doubtless taken my
shape: Thus Heaven chastises those who are unwise, I have not slept since, and
methinks I always see this Spirit pursue me: I see what Heaven will do with
me, and that I have offended it too long a time; let us take warning by this,
for my part I am wholly resolved to lead another kind of life, and if You love
me You will do the same. We went the way to ruin, and Heaven would Conserve
us; let us render it those thanks we owe it for this happiness: Do not see me
for some days, I will think upon my Salvation. I Conjure You to do like me,
and entreat You in the same moment to look upon me for the future as no more
than one of Your simple Friends. Adieu.


This Letter moved me, and surprised me extremely, but to speak the truth, were
it not that she was very ill indeed, I had taken all she said for Chimera's,
and pretenses which she might use to excuse her levity. I do not think my self
over-wise, hut I scarcely ever did believe these stories of Ghosts; however,
when I reflected upon what she assured me, how she had not seen me since she
had left the ^^^our, I began to be something af^aid also: I examined in my mind
all that happened to me with this pretended Ghost, and I remembered very well that
it spoke not a word to me; that it was sooner returned than I expected Egidia
would: I fancied to my self that it had opened the door without a Key, and that
when it left me it vanished: In a word, I insensibly gave way to my error, and
that served to make me indeed think upon my Conscience, and to endeavor to
reconcile my self with Heaven: I remained some days without so much at going
to the Monastery to avoid seeing of the Abbess, who had sent to entreat me to
return to the sa^^ Lodging I had before with her: I excused my self as well as
I could, and returned not before I had received this Letter, which her Sister
had sent me by one of her Friends.

SIR:
I Believe that Heaven will still do me the favor to allow me some time of
doing Penitence; the Physicians have now better hopes of my Recovery; however
it is, come and see me, to the end that if death does separate us, I may at
least in dying have the Consolation of having done my duty, in telling You of
things which I am obliged to tell You: I expect You. Adieu.


This place proceeded the Cavaleer is but little proper to divertize the
Company, for here is nothing but Tears; I gave her a Visit, and I avow to you
that I found my self so insensibly moved to see her in the condition she was
in, that I could not be Master of my heart, I could not refrain giving of it
ease by a Torrent of tears which immediately trickled from my eyes; all that
were present could not forbear weeping with me, insomuch that even the Abbess
was concerned to see in what manner I was afflicted; this poor Lady who endured
no less than me, used some endeavor to tell me some things of concernment in
the world, and spoke to me as if she had been to depart that day, and truly
most of them believed that she would scarce live much longer; but Heaven would
preserve her to be an example of a most rare constancy, and of a most sweet and
civil Friendship in which we have lived ever since: Perhaps you know not said
Madam de Eyrac to him, that no body has contributed so much to the recovery of
her health than me, and you shall see how; this Maid, or if you will the
companion of the Abbess, who as I have told you more than once reposed much
confidence in me, failed not to come and give me an account of this Adventure,
and how your Mistress had been frighted, so that it was not difficult for me to
know the cause of her Illness, and what might be the means to cure her mind:
Every body observed an extraordinary trouble in her Eyes, and such a disorder
in her words, that she seemed to be in a continual dream: I took pity on her,
and although it was to Sacrifice my Friend to declare the Secret which she had
confided in me, I believed that in the extremity wherein this poor Lady was,
there was nothing which I might not hazard to endeavor her recovery. I took
the opportunity just when there was no Body with her but a Young Maiden whom I
did not mistrust, and I asked her boldly whether her distemper proceeded not
from some trouble of mine? and whether she thought me not enough her Friend? to
declare it to me. She looked steadfastly upon me and blushed, thinking that I
would speak of the Cavaleer: But having afterward said that I perhaps knew the
cause of her Illness better than she did her self, and that I could deliver her
from the fear which she had in the Garden, she lifted her self suddenly up in
the Bed, and taking me by the hand, Oh Heaven! Madam said she, what you tell me
surprizeth me I Could it be possible that in my musings I should speak of any
thing like that? no, no! answered I to her in interrupting her, I came to the
knowledge of it some other way than by you, and I believe that no Body here ever
heard you speak of any such thing; the Persons that frighted You told it to me,
and I thought I ought not to leave you any longer in this trouble. I imagine
that you will do so well that I may have no cause to complain of your
discretion, and that you will make good use of the confidence I have in You:
She promised it me, and I told her all that had passed in the Garden after the
manner I had heard it related, and which did so greatly amaze her, that she
could scarce have believed me had I not told her all that happened to her self,
and even to the entertainment which she had had with the Cavaleer; she blushed,
and I perceived that she was ashamed that I knew this part of the story. But in
fine, since this time by little and little her mind was resetled; she recovered
her strength, and in a small time he Health entirely; I know not how she has
used it since with you; but I know that she had taken very strong resolutions,
that not knowing how to forbear to love You, she would do it in a manner that
she might not render an account to Heaven. I will assure you Madam answered the
Cavaleer to her that she has also done it, and that it is no more than a
Brotherly Friendship, to which in truth I had much difficulty to reduce my
self, but she would have it; and at length I brought my self to it. I pray tell
us a little said the Marchioness de Sindal how you afterward did with the
Abbess, and in what manner you put her off. I believe proceeded the Cavaleer
that the Abbess rebuked me furiously since the last Evening, and that what she
heard while I was in the Arbor with her Sister, finished he^ Cure. I ever
avoided being alone with her, during the small time I remained in the Abbey,
and when I departed I took my leave of her before five or six Ladies her
Friends who were in her Chamber with her Here the Cavaleer ended his Story, and
the Duchess Invited the Company to take a small turn in the Garden before they
retired, they were all the rest of the time entertaining each other about this
Adventure, and diverse were their Opinions; but having done talking (according
to their usual custom) when each days Conversation was ended) they applied
themselves to Mademoiselle d'Armand for a Song, and she gave them this.

SONG.
^ By yonder purling Brook by chance,
^ sleeping away all Care,
^ I saw a thousand Cu -- pids dance
^ Le -- val -- toes in the Air,
^ but Venus in a Cloud descended,
^ and with the boys seemed much offended:
^ but Venus in a Cloud descended,
^ and with the boy seemed much offended
At length my Cloris bright I found
Near to a pleasing Grove,
I saw her too, receive a wound
From the Young God of Love.
But Venus, etc.
I slumbring blessed my self in mind
For what the Boys had done,
Must she who was so coy prove kind?
And can she then be won?
With that my thoughts Venus ascended,
Then smiled and seemed no more offended.
At length the Hour being come to go to Rest, the Duchess took her leave of
the Company, and the remainder of the time was spent by every one in taking
their repose.

CHAP. V.
THe Fifth day although it was the obscurest, was not the less recreative; on
the contrary the Sun is never more pleasant in the Summer, than when he shows
himself with less pomp than ordinary, and under the thick Vale of some Clouds
which he cannot penetrate with his beams; the season was very proper to take a
walk in. The Duchess used it to give some Visits to some of her Neighbors,
and she was accompanied by this illustrious and most gallant company, and they
returned not till about the Evening to take a magnificent Treat which the Duke
had prepared for them in the same Arbor where the Circle was kept: things were
no sooner taken away, but they had some agreeable discourse of Railery as a
prelude to something better, and which served only to dispose their minds to
furnish a most agreeable matter of Entertainment, the Duchess who would give
the Honor to the Countess d'Ermond entreated her to propose some Question; she
excused it with a very good Grace, and immediately asked her that they might
continue to do as they had begun, and not to have these particular regards,
that when it should come to her turn, she would speak as the rest: The Duchess
urged her no farther, and left this care to Mademoiselle d'Armond who was ever
in the charge of Lieutenant; this Lady said that it was not necessary to seek
new subjects of Entertainment, since there were already two upon the board, the
gallantest of the world, and wherein she for her particular was too much
interessed to let it pass by. I have not forgot continued she how two days
since it was proposed to us to learn how to discover the false and true Lovers,
and how a Lady might receive a declaration of Love; and I remember still very
well added she, that the Count took upon him to tell us these two things which
are important in the world, and wherein he will not fail to be succesful after
he has had some time of consideration. The Duchess said, that in effect these
were the two subjects of Conversation, which they did not continue, and she
prayed the Company to give it attention: I avow to You answered the Count, that
although I had prepared my self, as has said Mademoiselle deArmond for a
matter like this with which I should entertain You; I find it so difficult,
that I shall still have trouble enough to come off with the success I should
do: but be it in what manner it will, I will notwithstanding perform what You
desire of me, and prefer the honor of obeying You before the shame of being
unsuccesful in my Enterprise. The first Counsel I pretend to give to a Lady,
like that, whose Picture I drew three days ago, is not lightly to believe that
she is loved, and to be the last to say it; there are I know not how many Women
in the World who do not only believe all the protestations the men make them,
but it rejoices them to hear what they will say to them when they sigh and
complain by them; they endure with an artificial Vanity all the praises they
give them, or if they defend themselves, it is so weakly, and in a certain
manner, that they may see it is not what they hate, and that maugre all their
Grimaces, that the secret to please them is to flatter them. My Opinion is that
a Lady should always let them see that these sorts of Discourses molest them,
that she loves not that way to let them gain her esteem, that she knowerh her
self, and whether she be Fair or not, that she knows it without giving any
one the trouble to tell it her; she ought to imagine that a man has not much
esteem for her, who dares to speak to her publicly of Love: that true Love
renders people respectful, and that they must at least have sighed long before
they come to a declaration: All these maxims are Touch-stones for the false
sighers, and the least resistance sends them going, and who are not Lovers
but when a Lady is so innocent to let her self be persuaded to tendernesses,
transports to Tears and to sighs of Commrnd; they Swear that they alone have
more love than all the met together, and they know not what this passion is,
all their care tends only to make them believe what they say; but they are
not always believed; and I dare aver that were all Women reasonable, there
would be no false Lovers, the self-weakness of this Sex draws upon them all
these Treacheries; the men would seek to deceive, the less did they not find so
much Facility in it. Now as in former Times, there will ever be Traitors, and
Women abused. But what said Mademoiselle de Armand to him, interrupting him,
must a Woman then do when a man is so very bold as to make a declaration of his
Love to her? must she be severe, and treat him illy, and send him away that he
may not see her more? On the contrary answered her the Count, I would only have
her to give him an answer, whose discreet coldness might give him to understand
that she takes no pleasure in those sorts of Liberties, and if he be a
Gentleman that knows how to carry himself with her, and who mentions not
his passion to her, but in modest terms and under a hidden sense, which is the
way that witty perfons use, I believe that it may be very easy for this
Fair-one to rid her out of trouble, and that she may give to his words what
signification she pleases, as if she understood nothing, and turn the
discourse upon another matter, that if it so happens that she cannot but give
what he says the true meaning, she might convert it all into Railery, and
attribute it to a certain custom which witty persons have when they are in
company with Ladies, that they make it a necessity to praise them, and to tell
them that they love them; there is more safety that way, when a Lady has the
readiness to use it ingeniously. You speak said the Cavaleer as if all men were
deceivers; and pray tell me to what torments should you not condemn a brave
Gentleman that were truly in Love with a Lady; if they all followed your
Maxims; should you be contented continued he to be in his place, and to be
reduced to those afflictions which this passion is accustomed to make
unfortunate Lovers suffer, when they find themselves with those that are
insensible or given to Railery, which implies proceeded he, that if the Women
would believe you, they shall esteem the services and tears of their Lovers, as
if they were mere trifles, and a subjection more assiduous, more careful, and
more earnest than that of slaves shall be for persons who shall disdein and
laugh at us; you give in truth such counsels that are but little humane; you
should beware how you instruct this Sex in new injustices, for this is not
truly just, and we commonly see them but too full of Cruelty. You are too soon
moved answered the Count to him smiling; I have not yet spoken precisely of
those that truly Love, but only in general of those who speak of Loving, and
say they love. Here are many that say it too well to do it; it is commonly those
who love most that speak it less; the eyes and silence speak in love, and one
ever says enough to those that rejoice to understand us; if I must speak the
truth, I believe that it is very difficult to give certain rules upon what You
now demand of me, for as many as there be of men, as many ways are there to
love, the Proverb confirms it enough, that says, Let every one love
according to his Guise: How shall I tell you then the cautions, a Lady ought to
have upon this without first examining the different ways of making Love; that
which is most true, and ought to pass as a general Maxim, is that a Lady ought
not to make it known that she loves before she has had great experiences of
her Lover, and to wait till he discovers it, because it is ever dangerous for
a Lady to have discovered her fire, whereas the men make it their glory to have
declared their passion. I perceive said the Baron that You will speak for the
Married Women; for the Maidens I believe not that the most severe carriage can
keep them from disclosing a thing so natural as is that to love, and to say
that one loves especially to those of whose fidelity and love they are
persuaded; if it were so the Love might return and continue in the place from
whence it sprung; there is no man that would engage himself to Love in that
manner unless it were to hate himself, I know not what would become of us: I
speak answered him the Count of all Women, and much more for the Maids than the
Married Women, to whose Virtue these sorts of Engagements cannot but do much
prejudice. What You aver there replied d'Arignan to him is very austere, not to
permit the Married Women to love as well as the others. I will assure You there
are but few would Marry were it so; we must leave these things to a Preacher,
or to those that deny love to the world that they may have the better part:
There are continued he so many unfortunate Women who without reason are so illy
used by their Husbands; so mamy others whom their Parents have Married to old
jealous heads to Brutes to peevish Coxcombs that make them live in so strange a
manner; if a Divorce was permitted for these Women, and that they could deliver
themselves from their Tyrants, I would not pardon their weakness in loving
elsewhere as long as they remained with them: But when by the effects of some
bad star, or when their destiny will have it so, that in the bed where they
should meet the pleasures of Love and Peace, they have these cruel Hang-men to
torment them, and with whom they must perforce live (if we may call the time
they pass with them life:) Would You have these poor Ladies deprive themselves
of the only pleasure they have to oblige a Gallant Gentleman which an Owl of an
Husband has not only in disdain but horror. I agree added de Arignan, that a
Woman who has a Husband that understands Reason, and who knows how to
live, should rather dye than do him any Injury. But for the unfortunate Ones, I
forgive them all, and they would do themselves wrong if they knew of a sure way
to be revenged of their Domestic Enemies, and should not do it. The Ladies all
laughed at the opinion of d'Arignan, and the Duchess told him that he spoke as
one Interessed, and that if he had been a Woman, and a Woman of Honor, he
would have had other Opinions; she added further, that it was a naughty revenge
to ruin her self to do her Enemy a displeasure, and that a Civil Lady had her
actions to answer to others more than her Husband; however it is said the
Count, to come to the Married persons, I say that it being a thing that does
not always depend upon us not to love, I would that when this misfortune
happens to any of them, and that the Injustice of her Husband, or the desire
she has for another, brings her to some inclination; I would I say have her
make no other agreement with him than for a tender friendship and esteem, and
never to give him such certain tokens of what she suffers for him, whereby
the Cavaleer might make it his glory: There is no man said the Cavaleer but
would Appeal from this sentence before the Women themselves: But after You
have taught such a strange humor, and such severe maxims to those that are
Married, will You at least not grant something more mild to those that are to
Marry; and will You not let them have something more of Indulgence for those
whom we may call true Lovers. If a Young Lady answered the Count must love a
man, it must be those with whom she hops to be Married, and then I should not
condemn her although she showed him some tokens of esteem. Nevertheless I would
have it be with so much reservedness, that her Virtue might find nothing
wherewith to reproach her heart: I will assure You a Lady cannot be too
cautious upon this Article, and that the men have now so much presumption of
themselves, and are so much accustomed to promise themselves all from their own
merit, that the least favor flattereth them, and makes them withdraw from
their duty. Tde Count interrupted, the Abbot seems to be Feed by the Women
to speak against the Men, as was Monsieur d'Armenton the other day to tell
untruths in favor of these Fair-ones: I thought said the Marchioness, that Mr.
Abbot had no more to say against us; but now his desire to be chastised is come
again. Courage Sir added she in smiling, the Btave Ones like You are not amazed
at stripes; You used me too illy (said she Abbot) the first time for me to dare
to adventure any more: But however, were it necessary for me to expose my Life
for the Truths sake I would maintain it well that there has been nothing said
on Your behalf in all there has hitherto been spoken. Stay replied the same
Lady to him til Monsieur d'Armenton be in a humor to answer You, for I believe
he is preparing notwithstanding he has been so long silent: I Madam answered
her d'Armenton, I swear I have not such a thought, because that all that the
Count has spoken I find so just and reasonable, that they must be Void of
Sense who are not for him, and who dare to contradict him. For my part replied
the Count, I expose here neither party, and I only speak what belongs to
Reason, and a good custom against abuse and false appearances: But to return
where I was, there are I know not how many Women who desire nothing more than
to be esteemed handsome, to have at their Train a multitude of Lovers of which
they make a Trophy, and who serve as a Triumph to their Beauty; they employ all
means for these Conquests, and make no difficulty to make advancements to
their ruin; and these proceedings contribut^ to satisfy their Vanity, they
stray from tha^ modesty and bashfulness to which their Se^ engages them, they
endure certain discourses, they permit some languishing Glances in sweetly
clofing the eyelid, and keeping it hal^ shut, by which they think that
sweetness must enchant all those that dare to behold them; in a word, they are
knowing in the art we call Gossiping; but these are weaknesses unworthy those
Women we speak of. It is true also that I am not for those nice ones, who are
more than Savages, and who bring their Virtue even to a point of delicacy, that
for the least word they will discountentnce people: I think there is a Medium
to be kept, and which I would counsel an understanding Woman to follow. I say
that a Ladies merit is much greater, when the Conquests she makes are merely
due to her own Virtue, and when the good Behavior and Grace she has in all
her actions, draws hearts to her. Love is much more solid when it is grounded
upon esteem, than when it is upheld by Beauty alone: Esteem may ever continue,
and Beauty fades, and a Lover who is tied to particular Features is subject to
very many accidents, and cannot Love but in Fear, whereas he that suffers
himself to be inclined to Virtue, loves without molesiation, and cease not
to love till death; a man who shall love a Lady as I say will be satisfied with
the least regard he receives from her: A simple civility shall in his mind
pass for a considerable f^vour: I know not said the Baron who these men are who
think their services well requited in so small a matter; and I know not said
d'Arignan whether there are many Women in the world so good House-wives of
their Favors: I believe answered the Countess d'Ermond, that You see none here
who give You not a very true Example. I avow said the Cavaleer, that what the
Count said is not so extraordinary, but some of it is practiced by many Women:
But it is also true, that he is something scrupulous in certain matters, and
that there is even injustice in it, not to permit a Mistress to give some
manner of Hope to a poor Lover that shall languish for her, that one day at
least he may be Loved. I have seen Women added he, whom Beauty rendered them
perhaps something too proud, who at the only words of Love would seem to be
extremely angry, but in the end, these Obstinate Beauties have if not
submitted, at least grown very mild, and the services, importunities, sighs,
and tears have worked so upon them, that they have also taken delight to love
such a one were the most rigorous person in the world, that could resist at the
sight of a languishing Lover whom she sees upon his knees to her: A heart
though Obstinate, is not insensible, and it is a difficult thing to escape
loving when one is persuaded of a persons merit, there is nothing sometimes
that in endreth truer Love than Obstinacy when Overcome, and those Hearts which
are the difficultest to win, are those which are most moved: You imagine said
the Marchioness to him every one to be like your Religious Ladies. Not so
answered her the Cavaleer: but you will confess that if all Women were as the
Count would make them, they would not be very amiable, and very few wise men
would love them. Perhaps said the Count to him, that all people would not be of
your Opinion as You are not of mine; but however if You took notice, I said not
that a Mistress should bring a poor Lover to despair, I am not for such
Barbarous Counsels, I avoid Extremities in all things, and my Opinion in this
was, that a Lady ought to grant no other than a tender Friendship and Esteem,
and it is with this a Gentleman may rest satisfied from such a Lady I spoke of.
It is true continued he, that in Love the Pallates are as different as there
are difference in Beauties, and that one cannot Regulate all Lovers to one and
the same point; there are of them who seeing a Lady of a humor something
serious, and who is accustomed not to do any thing but what seems very civil,
will be taken with a certain respect for her, that they scarcely dare bring
their desires to love; they will rather love another, whose languishings,
words, and glances may give them leave to hope. I also know others who care
little for the Artifices, and all the outward appearances of certain Beauties
who ignorize nothing of Gallantry, they will sooner engage themselves to a
Fair-one whose humor seems full of sincerity, and who they find without art
and fashion, I mean without being too witty; they will love that simplicity
which shall cause her to utter her thoughts in matters as they are, there are
yet lovers of a character much different from these who would pass for
ingenious people, and who vainly believe that in Love as in all things else,
the glory of a Conquest consists in the difficulty and resistance; they are
persuaded that there is no Victory more sweet than to overcome that which
others have found inaccessible; they will apply themselves to Beauty, whose
looks, words, and proud Behavior, menace nothing but Rigours; as if there were
no advantage more glorious than to reduce a proud heart to love. These same men
will sometimes love certain Women that use a thousand Artifices, and who are
oftentimes more difficult to vanquish, than those who are austere by
profession; they try yet others whose disdainful humor with few words, and
some smiles, seems to despise the whole Universe, and with whom it is a crime
to dare only to behold them. I have seen another kind of Lovers who were for
the Women-gallants, and of great Conversation, for those who would show them
fair play, and whom nothing could shake; in a word, who love facility, and the
Women that are necessary: But when an understanding Lady shall miss of all
these sorts of Lovers, I Will not think her unfortunate. I know very well that
those who are already endued with Virtue, and love Discretion, desire not such
rediculous ones; there are for them enough that seek merit as well as beauty,
who serve the Graces of the mind as well as those of the body, and who can love
in a much more solid manner than the others; these are Lovers who ever give
testimonies of a passion as respectful as Violent, and think their service well
requited with a small affection, which a Mistress of the humor I have described
shall testify; they would not require a public declaration from her, nor any
favor which might touch the rules of Civility. Confess said d'Arignan that
there is much Tyranny in this Civility: (...) tf Ii must make this Sex close
their Eyes for services, respects, sighs, and for tears; in fine for all that a
Lover can do, it would be the terriblest thing in the world, and such an
Ingratitude was never heard of before: You would then said the Countess
d'Ermond to him have as much of Complacency on our side, as there is Love on
Yours; if it be true that Love is the cause of your sighing and weeping; what
do You think said she, that when a Lady has seen in the Cavaleers eyes that he
has a tenderness for her, that she is Obliged to declare to him what she has
for him, is it not enough that she separateth him from others? that she hears
his sighs, and explaineth them as she ought? that she loves to see her self
loved? that she also pittieth and bewaileth him, and in fine, that she perhaps
desires what he desires? without coming to what is too difficult to do, and
too dangerous for a Lady to tell her sufferings in that case. It is true said
the Abbot in smiling, that it would be a very sensible recompense, and that the
pleasure would be gteat to be made happy in that manner. By your leave Madam, I
pray tell me what sweetness one can suck from a thing that one is ignorant of;
and how a Lover shall know if he possesses the happiness he has so much hoped
for, and for which he has done so much service; if his Mistress never says
any thing to him, and if he knows not in what manner he is seated in her
mind, for my part I should almost as soon love to be hated; and I conclude that
there is a necessity in Love to declare their minds on both sides: Nevertheless
with this Order, that the men are to begin, but the Women must second them. If
any Body be so nice as to think it a thing so very troublesome as to say [I
love You] as the Countess d'Ermond would make us believe, let her at least
manifest to her Lover sufficient tokens to make him understand the love she
has for him, so that according to Mr. Abbot replied the same Countess, things
must be equally poised, and there must be no more difficulty on our part than
there is on yours; in truth You show your self but a novice in Love-matte^s.
Mr. Abbot said the Cavaleer to her has not so little reason as you think, and
if You did what he ha^h said, and that on your parts you would not seem so
insensible as you do, the e would perhaps be more sweetness in life than there
is found, Love would give a taste of his pleasures to both Sexes, we should not
know the torments, and the men would be delivered from an infinity of Evils
which they endure for your sakes: These Gentlemen said the Duchess speak for
themselves; and we must not think it strange that they give us counsels so
little reasonable; however I would know the opinion of d'Armenton, for though
he be inte essed in the matter, I doubt not but he will speak otherwise. I
believe answered her d'Armenton, that there would assuredly be much sweetness
in Love if the Ladies were a little indulgent, and if they would pass over some
ce tain considerations, and submit to our first sighs, since in effect it is
enough to be loved as one loves, to abstain from being unhappy in Love,
Modesty, certain Observations, and I know not what other scruples of the Ladies
causes our sorrows, makes us Ilment, from which we should be delivered were
it the custom among them to free us from these powerful Obstacles when they
see themselves loved. But to speak the truth, these delights and pleasures
would fade, and there are many that would not taste them, if Love made us not
to suffer. It is from these cruel effects which this passion produces in the
Soul of a Lover, that which pricketh us, and make^h us concerned, and in a
word, it is a seasoning of the pleasure; we commonly esteem but little a thing
that costeth us nothing, and a happiness which we possess in quiet, we forsake
it, and leave it without grief, for who will take it? It is commonly the pain
that gives the price to things, it is difficulty which heateth our desires,
and we should have but cold ones, and consequently small pleasures should we
take no pains, and fuffer a little to possess what we desire. A Lover who is a
Gentleman, and who loves as he ought, shall find more glory and more
satisfaction in the Conquest of a heart that has held out long, than in the
possession of another that is vanquished with the first A tack, the pains it
shall have cost him which ha^h made so much resistance, will make him esteem it
Infinitely, his love and his pleasure will continue the longer, he will never
be cloyed, and will always fear to lose what he has obtained with nothing but
a multitude of troubles. Love is no more love if we disarm him, and take away
his arrows. A man cannot be termed Lover except he su^^ereth; and I say
(answered the Cavaleer) that this mixture of bitters with sweets spoileth the
pleasure of Love, and that Love is so well love without them, that it ought to
produce nothing but sweetness; so that if I was capable of establishing Laws, I
would condemn these Cruel and Ungrateful Ones to the same place of Exile where
you have sent the false Lovers. The Ladies have not a Heart different from
Ours, they are not Insensible, and though our Sex cannot make show of so much
passion and tenderness as this, they nevertheless do not forbear to have as we
have, or to be capable as we are. Why all these Rigours then? why this affected
severity? and why not to manifest their desires sometimes as much as we? would
it not be better that there were none but happy Lovers and sensible Mistresses,
that tenderness governed every where; that nothing was done but in Love, and
that it were the chief of all things, as by the Law of Nature it ought: Can one
doubt that a Gentlewoman would not be glad to see her self loved by an
accomplished Gentleman, and more if she loved him, and gave way to her
Inclination to act; and would she not much more if she rendered him happy, and
could say that she wished it? wherefore de Armenton you must confess that you
are not in the right, and that Women being sensible of love, joy, and grief,
as of all other passions, do themselves a most horrible Injustice to torment
themselves to cause our trouble, and that they should follow other Laws than
those the Count has prescribed them. Whatsoever you can say replied the
Duchess, we are Obliged to the Count for having taught the Women an honest
method of loving, and to render the thing alike; some Lady in the Company
should show the same to the men. I believe Madam answered her the Baron, it is
the Women only must be taught the art to Love, because there are but few that
know it; they esteem it a point of Honor to be marble-hearted, and the Count
authorizeth them in these Opininions; but for the men, they know but too well
how to love, and the beauty of Women is a great Master to teach them, one
thing they should show us is the manner to make them love us. Well let us see
then said Madam de Armand to him what you can say upon it, You who have been so
succesful in two or three places wherein You have continued: You would perhaps
Madam answered her the Baron make me believe that I have not been unhappy in
Love, to engage me to tell You what I desire to know, and that the Evils I have
suffered make me discern that I am altogether Ignorant of it. I am none of
those who convert all into mildness, far from that, I am of those sort of
people to whom a little evil spoileth all the Fortune in the world; Judge then
if it be easy to be persuaded to what You say; I that in all my Life have
enjoyed so little felicity and so many Evils to endure; so it is those
Gentlemen do said the Countess d'Ancire that would go for discreet, and give a
good Opinion of their Carriage. But happy or unhappy, You shall however tell us
which is the shortest way a Gentleman can take to cause himself to be loved by
a Lady: Reason would replied the Baron, that in serving Ladies we should obtain
their good Opinions: But we must first know of themselves after what manner
they desire to be served, to the end we may Oblige them accordingly, for some
will after one manner, and others after another; and there are some that desire
things so particular, that a man would be very much troubled to Divine, and
that they sometimes know not themselves. It is for this Reason added he, in
regarding the Marchioness of Sindal, that You must do it, who knows all
things that can please the persons of Your Sex. It is You I say that must take
upon You the trouble to tell us the manner of serving Ladies to Ones advantage.
It would be a lesson of great profit for men, and those of the Company would be
particularly Obliged to You for it. You may Your self replied the Marchioness
still take this care, for You know well enough the cautions that must be
observed. Nevertheless since You desire it, I will tell You that generally with
all the world he that desires to be loved must love; and that this quality
suffices a gallant Gentleman to keep himself from being hated by his Mistress.
Now if without making You blush continued she in smiling, I may say in Your
presence that You have passed for one aimable enough; and I will add further,
that You would be loved more if You did not love in so many places, for that
cannot be called Love. Rivers divided into so many places do at length become
small Brooks: a heart divided among so many persons, cannot have much Love for
one only Object: In the mean time You send out your complaints, and give Your
self over to weeping, and to reproaches against most of those Women that You
have served, and that have known you better than the others, as if they were
Obliged to love You better than You can do; there are some that You have too
well persuaded not quite to forsake You, I pity them, especially one of my
acquaintance, and who to act her part better, would have You seemingly Court a
Lady her Neighbor; but I know not who would be the most abused: If it should
happen that You became really in Love with this Neighbor, for without speaking
false, she is too Fair to serve for a pretense; what You say there Madam
(replied the Baron) is the unjustest thing in the world, and it would be no
great trouble to me to let you see the contrary: If I might be believed when I
speak the truth, it is a terrible thing for a man when the Women are once set
to his disadvantage: I do all I can to please the person of whom the
Marchioness speaks, I spare neither care nor pains, I render her more Visits
than ever I did to any in this world before, I love her more than one can love,
and yet you will have it only a pretense, I believe unless I dyed for her I
should not be believed: I may well complain -- your Complaints themselves
interrupted the Marchioness, make it appear that there is Artifice in your
proceeding, or at least that You love her but little, since You desire of her
what she would not have You, against the first law of Love which Ordains that
we must not desire but what the person desires whom we love. Alas said the
Baron, I desire but too well what she desires, and if I complain, it is of her
Cruelty, and that she will not grant me that I desire of her; after which I am
well grounded to believe abcording to the Law you say, that she loves me not:
It belongs to him replied the Marchiones that begins to love first, to be
al, so the first to desire to please and accomodate himself wholly to the humor
of the person, he condereth he must govern himself to please her will, and make
his desires to be the slaves of hers, his Soul it self ought to Obey her in all
things, and never to be transformed into any thing but her if it were possible,
and make it his last Felicity: True Lovers ought to do thus. My felicity
replied the Baron, would doubtless be to have one will to be Mistress of her
heart and mine: but how shall this accord be made if she never does any thing
for me, while I do all things for her; if she does not something slacken this
great severity to give me at least some hope. The Baron was there when a Page
came to tell the Duchess that there was a great company of Persons of Quality
newly arrived; for which reason the Circle was broke up, and this Question went
no farther, that they might follow the Duchess who went before to meet those
that came to Visit her.

The rest of the Evening passed in indifferent discourses, or in small matters
without any particular Entertainment, except the ensuing Song which
Mademoiselle d'Armand gave the Company.

SONG..
^ I heard a Nymph that sat alone,
^ beneath a shady Hill,
^ in doleful Notes her Fate bemoan,
^ and the air therewith thus fill.
^ Alas said she, woe, woe is me,
^ that live under loves tyranny,
^ since naught but falsness I descry
^ in men, I Will lay me down and die,
^ the Wood-Nymphs shall carry me
^ to the woods, and bury me,
^ and o'th top of my grave they shall strew
^ Chaplets of Flowrs,
^ and make pretty Bowers,
^ to honor loves Arrow and Bow,
^ To honor Loves Arrow and Bow.
I. B.
CHAP. VI.
THe Sixth day the Duchess gave the Company an Entertainment, which I cannot
relate here without making a long digression of something very Noble. But I
believe it is better not to trouble the Readers patience, (for nothing
troubles it more than digressions) that I say only in passing that they had a
Ball and a Play, and toward the Evening mavelous artificial Fireworks;
after which they returned to form the Circle, and to propose new Questions.

Mademoiselle d'Armand addressed her self first to d'Arignan to make the breach
for a noble conversation, and he thus began.

I remember said he, that the Count has instructed the Ladies how to receive a
Declaration of Love, but no body has yet said in what manner it must be done,
for in sine added he, what must we hope from the fidelities, cares, and
services which we do to these Fair-ones if they know not upon what design we do
them: There are many things answered Ma 'amoiselle d'Armand that speak but too
much what a man feels when he is in Love, even to silence; all things speak in
Love; that is certain replied d'Arignan: But how many Mistresses are there that
seem blind to all the respects which the Lovers have for them, and show them,
to all that sighs may make them understand; so that all these advancements
being without effect, or at least without exchange, a miserable Lover is at
length constrained to complain, and from Complaint to pass to a Dec aration. I
would then desire some body to learn me the secret (if there be any one) to
explain ones self to a Mistress, without going in danger to displease her.
Methinks proceeded he, that it would very well agree with Mademoiselle d'Armand
to do it: If she would have the goodness to tell us any thing, as I am not in a
humor answered this Lady to receive a Declaration of this nature in what manner
soever, I cannot tell You any, but would displease me. I will truly tell you
that to be loved or not to be loved, is not so indifferent to me, but I could
desire it; it is a desire too natural to our Sex; but I would if it were
possible for me very much to hinder a man from entertaining me of his Love, if
through hazard he had any for me, so much relating to me; and for the rest, I
would ever counsel a friend not to speak till the last extremity, and to have
done all things before he comes to these words (I love You) and it must also
be done with so much discretion and so properly, that he must consider of it
often before he says it. If it be so troublesome a thing said the Abbot
smiling to say tha^ one loves, it must be in writing on the contrary replied
Mademoiselle d'Armand to him; if he be a man that is discreet, and
understands Heroical Gallantry, he will not use this means, You say there is
less trouble in it, but there is also more danger in it; and one is rarely
succesful because the liberty is greater, and that a Lady much sooner excuses
a word escaped from ones mouth, than what is writ to her. I know not replied
the Baron, but if I be not deceived, whatever grimaces these Ladies make to us,
when we declare to them the passion we have for them, since according to the
confession of Mademoiselle d'Armond her self they are glad to be loved, and I
believe not in the end that they will be displeased with one for telling it to
them: In truth You are deceived replied the Marchioness to him, and the most
part of Lovers do but ill to trust to that Opinion: What must they do then
replied the Duke on a sudden if it be me You ask said the same Lady to him, I
will tell You my mind. A Lover who has a desire to proceed to a Declaration,
ought to do it with a most respectful Carriage, and in the same moment so
discreetly, that his words may insensibly dispose the mind of his Mistress
favorably to receive what he will say to her, and that they may have a double
meaning by which means he may deliver himself from trouble, if he sees her in
a humor to give him attention, for else it were to ruin him; a Lady that had
been accustomed to live familiarly with him, and to treat him like a friend of
esteem and tenderness, would be no more so, but very reserved as soon as he
has declared himself her Lover, and would deprive him of all the civil
friendship which she had granted him before, by reason of the tenderness she
had for him; it is because of this, that those Lovers who are thus carried away
by their passion scarce ever have good success, because that the Women seek
above all things to have respect showed them, and they think that to make a
public declaration of Love to them, is to bereave them of what is their due. I
know no discreet Woman at least but would be Offended at it, although she
might have a strong inclination for him that might speak to her of his love. It
is certain added the Countess d'Ancyre, that we shali see no understanding
Woman that would not blush upon a like occasion. That is true replied
d'Arignan; but I pray tell me by what motion is it they blush, for I imagine it
is not always for anger: However it is rep^ied the Marchioness, smiling at the
demand of d'Arignan, it is my Opinion that a Gentleman should make his actions
and his sighs speak before he speaks himself; there are many said d'Armenton
as has already been said, that contribute to the revealing of a Lovers designs
and inclination; a sigh and a service rendered in due season a small fear, some
respects on a certain occasion; all these things in their proper season are
oftentimes more effectual, and better understood than the smoothest Rhetoric
in the world; there is no body but may apprehend the Eyes meaning, those are
the faithful Messengers that bring the news of what passes in the heart, and
they have quite another power than the tongue; insomuch that they discover the
most hidden thoughts, and penetrate sometimes even to the heart of the persons
loved, and cause in them the same ardour with which they themselves are
inflamed: Do you believe that a Mistress how deaf so ever she seems, does not
understand what the eyes tell her; when she sees how pitifully they turn
toward her, how they fix tpon hers, as if they were made fast to them, and
turn away again as if they were dazzled: It is true it is good to Husband this
Language, and to beware the discovering ones passion to those from whom it
should be the most concealed. We seldom love without Jealousy, or without a
Rival, who continually observes the motion of these innocent Interpreters,
especially from persons who are most to be suspected: A Lover has but two
Eyes, and a Jealous Husband has four, he sees before and behind; for which
reason a Judicious man ought to govern himself wisely, and to behave himself
according to time and place, and when he has cause to fear to deprive himself
of so sweet a pleasure; the more secretly a Love is kept (I mean of these Loves
which are not permitted, and which are now notwithstanding very much Alamode)
the sweeter it is: and we know to how many evil Consequences the least
inclination is subject to when it is revealed; and I said the Cavaleer I
believe that the great secret is not to make it so much a mystery. We believe
that an inclination does not proceed so far, that they need to give themselves
the trouble to conceal it; and the world is now so much upon one matter, that
they take the most amorous things for simple Gallantry, when they are done in
company; whereas they that take the other part are in continual Alarms, because
indeed the least appearance to them is a deaths wound; they imagine very often
that there is more than they see, and more than there is, and it is a pleasure
to them to tell it, because they believe it not to be known. How many Women are
there who live with a Familiarity, without example with their Gallants, even
before their Husbands, who perhaps would suspect all things if they did
otherwise. I know one whose Husband is more jealous than any man, who could
never endure that any one saw her except one of my friends, because she
treats him familiarly before his face, and yet it is the only One that ever
has obtained the good will of this Lady: These things happen seldom replied
d'Armenton, and for my part I hold that the surest way is to love in private,
and that one cannot be too cautious before those that are Interessed. We must
dissemble, say that we least think of, and use constraint constantly, or else
we may be in danger to lose all. I believe replied de Ariguan, that these
maxims are good, but so difficult to Observe, that they are almost impossible
for a passionate Lover: We have not always an occasion to find a Mistress
without a witness, and there are some that are never to be seen but in company;
and if we must always practice what you say, we run the danger of being long
before we do our business, and never to receive content. We must love in
tranquillity that it may not appear a little, when we see the person we love.
Those that know how to love as they should do replied de Armenton, find
Expedients for all things, and means to make them to be understood, although
they have little Intelligence, without being understood by others, and without
amuzing me to particularize all those small secrets to you, since you cannot
have been in love, for not to have known much your self, I will only tell you
what happened a few days since in a company where I was; two Lovers whom the
jealousy of a Husband did for some time hinder them from seeing each other,
having in an assembly entertained each other most tenderly by the side of a
Table, and which seemed most indifferent; there was none but I in the whole
company that did suspect their discourse to be of Love; they were so expert as
to use some indifferent matter to entertain each other aloud before the
company, and from time to time when they talked of the most inward secrets of
their hearts they spoke to each other softly: And this scene continued above
two hours without seeming to look one on another, and as persons that had the
least acquaintance together; there are yet many other pleasant ways upon which
time, places, and the persons must give a Discreet Lover counsel, for it would
be impossible to form certain Rules. In truth the matter is too large replied
the Baron, and it is Love that must instruct us in that, he who is the Father
of Inventions, and who always favors a Lover when he has recourse to him:
But the thing which I would at present know, and which is not less important in
Gallantry than it is to be discreet in public, and to love in private: It is
the manner how to conserve our selves in our Mistresses favor, for it is the
chiefest thing we fail in, and of many Lovers who can perfectly gain the esteem
of a Lady; I see but very few that know how to conserve it, which is a great
defect, and which causes us to enjoy the happiness to be loved, when we love
but a little time: I believe that after so many pretty matters as has been
proposed, this here may deserve the pains of a continued conversation. It is
this that does evidence the men's inconstancy: I am certain at least that we
oftentimes need to seek no other cause than their unquiet spirit, which is
weary of a Happiness as soon as they possess it, whatever trouble it has cost
them to Obtain it: From thence you may judge whether the Women have no reason
not to engage themselves so far in Love, and never to submit if they can avoid
it: We may also replied the Cavaleer accuse the Women of Inconstancy, but that
is not the thing, and I believe that the samc means that are used to obtain
the Ladies good wills, may also serve to maintain us in them, and the great
secret in this is to endeavor always to please them, and not to do any thing
that may in any wise Offend them. It is no less difficult added d'Armenton to
give Lessons for this Article than for the other, because there are so many
cautions to observe, and so many Errors we are subject to commit, that there
are many things to be examined before we come to the principal: The greatest
Lovers are commonly those that commit the most faults, because they are blinded
by their passion, and because that Love and Reason seldom accompany each other:
If they are jealous, they give way to a thousand Follies, they are not in the
least circumspect they speak ill of their Rivals, they offend the person they
love a hundred ways, they bring upon her a thousand misfortunes, and endeavor
to ruin her if they can; they are in love, and they believe they have nothing
to answer, be it to whom it will in their going astray; the shadow of a man
near their Mistress frighteth them, they cannot endure to let her see any body,
even not in their presence: If she whispereth to any one, those are alarums
which deprive them of their Senses; if they turn their Eyes toward their
Rivals, it is a Crime inexcusable, and in fine, they put a double sense to
every word she says, of which there is always some one which they interpret
to be in favor of those they fear. But what are the fruits of all these
Extravagancies? they serve but to displease the mind of this Fair-one, who is
at length weary of so unjust and insupportable a proceeding; there is nothing
the Women hate more than servitude, their ambition ever extends to command
over those whom they by Natures right should Obey; and all their aim is to be
disburthened of that troublesome Yoke which Nature has imposed upon them: If
they cultivate their Beauty, it is but to obtain adoration: If they Love, it is
but to make their Masters become their slaves; but when these slaves will
retake their first authority, and play the Masters, then is it their
displeasure flameth, and that they despise to see themselves misused by people
that had vowed them an eternal Servitude, causes them to seek revenge; the
greatest part of Lovers lose their Mistresses in this manner. There are yet
another sort who are not so extravagant, but by a trick of vain foresight
render themselves unhappy, and help forward the affairs of those whom they
would destroy; they will tell a Mistress that such a one does love her to
Oblige her to avoid him; they will entreat her not to be in his company alone,
and not to give him occasion to engage himself any further; and I remember
something to this effect which I heard not very long since touching a Lover of
this sort who made some reproaches to his Mistress near to this purpose; why
Madam said he to her, will you seem thus obstinate as to tell me he loves You
not? do not I see it? does he not partake of all your counsels? does he not
affect to be in Your presence? does he not sigh so soon as you cast a look upon
him? in fine, does he not die for You? this person to whom he spoke, who was
truly innocent, and who had observed none of these things becoming for the
future more curious, found indeed that she was loved, and the success of these
reproaches was, that she loved also, which she perhaps had not done if this
jealous one had not taken the trouble to give her notice, and forbid her; thus
it is that these people through a strange Imprudence are Authors of all the
Evil that fall upon them; I have seen yet others who have thought to make
their Love secure by speaking ill of their Rivals, and which it is that a
Woman seldom believes so soon as she knows the design: On the contrary, as
she is persuaded that it proceeds from an effect of Jealousy, she does but
laugh at it, and will sometimes take the part of him Interessed; in this I will
confess my weakness answered the Baron to that, I am not capable of speaking
well of my Rivals, and when I have an opportunity to do them harm, I can scarce
forbear it: I would know some more civil manner of ruining them. You know the
Proverb replied the Count, which says that when an Adversary is in the water
up to the middle, You must give him your Hand to help him out; but when he is
in up to the Chin, You must set your foot on his head and drown him quite.
There are many People that do the same with their Rivals, and until they find a
fair Occasion to ruin them quite, they dissemble and live well with them, but
so soon as they see them upon the brink of the Precipice, they give them the
last push to throw them down. I say proceeded he what is done sometimes, and
not what I would counsel any one to do; for all these proceedings are some
thing unworthy of a Gentleman, and I would have a lover bear it above his
Rivals by means of his merit and services; it is easy for one that has wit,
and when a Mistress knows the world, to cause her to observe the difference
there is between man and man, love and love, service and service. Most Lovers
ruin themselves, without it be necessary for a Rival to work their ruin:
There are some who full of Vanity, to give their Mistresses a good Opinion of
them, will boast of some Favors to her, which they perhaps never received.
Others there are, who on the contrary will make as if they were misfortunate,
and will assure one that they have never obtained any Love; as if it were no
prejudice to them to be taxed of want of merit: But what do you think of those
that daily tell their Mistresses that their Rivals are much happier than they,
and that they reproach her, that she treats them best? I believe it is rather
a means to serve ones Rival, than not to do it: There are yet a thousand
Rencounters in which many Lovers are undone, who have not the art of governing
themselves in their Felicity; and if Love be a Sea as they say, we must confess
that Indiscretion especially is a shelf on which the greatest part of these
Gentle-men-sighers suffer shipwreck; He that desires to please in Love, ought
to know how to be respectful and discreet: and he that will rule must be
silent. It is strange said the Marchioness (that discretion being the
principallest quality a Lover ought to be endued with) that there should be so
few that make use of it, and that this secret must always be recommended to
the men. I avow answered the Baron to her, to our confusion, that it is the
most essential Virtue in Love, and which nevertheless we consider the least:
There are very few men that have power to keep a Love secret, and were there
not often many Women that often oblige us to this weakness, I know not how we
could excuse our selves: it would be a very delightful matter replied Madam
dEyrac for some of us to relate why there are so few men discreet: It shall be
d'Armenton said the Abbot, for he is much inclined to speak for you against the
men, and here is a subject will cost him little. It shall be rather You replied
Mademoiselle d'Armond, for You have been long silent, and we will see a little,
if after you have placed the Women so much beneath the men, You can retire the
men from so naughty a walk, to place them only opposite to the Women. I know
too little answered the Abbot what belongs to Love to know how to resolve You
how to keep an amarous mystery secret, and I will tell You no more upon that
than what I have read in Ovid. Ovid Sir, interrupted the Countess d'Ancyre, You
quote to us a very pleasant Author, Is it not he that counsels Lovers to
feign themselves in drink when they are with their Mistresses, that all the
liberties they take with them may the more easily be excused; and in another
place he proposes a fine manner of declaring Love; he says that if we find an
Opportunity to be with our Mistress at any Banquet, we must when we hold the
glass in our hand, dip our finger in the Wine, and afterward upon the Table
write down our Love for her; I heard these from a Gentleman that had read Ovid
very much, but would not imitate him. If this custom replied the Abbot,
seems now rediculous to You, it was not perhaps in the days of Ovid: It is
because the men said d'Arignan are now more knowing in Love, and I believe that
if it were possible for Ovid to rise again, he would cry up Maxim's which he
would expose to the Public, that would now suit with none but Serving-Maids.
Let us leave Ovid then said the Marchioness, and let us observe what the Abbot
will tell us upon the Question proposed, since You will not answered the Abbot
let me use this Author, I must tell You what I my self conceive upon this
matter: First I believe that diseretion consists in avoiding all things that
may breed disturbance, and make a noise; and on the other side beware, that in
endeavoring to be too discreet, You be not at all: There are some Lovers who
will not make use of any one in their Loves out of fear of trusting a secret
with any one that may deceive them: But in all the Mysteries of this Nature a
confident is so necessary, that You cannot be without; a man in Love is daily
pressed with his passion, he is ever desirous to speak, write to, or see his
Mistress, and to ease this eagerness which bereaveth him of his repose; He
stands often in need of a person that is of his Intelligence, and
endeavoring to do all, we ruin and destroy all: This Passion which
transporteth us, and whose aim is only at satisfaction, is not accustomed to be
over-cautious, it looks neither to the right nor to the left, but only before
it, and so that there be not any thing to hinder her course, it seems not
concerned at those that follow it by sight: There is nothing the world takes
so much pains in, than to discover the proceedings of an Inclination; they are
all curious to know the secret of an Intrigue, and as soon as they discover the
glimps of any thing, they will penetrate to the bottom: It is but suspecting a
a man in Love with a woman, to have a desire to know the truth of what passes,
a he or she confident of whose fidelity one is assured, save a Lover from this
danger, they manage a business better than he, they proceed with more care, and
besides their supplying with Counsels, and with the Favor they have with a
Mistress; they help many failings which a Lover would have committed: I extend
a little upon this matter, for that there are many people who think themselves
very expert in Love, and who make it one of their most principal points in
discretion, not to let any one know of tkeir Intrigue, and to make use of no
body, but to do all things by themselves: In the mean time You see that these
nice spirtts abuse themselves, so grossly I say, that it is most certain that an
assured confident is the most Important matter in an amorous commerce. To this
let us add the pleasure there is in telling a faithful friend the sweets one
has tasted with a Mistress, the charms of that amiable Creature, the joy one
has to love her, for these are certain things which lie heavy upon the heart
of a Lover when he has not the satisfaction to tell it to some Body. Do You
not Observe said the Duchess Interrupting him, how the Abbot will prove
himself unskilful in Love-affairs; however all that he has said even hitherto,
is a subtle Gallantry. I know not replied the Countess d'Ermand, whither all
that he has hitherto said be so gallant, but I find it not very near the
matter: The Question is to know the Reason why the men are so Indiscreet? and
the Cautions that are to be Observed to practice this Virtue, and he goes and
tells us the necessity there is to have a Confident, as if that had any
Analogy with discretion: Yes Madam replied the Abbot to her, assuredly it has;
and You shall see if You will grant me the Favor to hear me, that I wander not
so much from my Subject, I would bring the matter to the actions, which they
should not do publicly; for besides that, something of it has already been
said: It were needless to give Lessons for defaults, in which there are none
but block-heads, and people full of Vanity that can fall into them. I chose
rather to use a subject something more delicate, and to make it appear that
that was not to be discreet to desire to be too much; and that a man cannot be
accused of Indiscretion that confides his Secret in a Friend who can serve him
in that affair; and because of that, I have let You see of what Importance a
Confident was: This is well justified said the Duchess, and although the Abbot
did not directly answer the Question proposed, I find that what we Treat of is
not too far from the matter; That to declare that not only one may, but must
have a Confident in Love. We must have been in Love (proceeded the Abbot) to
know how many occasions are fit for a friend as I say in an Intrigue of
Affection and the necessity there is to have one to whom one might communicate
all things. The Abbot said the Cavaleer will at length petswade us maugre him,
that he has been in Love; for my part I am of his Opinion, and I hold that is
the safest way of loving to make use of a third person, and that we are less
subject to sin against discretion. A Confident added the Baron does doubtless
much contribute to manage a Love-affair discreetly: But to speak truth, the
Women are often the cause themselves, (as I have already said) of the faults
which we commit against that Virtue, their evil conduct renders us Indiscreet,
some for being too cruel, others by a certain ambition which they have to seek
daily to make new Conquests, and to desire the whole Universe to love them;
those who deck themselves with cruelty, and who think they do themselves honor
by being Insensible, are constrained to love in the end, and they Imagine it so
much Glory to see people suffer for their sakes, that they would think they
should ruin all if they lesned any thing of their rigor; they look upon those
pains, those restless minutes, and all those Torments in which their Lovers
live as Infallible tokens that they are beautiful, and they Triumph in that it
depends upon them to render men happy or miserable; the ambitious ones feed
themselves with rumor, and make their happiness consist in the noise which the
Crowd of their Adorers make; they keep an account, and judge of the power of
their Charms by the quantity of their Lovers. It is easy to see that these
two Characters of Women are capable of making us commit many Indiscretions,
excepting the danger they run of ever meeting this conduct from true Lovers;
some as much in love as they are, do in the end grow weary of suffering, and
pass from one extremity to another, when they will wholly oppress them. Others
think it a trouble to divide a happiness amongst so many Rivals, which they
thought they alone had well merited. There is yet replied the Cavaleer, a sort
of women who Oblige the men to be no less Indiscreet than the others, and these
are those who having many admirers, give them all hopes of being loved, and
take delight to breed always some jealousy among them, they know how to
detain those that are ready to escape them, and to suppress the vanity of those
that dare promise themselves too much from them, and who put too much
confidence in the favors thry receive from them; they favor sometimes one and
sometimes another, and cut the heart of this with a glance with which they
Oblige the other; in fine, these are Mistresses in Gossipping, and not in love.
These are the springs of Hatred and Quarrels among Rivals, and these Fair-ones
are thus the cause of many evil Consequences. We may make a long discourse
against women said d'Arignan, if we would examine all the reasons they give us
to destroy them. How many (without proceeding further) do we see of those who
after a Lover has manifested to them all the possible Tokens of an extreme
passion when they will have heard him, and when they have promised them that
part in their heart which they could reasonably pretend to, begin when he least
thinks of it, and finds himself engaged not to revoak it to pretend
difficulty, and to seem to doubt of his Inclinations, and make a pretense for
nothing, to begin all his cares and services afresh, as if he had yet done
nothing; a Lover is well requited for the pains he has taken by such a
Mistress; he must needs be patient that despite does not make him exceed the
bounds of his duty. Thus indeed You see said the Abbot how the one half of Your
gallant Ladies are the cause of their own misfortune, and how the Indiscretion
of men is oftenest a cause of their Evil conduct; yes if we will believe You
said the Marchioness; but it belongs to none but us to let You see that for
one Imprudent woman, there are ten thousand Impertinent Ones; if we must give
them their Name, it would be a long piece of work for us to undertake to tell
You how many men there are of this sort. I believe answered her the Cavaleer,
that there are but few of the kind You mention, but the Women have given them
cause to be so. By your leave Sir, replied the Countess d'Ancyre, is there any
thing that can Oblige a man to be dishonest, or Imprudent? The same things
replied the Cavaleer go not always by the same name, and there are Crimes which
reason and justice authorize; I know Mistresses who sell their Favors too dear
to content them only for having received them, we should think very often that
we had paid too much for them, had we not the honor of them by the pleasure:
The Cavaleer smiled at these words, to which Madam d'Eyrac answered that they
should no more be Favors if they could be bought, and that a Lover should not
think himself honored by them, when he had not obtained them by the power of
his merit as much as by his services.

Here the Conversation ended; it had continued longer if the artificial
Fireworks had not wasted a part of the Evening: But however the ensuing Song
was sung admirable well by Mademoiselle d'Armond at the request of the Company.

SONG.
^ The Nightingale in the sweet month of May,
^ shadie Woods does love to make her dwelling:
^ and in the Fields to Chant her Rounde-lays,
^ freely while my poor heart in sorrows swelling,
^ keeps me captive, and sighing makes me cry,
^ in mournful wise, break heart, break heart and die.
She only does not feel what I endure,
Oh Love will thou release my torments nevr!
If not kind death I hope will give a cure,
And let mine Eyes oppressed be closed for ever.
Then to Elysium I Will securely fly,
And all the powers of her charms I Will deifie.
I. B.
It now being late, every one was very willing to confine so delightful a day
with a sweet Repose.

CHAP. VI.
THe Sevenrh day, or rather the Seventh Evening, since we must here end, and
since it is the last Conversation with which I shall entertain the Reader, the
Company met something betimes in the Garden, where waiting for the Duchess
whom some affair had delayed, they spent the time in dancing some Branlies
round a Fountain; d'Armenton who was in an Age wherein Dancing is almost out of
season, acquitted himself notwithanding so well, that we might assuredly say
that Age is not the same with all the world: At this Instant the Duchess
arrived, and although she had long known d'Armenton, she could not forbear
smiling to see a man thus triumph in Dancing, who had passed fifty Years of his
Age; By what I perceive said she, dArmenton has not forgot what he learned
formerly. What Madam said he presently, do You imagine me so Old that I must
not be permitted to be concerned in what You do now? I will not say that,
answered him the Duchess on the contrary I find that You act every thing so
well that You undertake, that in truth a man like You may concern himself in
all things; but this Expertness which You have is not so general, but that it
may be true to say that Dancing like Love and Gallantry are not altogether
diversions for persons of your Age, and I, I believe Madam replied the same
party, that we are never more capable of the things You speak of, than in the
Age wherein I am; and for Love, it belongs to us to make use of it as we
ought. You were a very Ingenious man said the Cavaleer to him, if You would
take upon You the Trouble to ma^e us understand what you there say, for in my
Opinion it is a thing very difficult to maintain, and I believe there is no
Body here but is against it, and but who would be glad to hear You discourse
upon a matter so contrary to the Opinion of all the world. Thus said the Lady
Sindal, we have accidentally entered into a matter for a very pleasant
Conversation. If You please Madam added she, in addressing her self to the
Duchess, this we will fix upon; the Evening is delightful, and the place
wherein we are very pleasant, and methinks I see d'Armenton ready to relate to
us something that is Gallant, to make us discern that Gallantry is a Land
wherein People that are endued with his Qualities, and with a wit so ready as
his, may at all times enter; the Duchess did not Oppose this design, and the
rest of the Company doing like the Duchess they formed a Ring upon a green
Bank, after which d'Armenton seeing them ready to give him attention, began in
this manner.

I see well said (he smiling) that it is to justify what I always take so
much pains to conceal, to desire to maintain that Love appertains more to a
man who exceeds fifty, than to those who are not twenty or twenty one. But
since I have undertaken it I will not recoil, I shall at least give You to
understand, that though I am Old, Age is not such as the Vulgar believe it to
be, and that it is without reason that they would deprive them of the pleasures
of Love, that they know how to take and to relish them more happily than Youth:
You must first give me leave if You please before any thing else, to make a
small digression, and to tell You first what Love is, and in what that Felicity
consists which Lovers find, and afterward you will agree with me, that this
passion does not Illy suite with gray hairs, and that one must be no man at all
not to be capable. Love then according to the Ancients, is a desire to enjoy
beauty and since we desire naught but what we know, it must necessarily be that
knowledge precedeth desire, the eyes, reason, and the mind causes us to know
the happiness, and this knowledge produces in us the desire to possess it; the
Eyes discovers, Reason choseth, the Mind judges of what the Eyes and Reason
have done. Beauty though the most sensible thing in the world, is nevertheless
the most difficult to know, it never appears with more charms than upon the
face of a Woman; and Heaven who is mavelous in all the works it has done, is
in nothing so admirable as here; it is a work which brings men even to
Idolatry, both Old and Young are dazzled, every one desires it, but desire it
differently, because of the different knowledge they have of it. When this
Beauty happens to strike the eyes of a Young man, she does as soon vanquish
him, and in seducing these two Innocent Interpreters by I know not what
pleasure with which they are so enchanted, that they Introduce it even to the
heart, which being no more cautious than the Eyes, suffers it self to be
caught in this sweet snare: I say much more it feels a certain Joy which
transporteth it, and empoysons it self in a manner that it sighs for it that it
is tormented with a daily desire. Oh the strange disorder! when a heart is
cumbred with all these desires by which it suffers it self to be lead, and
which desires, being no less blind than the heart, cause it to make a thousand
mistakes; it thinks on naught but the Object that has struck it, it seeks
and follows it every where, not to be revenged on the harm it has given it,
but to unite it self wholly to it, and thinks that in possessing of it, it
shall be eased from the torment it suffers. Nevertheless it deceives it
self, and even the pleasure of this possession is a Liar. It is a gross error
wherein the most of these people fall that suffer themselves to be blinded at
the first glance of Beauty, to make the aim of their Love a brutal pleasure to
satisfy themselves, which they have no sooner compassed, but they cease not
only from having the same ardour, but pass even to disdain, and look upon him
no otherwise but a loathing that which before was the Idol of their heart. It
seems as though this desire repented for what it had done; that it is vexed
it is deceived, that it believed that to be all a heart could desire; the heart
who on his part acknowledges the fault it had committed, seems also to
reproach the Eyes of their blindness, to take a happiness in appearance for the
true one, he is not satisfied in himself; but Imagining the Felicity he
promised to himself to be yet far distant hence, desires augment in him as if
he possessed nothing, which makes it clearly apear that that is not the true
Felicity he seeks, and that these Young Lovers have a way of loving which is
not happy, or rather that they know not how to Love since they are never
satisfied, although they arrive to what they aspired; and this is it we may
well term unhappiness, for there is both pain and trouble at the end as well
as at the beginning of this Love. They cease neither complaints, sufferings,
nor sighings, and even then when they believe themselves at the height of their
desires, it is then they have more subject of desire, and that they find
themselves unfortunate? It is a precipice in which this foolish ardour does
cast them, which cannot justly be termed Love; it is here where Youth
Embarquing in foul weather perishes; he is carried away with all sorts of
winds, he follows his desires, and never consulteth his passion: Reason is
too weak with him to resist this Torrent: He permits himself to be led away;
every Guide is a Guide for him, and if he may be carried toward the Object he
cherishes; he forsakes himself, and will follow even his own Enemies; he
knows not so much as how to distinguish the true from the false, he is blind
who takes good for evil, and who feeds himself with every thing which his
will and desires will persuade him to, who being of themselves Incapable of
discerning any thing, cannot fail to render him miserable. You see then how
those who are possessed with this blind passion (altogether contrary to the
laws of Reason) do never find those solid pleasures in Love which those take
whose riper Years has learned them to know them. This being supposed (as it is
most certain) I say that it happens otherwise to those Persons who are come to
the age by me beforementioned. This ardour which Time has laid asleep in
them, re-kindleth at the sight of a Beauty, for whom they breathe sighs which
are guided by a choice that is reasonable, which detaineth them from wandering;
they approach her, and enjoy her without any confusion; their design is pure,
and the effect of it is naught but Felicity; the bridle of Reason who reproves
the folly of the Senses, suf^ereth not it self to slacken into Repentance, they
have what they desire, and without any trouble they relish the pleasures they
seek: A man I say arrived to those Years wherein I am (for I may well place my
self here) and who is not transported with this violent ardour, beholds
Beauty, and knows it as much as can be; he finds wherewithal to be charmed
in the face of a Woman: That just proportion of so many parts, that agreeable
accord of the Fairest colors, that luster that shadow so well ordered, so
many marvels which he discerns there to glister, which do both astonish and
Enchant him, causes him to consider matters more than he can express: But is
he not dazzled in such a manner as to make him forget what he is? Reason
resists the Enchantment, his Soul is too discreet to be deceived, and
alahough she does extremely desire this Beauty; her desires give her nothing
but a sweet unquietness: In fine she enjoys this Beauty; but she is so
jealous of the pleasure she takes, that she would not communicate it to the
Body; It is in the highest part of the Soul that this pleasure resideth where
the senses have no Intelligence. Truly it were an offense to Beauty, and a
thing beneath her, (she the only precious thing in the world) to design it for
the Body, and who being made to rule over what is most high in man, to subject
her self to what is most beneath her; there is naught but the Soul which can
aspire to this sweet Union, because there is none but she that understands
the happiness, you will doubtless say that the Soul does not also make it
difficulty to desire when she is in the depth of this possession: It is true,
but it is always to possess Beauty, and for fear of losing it; whereas the
Young people desire quite another thing than that which they have possessed,
because their desires are not contented with so short a pleasure which they
lose in the moment they have it, for which reason they are never without grief,
nor without loathing it is not beyond Reason than to say that the persons who
are something advanced in Age, are those who are the most fit to love. We must
be assuredly Old said the Baron to him to comprehend this Love well; and we
must be more than you are to content our selves: I know not in good Faith what
you could answer, if (as Old as you are) we should freely ask You to know of
You if you loved in no other manner than as you say. d'Armenton answered him
but with a laugh, whom the rest of the company did also Imitate; and a little
after the Cavaleer taking up the word, said that d'Armenton had reason to
attribute this love to Old-Folks, for it must have been in Old Times; for now
whether they are undeceived by these Lovers in Idea, or whether they love in
quite another manner; and even those who are Older than we, must have found
that in that (whatsoever d'Armenton can say) we are more reasonable than they,
since those that concern themselves therein act just like us. It is certain
said d'Arignan that Love requires something that is more sensible; and that as
the Soul and Body enters into communion with the Evils of this Nature, they
ought also to partake of the sweets: this is so true, that the Soul cannot well
conceal the pleasures of Love, and taste them in a retreat, she cannot do it so
well, but the senses must take part in these pleasures; they presently discern
mirth seated in the Visage, the Eyes sparkle, there is sweetness and raptures
found; all these speak so well of this admirable Intelligence, that it is only
by that that the Soul is judged to rest contented, therefore it is a vain thing
to make a love apart for the Soul, and another for the Body; the Interest is
the same, their sufferings and enjoyments are together, they act and repose for
one and the same reason; and it is by the means of the Senses that the Soul
knows Love, she can also not be without them in tasting the pleasures of
Love. Since you never were in Love answered him d'Armenton after the manner I
mean, I must not thnk it strange that You know not its sweetness. The Soul is
so well capable of tasting the pleasures of Love alone without the Bodies
participation, that the pleasures are not true ones as soon as that partaketh,
but pleasures soaked in Tears, which begin and end always in grief. Well Sir
said the Baron to him, love you after this delicate manner that we may not envy
you, and leave us in the error in which we are, and where we will continue that
Love, having Charms for the Body as well as the Souls the joy may spread all
over: But to come to Age, I received a Letter not long since from the same
Friend that writ to me concerning Jealousy, who makes me discern, that not
only an Aged man ought not to Love, but that if he would he cannot; if the
Company please they shall hear it. There was none but desired to hear this
Letter, even to d'Armenton, who entreated him to defer no longer the doing them
this pleasure; it contained these words.

Dear Sir:
IF you were more aged, or less witty than You are, I am apt to believe that
your own interest or curiosity might perhaps Oblige You to demand of me how it
is that You do if Aged Folks can love? but knowing You to be a Person of
Understanding, and knowing also that You have no reason to complain of time, I
imagine that your design is to be revenged on some Old Person, and that you
will make use of my Weapon lest yours might not beproof. I shall tell You then
that Love is a Young Infant whom long beards affright; and that he is not only
a thing loathsome to our Fathers, but that at that Age one cannot love: there
are many reasons which persuade it me; the first is as you may better know than
I, that that which supporteth and nourishes Love is the hope we have one day
to possess that, which we love; and certainly if that were not, Beauty might
well have the power to introduce desire into the Soul of him that sees it, but
not to make any impression, or continue there long; who is he who considering
those blisses and honors whicho^ King receives that does not presently desire
to be a King! but because it is too difficult ts become one, hope is not moved
and so this desire is no sooner horn but dies; no body shall ever make me
believe that Love can Reign without hope; how then shall an Old man love? if he
have nothing in him that may make him hope to be loved, and consequently to
obtain what he loves and desires: let us begin with wisdom, which is the
thing that does Old men the most honor; and let us see if she be capable of
making them hope any thing from love: if I discourse with one of them, he will
doubtless tell me that it is the greatest folly a man can do to become in love
in his Old Age; by this then it is plain, that an Old man cannot hope much,
since he is assured to go for a Fool to love at his age, Besides they know but
too well how Odious the name of Old Age is to all that are beautiful in the
world, and how they change both Voices and Countenances at the sight only of
gray hairs: I might have here a fair field to enlarge upon, but to you that can
devine the half of what I would say I must not relate all; let us observe Old
Folks another way, and we shall find that being far enough from hope, nothing
is so natural to them as to fear, whether it be that it proceeds from their
own weakness, or from the experience they have that the world is but a cheat:
How can we make it appear afier this that they love? if they are in continual
apprehensions to be deceived. I remember something to this purpose which one of
my Friends told me not long ago, that an Old man might love a person much
inferior to him, and of an indifferent Beauty that may make him hope to be
loved again by reason she is not amiable enough to be loved of another; but who
is it that sees not that there is more of wit than truth in this reason,
because it is first necessary that Love comes either from choice or destiny,
as for example, destiny causes that two hearts love each other, when it
happens that they are both born under the same ascendant, or that the same
Planet rules the life of both; it is certain that these two Persons love
entirely. Again, we may love by dcstiny when there is a resemblance of humors
as Physicians argue, and in many others which I could tell You: If it were
requisite to tell you all the opinions they have upon this Subject, we cannot
say that these good Old Grandsires are capable of this love when they chose a
Mistress, for they are not assured that she they shall take for the Object of
their desires has a humor like them; that she has the same Ascendant, or that
she is born under the same Planet, they are I say no more assured, than to know
how to bring themselves to it. If we will now that love comes to an Old man by
choice, since in effect he seeks her whom he thinks easiest to win, I say
that love comporteth himself to all that are good, or fair or that seem so: If
it be thus, I pray tell me what reason is there to believe that an Old man can
be in love if he seeks that which is less amiable; it is rather a token of
Choler and Hatred which he has against himself, than a sign of love; it
seems as though he would punish himself for the smalness of his merit, or
that he has despite for not knowing how to aspire to something better
composed. We also see that most of your Gray beards address themselves commonly
to none but persons that are made unhappy by the way of Fortune, or to those
that have not too much wit to be succesful in their deregulate affections: But
yet this cannot be called love for the reason I have already mentioned, since
considering these two evil qualities in them, it is impossible they can have
any love no more than esteem. If the Object they chose be in misery, they
believe (as in effect it is true) that it is the Estate they love in them, and
not their person that they would have no love for them, did they not buy it,
and that they courted them for naught but to pick their pockets; In the mean
time as in this thing they are most sensible, and since they behold their
Mistresses like so many Harpies, I believe they cannot have any love for them.
And for the last Reason, I conclude that an Old man is incapable of love,
because he thinks himself not loved again. But should there be found in the
world Women with so little sense as to love men of their Age. I say that
notwithstanding they would have no love for them, judging themselves unworthy
to be loved by people like them. I am, etc.


All these Reasons said d'Armenton after the Baron had ended reading of his
Letter, are good; but they make nothing against what I have said, and I am
likewise of that Opinion with the rest of the world, that one must be a Fool
indeed to love at that Age after the manner of Young people; but one must
likewise be wise indeed to Love after the manner I say, but it does not belong
to a Young man. There is nevertheless said the Count a famous Author among the
Greeks, who says that the less time we have to live, the more we ought to give
to love: and that a man who has gray hairs may Court a young Lass with as good
Grace as we may join the ^oses with the Lillies to make a fair Nose-gay; I
believe he understood not that love only of the mind, but that which causes us
to fall into an agreeable weakness of mind to be the more tender of what we
love. This Author was doubtless Old replied the Abbot and we must not wonder at
it if concerning Love he has mentioned things of so little sense. I remember I
heard Madamoisella d'Armond diverting her self in this Garden with a Song not
long since, which is not a little pertinent to our present Discourse, and I
hope she will vouchsafe this Company the goodness of obliging them with it now.
She after a small modest refusal, thus began.

SONG.
^ It Is folly to think old Men can enjoy
^ the sprightly Pleasures of Youth,
^ their desires are frozen, and Youth will not toy
^ with Ice on an odd perished Tooth,
^ to enjoy the sweet pleasures of love in due time
^ It Is fittest to taste 'em when we are in our prime.
Age may desire and wish, but wants power
To love (but in fancy alone,)
The effect of which Love's like a winter shower,
Or the work of a feeble Drone,
TO enjoy, etc.
How rudely are the young Rose-buds embraced
When kissed by a cold North Wind;
So Youth seems nipp'd with a bitter Frost,
When enjoyed by a gray-haird Friend,
TO enjoy, etc.
Beauty was never designed for Old Age
By Nature that excellent Dame,
Her Lessons say Youth with Youth must engage,
Since there is most fire and flame,
To Enjoy the sweet pleasures of Love in due time,
It Is fittest to taste 'em whon we are in our prime.
This Sung with so Divine and sweet a Voice as was that of this Ladies, did not
a little divert them after they had all spent their thoughts upon it, they
returned to their former discourses: I would know said the Cavaleer what might
be said of an Old Woman that might be in Love, since a man ought not to love,
nor cannot at that Age: For the Women answered him the Baron insomuch that it
is to be imagined that they ought never to Love unless they are loved; we may
conclude that because there are no Old Women beautiful, they ought not to be in
Love, since they cannot inspire it: There are notwithstanding enough said the
Abbot who forbear not to Love, and I believe I swerve not from the truth if I
assure you that there are Ten Old-Women Lovers to one Old Man that is in Love:
But at what time interrupted him the Marchioness, Mr. Abbot do you think that
the Women are Old. I believe answered her the Abbot, that as to what concerns
Love, they are Old enough at Forty. Alas you are too rigorous replied the
Countess d'Ermond to him smiling; and you will bring a great many Folks against
you to condemn the Women from loving after that Age. It is true added
Mademoiselle d'Armond that you will do your self an ill turn by it, for I know
a Lady who has passed Forty Years, and who nevertheless shall dispute her
Beauty with all the handsome Women in the Universe. No, no said the Duchess,
the Abbot is not just in that, for even as the hard-favoured Women are Old when
they are first born; even so on the ontrary, the Fair-ones conserve their
handsome Features even almost to the last; and their Autumn has this
privilege of being more pleasing, and more agreeable than the Spring of the
others. There are some Women who in their Fiftieth Year have such beautiful
remnants, that they are capable to move the passions at first sight; why should
it not be permitted to them to love what they may find amiable. Madam replied
the Abbot, you may say what you please, but Age effaceth all that is amiable in
your Sex, and I would willingly advise all Women to imitate the Empress
Poppea, who prayed to the Gods that it would please them to let her dye before
she saw Old Age with which her Looking-glass did already threaten her. You have
declared your self so much an enemy to Women said the Marchioness to him, that
although Your Counsels might be wholesome, yet we should make difficulty to
follow them; we must agree with you that there are but few Beauties that are
able to resist time. But are none aamiable but those that are beautiful and a
virtuous Soul does she never borrow a recommendation for the Body as a precious
stone does for the Mettle that Environeth it. I know not answered her the Abbot
what would become of the Women if their beauty were not the cause that we seek
them, and that we shun ^he Deformed Ones. Again it seldom happens that a fair
and spotless Soul Inhabiteth in an ugly Body. The Exte ior Beauty is commonly a
Token of the Inward Goodness, it is a character by which the Soul is known, and
in which Physiognomists make their whole Art consist. In a word, Deformity is
so much an enemy to Happiness, that methinks it is a Scare Crow to all that
meet it. I had proceeded the Abbot a Song given me not long ago by a Friend,
wherein is displayed how unfit it is for hard-favoured Women to Inhabit
amongst Mortals; so pulling it out of his pocket, he read it as follows, and
after desired Mademoiselle d'Armond to sing it.

SONG.
Mr. Robert Smith.
^ A woman that is homely is never Alamode,
^ She Is a sight intolerable,
^ she is fit for no place but Pluto's abode,
^ or a place that is more dam -- na -- ble,
She Is able to turn the day into night,
Her Features are detestable,
The Devil himself she will put in a fright,
Her Charms are abominable.
But yet for all this she cannot forbear
To think her self amiable,
And with laces and hair to deck her with care,
She Is another Confusion of Babble.
And truly of Nature she need not speak ill
As not being favorable;
Her Face it has power enough for to kill,
And is most insufferable.
The Abbot spoke with so much ardour and action, that the Company could not
forbear laughing; he ought not to have apprehended that any one would take the
deformed Women's parts, for although there were none here but what were extreme
Beautiful, there are none but flatter themselves on this score. The
Conversation dured a while; it was a matter which was large, and which would
have produced more. But I perhaps begin to tire the Readers patience, and since
this Illustrious Company did here Conclude, I shall also do the like.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 2. Line 6. for Ancore read d'Ancyre, p. 2. l 8. Spirit r. merit, p. 4. l.
30. the Lady r. this Lady, p. 6. l. 26. d'Exorc'r r. d'Eparc, p. 10. l. 11.
amicable r. amiable, page 12. l. 24. will r. which, and give r. gives, p. 16.
l. 18. d' Exaxe r. d'Eparc, page 18. l. 21. too much r. so much, and l. 26.
that r. than, l. 29. set upon r. let you, p. 19. l. 31. there r. these, p. 20.
l. 8. had r. have, l. 10. Administer r. administered, p. 22. l. 3. Gentleman r.
Gentlemen, page 24. l. 25. so much r. too much, l. 28. this r. his, p. 24. l.
10. thereof r. than p. 33. l. 24, then r. thou, and l: 28. r. thou have
been,.30 their words r. these words, p. 42. Woman r. Women. p. 41. l. 2.
Critheans r. Eritheans, page 58. l. 14. seditiousness r. perfideousness, p. 59.
l. 18. conceived r. perceived, p. 74. l. 31. me r. the, p. 76. l. 16. her sake
r, my sake.


