SAVL and SAMVEL AT ENDOR, OR THE New Ways OF SALVATION and SERVICE, Which
usually temt Men to ROME, and detain them there.

Truly Represented, and Refuted.

By DAN. BREVINT, D. D.

As also A Brief Account of R. F. his Missale Vindicatum, or Vindication of the
ROMAN MASS.

By the same Author.

They have hewed them out Cisterns, broken Cisterns that can hold no water.
Jerem. c. 2. v. 13. OXFORD, At the THEATER. 1674.

The Preface.
I Never expected, that my Book against the Mass should have the liberty to go
abroad two Years together, without meeting opposition: nor that two Points so
dear and so fundamental to Rome, as Mass Sacrifice, and Priesthood are, could
be left so long in the Dirt, and under the Impeachment of that Lewdness and
Impiety, that I have accused, and I hope convicted them of, without an Advocate
to defend them; and therefore am not at all surpised, that after so long a
time, an Answer is pretended to be made to it: But such an Answer, so emty and
impertinent, I must confess I did not expect, imagining the Cause, as bad as it
was, tho it could not find good Reason, would yet have had good Sophistry, and
Artificial Color to defend it. But since that Roman Catholics are pleased to
take up with these most trivial Shifts and Cavils, and in spite of both Sense
and Grace persist in an Abuse, which neither they nor any body else can in any
tolerable manner justify: the next thing which I have to do, is to examine
what the special Attractives are, which can draw Men to, and detain them in
such a strange and unchristian kind of Worship. Here I do not propose to my
self the cure of such as are already prepossessed, and thoroughly sick with
wilful Ignorance. He that can cure the Deaf, and the Dumb, is alone the
immediate and proper Physician for that Disease. But I do what I ought, when I
do what I can, to hinder the Plague from spreading, and them which are
desperately ill with it from infecting others. The Roman Church abounds with
prudent and politic Men, who can infuse their Mysteries in as plausible and
Christian Words, as the Assyrian Envoy did his Designs, in good and true Jewish
Language, Isa. 36. The very Jansenists, (a more reformed kind of Papists, whom
therefore one might less suspect) exceed sometimes the Missionaries, and the
Jesuits, in this black Art of disguising: and I have had in Conferences, such
Experience of some of the best of this sort, both at the French Court, and the
Sorbone, that tho I may here spare their Names, I may not, with any Charity,
spare to warn others, to take heed of their Companies. The proper Genius, and
as it were, the Universal Spirit of that Church, consists much in a Confidence
to raise any thing which they have, although that were but a Dunghill, into a
Castle; and by the noise of strange Expressions, to persuade you out of your
own knowledge, that you may believe the Enchantment. Transubstantiation, the
Mass Sacrifice, Purgatory, and their pretended Infallibility, had bin as soon
tumbled down, as started up, had they not bin kept on foot by this kind of
Roman Hectorism; and the better to turn both Men's Brains and Hearts to that
side, their pretended Catholicness, Miracles, Suffrages, Confraternities,
Church Tresury, Indulgences, etc. (the very Dirt and Dung of that Church) are
by the same Art and Valor erected into plausible Means of Worship and
Salvation. Therefore my present business is, to remove these, and other-like
Snares out of the way: and to let impartial Men see, that the very Meat and
Drink wherewith they are allured and baited to Popery, are the very Poison and
Imostume, that should deter them from it. To this end, I fetch out the Soot and
Ashes which lie hidden in the skin of a Sodom, when it passes for a Golden
Apple: and, as the Fathers did before me, under the first Christian Emperors, I
expose to public view the Vermin, the Cats, the Crocodiles, and other such
foolish Idols, which are adored by vulgar People, upon the credit and account
of pompous and stately Temples. In this unbowelling of Rome, I fear not what
Papists shall say, and some unexperienced Christians perhaps suspect, as if I
made the case worse; for I make it such as I have seen it, and, not to be mine
own witness, such as I find it in their Authors. I might have bin as charitable
and as ignorant in these Affairs, as those who know little of Popery, but what
they read in Bellarmin, or what they heard of subtle Jesuits discoursing among
raw Strangers: had I not bin made wiser then so, both by the Times of
Rebellion, that kept me 17 Years abroad among the Romanists themselves; and by
the special favor of great Persons, who during nine whole Years of that long
Banishment, procured me the advantage of being pretty well acquainted with all
sorts and degrees of their Roman Learned Clergy. And to say this also by the
way, the undeserved Conceit of some of them, and my Friends too, who were
pleased to look upon me as a fit Man to be employed about the great design then
in hand, of Reconciling the two Religions, gave me such an Access into every
corner of that Church, that it is much my Fault, if I do not know as well all
that which is within its entrails, as those Men do, who make it their great
Business to Disguise and Paint its outside. As to the Safety and Savingness
which it promises (the great Imposture of the times) I do sincerely represent
here, both what it is, and what it can do. The truth is, Ignorant Sinners run
generally for shelter to Rome, as broken Merchants do to the Kings Bench, with
hope of being there secured against the ordinary course of Justice. So that as
long as God, and the Kings Laws keep Men in awe, and that there shall be
ranting and spending, neither that Prison nor that Church can want good store
of Proselytes. In order to make them throng in, when the Roman Church has the
good luck to meet with tender Consciences, she will be ambitious to exceed all
the degrees of Christian Severity; and if she meet with Men of a contrary
temper, she will accommodate them also with all the Condescentions of the
loosest Indulgence. So let these Fishers cast out their Nets at which side of
the Ship they please, both the Superstitious and the Profane, if they have the
Grace but to fear Hell, shall be sure to become their Prey. And upon this one
account, it is a very great Wonder to me, and, as I hope, a great Mercy of God
upon a better Posterity, that in this both most ignorant and sinful Age, all,
as well as many, do not run away from us to that promising Sanctuary. And this
is the motive wherefore, in opposition to a more general Apostasy, I do here
endeavor to break the main strength and course of the present Temtation; to
discover and break the most dangerous Snares; and, with the help of God, to
secure from the hazard of perishing, all such Persons as are not willing to
perish. If in all these Essaies, my Discourses seem to be long, as I confess
they are; this length, I hope, shall be tedious and useless to none but to such
as read them only, that they may divertise themselves, which end this Book is
not made for; my real intention being only this, to give Men a solid account
both of the true Christian Doctrine; that is, of the true ways of God to save;
and of the new Methods and Wiles of other Spirits, to seduce Souls. Of these I
have said as much as at this time I could prove out of their Books; but much
less, then I know, by mine own Experience. It is a gross mistake, to think that
the Roman Religion is made up of nothing else, then what we find in their
Councils and Breviaries. You might fancy as well, that Rome has all within
the Walls of the City, and little or nothing in the Suburbs; and that all her
unwritten Traditions are destitute of unwritten Ways and Practices. The truth
is, in time of War the Romanists love to Camp as close as they can to Lateran,
to Trent, and to such other Council Forts, while they stand upon their defense;
but they dwell and spread infinitely farther about, when in peaceable Times they
have a mind either to win, or conquer others: and I may safely affirm, that
Rome has no ground more commodious for Ambushes, nor more dangerous to poor
Strangers, then what she can either take or leave, as she sees cause. There is
not so deadly biting, as with those Teeth, that Vipers, as they say, can keep
unseen in their Gums; nor are there fitter Tools to do mischief, then those
short Weapons, which one draws out, or hides under his Clothes. The Roman
Church has Officers that can offer you Salvation on any terms; if you take
them, they are that which in their Language must needs ease you of all your
Sins; and if you happen to perceive the Cheat, and the incredible Extravagancy,
then she has other graver Doctors that will tell you (in order to save her
Credit) that these are but the Dreams of some Monks, and no part of their
Catholic Doctrine. So let that Church mix and temper whatever kind of stuff she
pleases, to charm you into her Party; if she find you well disposed to devour
it, then she gives it you as good Meat; but if she see that you abhor it, then
to please you, she will disown it as rank Poison. By these means, Rome both
abuses the World, and keeps up her Reputation; and under this Collusion, lies,
works, and thrives, the Mystery of Iniquity, and the Power of Darkness.

If after this second Warning, Men will fall off to a Religion, which in its
most Essential Services (as I have already showed) is plain impiety, and be led
to it by Motives which I show here to be no other then the worst kind of
Impostures, their Blood shall fall on their own Heads. It is not in the power
of human Help in this case to save Men, who will destroy themselves.

THE CONTENTS.
Chap. I. A General Account of the new ways to Salvation, and Services of the
Roman Church. Page 1. Chap. II. How far, and in what sense Papists may be
called Catholics; and how the Roman Church is neither the true Catholic, nor a
truly Catholic Church. Page 8. Chap. III. Concerning the second Inducement to
Popery, The Roman Miracles. Page 34. Chap. IV. Concerning the Protection and
Assistance of Roman Saints. Page 71. Chap. V. Of the Worship deferred the
Virgin; and of the Blessings expected from this Worship. Page 99. Chap. VI.
Concerning the Adoration, and new ways of serving the Virgin Mary. Page 123.
Chap. VII. Concerning the daily Services bestowed upon the Virgin Mary. Page
153. Chap. VIII. Of another special Inducement to Popery, by a more easy way
of serving the Virgin by Beads, which they call the Rosary. Page 168. Chap. IX.
Of the vast Tresure of the Roman Church, and her power to dispose it. Page 189.
Chap. X. Concerning the Roman Indulgences, the most general Inducement to
Popery. Page 210. Chap. XI. Concerning the procuring Pardon of Sins, by the
means of Holy Confraternities and Friends. Page 240. Chap. XII. Concerning
three special means of Salvation, The Holy Girdle of St. Francis; The 150 Beads
of St. Dominic; and the Scapulary of St. Simon Stock, in their respective
Fraternities. Page 269. 1. Concerning the Holy Rope, or Girdle of St. Francis.
Page ib. Chap. XIII. 2. Concerning the second special Means of Salvation in the
Confraternity of Mount Carmel, by wearing the little Mantle or Scapulary of
Saint Simon Stock. Page 277. Chap. XIV. 3. Concerning the third means of
obtaining Salvation, by the Confraternity and 150 Beads of St. Dominic. Page
284. Chap. XV. Concerning diverse other Instruments of Blessing and Salvation.
Page 300. Chap. XVI. Concerning the most general, and most sensible Inducement
to Popery, by the means, and in the use of Consecrated Images. Page 330.
SAUL and SAMUEL AT ENDOR, etc.
CHAP. I.
A General Account of the new Ways to Salvation, and Services of the Roman
Church.
WELL may the Church of Rome look Full and Rich, since what the Church of
Christ has single, she still has double, and of different sorts; keeping in
her Bosom as much of good and bad together, as can both furnish true Catholics
with the Fundamentals of Christian Faith, and lend to others, thereon to build
whole heaps of ruinous Superstitions and Abuses. Here you shall find under one
Roof, the Eternal God of Israel, and a Mortal Woman, standing very near upon
the same ground, both for your Worship and Prayers: Two sorts of Christ's called
upon in the same way; the one born of a Virgin, and the other made by a Mass
Priest: two necessary Sacrifices for the Salvation of Mankind; one once offered
up to God on the Cross, and another which is offered up every day upon an
Altar: Two sorts of Mediators and Advocates, worshipped and surrounded with an
equal number of Clients; our Blessed Savior, and Canonized Saints. Suitably to
these two different sorts of Patrons, you shall find in the same Church two
different ways of obtaining pardon of sins; the one by the Evangelical Mercy
of God upon all men, whosoever shall repent, and believe on his Son; and
another by the Bulls of the Pope, for them who will either pray before an
Image, or without any mention of Prayers, look devoutly toward an Altar: Two
Ladders to get up to Heaven, one white with the milk of Mary, the other red
with the Blood of Jesus; both equally puzling poor Worshippers about the
choice: Two sorts of sufferings to be allowed to sinners for their behoof and
benefit, the Passion of the same Savior, and the Mortifications and Services of
the Saints: Finally, two sorts of Spiritual Kindred, and Ghostly Fraternity;
that of Christ, by a partaking in Faith and Holiness, and that of the Rosary
for instance, or S. Francis, and twenty more, by turning Beads, or wearing
Frocks or Girdles, and by such other new Performances. To join and keep all
this together, the Roman Church submits to two Heads; the Son of God in Heaven,
and his Holiness in Italy; and Preaches two different, and sometimes contrary
words of God, which you must embrace both together with the same Devotion and
Faith, namely, the written word of God, which you may find in the Holy
Scripture, and the unwritten Tradition, which you must seek in that Churches
Breast.

In this unhappy conjuncture of true Catholic Christianity, and of mere Roman
Popery, that happens which you may observe, either in unnatural and beastly
Copulations, the baser kind spoils the better; or in the Dreams of Pharaoh, the
ugly destroies the well-favor'd. We find by sad experiences in these last times
of the Gospel, what heretofore was typified by Ceremonies, and also expressed
ever after, by unhappy Examples under the Law; the Flesh which was consecrated
and made holy at Gods Altar, had not the same virtue to sanctify the unclean,
as the unclean had to defile that which was Holy. Nor were the Israelites so
powerful to convert the Idolatrous Jebusites to God (when Married together) as
were the Jebusites, to seduce them to their Idols: and for this consideration
the Law forbad such Societies. Corrupt Nature, we know, has of it self both a
strange tendency to frivolous and unlawful, and no less aversness from truly
good and holy things: so, tho the power of both were equal, as to sanctifying,
or corrupting, our inward Inclinations are more likely to determine us to the
worst side. Never were Women so ready to part with their choicest Jewels, as
when 'twas to make a Golden Calf: nor could ever so many Fathers have bin
persuaded to be so cruel, as to pass their Children through the fire, had it not
bin to serve Molock.

The Kingdom of Heaven is by our Savior compared to Seed; now one handful of
Tare is enough to poison and overrun a whole Field. Hence it is, that tho the
ten Tribes of Israel retained the Law of Moses, as well as the Papists do at
this present the Gospel; yet the holy Prophets mention no other Religion,
whether in Dan, or Beer sheba, but the ways of Jeroboam, and the Ordinances of
Omry. And tho the Samaritans did make profession to serve the Lord God of
Israel, among the gods of other Nations, 2 Kings 17.33. Yet their service to
these so immediately takes up their whole Devotion, that in the following Verse
you find, that they do not fear God at all.

It is by this fatal prevalency of evil over good, and the corrupt readiness of
Men to yield to this prevalency, that the Roman superstition has not only
over-topped, but even overwhelmed the Catholic Faith, to that degree, as any
Christian may both see it, if he have Eyes, and must deplore it too, if he have
any sense or fear of God. What the Blessed Evangelists have set down in the
four Gospels, and what the Blessed Apostles have Preached upon it through the
whole World, is yet at Rome as to its being; but as to its condition, there it
is as miserably buried under the confused heap of other new and unchristian
services, as ever was that Book of the Law, 2 Kings 22.8. under the Ruins of
the Temple. Their Masses, Legends, Auricular Confessions, Bulls, Prayers to
Saints, and the Worshipping of Images fill up the Churches, and make the main
Bulk of all visible Religion. There if some good Prayers to God Almighty appear
by chance among the Crowd, it is as one Pater noster among many Ave Maria's,
that is, one among ten in their Beads; and if you take the pains to compare how
many Prayers, Proses, Panegyrics, and other expressions of the deepest
Devotion, are bestowed on the Virgin, with what is left for our Savior; there
you shall find somewhat the same proportion between them two, as you may see
both in the Images that represent them in their Churches, and in the most
Authentic Visions, which are pretended to show them together to their Monks,
where she appears still with all the Pomp that can attend a glorious Queen,
whilst Christ her Son is still represented but as a Child. Thus Papists have
the Common Faith (and I wish to God they had no more) and their own proper
Romanism, to the very same or like purpose, as the Jews have the Law and the
Prophets, and the Talmud of their Rabbis; and as the Turks have both much of
Moses, and of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and all the Impieties of Mahomet,
this latter to choke the former, as the Tares in the Parable did the good Seed;
or to dishonor and abuse it, as the Babylonians in Dan. 5. did the holy Vessels
of Gods house.

To make all these sins more sinful, and Popery more dangerous; these unhappy
Superstructures, which lie as a heavy Encumbrance upon the holy Foundation of
God, are now adays used as so many Snares and Attractives to draw Men to the
Church of Rome. Protestants have among themselves neither better, nor other
ways of saving distressed Sinners, then by charging them to forsake sin, to
believe and to live according to the Gospel, and with this Faith, and the use
of Divine Ordinances, to cast their burden and themselves on the Mercies of God
in Christ; whereas over and above all this, the Papists have a great deal more,
which others do lay no claim to. First, they have the Queen of Heaven and the
Mother of Compassions, who is unknown on this account to the best Churches. And
this Goddess is represented, as such a Tresurer of all Graces, and a Favorer of
such Persons, and upon such good and easy terms, as without her it were
absolutely vain to expect advantage from the aid even of the whole Trinity. In
the second place, they have millions of Saints, who whenever called upon,
make it their business to help, as much as in them lies, every condition, sort,
and profession of Men. There is never a small Parish, nor Trade, no nor any
exigence, want, or disease, but has some favorable and proper Saint. The very
Images of Wood and Stone are instrumental to great Blessings: their Churches
and Altars are consecrated in such a manner, that the very coming near them,
forgives some sins. The sound and ringing of Bells, if Christened after their
way, has much virtue. Who knows not how much devout persons are benefited by
Holy Water, and devout Prayers improved to high Merits by holy Beads? It were
infinite to say all that is pretended of the Agnus Dei Medals, and a numberless
store of Relics, and how they are working every day up and down the World for
believing Catholics, more Cures then you can ever imagine. The Milk, the Hairs,
the Shift, the Shoes, but especially the Girdle of the Virgin Mary, are to this
purpose tried and well known. What shall we say of those swelling Streams,
which, tho they do not sanctify Sinners, yet overflow them with Pardons? I
mean the Bulls and Indulgences, the Confraternities, the Masses upon
privileged Altars, Pr^iers before certain Images, Stations and Jubilees upon
visiting of certain Churches, great and extraordinary Powers conferred on
certain Priests, whenever occasion requires it, for dispensing with ugly
things at easy rates: poor Protestants, I say, want altogether all these
Blessings, and blessed Catholics abound with them. And if any of these ways of
attaining Salvation seem to some Men inconceivable; this very inconceivableness
is thought by others a proper Character to set out all for Mysteries. And if
that do not fully satisfy all Men's Consciences, this must, namely that their
Roman is the undoubted Catholic Church, and that the Catholic Church cannot err.

Such things as these have a great weight with Ignorant, and sometimes too with
intelligent Sinners, who find themselves both laden with their sins, and
unwilling to part with them. And who could blame poor Creatures for going to
Rome for such Pardons, as it is certain they can never find among us, nor in
the Gospel, nor in Heaven, nor any where else but at Rome? Therefore I think it
charity to undeceive men in these matters; and convince unhappy Saul, if his
obdurate Heart be not altogether incapable of reasonable Instruction, that what
he sees or hears at Endor, tho perhaps sounding like the Voice, and looking
like the Appearance of Samuel in the night time, will be found in the day
light, not to be any thing but the Enchantment or Cheat of a poor and silly
Witch. I will begin with the Catholic Church, because it is the first Varnish
that they adorn their Errors with, and the general Illusion, whereby they
inveigle both themselves and others.

CHAP. II.
How far, and in what sense Papisls may be called Catholics, and how the Roman
Church is neither the true Catholic, nor a truly Catholic Church.
THE Papists are much pleased with calling themselves Catholics, and take it
Bellarm. de Eccles. l. 4. c. 4.
for the first Mark and Acknowledgment of their Church, when sometimes others
call them so; not considering in the mean while, that Titles in all kinds of
Tongues do continue most commonly long after the things signified by them are
gone: and that we may call Rome the Catholic, upon the same account that St.
Matthew 4.5. calls still Jerusalem the Holy City, tho this has lost her
Holiness, as that has depraved her Religion.

Catholic Doctrine and Service, rightly applied, and called so, is the most
essential Jewel, and the very Soul of true Churches. The first Title they ever
had, after Christ was gone up to Heaven, was to be called Christian: the second
was, after the blessed Apostles had planted them in most Countries, to be
called Apostolical: the third, if Churches did keep faithfully that Gospel,
which had bin Preached by the Apostles every where, both such Churches and such
Doctrines were entitled Catholic. This last Title is the essential Seal and
Character of the two other: for whatsoever is thus Catholic, that is thus grown
Universal thro-out all Churches, and in all times, since the preaching of
Christ and his Apostles, let it be where it will, at Rome, or at Jerusalem, is
both Apostolical and Christian: and therefore S. Paul Coloss. 1.6. and 23. uses
it twice, as an infallible evidence to demonstrate, that the Doctrine which the
Colossians had heard either from him, or from Epaphras, was the true Gospel of
Christ, because it was come to them and all the world, and was preached to
every Creature under Heaven. Men may set up small Candles, that can fill with
light private Rooms, and if carried about, lead Travelers some part of their
way: but none but God alone can make such a Light as the Sun is, that can in a
moment, as the Sun does, spread a bright day over the whole world. No
Philosophers that we know, were ever able with all their wit, to extend their
Opinions beyond their Schools; nor the greatest Kings with their might, settle
their Laws beyond their Dominions; nor the worst Heretics spread their Errors
much farther then their several Abodes. The true Doctrine of Christ only, and
all such other holy Precepts, Ordinances, and Traditions, as are proper to his
Gospel; as they went forth with a divine commission, had suitable Power to carry
them, and to maintain them thro-out all parts, and to all Creatures every where
(whom God would call) in the whole world. Matthew. 26.13. Mark. 14.9. Hence come
such Doctrines, and the Churches on their account to be called Catholic. As for
all other private Tenets, Customs, and Traditions whatsoever, however intended
by their Authors to follow close after them, they could never reach half the
way: they stayed behind; they wanted breath; they had not the Arm of the Lord,
nor the power of his Spirit, which the Gospel had, to carry and convey them so
far. Thus without any exception, whatsoever you can find has bin made thus
general among Christians from its very beginning, (and nothing else) is
Christian, and Apostolical, and truly Catholic, by this infallible token, and
upon this account, because it had the strength and Almighty Spirit of God to
make it so, and without which it could not be so.

Thus one may judge of the Catholicness, which Romanists brag of, and challenge
on two accounts, the first, when they give it to their Church, and themselves
the honor of being the Catholic Church; the second, when they give it to their
new Doctrines, and Traditions, and obtrude all as Catholic. By the Catholic
Church in the first sense, nothing else can be understood, but an Universal
Collection of all the Churches in the world, and of all Christians in those
Churches, which by the same faith join together into one Communion of Christ
their Savior and their Head; as all the Boughs of a Tree, however spread and
scattered one from the other, unite into one stem; as all Rivers into one Sea;
and as the twelve Tribes of Israel into one Kingdom. After this rate, if the
Pope be the Universal or Catholic Bishop, you must needs conclude thence
against him, as Pope Gregory the great did several Gregor. Magn. l. 4. Indict.
13. Ep. 32. item Ep. 36. item l. 7. Ind. 1. Ep. 30.
times against the Constantinopolitan Patriarch: if one, says he, be called
the Universal Bishop, this one has all, and all the other Bishops have nothing
left: and thus if Rome be the Catholic Church, the other Churches are no
Churches: Rome alone is the whole World, and this Tiber the whole Ocean.

To this some are pleased to say, that the Roman is the Catholic Church, not
collectively or extensively, that is not by being in her self the collective
and extended body of all the Churches, but virtually, and as the eminent
Cardinal Du Perron expresses it, eminently, that is, the Roman has an eminent
Power Influence and Empire over other Churches. Thus Rome is all Christendom;
as if one should say London is all England, when the King and the Parliament
sit at Westminster; and the Tribe of Levi all Israel, when the High Priest and
his Sanhedrin keep their Courts there: Which is to say, not that all
Christendom is contained in the precinct and bosom of Rome, but under its hand
and power. Thus to be the Catholic, is not to be the Universal, but only the
Domineering Church, and so far Roman Catholic; which many wise men take for a
Bull: perhaps it sounds better then they are aware of, since the Romans love to
be Masters, and since the Mastering Power has bin a great while under their
hand. But there is a reply against all this, that no Roman Power or wit can
well shift off, First, this notion of Catholic, to signify commanding or
Monarchical, is altogether unusual, and unheard of among the Fathers;
especially St Cyprian and St Austin, who are all for keeping close to the
Catholic Church and Faith; and all, at the same time, for keeping themselves
and their Churches free from the Monarchy of Rome. Secondly, it is, tho it were
true, impertinent to such purposes as the Papists apply it to. For suppose Rome
has the Power; has she therefore the Holiness, the Infallibity, the Promises
of being led into all truth by the Spirit? Has she all such other great
advantages which are made to the Catholic Universal, and not to the Catholic
Reigning Church? Did Aaron never make an Idol, although he was the Lords high
Priest? Were either the Scribes ever kept from inventing idle Traditions, by
being Rulers in Jerusalem? or St Peter, from cursing himself, and denying his
own Master, by that Jurisdiction, they say, he had over the rest of the
Apostles? Is his Holiness, for instance, John the twelfth, or Sylvester the 2d,
the one less effeminate, the other less a sorcerer, or either of them more
holy, for all the power they say they have both over all the Kings of the
Earth, and over all the Churches of Christ? And may not the holy City of
Jerusalem be turned both into a Den of Thieves, or into a Synagogue of Devils,
although you believe her to have a very great and eminent sway over all the Tribes
of Israel? Therefore it is not the Catholic, that is, the Monarchical, but the
Catholic in a better sense, that is, the Universal Church of Christ, that has
the Promises of God, and this excellent Privilege, which both Papists and
others look for, of bringing all its truly Catholic Members to Eternal
Salvation.

But admit all what they would have, that their Church may be said to be the
Catholic, because it has dominion over all other Churches: whence comes this
Catholic Power, that can make her as really to be, as to be said so? It comes,
they say, by lawful succession from Saint Peter, who had it, and so bequeathed
it to their Popes. This is, I confess, easily said, but hardly maintained or
understood. For first, St Paul knew nothing of it, when he resisted this
Sovereign both publicly and to his Face, Galat. 2.11. Nor did the whole College
of Apostles, when they sent him with John as freely, as now the Pope sends his
Legates, to settle the Church at Cesarea, Acts 8.14. Nor the whole Church of
Jerusalem, when they called him to an account about his behavior with the
Gentiles, Acts 11.2.3. Nor the holiest Fathers of the Church, when they did
call his Successors, that is, their own Sovereigns, by the familiar name of
Brothers: Nor the whole Church of God with them, when, as it appears Aen. sylv.
Epist. l. 1. Epist. 288. page 202. Basil.
by the very Confession of one who afterward came to be Pope, they took little
notice of this sort of Catholicness, Ante Nicenam, etc. that is, Before the
Nicene Council they regarded little the Roman Church: and by the Interpretation
of Ruffinus a Roman Priest, who lived but few years after it, its sixth Canon
restrains this pretended Universal Power, within the adjacent Towns of Rome. I
will say more, even two hundred Years after, Pope Gregory the first was so
little acquainted with this pretended Prerogative, that he could not suffer the
hearing Greg. Magn. Regist. l. 7. Ind. 1. Ep. 33. ad Eulog.
of it, no not in a Compliment (although bestowed sometimes on others) and so
little as to this point skilled in Scripture, that tho he insists often on
these words, Thou art Peter, etc. Feed my Flock, and I will give thee the
Keys, etc. (the present great Supporters and Demonstrations of Universal
Monarchy) this blind Doctor could see in them nothing tending to such a
Catholic Latitude.

If Christ had intended any such Power for Saint Peter, 'twas not a business to
be whispered privately Ruffin. Hist. l. 1. c. 6.
in the Ear, as the Treason he told Judas of: it was to be proclaimed on the
House tops, and in the hearing of all the World; according to the practice of
Moses and Elisha, when they made choice of their Successors in the face of all
Israel. Such a public Declaration might have presently both quelled the
dangerous and undecided Contention among the Disciples, to wit, Who should be
the greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven; and prevented all the Disorders, which
have ever since troubled the Church for want of knowing this supreme and
infallible Governor. Then might the Roman Church have spared forging Binius in
Donat and Edict. Constant. Conc. Tom. 1. page 313. and 314. Edit. Par. 1636.
Donations and Decretals to her own shame, to assert her Power in Europe: And
the Popes might have reserved that massy weight of Gold, which they gathered
from the Christians under the ordinary pretenses of Holy War, for holier uses,
then were either Avent. Annal. Bocor. l. 7.
the arming Turks against such Churches, as would not acknowledge his Grandeur,
or driving distressed Bishops on this account by Persecution Vid. Quillem.
Tyrium. l. 15. c. 15. etc.
and hard usage, to seek for shelter among the Turks. All Nations, without
either fraud or force, might then have learned their duty toward S. Peter's
Chair, at the same time when they heard of S. Peter's Gospel: and if this
pretended Tradition, whether written or not written, had waited but at a
distance on the first Preaching of Christian Faith; they would certainly have
submitted to it, that is, to that Universal Empire, as they did to Episcopacy.

Secondly, Suppose, against all what I have said, that St Peter had, during his
life, an Universal Monarchy; What sound Reason, what clear Text of the holy
Scripture, or what undoubted Tradition, can any one allege to show he left it
to a Successor? Did he leave him also his other Gifts and Privileges, and among
them his Faith of Miracles, his Apostolical Rod to strike men with, some to the
ground, as they say he did at Rome Simon Magus; and others to their very
Graves, as he did certainly Ananias and Saphira? Did he pass to his Successor
his special Commission and Apostleship over the Jews? Did St Paul leave either
at Rome, or in any other Cities he was in, proper Apostles to succeed him in
all his Prerogatives among the Gentiles? Let any one show me, where the twelve
are whom James, John, and Thomas, and all the rest of the Apostles, left endued
with equal Power in their rooms; and then let, if you please, the Popes, in
quality of Peter's Successors, reign over them.

Thirdly, Suppose there were any where in the World such an Apostolical Sacred
College; What claim has Rome, more then another place, to the Headship of this
College? Is it not as likely, that St. Peter would have left his Throne at
Antioch, where he made the first Christians, as at Rome, where no Scripture
says he was ever to make any? Would not one think that his first Chair, namely
that of Antioch, which always has bin honored with a kind of Holy Day through
Christendom, should as soon be the Seat of their Universal Empire, as his other
second Chair at Rome; which if it have now the same Honor, has it but Bell. de
Romans Pontif. l. 2. c. 6.
since the other day? They say, that this was Ibid. c. 12.
his last Throne, wherein he died, and never removed any whither else: but they
should prove that this was his last Will also it should stand there. He removed
this Seat no whither else, because there he was put to death: Thus Nero made it
his last Throne; as about six hundred Years after, Phocas made Paul. Diacon.
Gest. Longob. l. 4. c. 11. Vet. Edit. Platina in Pelagio. 3. Anastas. ibid.
it Universal. This last did it to vex his Bishop Cyriacus, for having
Theophanes, and Graecorum Annal. apud Baron. ad An. 606.
saved out of his Bloody Hands the Empress Constantina, and her two Daughters:
and to gratify the Bishops of Rome, who were so base as to flatter him. So
these two renowned Worthies, the Murderer of his own Mother, and the Murderer
of his own King, have first founded that Universal Eminence, which has made
Rome thus Catholic.

The Foundation being thus laid down, both for Primacy over other Churches, and
for Reverence and Dignity among most Christian Potentates, who ever showed
themselves exceeding liberal on these accounts (for as yet the Roman Papacy
went but thus far;) the next task was to raise it up from this degree to in
absolute Monarchy. Both the Invasions of Turks, and the Broils and Dissentions
that happened among the Christian Princes, helped the Popes to shake off all
Subjection: and Gregory the seventh understood and practiced so well the Art of
Building upon Ruins, that he left to his Successors, partly in Design, partly
in actual Usurpation, very fair ground to advance farther by these Rules,
commonly called the Popes Dictates. Dictatus Papae Greg. l. 2. post. Ep. 55.
1. That the Pope alone is the Universal Bishop. 2. The Pope alone can make new
Laws. 3. That the Pope alone can take the Arms of Empire and Sovereignty. 4.
That the Pope alone must have his Feet kissed by all Princes. 5. That the Pope
alone has the Power to Depose Kings. 6. That the Pope alone can release
Subjects from Allegiance. 7. That the Pope cannot be judged by any Man. 8. That
the Roman Church never erred hitherto, nor can ever err hereafter. 9. That he
is not a Catholic, that is, a Christian, whosoever dissents from Rome. There
are many more Dictates of the same sort; but these are enough to intimate, how
Popes would master the whole World. After Gregory the Seventh, comes Pope
Boniface the 8th, to hoist this immense Power from this World both up toward
Heaven, thence fetching Angels Wessel. Groaning. de Potest. Papae. c. 8. sect.
Neque parum.
by his Bulls for the care of his dead Pilgrims; and then down to Purgatory,
thence pulling Ibid.
up such tormented Souls (some three or four at one bout) as his Croisado-men
shall require. Hell it self is related to the Popes Dominions: for if he be
pleased by negligence, or otherwise, Gratian Did. 40. Si Papa.
to send whole Nations to Hell, and to deliver them as well as himself to the
Prince of the Devils, many are of an Opinion, that no Man ought to rebuke him
for it.

The Project of this vast Empire comes fully either to the Infernal Pride, that
St. Gregory Registr. l. 4. Ind. 13. Ep. 34.
charges him with, who would be called Universal Bishop: I will, says he,
exalt my Throne above the Stars of God, and I will ascend unto Heaven, Isa.
14.13. or to their Bedlam Distemper, who, whatsoever they hear or see, imagine
it to be their own. But take the whole work as you please, either as mad, or as
impious, it becomes well its three Builders: The first is Phocas, a Villain,
who Theophan. Miscell. l. 17.
Murdered both his own Master and Emperor, and his Masters Roial Family, his
Wife, his six Sons and two Daughters. His Holiness, I say, ows his first Title
of Universal Bishop to this abominable Massacre. The second is Gregory the
Seventh, before called Hildebrand, who is branded among many for a Magician of
the worst fort, and for a pestilent Incendiary, both in arming Subjects against
their Princes, and (which is more unnatural) the very Children against their
Fathers: And at last, being at the point of death, he himself confessed in the
presence Matthew Paris, Willelm. 2. Anno 1086.
of his Cardinals, That by the Devils persuasion he had provoked the wrath of
God against Mankind. The third is Boniface the Eighth, who is reported in the
Fasciculus Temporum. in Bonifac. 8.
Chronicles, To have crept up to the Popedom like a Fox, and there reigned like
a Lion, and at the last died like a Dog. These are the Men that have preferred
the Church of Rome to the Dignity she takes upon her, of being the Catholic
Church. Thus it appears, that the Church of Rome is the Catholic Church in no
sense, neither formally or properly, as it signifies the whole Universal Church
of Christ; nor virtually or eminently, in their unproper and unusual notion, by
having any lawful universal Dominion and Headship over all other Churches.

Benno Cardinalis. de Gest. Hildebr.
Now I come to the second part of the matter in question, to demonstrate, That
the Church of Rome is no truly Catholic Church at all (much less the Catholic
Church) further then it agrees with ours: and that the proper notion of
Catholic, excludes as inconsistent with the Apostolical and Christian Religion,
whatsoever she pretends as proper to the Popish Faith.

First, I begin with the Doctrine concerning St. Peter and the Roman Dominion.
Ask them that know, what is properly Catholic, they will tell you after honest
Lirinensis, Vincent. Lirin. c. 3.
It Is that which is believed by all Christians in all ages, and every where. I
have demonstrated already, that St Peter's Roial Power was not believed by the
Apostles, nor in any Apostolical times; and made it good out of Acts and
Evidences altogether incompatible with, and destructive of this Belief: namely,
His being rebuked by St. Paul, both to the Face and publicly; his being called
to account by his Brethren; his being sent to Cesarea, etc. Can you think, that
if at his return, they had found him guilty of such a foul miscarriage as would
send whole Nations to Hell, they had thought it presumtion, as the Canon Law
says it is, to ask wherefore he did so? Was it ever heard among the twelve,
that besides the general Commission of Preaching Christ, St. Peter had another
more special and proper Power of degrading all such Princes, as would not be
ruled by his Bulls? And if he had it not; Is it likely that the present Roman
Popes have more Secular Power from Christ then he, for compensation of their
having less Holiness? To come lower to the holy Fathers; read their Epistles to
the then Popes, and judge whether St. Cyprian, St. Basil, etc. did believe them
to be their Monarchs, when they call them (as commonly they do) their Brethren
and Fellow Servants. Did St. Augustine and his Brethren, the worthiest Prelates
of that Age, submit themselves very modestly to the Roman Papal Power, of
controlling by their Legates and Officers the African Church Affairs, when they
called it again and again Secular Conc. Afric. sub Bonif. Ep. ad Bonif. and Ep.
ad Celest.
Pride? and do the African Codex Canon. Afric. Can. 28 sect. Item placuit ut
Presbyteri.
Canons (the best Ecclesiastical Rules that the Church has) look upon Popes as
their lawful supreme Visitors, when they do forbid all Churchmen, under pain of
Excommunication, in any Church business, to appeal to Rome? During this long
misunderstanding, which lasted the lives of three Popes, did Sozimus, Boniface,
and Celestin, (Learned and Wise Roman Bishops) believe, that clear Texts of
Scripture did sufficiently assert the Papacy, when they were afraid of their
Cause, unless they could help it up better, by forging false Nicene Canons? And
on the other side: What meant the honest African Fathers in sending Council.
Afric. ibid.
to Constantinople, to Alexandria and Nicea, for true Copies, with profession
of a readiness of submitting to all the true Nicene Canons, if they had
thought, That feed my flock, and Thou art Peter, and such other Texts of
Scriptures (better worth then all the Councils) had so much as nodded the Roman
way? Or if the Papists say (for I know not what they can say else) that these
places of Scripture, which they now mainly stand upon, are not so clear to
their purpose, without the help of Tradition; Did St. Augustine, and all the
rest of Africa, not yet know what Tradition was or what it said? Was the
ancient Tradition of the Universa Church then quite lost, among the eighty
Nicene Canons, which some Alph. Pisan. l. 3. in Conc. Nic. Ep. ad Marcum.
fondly suppose to have bin burnt by the Arrians? Books and Papers indeed may
have bin burnt; but Christian Faith, and Tradition written no where so legibly
as in Men's hearts, could not be so, unless the whole Church had bin burnt also.
Besides, the general Practice, whatsoever becomes of Tradition, must remain
still: for you cannot imagine that the Church of Rome could actually exercise an
universal Jurisdiction over all the Churches of the World, without imagining in
these an universal submission to that Power. To this purpose, tell me I pray,
Whether and where S. Chrysostom or St. Basil, did swear Canonical Obedience to
his Holiness when they were consecrated? What sums of Money did they send to
Rome, when they had thence got their Pallium? And when or where among a
thousand Prelates in the old Times, do you find one either subscribing himself,
or being called by others, as now they do, and are Archbishops or Bishops of
Milan, of Constantinople, or any other Diocese, by the Grace of God, and of the
Holy Apostolical See; fairly acknowledging themselves thereby, little better
then what they are now, mere Suffragans, Vicars, or Curats of that Universal
Bishop? I am sure that Pope Gregory abhorred, as long as he lived, that very
Title (and much more the Usurpation) as Greg. Magn. Regist. l. 4. Ind. 13. Ep.
33. Item. l. 5. Indict. 14. Epist. 39.
a Mark of Antichrist, and as a Destruction of the Faith. Now it is cherished
at Rome, not only as a Catholic Doctrine, but as the very Fundamental that
makes the Catholic Church. Thus Knaves grow great upon cheating, and Rebels
become Kings upon a Murder, and Men's Crimes prove sometimes their Pride and
Exaltation.

2. From the Roman Supremacy, go on, and look upon the Roman Mass; you know
what great proportion that Sacrifice has among them. Whole Popery depends or
tends that way, as on its Center: and if the Roman Pope is that Churches Head,
this Roman Service is its Body. I say then in the second place, that this vast
and comprehensive Bulk is nothing less then Catholic. Catholic is, By all Men's
acknowledgment, that which has bin always believed (if a Doctrine) or
observed and practiced (if a Service) since Christian Antiquity, in all
Christian Churches and Ages. Go therefore and seek, when and where the twelve
Apostles ever offered in Preaching their Savior to men, to offer him up, and to
make him a Victime to God. Enquire of all the Holy Fathers, when and where they
sung any Mass publicly without any Communicants except the Priests? When and
where they ever solemnly and publicly administered the holy Communion under one
kind? When and where they ever heard one single syllable of those Unchristian
Doctrines, that now a days make the Main Fundamentals of the Romish Religion?
to wit, that Christ offered up himself to God as an Expiatory Sacrifice any
where else but on the Cross; that the Natural Body of Christ is both in Heaven
upon a Throne, and on Earth on a thousand Altars; that here his Body contracts
and shrinks it self into the compass of a small Crumb of Bread, or any the
least drop of Wine; that these appearing Crumbs and Drops, although emtied to all
Substance, and attenuated to mere Accidents, can both well subsist by
themselves, and whithersoever they be driven, pull along with them the Flesh of
Christ. If these and other like Doctrines, which now are essential to Roman
Mass, had in Ancient time bin Preached and heard as essential to Christian
Faith; Where was all the wit of Celsus, or the malice of Julian, and such
Enemies of Christ Jesus, when they fell foul upon the Blessed Trinity, the
Incarnation and Resurrection of Christ, and all such other Articles as seemed
to them ridiculous, to spare both the Mass-Sacrifice and the
Transubstantiation, that both are, and seem to be so? Where was either the
wisdom or the care of Origin, Eusebius, St. Augustine, and other Christian
Champions, whilst they were writing large Volumes in defense of Religion,
where it seemed subject to reproach, to leave this part alone undefended, which
by all Men's confession had, if then in being, the greatest need of defense? If
the Church of God had in those days a most real and continual Mass-Sacrifice;
How came S. Cyrill of Alexandria to be so dull against his Custom, as when
Julian laughed at Christians for having neither Altars nor Sacrifices, to stop
his mouth with nothing else then Metaphorical Oblations? And was this Apostate
such a Sot, as to object at every turn such mere Falsehoods (if Mass be true)
wherein he knew (having bin long a Christian) that any Body might stop his
mouth? It seems (as some of their best Authors Alphons. de Cast. l. 8. tit.
Indulgentia.
confess) the Mystery of Transubstantiation was yet in the Church incognito,
and came to appear, as it does now, but a long while (as they say Gabr. Biel.
in Can. Sect. 41. I.
too) after Christ had instituted it: So it is not Catholic at all.

3. Go you down to Purgatory, that vast and wide subterranean Rome, as great at
least as this aboveground; who also in a very great mesure is her Mother and
Nurse: for if this pretends to send down any kind of relief to that, by her
Masses and Massoffices; yet it is that which maintains and helps up this, with
Wealth, Honors, Monasteries, and all imaginable affluence of Riches. In the
mean time, this commerce, how mutual and great soever, is nothing less then
Catholic, having not followed the Gospel through all the Countries, nor times
of the Church. Whenever and wheresoever the Christian Faith was Preached,
there is left an Impression in the Heart of all Believers, that there is after
this Life a Heaven prepared for Faithful Souls, and an everlasting Hell for
those that shall be found not to be so. Purgatory, which is a third place, and
should of course, if true, have gone in the same company with these two, never
followed them half the way: no Apostle, so far as we can see in their holy
Writings, ever Preached it: it was not blown by Gods Spirit thro-out the whole
World, as other Catholic Doctrines were; it lodged in some corners only, and
that late, or upon a Heathenish account: and where by chance it was admitted,
it found no better entertainment then a wavering Opinion: Such a thing may be,
says one: It is not unlikely, says another. The Greek and Armenian Churches,
larger then the Roman is, do not believe it, Alfon. di Castro. l. 12. tit.
Purgatorium.
says one of the most learned Papists. It was believed but somewhat late,
says Fisher. cont. Luther. Art. item.
one of their Cardinal Bishops, and tho Bellarmin turns over and over all the
Scriptures to search it out, many of his own Church do confess, that they
Fisher. ibid. Pet. a Solv. Assert. 8. Mart. Peresius de Traditione.
cannot find it there.

4. Indulgences, that vast revenue, and staple Merchandise of Rome, is neither
more ancient nor Universal then its correspondent Purgatory. For, says Polyd
Virgil. de Invent. l. 8. c. 1.
a good Roman Author after Cardinal Fisher, no body thought of Indulgences,
before Purgatory was set a foot: these without this being of no value. But a
while after men had bin affrighted with the Purgatory Torments; then began
Indulgences to be of use. If you will know why both came in late, they will
endeavor to Gab. Biel. in Can. Lect. 57. M. Alfons. a Castro. l. 8. ^it.
Indulgentia.
satisfy you with two Reasons; the first is, because Christians in primitive
time had few sins to trouble them after their death; when they had any, they
needed no other flames then their own Zeal to burn them out, and their great
Gregor. de Valent. de Indulg punct. 2.
Mortifications besides, left nothing to do for Indulgences. The second is,
because the Ancient Church did not know all, however, much less, then now we
do. The first reason stands upon mere inconsideration of what men were for the
most part in the best times. The second stands fair for new lights: and upon
this account you must exclude Purgatory, Indulgences, and Fanaticism, from
being Catholic Doctrines.

5. You may join with those three, all the Roman Prayers and Devotions to
Saints. This recommended daily, and reputedly devout Emploiment has not so
much as the shadow of Catholic; for it crept in among Christians, (as the
Baalim did in Israel, when the Holy men that had seen Moses and Joshua, and the
elders of that generation were all departed Jud. 2.10.11.12.) when our Savior
and his Apostles and the first Preachers of the Gospel had left the world.
During above four thousand years, when God had undoubted Saints living on Earth
among his People, you shall not find one, who ever called, prayed, or
worshipped any other Saint in Heaven, then the Holy one of Israel. Salmero, one
of the learned Disputants at Trent, confesses, Salmero. 1. ad Timoth. Disp. 7.
Sect. Nec obiter.
such Invocations have no express ground in all the Scriptures. Bellarmin Bell.
de Beat Sanct l. 1. c. 19. Sect. Item ex c. 32. Suar. p. 3. q. 52. Salm. 1.
Tim. 2. Disput. 8. Eckius. Enchirid. c. 15.
and others must yield it, as to the 4000 and odd years, that preceded the
Ascension. And as for the years that followed it, Would to God says
Stapulensis Faber. Stapul. Praefat. in Evang.
we would conform our ways of Faith and Devotion to the example of the
Primitive Church, who never looked but on one Christ; and never Worshipped any
other then, he Holy Trinity. Eckius Eckius in Enchirid. c^de Venerat. SS.
also is clear for this. Read for your better satisfaction Origin. contra Cells.
l. 8. Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 4. c. 15. S. Epiphanius his whole Tract against
the worshippers of the blessed Virgin. S. Ambros. 1. Romans S. Austin de Civit.
l. 8. c. 27. l. 22. c. 10. item contra Faust. l. 20. c. 21.

The whole business of Image worship (the most visible part of the Roman
Religion) came in later then the Saints worship, and therefore appears to be
less Catholic. If Ancient Authors mention once as it were by chance, Eusebius.
Eccl Hist. l. 7. c. 18.
a Statue made by the Woman (and a Heathenish Woman was she) whom Christ had
cured of a bloody Flux; or the Picture of some Apostles, which had bin seen on
private walls; or the Figure of a Shepherd with a Lamb upon his shoulders,
ingraved in a Cummunion Tertull. de Pudicitia.
Cup; or a Representation of Histories and Gregor. Nyssen. Tom. 3. Martyr.
Theodor. p. 579. Edit. Paris. 1638.
Martyrdoms in one or two Oratories; yet where is the Prophet, the Apostle, or
the Holy Father, who ever looked on such Figures, otherwise then common
representations or Pieces of Antiquity? or ever consecrated them in Churches,
where they are now Alex. Alens 3. Part. q. 3. a. ult. Tho. 3. part. q 25. q. 3.
Cajet. ibid. Bell. l. 2. de Imag.
proper means to serve Saints by, and fit Objects to have for themselves a
considerable part of this service? That one Hanging with St. Epiphanius Epist.
ad Johan. Hierosol. apud Hieron. Tom. 1. Ep. 6. p. 449. Edit. Paris. 1643.
tore to pieces, because it represented a Saint, at the entering into a Church,
might well serve for a winding sheet to wrap up all such Images, and to bury
them out of the precincts of Gods Church.

7. All other Tools and impliments of Popery, as Rosaries, Beads, holy Medals,
Agnus Dei's, Blessed Grains, Privileged Altars, Christening of Bells, all the
three sorts, of holy water, and such Furnitures of the Roman Church, may very
well go the same way, as rather the dirt then the Doctrine of any true Catholic
Church.

Ibid.
8. Auricular Confession, that is the continual work of Priests and People, is
not much better; and, as it is sometimes practiced, is a great deal worse. Of
all their more sober and intelligent writers, Gratian. de Poenit. Did. 1.
Sect. Quib. Authoritatib. Nicol. de Othel. 4. Sect. Sent. Dict. 17. Gab. Biel.
ibid.
some doubt much, whether it be a Catholic Practice: and others adventure to
say, Panormit. C. Omnis utriusque Sexus. Beat. Rhenanus in Tertul. de Poenit.
that it is not. The Eastern Churches, where the Gospel was first preached
Gloss. de Poenit. Dict. 15. Theod. Gent. apud Gratian. de Paenit. Dict. 1.
Sect. Quidam deo.
never had it: and it came among the Romans, Beat. Rhenan. Sup.
when public Confessions and other good customs grew out of date.

I forbear to bring more instances, because these, being the chief materials,
which compose this Roman Body, may suffice to show what it is. As a dry skin
filled with straw can never make a true Lion; nor the hollow bark of an Oak
stuffed up never so industriously with moss and dirt, ever make a fruitful
Tree; so neither can now the Church of Rome, to what bigness soever it swells,
or what face soever it may put on, make with these pitiful Ingredients a
Catholic, much less the true Catholic Church. Let Papists try by these
undeniable Characters, namely Christian Antiquity of Beginning, Continuance of
Duration, and Universality of reception, what is properly Catholic; and then
turn out of their doors what is not so; you shall presently see Rome without
Popes, Churches without Imageworship and Mass service: all new Doctrines and
old Idols will fall immediately down to the ground, and the manifest novelty of
what they brag of, and give out as old, shall soon betray the Imposture.

I confess that Popery wants not as much Age and Antiquity, as may deceive
ignorant men; their Doctrine of Purgatory is as old as Homer himself, who lived
many years before Christ; and their worshipping of Images, as old among the
Christians, as is Simon the sorcerer, who both had and adored them, and
therefore S. Iren. adv. Haeres. l. 1. c. 24.
is branded for it in the very Apostles times: only some difference may be,
that Simon had his from Pilates Brush; and Rome had theirs, as they do think
from St. Nicodemus, or St. Lukes hand. There was a worshipping of Angels, (as
bad it may be, as as the Popish is at this day) of no lesser date then all the
writings of S. Paul. B. Theodoret. Coloss. 2.
Coloss. 2.18. and condemned Council. Laodic. Can. 35.
by the Ancient Fathers. Transubstantiation is not so new as many think: for
Marcus, an old Enchanter, endeavored somewhat like it by Iren. cont. Haeres. l.
1. c. 19.
turning the Wine into Blood, which he called (...) something like
Transubstantiation. That the same Body might be, and was at the same time in
several places, was a Doctrine plainly taught by the Manichees, August. cont.
Faust. l. 20. c. 6.
many hundred years before all the Councils of Lateran or Trent. Those Laws
forced on men's Consciences, since Christ and his Apostles had left them to
their Liberty, concerning Meats, and Marrying, are not less Ancient then
Theodor. Haeret. Fabul. l. 5. c. 24.
Cerdon, Marcion, Tatian, and the Encratites, who were very Ancient Heretics.
Extreme Unction bestowed by the Mass Priests on dying persons, was prescribed
by S. August. cont. Haereses. c. 16.
Heracleon, about an hundred and ten years after Christ. Not to multiply
instances, the very source and fountain, whence all errors were derived to
Rome, namely the magnifying Hieron. ad Dametam.
an unwritten Tradition, and the vilifying the Holy Scripture Iren. l. 1. c.
24. and l. 3. c. 2.
for an uncertain and obscure Rule, has no later Authors then the Scribes
were, long before Christ, and the Gnostics, soon after him. Thus the Papists
are not without Antiquity, such as it is: for I may say in general, and prove
too by many Instances, that Jews, Gentiles, and old Heretics scarce ever had any
famous and general Abuse among them, but Rome would have somewhat of it. But as
for truly Christian and Apostolical Antiquity, such as can be the only Root,
and essential Character of Catholic Doctrine; I may safely defy the best of
them to name me any one Article proper to their own Roman Faith, that is
ancient in this sense. And as to those Articles of Christian Faith, which they
have in common with us, and are truly Apostolical and Catholic; it is most
pitiful to think, how shamefully they abuse and poison them by the mixture of
their own peculiar Roman ones. Therefore if you take this mixed and confused
Body together, that is the Roman Church at the best side, as it holds yet the
fundamental Ground of Christianity, which we profess; thus far I grant it is a
true Church: and if you take it at the worst, as to its proper Roman Doctrines,
wherein it differs no more from us, then from all true Catholic and Apostolical
Antiquity; thus far it is, if a Church at all, a most corrupt, and desperately
infected one. But if you come to huddle up these two heterogeneous and
incompatible Parts together, in order to an absolute estimate and denomination
of the whole (as at the great day of the Lord one shall not appear without the
other) then it were most unreasonable that the lesser and weaker part should
give the Title; and that the Cities of Sodoma, Gomorrha, Admah and Zeboim
should be called holy Cities because they have one Lot among them. The Mountain
that has many Grains of Gold lying under it, is rock or sand nevertheless: and
the Ocean is still salt water, tho some Rivers, and some Shipwracks mix with it
other liquors. Thus Papists are ridiculously vain, who brag as they do of our
acknowledging their Church, to have the Essentials of Christian Religion. For
these essentials are not saving but where they have the Prevalency: and they
can but aggravate sin and leave it more inexcusable, where they are baffled and
oppressed. Can any man think that Pilats Judgment Hall becomes a Church, for
having Christ standing there to be condemned? or that Dagons Temple becomes
Gods house for having the Ark there shut up? No wise man looks for any Harvest
from a few handfulls of Wheat choked with all manner of weeds: nor takes it to
be good Pasture, which he sees to be overgrown with Thorns. No sincere
Israelite can ever think of being saved by the Religion of Dan and Bethel,
because it keeps still Moses his Law; nor by the Samaritan Religion, because
they serve God as well as Baal. Mixed and corrupt Religions are not to be valued
so much in what is trodden under men's feet, as by what is predominant, and set
upon their high Altars. The great Building raised at Jerusalem by Adrian, did
not cease to be Jupiters Temple, for being raised upon holy Foundations; and
the best Altars of the Lord can procure no Atonement tho they be kept in good
repair, when they serve for burning Swines Flesh. Thus what expect you from the
whole Bible, while what is in it is but a Pedestal to hundeeds of false
Superstitions? or from the Preaching of Christ, and himself crucified, the
chiefest learnin of S. Paul, and the Salvation of Jews and Gentiles; as long as
it is made a Foundation for an abominable Mass Service?

In the mean while, if Papists will still bless themselves, and think that all
is safe at home, because they are called Catholics abroad (and for my part, I
can but wonder to find here Bellarmin so weak) let them remember, that in the
ancient times, Men, as erroneous as they are, were called Gnostics, Apostolics,
and Angelics, that is, Sublime and Angelical Christians: and thus the very
Turks may bless themselves, whenever we call them Musulmans, that is, Men of
true saving Faith. The Papists may give to themselves such Titles as they are
best pleased with; but when Protestants call them Catholics, it is either out
of ignorance (for many are not acquainted with the true signification of that
Word) or a civil Complement, or a mere Jest and Mockery (...) as to the truth
it self, the Roman Church (...) the true, nor a truly Catholic Church (...) the
true Catholic Church, for this (...) pretend to, but upon the account of (...)
Jurisdiction over all the Churches of (...); which Pretension, where it
prevails, is a Sacrilegious Encroachment; and where it does not, is a mere
Fable. Nor is she truly Catholic, either by her own proper Doctrines, Laws, and
Worship, which all are new (as to Christian Antiquity) Local, and
unapostolical: or by the common Principles of Christianity that she detains,
since she detains them in Unrighteousness, overwhelmed, oppressed, and
groaning under many heavy massy Burdens of Superstitions and Abuses, beneath
which she kept them, and that not like the Oracles of God in a Church, but as
Captives in a Dungeon: There, both God in his Law, and Jesus Christ in his
Gospel, are in a manner close Prisoners, under a cruel Band of Soldiers: not
one Commandment among the ten; few, if any, of the twelve Articles of the
Creed, but there are in the Church of Rome some special Errors and Impieties
wickedly set to abuse them. And this is both the Sanctuary that Rome opens for
Salvation, and the first fundamental Allurement she serves men with, to entice
them to Popery.

CHAP. III.
Concerning the second Inducement to Popery, The Roman Miracles.
NExt to the pretended Catholic Church, Roman Miracles are the main Pride of
Popery, and its strange Wonders, such as they be, of Lauretta, Montserrat, and
other places, give as much countenance to the Roman, as Delphi, Delos, Dodona,
and such other Seats of Heathenish Gods, did to the Heathenish Religion. The
truth is, Miracles will carry a great weight, both with the unlearned and
Learned Men, when they are right; and therefore it much concerns every one that
has no mind to be cheated, well to know the right from the wrong.

All true Christian Miracles are supernatural, or extraordinary Works wrought
for a time, either by the immediate Hand of God, or by the Mediation of Men and
Angels, when moved or strengthened thereto by him, for the farther authorizing
and confirming true Catholic and Christian Truth, especially among Infidels.

First, I say, true Christian Miracles; not only to oppose them to all Cheating
and Fabulous, but also to distinguish them from other more common supernatural
Effects, which God is pleased sometimes to show promiscuously among all sorts
of Nations for the asserting of his Power, Justice, Mercy; or more generally,
his Divine Being in the course of his Providence: There is not a Nation in the
whole World, but may find, if they will search, many such admirable Passages in
their Chronicles; nor scarce any private Man, but may observe somewhat of these,
as he calls them, strange Accidents in his own time. It is most certain, that
God sent his Angels, and with them his great Judgments and Powers among the
Persians, and Greeks called Javan, Dan. 10. as well as among the Israelites:
and besides, what either the Earth or the Heavens can do by their proper
Influence, and what Mankind can add unto it, by their own good or bad conduct,
in the ordinary course of things, the miraculous Hand of God often times
overrules so visibly, that no sober man can doubt of his interposition and
guidance. Of this kind are the stupendous and unexpected rises and falls of
great Estates: the slaughters of many thousands, mentioned in diverse Histories,
by an inconsiderable handful of men: the raising of Princes among Pagans to an
extraordinary pitch of Moral Virtue, and Heroical Courage: the terrible
Prodigies, Blazing-stars, and Predictions before great Desolations and Plagues;
sometimes Curses, sometimes Blessings fastened as it were to some Houses, etc. No
judicious Man will fancy, that Cyrus for example, or Alexander either, would
undertake, or could perform their vast Designs amidst their Disadvantages,
without some singular influence and help from above: and whosoever will
consider, what Plato was, and what he makes Plato in Apolog. Socrat.
Socrates say before his death, can hardly forbear thinking, but that this
Heroical Pagan had commonly the Assistance of a good Angel. These, and other
such great Examples taken notice of by all sorts of Historians, confirm the
truth of Gods special care; about the conservation of Societies, and signify
nothing at all about their true or untrue Religion in Churches or Temples. If
they did, where is that pitiful Sect or Country, but might allege sundry
Miracles to justify its own Pagan or Heretical Persuasion? The Emperors
Vespatian and Adrian, might have authorized, by this means, the Worshipping of
Roman Eagles: for both are said Corn. Tacitus, Hist. l. 4.
to have restored sight to blind men: the Vestal in Valerius, with her holding
of Water in a Sieve, or drawing a Ship with her Girdle, might as well have
asserted her Heathenish Religion, as her Personal Innocence. There is nothing
so absurd with the Donatists, nor so impious with the Manichees, which some
Miracle or other wrought among them, might not countenance in some mesure. And
without looking back toward old times, the Kings of England, and the Kings of
France, with that gift which it is said they have, of healing an otherwise
scarcely curable Disease, might come near to justify at once (which is both
absurd and impossible) both Protestancy and Popery: So far do these
Providential, differ from Christian Miracles, as to the confirming of any
Christian Truth.

Secondly, I say, that these true Christian Miracles are commonly but for a
time, and for the first authorizing, etc. For the Gift of working Miracles is,
as that of speaking Languages, 1 Cor. 14.12. intended for the Conversion of
Unbelievers, and for assisting the Gospel, wheresoever it should be first
Preached. Therefore the first Evangelists, and other first Planters of
Churches, as well as the Holy Apostles, had as long this help of Miracles, as
God had Nations in the World, to whom he would revele his Will: which, being a
work of many Years, this supernatural Hand of God helped it forward, both in
confounding Pagan Idols, and strengthening Men against Pagan Persecutions, till
God had sent Christian Princes, to whose care he then committed the work (both
of countenancing the Church throout all their Dominions, and of mastering her
Enemies) which till then he did by his own hand. After this, it is certain
Miracles ceased apace, if not to be, yet to be common, being thenceforth not so
necessary as before: Those that continued the longest, were about the healing
of Sicknesses, and about the casting out of Devils: and the corners where they
continued, were those wild Deserts and remote Places (the refuge of the
Primitive Christians from the Face of their Enemies) where there was more need
of such continued Wonders, because that more Infidels did lurk there. And by
the way, it may be imagined, that God inclined those last Workers of Miracles,
whose austere Life and Devotion now adays seems to us so strange, * to leave
the more cultivated World and retreat to Deserts, in order to convert barbarous
men in their most barbarous Countries.

All this being done, and all known Parts and Creeks of the World being either
mostly converted, or sufficiently called to the Christian Faith, the Holy
Fathers tell us, that Miracles S. Chrysostom. 2 Thessalonians. c. 2. Hom. 4.
ceased; that they were Idem 1 Cor. c. 2. Hom. 6. Author Quaest. ex Nov. Test.
apud Aug.
unnecessary; that to expect S. Crysost. in Joh. c. 3. v. 25. Hom. 23.
of God any other then the old ones, by which the Gospel had bin already most
sufficiently confirmed, was no less then temting of him; that if any were
wrought in their times, they could not be well looked upon, but as a suspicious
kind of Signs (and not infallible proofs of Faith) because the true Author
Operis Imperf. Hom. 49.
Servants of Christ having confirmed their Preaching by true signs, called Men
away from their Infidelity, to the Faith: now this first calling being over,
the Devil will set up himself, by the means of his own Miracles, in order to
draw Men back again from Faith to Infidelity.

And as to this, God was pleased to take the same course in the publishing of
the Gospel, as he had bin pleased to take in the publishing of the Law. In this
first he asserted the Glory of Israel, the redemtion out of Egypt, and his own
Law under Moses, by such Miracles as no Egyptian at last could question, and no
false God could counterfeit. For although most of them, as for example, the
producing of Lice, the dividing an Arm of the Sea, the making Thunders and
Earthquakes, etc. seemed not much to exceed that compass, which created Causes
might have reached to: yet God so visibly confounded both the skill of all
Magicians, and the power of all Devils, that his Almighty Power and
stretched-out Arm, did not appear so much in the very working of these Wonders,
as in restraining the contrary Powers both of the Air, and of Hell, from
attemting to any purpose the like performances. Lastly, God having sufficiently
evidenced both the Power of his Laws, and the Truth of his Promises, he
thenceforth both withdraws his Hand from working his former continually
appearing Miracles, and takes off that restraint that alone kept the Devils
from either doing or counterfeiting any like them. And then, the Evil Spirits
being let loose again to their former Liberty, God gives his People this fair
warning, against all Revelations and Miracles whatsoever: If there arise among
you a Prophet, and give thee a Sign or a Wonder, etc. Deuteronomy. 13.1. In like
manner those Miracles which ushered the Holy Gospel, and spread it over all the
World, were in all respects unquestionable. First, they were marked out
beforehand, by clear infallible Prophecies, both of Isaiah 35.5, 6. The eyes
of the blind, etc. And of Joel 3.28. I will pour my Spirit, etc. Secondly, to
remove farther out of the way, both all suspicion and possibility of Error in
those first times, all the Devils and all their Ministers were tied generally
from all false and considerable Miracles: I beheld, says our Savior very much
to this purpose, Satan falling as Lightning from Heaven. His Oracles were over
the World all upon a sudden Plutarch. de Orac. defect.
suppressed, Magicians and Seducers, if they attemted any thing, were either
struck blind, as Elymas in the Acts; or silenced, as so many Demoniacs were in
the Gospel; or confounded, and even beaten down, when they thought to exalt
themselves, as Simon Magus was by St. Peter, as we find both in the Acts, and
in the Ecclesiastical History. Then, after a long course of true and infallible
Miracles, sufficient in all respects both to persuade men through all the
World, and to seal the Holiness and Importance of the Gospel to all Ages; Satan
is permitted to use his ancient Power again, both for the trial of the
Believers, and the punishment of the Rebels. Then all sorts of Seductions,
false Revelations, and false Miracles, could not but return back again by an
infallible Consequence, and with greater Violence then ever, because after a
longer restraint. Hereupon come the often repeted and serious and merciful
warnings of Christ: There shall arise false Christ's, etc. Matthew. 24. Thus both
in the Law and the Gospel, the first times and sorts of Miracles do carry
always along with them, and as it were in their Foreheads, such express
Characters of Gods hand, as is most proper and most sufficient to put the Truth
above all doubt: Therefore Christ often does make use of them, John 5.36. and
9.37. And so do the Holy Prophets most celebrate and insist upon those
Principal and Primitive ones, that had bin wrought by Moses, by Joshua, and by
the first Judges. Whereas the second sort of Miracles are all branded with such
black Marks, and discredited in all respects with such heavy Charges and
Warnings, as must needs affright all Christians from being misled, but those
who are pleased, or given over to be seduced by them. Maricon Tertull. cont
Marcion. l. 3. c. 3.
, and Donatus August. de Vnitate Eccl. c. 16.
, and other worse Hieron. Ep. ad Galat. c. 3. v. 5. Tertull. de Praescript. c.
44.
sorts of Heretics, seldom wanted these last Miracles.

Thirdly, I say, True Christian Miracles are intended for the confirming of
Christian Truth. This is their chief and ultimate end, tho in order to it they
may and do serve commonly for other more immediate accounts. Thus, when Christ
cured the Sick, and cast out Devils, these Miracles were to be looked on both as
extraordinary effects of his Divine Power, and most signal Expressions of his
Mercy to those persons whom he did cure. Yet the main thing Christ aimed at,
was this, that both those who were cured, and those who saw that they were so,
might be persuaded by such wonders, that the expected Messiah was come, that it
was He; and that whatsoever he said and commanded, was to be believed and
obeyed. So Miracles were both to Christ and Christ's Ministers, what Credential
letters, badges and robes are to all Public Officers: and also were to the
Gospel, which they preached, what Signs and Seals are to the Articles, Patents,
and other Commissions, which are brought by those Officers; that is to say,
such Confirmations and Evidences, that if all those, to whom they were expressly
sent would not believe them upon their word, or upon the hearing of their
Doctrine, (which many did without more ado) they might do it by seeing their
works. Hence it is that both our Savior, and his Apostles ever preached the
Gospel in the first place, and confirmed it by the words taken from the Law or
the Prophets; and in the second place, if what they said, required in the
hearers any farther Confirmation, then in that case they showed Miracles. They
went forth, says St. Mark 16.20. and preached every where, the Lord working
with them, (inwardly by his spirit,) and confirming the word with the Signs
that followed. Therefore the following Signs having such a special dependence
and proper aspect on the Gospel, which went before; if no Gospel, nor any thing
essential to it is preached or delivered some other way, these Miracles are
just like Seals and Signs, that are merely put to a Blank; and, as to Christian
Doctrine can signify nothing at all. And so these Signs, if true, are merely
Providential. If they be put to any true and real Deed, but enterlined
afterward with Clauses, that cannot well agree with it; you may be sure those
Seals relate not to any one of the forged Additions. And if all was blank
before, and all afterward be filled with a whole false Commission, the Seals
and Miracles pretended for it, must needs be utterly false, and if real,
utterly Devilish; it being utterly impossible, that God the God of Truth, would
put either his own hand, or the hand of his good Angels to the countenancing of
an untruth, and to the contradicting any Truth which he has confirmed before.

So, to prevent Delusion, some care and skill must be used in understanding and
construing the voice and Signification of Miracles. For instance when God sent
Lions among those Heathenish Colonies, who used no other Religion in Israel,
then what they had learned in Babel or in Ava. 2 Kings 17.25. this
extraordinary Judgment said nothing at all to countenance what Jeroboam and the
ten Tribes had adulterated in Gods Service; for such language in a Miracle
should contradict, and not confirm the clear Voice of God in his Law: it
declared nothing but this truth, to wit, that God would have always the Memorial
of his Name kept in that Land; and that in order to this will of his, he would
rather bear with any Corruption, then with the utter Abolition of his Service
in that Country, till his Son should come to reform it. Thus the Angel moving
the water once every year at Bethesda. S. John 5. or the other Angel that at
one time dried up or removed twice the water, which a Novatian Socrat. Hist.
Eccles. l. 1. c. 17.
Bishop had consecrated for the Christening of a Jew, who had bin Christened
already, and who thought of nothing else then of surprising by this means the
Liberality of Christians, which then was very great upon such occasions;
neither of these true Miracles I say are understood, if you draw them, either
to favor the Traditions which the Scribes then taught in the Temple; or to
countenance the long Schism, which this Novatian Bishop with others did keep
and foment in the Church. These two Miracles must be applied to their own
proper and fit ends, or to such things as Christian Truth can allow of. That of
Bethesda to declare the continuance of some temporal Mercies upon a corrupted
then, but before an elected People: and to signify to all men the Blessing of
holy Baptism, and the admittance into the Christian Church, which was, fitly
represented by the said Pool of Bethesda, that is the Laver of Regeneration in
the House of Gods Mercies. And the other, to vindicate the Honor of this same
holy Baptism, which the Novatians kept entire, and which this wandering Jew
thought to abuse. By this means the true Miracles done in Christ's Name (and
power too) sometimes by false men Matthew. 7.22. shall recommend only Christ's
Gospel, not their Iniquity who work them. No simple Ignorants shall turn the
wonderful Acts of God as S. Peter says, some do the Scriptures to their own
Destruction 2 Pet. 3.6. nor the foulest Hereties, as otherwise they may) toward
their foulest Blasphemies, and whatever be don or reported to be so, among men
of mixed and corrupted Religions, shall give them no ground of bragging in their
Error, or Heresy. Thus suppose (which for my part I might very well wish it
were true) that the great Cures done anciently at the Graves of the holy
Martyrs, were yet to be seen every day; these Acts of God, how great soever,
wrought at the touching the Relics of St. Stephen in Africa, or of St. Andrew
at Constantinople, or of Gervasius and Protasius at Milan, would justify
neither Turcism, nor any other Impiety now believed or practiced in those
Countries; they could attest nothing but this, that those Martyrs howsoever
killed, and cast out like Dogs, were holy men: and that what they taught and
died for, when they were taken for Seducers, is proved by these great works, to
be most true. Thereupon enquire what they taught, what they did, and what they
believed; for this certainly (and this only) is attested by those Miracles: and
if the Heads of Peter or Paul showed yet yearly upon great holy days at Rome,
did really the greatest Cures; these would assert S. Peter and S. Paul's
Epistles which the Papists now contradict in many Points; and not the Popes
Roial Power, nor the Roman Purgatory, nor the works of congruity, condignity,
or supererogation, nor any other like Doctrines which are contradicted by these
Epistles. But if you meet, as often you may, with another sort of Miracles,
which, what way soever you turn them, do not look toward any Doctrine
delivered by Christ or his Apostles; these can be none of those, we may be
sure, which S. Mark calls following Miracles, such as are properly the
Christian ones. They may be from God nevertheless, and true, and good, and
thankfully to be accepted, as the Providential Miracles are. But if they look
or go plainly a quite cross or contrary way; be sure they are Antichristian,
and are designed either to sow, or to improve some other Seed, then was at the
first Sown by Christ's Preaching, and cultivated by his Miracles. And such were
those true Prophecies, which Moses bids us to take heed of, Deuter. 13.1. to
draw Israel after strange Gods: such were the many Signs and wonders, which
Jansenius Bishop of Gant affirms Cornel. Jansen. Conc. Evang. c. 123.
to have bin don in his time, to seduce men after a false Christ. Nor matters
it that these Miracles seem not much less, then those first were, wherewith the
Gospel was confirmed; For the Beast can perform great wonders. Revel. 13.13.
Devils by Gods permission come very near that which good Angels attain unto, by
Gods Command: and tho there are many Miracles beyond the reach of good and bad
Angels, as for instance the Reviving of dead Bodies, etc. Yet there are none,
but by some illusion or other, may be so exactly counterfeited, that tho they
have no Reality, yet will they have as much appearance to confirm Lies, as the
other have to confirm the Truth. Hence comes in these last times (when the
Devil has no restraint to keep him from making the utmost use of his Power)
the absolute impossibility of discerning those from these any other way, then
by the end, which they aim at, to wit the reveled will of God, and the
manifestation of his Truth. There are some of the Devils Miracles, August. de
Civit. l. 10. c. 16.
says S. Austin, that as to the work it self seem not to be lesser then Gods
are, but their End must distinguish them. And therefore, he will have the
Miracles of later times to be tried by the true Church Idem de Vnitat. Eccles.
c. 19.
as we find it in the Scriptures: and not the Church, by these Miracles.

Bring Roman Miracles to this Rule, you may divide them into three Ranks; for
some of them are but mere Tales; some are counterfeit Impostures, and
artificial tricks of Juglers: others have a real Being; but the question is,
Whence they have it.

As for the first sort of Miracles: the Papists have by little and little,
heaped them to such an Extravagancy, that diverse of their communion, who have
some modesty left them, can scarce forbear blushing Melch. Canus. Loc. l. 11.
c. 6.
at their relation. Gregory of Tours, and Gregory the first Bishop of Rome (if
the four Books of Dialogues be truly his) did begin pretty well to tell
stories: But it is nothing to the advances made by some other Prelates and great
Roman Doctors, in the following Ages: And I may say confidently, that these
Romanists are not much short of the most extravagant Romancers. There you shall
read of Constantine the great being a Leper, and transferring his Roman Empire
upon that Pope that made him clean; of Wolves and Lions bringing back Lambs,
and restoring them out of their Entrails, after they had torn them to pieces;
of Birds flocking about to hear Sermons; and of Asses becoming Roman Catholics,
at least kneeling to adore the Mass-Sacrament, etc. They cannot conceive any
great Man to be a Saint, unless he has an extraordinary Gift for the working
of such Miracles. How true they be, you may best learn of the very Saints, who
deny them: as for Example, Bernard. Sermon, de Benedict.
Berard, S. Chrysostom. passim.
St. Chrysostom, and S. Gregory, Hom. 29. in Evang.
St. Gregory, and yet they are forced upon them: and you can hardly pass for a
true Catholic, unless you believe; that St. Bernard Chronic. Deip. an. 1152.
was saluted and suckled several times by our Lady in her Image; that Simeon
Metaph. in vita Chrysostom. Sigeb. an. 606.
St. Chrysostom did raise the dead, did cure all sorts of incurable Diseases;
and had every night St. Paul himself whispering continually in his Ears, what
he did write on his Epistles. And as to St. Gregory the Great, he had no meaner
Whisperer Simeon Metaph. in vita Chrysostom. Sigeb. an. 606.
then the Holy Ghost in Person, under the shape of a Pigeon sitting quietly
upon his Head, and sometimes stretching down her Bill Petrus apud Vossium de
Historic. Lat. l. 2. c. 23.
into his Mouth, when he was Preaching. And we know that the grand Impostor
Mahomet pretended somewhat the alike about the same time. Now you may be sure
all this is merely Fabulous, since it is disowned by the very Men who are
pretended to have had it, and who therefore knew best the truth of all these
Works and Assistances. Much like to these are the Miracles and Revelations of
Ignatius Loyola, when he cures Women in their Travel, if you but set his Seal
Valderama Sermon. de Canon. Ignat.
or Signet on their Belly; when he makes Ibid. page 10.
the House where he happens to be, horribly shake; and when himself grows as
hot and as terrible as Mount Aetna, by the fierce motion of that Spirit, which
from a debauched Soldier made him a Holy Jesuit: or when he sees the Soul of
his dearest Friend Hosius Ribadaneira in vita Ignat.
mounting up into the sky, far more gorgeous then the Soul of any other: or
when he works greater Miracles, with his own name in a little piece of Paper
Valderama, ut sup. p. 51.
, Cum nomine suo Chartae inscripto, then Moses and the Apostles did in Gods
Name. We cannot deny (says the Bishop of Canaries) but sometimes very grave Men
write and leave to posterity such reports about Saints Miracles, humoring
hereby both themselves and the People, whom they perceive both prone to
believe, and importunate to have them do so.

There is a second sort of Roman Miracles, which are somewhat, but have it all
from Artifice and Imposture. Pope Boniface in this matter once behaved himself
like a Man, when through a Pipe or Sarbatane he conveied so dexterously this
Platina Bonifac. 3. Bergom. Supplem. l. 13. in vita Bonif.
Oracle, Celestin get thee away, if thou have a mind to be saved; that Pope
Celestin took it, it seems, notwithstanding his Infallibility, for an Angelical
Warning, and so left his Popedom to the Cheat. Pope Hildebrand had once another
as good intention of Cheating, but as it was much more cruel, it had not so
happy a success; when he had ready a huge Stone Card. Benno de Gestis Hildebr.
, which should have fallen from a high Vault, like a Judgment out of Heaven, upon
the Emperor Henry the Third's Head; but the poor wretch, who was employed in
that good affair, made too much have, for he fell down with his great Stone,
wherewith he was crushed all to pieces, before the Emperor came under that place
where he used to kneel at Prayer. It was a prettier trick of the Country
Curate, Card. Benno de Gestis Hildebr.
who getting Crabs, with little candies fastened to their backs, set them a
crawling up and down his Churchyard at night; and persuaded his People in the
morning, after he had taken them again, that they were poor distressed Souls
which wanted Melch. Canus, Loc. Com. l. 11. c. 6.
Erasm. in Epist.
Masses. Images and Crucifixes are very commodious for working this kind of
Miracles, especially when they are ser up close to thick Walls, as the great
Serapis of Alexandria was once; for then it is an easy matter to get up behind,
by secret ways, to anoint the Face of the Saint, and to put in a Chafing dish,
that shall make him both sweat and weep, by heating and melting that Liquor.
Springs, and Wheels. and such like Engines, are of great use to move and bow,
and make them speak. By such a Miracle, the married Clergy unhappily lost once
their good Cause at Winchester; for when they were upon the point of winning
it, Polyd. Virgil. Hist. l. 6. sub. fin.
a Crucifix started at it, and declared against the Priests. This Voice in the
Synod being well seconded by the Monks, went presently for an Oracle: So either
simple were the men, or strong the Impostures of those days; nor are they now
much less in many places. Although Lyranus tells all the World, That great Lyranus
c. 14. in Daniel.
Delusions are often put upon the People by Mass-Priests, and their
counterfeited Wonders and Signs.

Besides these two, I will not deny, but the Roman Church may be granted to
have another third kind of Miracles, which neither are fancied by Historians,
nor counterfeited by Juglers, but really wrought by higher Causes. For my part,
when I do read in grave and famous Roman Writers, that a Consecrated Host will
fly and flutter in the Air sometimes, till a Mass-Priest holds up his Pix to
receive it; that shapes of Flesh, and young Children, have appeared on their
Altars, at the Elevation of the said Host; that by many good Experiences,
Horses, and Mules, and Cows, have bin cured of their Diseases, when some Masses
were sung for them, to the honor of St. Barbara; that St. Dominic did write
Books, which, upon several Trials, no fire could ever Burn; that once he was
seen perfectly in the shape of a Crucifix Boet. Alan. Rediv. part. 2. c. 60.
, with the five Wounds in his Body, and a Crown of Thorns on his Head; that at
the Consecration at Mass, something like Christ was seen hard by him, with the
same signs of his cruel Passion, dropping out of his own Wounds, some of his
dear Blood on this dear Saint; that the Blessed Virgin beheld all this, and of
her own accord played the Mass-Priest, and administered the very Body of her Son
in one moiety of a Consecrated Wafer to this same Saint, in token of special
Friendship: and all this averred and sworn as true, by a formal Oath in the
Name of the Blessed Trinity, and under pain of all kinds of Gods Curses, in
case of a lie or a mistake, with five hundred such, and greater Marvels: I
think it a kinder and safer part in me, to take them for something, then for
mere Tale But for my pains of believing so, let me, who by Gods grace am a
Protestant, have the liberty which the Papists allow themselves, when they
control what is done by Pagans; to say, as perhaps it is true, that Bell. de
Eccl. l. 4. c. 14. sect. ad quartum.
when the Emperor Vespasian once cured a blind and a lame man, it was the
Devil, who hindering the sight of the one, and the motion of the other, seemed
really to heal both, when really he did but cease from hurting and annoying
them. Sometimes Papists will come so far, as to suspect their own Miracles,
Biel. in Canon. Lect. 51.
and to take them but for sportings of unhappy and wicked Spirits. Those
extrordinary shows of a young Child, or of a Man of complete stature, that
appear sometimes, as they say, among their holiest Mysteries, and upon the Fists
of their best Priests. They might as well, if their Interest would suffer it,
find the like flaws in all the rest: And you may easily do it, if you compare
their own Roman, with all averted Christian Miracles. For,

The Miracles of Christ and of his Apostles, had in them three prime
Characters, which set them past all doubt. 1. In themselves all were very
substantial and serious Works, and of a suitable nature besides, both to
promote the Glory of God, and to procure some very considerable good to men. 2.
They did tend, and were also proper, to rouse the dullest Infidels to the
belief of some Fundamental Article of Christian Religion, as the Resurrection,
or coming of Christ; the accomplishment of Prophecies, and the establishment of
the Gospel. 3. And for this end, God had them wrought mostly in such remarkable
times, as were set out by most express Predictions, and freed by Gods
restraining hand, from all mixture and possibility of Lying Wonders. The Roman
Miracles, contrary-wise carry with them three such sad marks (or at the least
some of the three) as both visibly distinguish them from the Christian ones,
and must needs render them suspicious to all Christians. First, By their own
intrinsecal Impertinency and Frivolousness. Secondly, By their general Aptness
and Tendency to confirm rather any piece of trifling Superstition, then any
fundamental Point of Christian Faith, Thirdly, By being done late, after the
Gospel of Jesus Christ had bin thus abundantly confirmed over all the world by
the former true Miracles, that the farther continuance of them had bin useless;
which times were reserved for false Miracles, and are branded accordingly by
Christ himself and his Apostles, with this woeful Prediction, that Antichrist
should then come, and enchant men with strong Delusions, and lying Wonders, 2 Thessalonians. 2. Revel. 13.13.

As to the first black Character, whereas the Ancient Miracles of God are grave
and serious works, and do carry along with them both some Image of Gods Wisdom,
and some holy Impression of the Divine hand that causes them; the modern and
Roman Miracles are commonly such Sports and Pranks, as can become but Fairies
or Hobgoblins. What is there in the whole world more impertinent, then to make
the most blessed and holy Virgin Mary come purposely out of Heaven, whence it
was not heard she came before, to drudg here and there about Monks, about sick
Wives, about Images and such like things? Who could take for a holy Soul, or a
good Angel (much less for that ever Blessed Saint) that which appears under her
Name like a Woman showing her Breast, Alan. Rediv. part. 2. c. 4.
embracing men, giving them suck, enticing them with her Favors, Hoods, Vests,
and sometimes fine Rings, which she makes for them of her own hairs? for
whenever she is pleased to come down, and to bring her Heavenly Train about
her, it is commonly for such purposes. Once St. Ildephonse met her at Church
Jul. Pomer. in vita Ildeph. ap. Sur. 23 Jan.
sitting gravely in his own Throne, with thousands of other Virgins, that stood
singing round about her, and about the reading Pulpit. This great Appearance
was for nothing else then for complimenting that Bishop; and for presenting him
with a white Robe. Come to me, says she, thou Servant of God, and accept of my
hand this small Present, which I have taken out of my Sons Wardrobe. Thou
may wear it upon my day (that is, her Assumtion, or Conception, etc.) and
not at any other time; and because thou hold the eyes of thy Faith
continually bent to my Service; (for this is the best Eye of Roman Faith) thou
shall use it here in this Church, and hereafter in my Closets, in Promtuariis
meis, thou shall have joy. They show yet this Gown at Toledo. At Magdeburg
another time she came to Church upon a more serious affair. She Chronic.
Deipar. an. 985.
had the goodness before, it seems, often to chide Vdo, (the then Bishop) for
lying so often, as he did, with her Virgins the Nuns. Thou have had, says she,
sport enough, do so no more. Notwithstanding this fair warning, she found him
afterward a Bed with no meaner Miss, then the Mother Abbess her self: then
indeed was she sore vexed; so she calls down her Son to her (you may be sure it
was not Christ) and they both by their Angels pulled him off out of the Bed
from his Abbess, and soundly beat him for his pains. At every blow Vdo vomited
out one of those Hosts, which he had consecrated, being in that sin: and
because of her Sons dirty lying (if Transubstantiation be true) in that
stinking, she held the Chalice to take both the wafers and her Son in it. Then
the Quen of Heaven, says the Historian, takes up these vomited Wafers, and
washes them clean with great care, and lays them up reverently on the Altar.
It would never be don to tell you of all her other strange passages; as, when
she goes to Orleans Leander. in vita Reginald.
with a Box of precious Ointment, there to anoint the back of a Dean; when she
Chronic. Deip. an. 598.
gives special Pills to a Monk, to purge his choler: when she feeds S. Albert
Robert. Archid. in vita S. Albert. ap. Sur. 7 Apr.
with a kind of Bread, after which he resolved ever after to feed upon nothing
but Roots and Herbs: when she comes down out of Heaven (that is, I think from
the Powers of the Air) purposely to uncover her Breast) and to put her Paps
into men's mouths; as for example to Histor. Eccl. Carnot. an. 1020.
S. Fulberts, but more effectually Chronic. Deip. an. 1152.
to S. Bernards; for since this Virgins milk went down his Throat, his Words
and Eloquence, says the same Author, were much sweeter: when after these
familiar visits, this obliging Lady comes to woe Sweethearts, and to desire
their Marriage. Thus when once she had made a Ring Ibid. an. 1476.
of her own Hair, and given it to S. Alain, a most filthy companion before, and
in the presence of her Saints and Angels (all Spirits of the like nature) she
then took him after for her Husband. But before him she had another, who
deserves to be remembered; it was the pretty S. Harman. This Gentleman was from
his youth much devoted to her Service, and she to his. At last, after many
sweet Conversations and Visits, under the notion of our Lady, and her Chaplain
(for she used to call him so) once she appears Chronic. Deip. an. 1235.
to him (being at his Devotions) led by two Angels; who being come within the
distance, where S. Harman did well hear them; one of them cries out, To whom
shall we give and marry this Virgin? the other answered quite as loud; To whom
should we, rather then to this young man? meaning Harman. Then the Angel took
him by the hand, and joined it with the said Virgin, with these solemn
Expressions, O Harman, I give thee this Virgin to be thy Spouse, in the same
manner as once she was to Joseph; and hereafter be thou her Husband, and upon
these terms be called Joseph. Then at night when he was asleep, this Queen of
Heaven comes to his Bed side, and laying her Child, whom she carried on her
left Arm, into this new Bridegrooms hands, Take you charge of him, says she,
hereafter, as once my other Joseph did, when we three fled into Egypt: but
after all these good Kindnesses, there (as it is usual among Lovers) happened an
unlucky distaste: for this Joseph being entrusted with the Guardianship of a
Convent, she grew Jealous of her new Joseph (which she never was of the old) as
if he had taken greater care of his Convent, then of her self: and being in
that musty humor, she appears to him under such an old ugly Face, that poor
Harman thought (as well he might) it was the same Devil, who in former times
used to haunt him: and cried out frightfully, Who art thou? I am, says the
Apparation, I am the Keeper of this place, as you know, I was so before; then
Joseph Harman knowing who she was by her sweet Voice, tho much troubled at her
sour Face. O my Rose; quoth he, for he was used to call her so; art thou the
same, and how came thou by this old Face. I had a mind, replied she, to
appear in your Eyes, such as I fear I am in your heart; where I perceive I am
accounted no better then if I were an old Woman: Where are now the frequent
Prayers, which I used to receive of thee, and which did heretofore render us
young one to the other? With these, and many more reproaches, she so mortified
her poor Joseph, that he quite laid aside all the care he had of his Convent;
and since that time had no other thought, then of making his Queen younger by
rehearsing her Ave Mary's, and other-like Angelical Prizes, till poor Harman
got a mischance: for when he was running too fast, he fell down flat upon his
Face, and struck out two of his best Fore-teeth by that fall; but his Lady put
them in again, both so fast, and so dexterously, where they had bin, that he
was well of them ever after. At another time she came to his Bed, and finding
him lying on that side, where he had bin let Blood in the Arm, she turned him
upon the other, and showed him how to lie and sleep without fear of farther
danger. If these evil Spirits dare thus appear, under the name of Christ's
blessed Mother, whereof Scripture gives no warning, it is no wonder if they do
it under the name of Christ himself, after so many Prophecies. It is not the
true Christ certainly, that being Immortal in Heaven, comes down either at
every Mass, there to lie as if he were dead, under the hand of any Priest; or
to show tricks of Activity under the shape of a young Child, and act among Nuns
and Novices twenty silly Pranks in their Churches. We are not bound to believe
all; but it were hard to believe nothing, when so many and great Doctors, and
among them some great Saints too, aver for truth one and the same thing. One,
says he, has seen this little Child creeping out Matthew. Paris, in vita S.
Godric.
at the mouth of a Crucifix ('it is all that a Sparrow could do, but the Devil
can do much more) and thence jumping into the Lap of an Image, and thence
flying up again the way that he came. Another says, That St Ida Menol.
Cisters. 29, October.
had him, and kissed him, and embraced him, ut sponsa sponsum, that is, as you
may think, as a young Wife kisses and embraces her young Husband. The worst is,
that once when being to sing, and by her order to stretch out her arm, she was
put to a great distress lest he should fall, Cogitate, etc. Look to it my Lord,
says the young Nun to the Baby, for I must obey my Order: but the Baby was a
strong Child, and so twisted himself about her neck, that he had no need of her
holding him, till she had don with her Anthemn, and so she took him in her Lap.
St Agnes Bov. 14. Annal. an. 1317. n. 2.
had him too, witness the little Cross which in a loving way she stole at the
same time out of his bosom. And so had St Catharine, of the Order of St. Clara
Flamin. in vita S. Cathar.
, being brought to her by his own Mother to kiss upon a Christmas Eve. St
Boniface Henriquez. Fascicul. SS.
had him likewise brought to his Bed in Swadling-clothes, by the same Dame. As
for St. Lucia, of the Order of St Dominic Chronic. Ord. Praedic.
, she had him three days and three nights; during which time, it is
remarkable, that the Virgin Mary's Image had no Baby on its left Arm. At last,
Dominus Jesus, the Lord Jesus, (God have mercy on the Blasphemer) took her to
Wife, (when he looked as if he had bin but seven years old) in the presence of
all his Saints. What shall I say of St. Hostradus and others, who mistook these
enchanting Devils for real Appearances of the Infant Christ: and upon this
Illusion, Henriquez. 3. Jan.
some did offer him, as we do to Children, something to eat; some did take him
Chronic. Deip. an. 1285.
upon their knees; others did Ibid. an. 1235.
play with him, and with St. John who was his Companion at it. These few
Instances may serve the turn, to let pious Souls see with grief, that as
according to the Prophesies, Jerusalem was trodden and danced upon by ugly Owls
and wild Satyrs, Isa. 13.21. So the Roman Church is made a Stage for vile
Spirits to act upon. If some say, these were Visions, I grant they were, and
Divelish ones too: For where are the good Saints or Angels that will represent,
much lest act Christ and the Blessed Virgin, under such shameful Personages?

If you are for sounder Miracles (tho good Catholics must take these for very
real and true ones, or most of their Saints are but Cheats) go to the Founders
of their Orders, you shall find about St. Francis, S. Bonavent. In vita S.
Francisci.
Sheep and Asses running to hear his Sermon; Swine falling dead under his
Curse, for having hurt a poor Lamb; all sorts of Cattle recovering, with the
Water he washed his feet in; Women presently eased of the hardest Travel, by
applying to them some of the Hay which his Mule was used to eat. This don, go
to St. Dominic, you shall find him either at Mass, Joh. Gargo, in vita S.
Dominic. ac Lipom.
hanging in the Air like a Bird; or at the Bedside of a sick Woman,
transubstantiating Worms into Pearls; or by the Waterside, raising the River
into a Flood; or at his Devotions, forcing the Devil to hold a light, and to
burn his Fingers in that Service; or it may be, changing the Sex of a young
Girl into a Boy.

Lastly, If you will know what Feats Women also can do sometimes; read me but
the Life Tho Cantapr. in vita S. Christinae ap Sur. Jun. an. 1160. item Jacob.
de Vitriaco, in vita S. Mariae Oeigniar.
of Saint Christina: to say nothing of St. Brigitta, St. Juliana, St. Clara,
Saint Vrsula, with hundreds more, known and famous in the Roman Church. This
great Saint arose from the dead twice, before she died for good and all, and so
died thrice. All her Life long she had a very extraordinary gift of Miracles;
for having taken upon her to save Souls from Purgatory, by suffering here what
they did there; she loved to throw her self into all the hot Ovens or burning
Fires she could find, and yet met with none that could burn her; she would
atone for Gluttons, by resolving to starve her self: and while she felt the
great pains of a sharp hunger, this Virgin got Milk in her Paps, and so found
ease by sucking her self; she did satisfy for proud Souls, by applying her
self to the worst way of common Begging: and herein she had this comfort, that
when honest Men did give her Bread, it tasted in her mouth like Bread;
otherwise, it tasted like Toads flesh. To expiate all sorts of Sins contracted
by much company, this Saint resolved to forsake Mankind, and to come near
none, but Beasts; and at last, that she might be the safer from all Contagion
of Flesh and Blood, she parched her self on the tops of Trees: There her thin
Body being made thinner, both by continual Fasting, and great fervency of
Spirit, she did at her Prayer contract her self into a round form, that was
somewhat like a Hedg-hog. She could climb up the highest Trees like a Squirrel,
and swim in Rivers like a Fish, till her Friends barbarous, it seems, and not
believing all these Miracles, put her in Chains as a mad Woman; and there she
tore sadly her poor Body with struggling hard to free her self: and this
struggling in her Prison, gave occasion to more Miracles, for the Milk she had
in her Breast, turned into Oil, wherewith she did anoint her sores; and
sometimes also she used it as Butter to sweeten her Bread. Cardinals, and whole
Towns besides, can aver these Extravagancies, and make therewith the first kind
of Roman Miracles.

A second Evidence against Roman Miracles, is their looking quite another way,
and their being designed for the confirmation of quite different Doctrines,
then ancient Miracles were. The last Primitive Christian Miracles, being
wrought for the most part at the Graves of Holy Martyrs, never confirmed more
then this Truth, That the Death, the Souls, and the very Ashes of those Saints
were precious before the Lord; and therefore, that the Christian Faith which
they had believed, taught, and died for, was very true. So it remained only to
enquire, what this Faith was, and what kind of Doctrine St. Stephen and other
Martyrs believed and Preached: for nothing else but this can be asserted by
their Miracles: What is it, says St. Augustine, Aug de Civit. l. 22. c 9.
that these Miracles will attest but the Resurrection and Ascension of Christ?
The Holy Apostles being alive, never confirmed by their Miracles, but what they
taught; and what they taught, St. Paul tells you is concluded within the Law
and the Prophets. You may be sure, it went no farther then what you find in
Christ's Gospel. This is that Faith, which once (and but once) being delivered
to the Saints, was carried through all Nations, (and thus made Catholic) by the
Almighty Breath of God, and there settled by his Almighty Hand, and the Miracles
that followed it, Mark 16.20. So at this very day, tho all sorts of Operations
were continually seen at the Sepulcher of S. Paul at Rome, they would rather
confirm his Epistles, then the Popes Bulls. As for Roman Miracles, they do
follow likewise Roman Doctrines, which sometimes are quite contrary to, and
always quite different from the true Christian Gospel. They would be huge
books, that could contain all the Revelations and strange Wonders that
encourage Men in general to the worship of the Virgin Mary. As many more are
bestowed upon the doing it by special ways, and at special Feasts: for what
else mean those swarms of Monks, who lie hid S. Anton. 3. part Hist. t. 23. c.
3. sect. 1.
under her Coat? or those Ladders whited with her Milk Chronic. Deip. an. 1231.
, from which no body taking that way to go up to Heaven, can tumble down? or
those Quires of Histor. Carnat. an. 1116.
Angels heard in the bottom of a deep Well to sing her Praises? What can you
make of those Images, that Archiv. Buburg. in Frand. an. 1383.
bleed, or Menol. Cisterc. 28. April.
speak, or fly as light Leand. in vita Hyacinthi. ap. Sur. 16. August.
as Feathers, unless they serve to bring Mankind to the worshipping of Wood and
Stone? What aile those thousands of sad Souls to ramble up and down the whole
World, since the times of Pope Gregory, but to revele Purgatory, and to
recommend Masses for the dead? How many strange Feats have bin wrought by the
hands of S. Dominic, and S. Francis, to no better end, then to confirm the new
Orders and ways of these Saints? All those heaps of Excommunicated Specul.
Exemp: Tit. Excommunicatio. Exemp. 5.
Flies, and that Ibid. Exemp. 4.
poor Raven pining to death under the same Fate, for having fled away with a
Bishops Ring; What else can they signify, but the terror of the Roman Keys?
What shall I say of those both small, and huge great Toads, crawling Ibid. Tit.
Confessio. Exempl. 22.
out and into Men's mouths, when they do observe ill or well the Rules of
Auricular Confession? or of the many little Children Ibid. Tit. Eucharistia.
standing upon Consecrated Wafers, there purposely to justify the real
Transubstantiation at Mass? or of the many Cures wrought every where, partly in
the behalf S. Bonav. in vit. Franc.
of the five Wounds, which St. Francis had in his Body, or of the Rope he did
wear about his Loins? And since we are about this great Saint, tell me what you
think of this Miracle. Hieron. Platus de Bono statu Relig. l. 5. c. 33.
A Bishop moved with Passion against a Convent of Franciscans, had resolved to
turn them out of his City, and was to do it the next day: the Night before,
behold their Sacrist sees in a Vision the Image of St. Paul and the Image of
St. Francis, both painted in the Church Window, talking earnestly one with the
other. He hears St. Paul extremely blaming St. Francis Gregor. in Dialog.
passim.
for no better defending his own Order; and St. Francis answering to him, What
shall I do, says he, I have but a Cross, and that is no defensive Weapon; but
had I a Sword as you have (for commonly they represent them so) perhaps I might
do somewhat more. The man being awaked, starts off his Bed, and his Imagination
being full of this, runs to the Church, finds the two Pictures had exchanged
their Arms: Paul in the Window had the Cross, and St. Francis had the Sword.
This amazed the whole Convent; but that which is more then all the rest, St.
Francis had not St. Paul's Sword in vain, for that same night the Bishop had his
Throat cut. What Evangelical Doctrine can be confirmed by these three Wonders;
Pictures, that can speak and move; St. Paul, that exhorts to revenge; and a
Saint, who during his Life made conscience, as they say, to kill a Louse, now
can cut his Bishops Throat: What, I say, can you make of this, unless it be
this wholesome Doctrine, That Bishops are not Jure Divino, but Friars are? All
these, and whole Millions of other such Roman Miracles, are not fit for Christ's
Calendar, because they never were fitted for persuading Men of the truth of
Christ's Gospel, and therefore upon that account must needs proceed from any
other then Christ's Spirit.

The third foul mark of Roman Miracles, is, that besides their unchristian
ends, they happen in such suspicious times, as may discredit the best that are.
The Gift of Miracles being to Teachers, what both Credential Letters and Roial
Colors are to public Officers, which signify much with good Subjects, whilst
they know them granted to none but such as the King does really send; but very
little, after they see those in the hands, these on the backs of every dirty
Carrier, who has a mind for his own ends to counterfeit them, and rant with
them. No wise man takes for good payment, whatsoever has Cesars Image, after
he hears of false Coiners who have dispersed vast sums abroad, and marked them
with the same Stamp. We are not now in the privileged days either of Moses, or
Elias, or Jesus Christ, or his Apostles, when neither all the Magicians could
make one Louse; nor all the Baalims could light Fire on one Altar; nor all the
Workers of false wonders open their Mouth against Jesus Christ. We live in
times, when the Devils, in all Men's account, are let loose from such a
restraint, and the Church left unguarded of such a Protection: when false
Prophets may arise with such Prophesies, Deuteronomy. 13. and false Christ's with such
Miracles, as, if it were possible, might deceive the very Elect, Mark 13.22.
Now the Mirabilarians Aug. in Joh. Tract. 13. sub fin.
as S. August. calls them, are abroad, against whom Christ, says he, already
(and we much more, that are 1200 years after him) cautum me fecit Dominus, the
Lord himself (and his Apostles after him) have given us all sufficient warning:
And so it were a great folly to take notice of a Painted Cloth, when we are
told of so many that Ibidem.
run away with Christ's Colors, (that is, with a permitted power of
counterfeiting true Miracles) and therewith amaze poor Country People; but
whosoever has no mind to be either affrighted or cheated with this, may look
to it. The glorious Works of Christ, of Christ's Disciples, and other
Apostolical Fathers, were don in such clear days, as scattered and dissipated
all suspicions and imaginable Clouds of Imposture; the Devils had not so much
as the liberty to preach the Truth, Mark 1.25. If either Simon, or Elymas, tho
Sorcerers of the highest rank, did but offer to play their old game, you read
in the Acts, how they were kept in. Thus this mighty restraining hand, rather
then the intrinsecal greatness of the work was an infallible Evidence, which in
those days shined about all true Miracles; whereas the Revelations and Feats
of Rome must needs be full of suspicion, and noted for such by all Christians,
since they came forth, when all false Christ's and false Prophets have the
liberty to work them. In this horrible Confusion either of Miracles, or Actors,
none but God or a good Angel can well discern by the work it self, which is the
Impostors, and with the Saints. If the restoring life to a dead man, or giving
sight to one born blind, be thought to be proper to God; this may be without
much ado counterfeited by any Devil: and as Brass sometimes out shines Gold,
lying wonders may dazzle our Eyes as strongly, as most true Miracles.

This dark and dubious conjuncture is the season and the very point of time,
when Roman Miracles swatm abroad. Then the Apparitions of sad Souls first begin
by thousands to come up, and to acquaint their friends with their condition
underneath: and what neither Moses, nor the Prophets, nor Jesus Christ, nor his
Apostles ever thought to mind us of, sad groaning Spirits make it their
principal business to express, and throng about, craving for help, for
Pilgrimages, and for Masses. Then come Images after them, to bleed, or sing, or
mourn as occasion requires: and the consecrated Elements, the better to
justify what they are not, appear with blood, with flesh, and even sometimes
with whole children. It passes all understanding, how the Virgin Mary, who kept
her self so long above, would not come down among us men, both sooner and in
fitter times. She passed all her days on Earth, always keeping close and
quiet at home: and since her happy departure, I can account five hundred years,
when all good Authors will justify, that she continued as quiet above. Here
then are two huge great Marvels, the first, how the blessed Virgin, after so
many years of rest, comes to have new Inclinations to bestir her self among
men: and the second, that she should consent to take this suspicious unlucky
time of showing her Activity, when the Devil and all his Spirits are permitted
to play their Pranks. How is this Change imaginable, that she, who never did
appear to any one of the primitive holy Fathers (when she could do it, without
any suspicion) would in these last and branded times show her self to a dirty
Monk? Did not S. Augustine, before he died, being besieged by Barbarians,
deserve as well her Protection, and a guard of her armed Angels, as S. Dominic
did, whilst he held with his Rosary Specul. Exemp. Tit. Rosar. Exem. 1.
about the neck one poor pitiful Heretic? wherefore never had these holy men,
S. Athanasius, S. Hilary, S. Cyprian as well the comfort of a kiss, or an
Embrace, as Ribaden. in vita Ignat.
Loyola, as Attich. Chron. Ord. Minim. an. 1612.
Stephen the Minime, and thousand more, less deserving it? And how comes she
who never was known to take notice of any trouble, disease, or Imprisonment of
true Saints, as the Headache of S. Chrysostom, the sickliness of S. Basil, the
infirm Body of S. Gregory Nazianzen, the Prisons and Tortures of all the
Martyrs; now to be running up and down, to relieve all sorts of persons: to
cure a Jesuit with her Chronic. Deip. an. 1561.
Child, whom she put by him in his bed: to cure whole Countries Oliver. L.
Mirac. Mar. Montis.
of purple fevers; and to free several Rogues, that had well deserved Albert.
De Viris Illust. Ord. Praedic.
hanging. from the Gallows, from Dungeons, and from all Imaginable sorts of
Dangers? How comes this fancy to take her so late, of bringing down out of
Heaven, Crosses, Hoods, Books, Robes, Holy water and such other utensils, which
the Fathers in former times never had, nor expected from her? the truth is,
this kind of Apparitions, and Miracles were most advisedly reserved till such
times, as these later are, dark and confused, and more propitious to Imposture,
and these strange new doings have another reason besides, which I wish Roman
Catholics would seriously take notice of, and it is this.

As long as the blessed Virgin, had no more honor in the Church, then what
became a Creature, and was allowed to her by the Fathers, to be Epiphan. contr.
Haeres. l. 3. adv. Collyrid.
honored, not adored; no ancient Author will tell you, that she ever appeared
among men. But as soon as the later times brought in Public Services to pray
with to her, and new Images to pray to her by; then she (or rather some other
Spirit under her Name) began first to bestir her self: then she and all other
Saints with her, seemed to come down and appear at the voice of these new
Prayers, just as the Soul of Samuel did, (or rather seemed) to come up at the
Mysteries of Endor. Sam. 28. Ever after, the pretended Queen was seen in the
Roman Church, as in her Heavenly Palace; and she had more Angels, to wait on
her in the least of her ordinary progresses, then Christ himself ever had in
any one of his most Solemn Appearings. But as the Circumstance of a base witch,
who did order Saul's business, was a sufficient Evidence, that the Appearance of
Samuel, had not the Soul of Samuel: and, as when Devils will look like Angels;
you may still, they say, either perceive a Cloven Foot, or smell a stinking
vapor, that betraies the pretending glorious appearance; Roman Miracles and
Visions have most commonly some black Mark, which may convince any sober man,
that they are not what they seem to be. Consider in the holy Scriptures what
all the true Saints of God both holy Angels and Apostles, say or do whenever
they meet with more honor, then is their due; and ask S. Austin, what Spirits
those are, who take it whenever given, or call for it, when it is not. No
Saints or Angels, says this holy Father August. cont. Faust. l. 20. c. 21. and
22.
will take of others what they know to be due only to God; as it appears by
Paul and Barnabas, who tore their clothes to show they were mere men. Act. 14.
and by that Angel, who rejected adoration; Unclean Spirits are for Worship; and
tho they care little for Flesh, yet they pride themselves with Sacrifices, only
because they are due to God. And in another Place, Idem. De vera Relig. c. 55.
Good Angels are for this one thing, namely that with them we may serve God, in
whose contemplation they are happy: but those, who invite us to serve
themselves, are like proud men, etc. only the serving of proud Devils, is more
hurtful. And in another place, Idem de Civit. l. 10. c. 7.
Celestial and happy Ibid. c. 16.
Spirits will have us Sacrifice (not to themselves but) unto God whose Oblation
they are, as well as we; and therefore all Revelations and Miracles that invite
us to serve more then one God, are such Seductions of Devils, as any pious and
prudent men must needs throw off; for this is their proud malice, who by that
token are noted to be neither good Angels in themselves, nor the Angels of a
good God. For the Ibid c. 7. item l. 9. c. 23.
good Angels love us so well, that they will not have us serve them, but serve
the true God.

Bring now to these Christian Rules, most of the Roman Apparitions and
Miracles. Show me where this humble Spirit, whom they worship, did the like
good Angel, ever reject one worshipping or devout Adoration: show me where she
tore once her clothes at the hearing the Te Deum, and the whole Psalter of
David sung and applied most blasphemously from God, to her. I am sure I find in
her ways, for several centuries of years, the steps of another Spirit, seeking
continually for more honor. We shall behold one who strokes Caesarius l. 7.
Hist. c. 55.
and kisses pious men, because they both Leandr de vrt is Illustrib. Chron.
Deip. an. 1372.
begin and end their best Devotions with her Praises: who teaches in what godly
form they must Chronic. Deip. an. 1178.
pray to her for all Blessing,: who calls them into brakes Franc. Hierasc. in
Vit. Henr. Sylvice.
of Thorns and Nettles, and sometimes into holes under ground, to find and
adore her Images: one who can put on the shape either of a Odo Gissaeus Histor.
Virg. Aniciensis.
Stag or In vita Manaveri ap. sur. 5. Jun.
a Pigeon, or a great Arch. Gian. Cent. 3. Annal. l. 4. c. 9.
Queen, purposely to show the place and stone, where she must needs have an
Altar, or a Chapel, or a great Church, that there she Od. Gissaeus. supra.
may be served and worshipped to the worlds end; and there Niceph Eccl. Hist.
l. 15. c. 25.
walk and delight her self: one I say who in all these Churches brags among
men, as if she were the Blosius in Monili.
Mother of Campassions, the Lady Menol Cisterc. 22. Dec.
of the House of Prayer, and the fountain Chronic. Deip. an. 1467.
of all Blessings: lastly one who spreads forth about her a great Mantle,
therewith to betoken the great Tho. Malvenda Tom. 1. Annal. Ord. Praedic. an.
1221.
largeness of her mercies and favors, which, she says, she denies to none that
will come to her with faith. Hereupon let S. Austin judge what kind of Creatures
these Spirits are: and what great difference there is, between those which
among Pagans did perpetually labor for Sacrifices, and these which now among
Papists are all for Masses, and the greatest Oblations that can be set on Romes
Altars. Mean while we may be confident, that none but God alone can own
Sacrifices, Altars, and Churches to be served with; and that none but Devils
ever owned Images to speak, move, or in any wise to work in. Such Spirits as
these may be the Authors of all the Roman Apparitions and Miracles; and such
Apparitions and Miracles are very fit for such Spirits: and both foretold and
reserved for the last times. And so you may guess what that Church is, that
has her proper establishment both from such Wonders and such Saints.

CHAP. IV.
Concerning the Protection, and Assistance of Roman Saints,
THIS pretended help of men and women, who after their departure out of this
world, and their being Canonized by some Pope, are called Saints; are another
great Enchantment to keep and draw People to Rome. Their Souls are conceived to
be still ready to go about any business, which their worshippers have in
Heaven: and their Bodies, even to the least of their Bones, their Clothes and
their Shoes withal, can at every good occasion work great Cures and Feats on
Earth. Thus one Saint is upon this account worth as much or more then any two
Angels. What sober man therefore would not be temted, to turn a Roman Catholic?
and who would turn from being so; tho there were no other reason for either,
then the getting, and losing such Friends? The persuasion of Romanists is, that
all such Souls as deserve their Canonization at Rome, go up directly to Heaven
as to a place, where, their happy Rest from all their Labors, and an happy
Possession of an eternal Glory with God, is not all what they expect: they must
have also Government, and Regencies Bell. de Sanct. Beati t. l. 1. c. 18.
over the whole world; wherefore they fancy them sometimes like so many great
Captains marshalling all the Natione under Christ, with an Iron Rod: sometimes
like great Pillars above, holding all Churches under them. And because so much
were too much for any one Saint, to manage it well; and that no Creature is
capable of such an Universal Burden, except the Virgin Mary above, and the Pope
of Rome, here below; to facilitate Gab. Biel. in Can. Lect 32. N.
the business, they divide the whole among themselves; that every one may be
troubled with no more, then his proper share.

First by this imaginary Distribution, they divide their Saints into Countries.
Salmero. 1. ad Tim. c. 2. Disp. 7.
S. James is to take care of Spain: S. Sebastian of Portugal: S. Denis of
France: S. Mark of the Venetians: S. Nicolas of the Moscovites: S. Ambrose of
Milan: the three Kings of the Electorat of Cologne: S. Barbara of Germany, etc.
and before the happy Reformation, S. George, S. Andrew, and S. Patrick had the
respective charges of England, Scotland, and Ireland.

Secondly they subdivide their Emploiments in these and other Countries, after
the several sorts of Professions and Trades extant therein. For S. Nicolas, and
S. Christopher are thought to look to the Seamen; S. Catharine to the Scholars;
S. Austin to the Divines; S. Luke to the Painters: S. Ivo to the Lawiers; S.
Eustachius to the Hunters; S. Chrispin to the Shoemakers. The very Whores have
their proper Saints, and they are S. Magdalen and S. Afra who look to them.
Some others are put to equally vile Services; as St. Anthony about Swine; St.
Pelagius about Cows; St. Eulogius about Horses; Saint Vendeline and S. Gallus,
have the care both of Sheep and Geese. Judge you how gladly these happy Souls
leave the Bosom of Abraham, to drudg about these sorts of Cattle.

Thirdly, In these distinct Provinces, and about these ranks of Men and Beasts,
the Roman Saints are for the most part appointed to distinct Works, and Helps,
Non omnia possumus omnes, that is, Every one cannot do all, says one of the
Biel. sup.
Learned Catholics; and therefore will they sometimes direct Clients to other,
although possibly inferior Saints; as once St. Peter sent a Gregor. Dialog. l. 3.
c. 25.
Woman to a Sacrist he had at Rome, for the cure of her Palsy; and it is upon
this ground, that devout Persons are directed to several Saints, for their
several Exigencies, to the end that both every Saint may have his share in the
Worship, and every Client in the Relief. This is it which they Idem. in Can.
Lect. 32. N.
call the discreet Variety, so honorable to their Church, and so advantageous
to her poor Members; when you shall see one pray to St. Peter, for the Gift of
Submission: to St. Agnes, for Continency: to our Lady S. Anna for Wealth: to S.
Margarite for Childbearing: to St. Rochus against the Plague: to St. Petronilla
against an Ague: to Saint Apollonia against the Toothache: to St. Liberius
against the Stone: and so to every Saint for that help that is in his way. Let
no Batchellors go to St. Peter, because a married Man: nor no married Man to
St. John, because he was a Batchellor: but Salazar. Proverb. c. 8. v. 18. n.
172.
let every one go to a Saint of his on Tribe; a Widow to a Widow-Saint, and a
Soldier to one of his Trade, for this is the humor of Roman Saints, to favor
better their own Companions.

According to this Economy, there is not one Romanist but may pretend to march
under the colors of several Saints. For example, a French Catholic born at
Paris, has as fair title as Rome can give, to the protection of St. Michael,
St. Denis, and our Lady, who generally rule that Kingdom: of St. Genevefa, that
more specially looks to Paris; of St. Germain or St. Thomas, or St. Sulpice, if
he either be born, or reside in those Parishes: of St. Cosmus, and St. Damian,
in case he do practice Physic: of St. Ottilia and St. Lucia, when his Ears and
Eyes trouble him, and of St. Mathur in also, if he be troubled with folly. Over
and above these, he may be sure of other Saints, St. Dominic, S. Celestin, S.
Francis, and twenty more, by matriculating his Name into their Confraternities;
which he may do for a small matter.

It is great pity that this fancy of distributing Presidencies and Powers thus
among Roman Saints, has no better ground then that had which Julian Julian.
ap. Cyrill. Alexand. l. 4. sub init.
the Apostat alleges, and S. Augustine observes Augustine. de Civitate l. 6, 7, 8.
to have bin constantly practiced among the ancient Pagan Gods. What signifies,
says the holy Father elsewhere, Idem de Civit. l. 6. c. 9.
that trifling Division of Offices among your Gods, wherefore must they be
severally prayed to, but to make it rather a Play fit for a Stage, then any
thing which may become the worth and gravity of a true God? This new Comedy is
still the same, only the Actors wear better Clothes, or rather borrow better
Names; and the Roman People that stand about it, adore the Virgin for Juno, and
S. George instead of Mars; and as a Learned Romanist Lud. Vives, de Civ. l. 8.
c. 27.
says, another kind of he and she Saints, instead of the old Gods and
Goddesses. But as to any honest ground and precedent for such practices, these
two things may, and must be said, to the everlasting shame of the Roman Church;
The first is, That whereas, as long as either the Patriarchs, or the Prophets,
or the Apostles, or any Holy and Apostolical Men ordered the Church, there
never appeared one soul that offered to speak to Men, unless the soul of
Samuel, 1 Samuel 28. (and in the judgment both of the Fathers, and of many Roman
Doctors, that appearing soul was a Devil;) the Church of Rome brags in her time
of above ten thousand souls, all coming down to talk with Men, which souls she
believes to be Saints. The second is, That whereas neither Patriarchs, nor
Prophets, nor any Apostles, or any Apostolical Holy Men, in all their dangers
and distresses ever Prayed to, or Worshipped any Creature whatsoever, whether
holy Angel, or holy Soul; the Church of Rome in a great mesure prays to, and
worships nothing else.

And the truth is, this unusual praying to departed Saints, and this new
appearing of Men's souls, may very well meet together. It is the constant
practice of evil spirits, tho neither called nor thought on, to meet Men in
unlawful ways. When the Pagans did consult Fowls of the Air about their good
or bad success, and so did bird for Prophesies; the Devils moved Ravens and
Eaglesto signify somewhat, by either flying or croaking; the same did actuate
stocks and stones, when they did call upon Images: they made the Votaries often
to see Visions, when they watched for them about Tombs. And it is both very
just with the true God to suffer, and pleasing to false gods to do, that they,
who run after dead Saints, should find the same thing that Saul and the Witch
did, when they sought after dead Prophets.

First, It is a great presumption to pretend to more Wisdom, in point of
serving God and saving our selves, then either God has appointed, or all the
holy Prophets and Apostles have known and taught: and it is most just and
likely, that Men should meet with strong Delusions, and with the Devils
themselves, when they venture upon slippery, and unknown, and dark bypath,
where not one of Gods Saints ever durst walk.

Secondly, Admit what we know not, that the Souls of Holy Men are not confined
to Heaven, and fixed there to their happy rest; but (which Origin. ad Romans c. 2.
l. 2.
any discreet Man, tho he suspected it, would not affirm) that they may come
down now and then, and take some care of our Affairs. Admit that these few
Apparitions, which I find recorded by good Authors, 1. Of Potamiena Eusebius.
Eccl. Hist. l. 6. c. 5.
to Basilides. 2. Of a Father, August de Curapro Mort. c. 11.
who after his death, brings the true Acquittance of a Debt, that his poor Son
was troubled for. 3. Of something like Felix the Confessor Ibid. c. 16.
appearing to relieve Nola 4. Of something like Spiridians daughter, that
Socrat. Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 12.
offered to the good Bishop her Father, to show him where she had laid the
Jewels, which a Friend had entrusted her with. 5. Of something like John
Monachus, (a Holy Man) that Aug. sup. c. 17.
appeared to a really pious Woman, when once she longed to see him. 6. And of
something like St. Augustine, that once appeared to his Ibid. c. 11.
Disciple Eulogius, and another time Idem c. 12.
to one Curma about Hippo, when both this John and St. Augustine were yet alive,
and knew nothing of this appearing (at the least St. Augustine did not) but what
he heard other Men say; Suppose, I say, both against all probability, and the
Ibid. c. 16. etc.
positive judgment of St. Augustine himself, that these were not Angels, but
real Souls; What are some few extraordinary Apparitions, to ground an universal
and perpetual way of Worship? And suppose that not few, but whole thousands of
Souls should swarm down amongst us, as we know the Angels do; the Angels we
also know, were never called upon, nor prayed to, by any true Servant of God,
as long as the Church was ordered by any Prophet, Apostle, or Apostolical Men:
and after their departure, it is well known, how the Fathers who next succeeded
them, always voted both against Worshipping and Praying to any one created
Angel. The Disciples of Christ, says St. Ireneus, Iren. cont. Haeres. l. 2. c.
57. sub fin.
do nothing by praying to Angels, but by directing holy and undefiled Prayers
to the Lord, who has created all things. Prayers directed to others, it seems,
are defiled with something. And tho the blessed Angels Orig. Cont. Celsum. l.
5. p. 233. Edit. Cantabr.
, (says Origin, a most authentic Author in this Point) are sometimes called
Gods, and convey down to us the favors of God, yet we do not serve them as
Gods; for all our Prayers, Supplications, Addresses, and givings of Thanks
(which he makes to be all one with the true Service of God) must be directed to
God, who is the Master of all things, through our High Priest the living Word and
God, who is greater then all the Angels. And as for the Angels themselves, we
have no reason to pray to them, because we do not understand them well; and tho
we did, this very knowing of both their Nature, and Offices, would not afford
us the confidence of offering our Vows and Prayers to any other then to the
All-sufficient and Supreme God, by his Son our Savior. Not to trouble my self,
or others, with any more clear and direct Citations to this purpose, I will
only add the Verdict of two and thirty Fathers, who find Council. Laodic. Can.
35.
in a full Council, that the praying to Angels (for so St. Theodoret Theodor.
Colossens. c. 2. v. 18.
interprets the Word, (...)) to be both a hidden Idolatry, and a forsaking of
Christ and his Church.

The true reason which makes these and other Fathers so sharp against Praying
to Angels (much more against Praying to Saints) as to call it Idolatry, is not
because the Angels cannot hear always, the Saints never; for this would make
praying to them no more then an idle and useless act: but mainly and
principally, because Prayer, Vows, and giving of Thanks, is a main part of Gods
service; and therefore Saint Iren. Sup.
Ireneus, and Orig. sup.
Origin, take Prayer and Worship promiscuously for the same thing. And it is
upon this same account, that both Psalm. 50 14.15.
Scripture, and the Ancient Tertullian. Apol. c. 30. Eusebius Demonst. Evang. c.
ult. sub fin. Orig. in Romans c. 10. v. 14. p. 382. Edit. Paris, 1619.
Fathers, still reckon Prayer and Thanksgiving among the truest Sacrifices, and
which can belong to none but God. Now Prayer is part of Gods service, because,
if serious and devout (and I am sure Roman praying to Saints is no jest) it
presupposes and acknowleges in the Saint which is prayed to, such an infinite
knowledge of Men's hearts, such an Universal and extensive Capacity, or rather
Being, in hearing them all, always, every where, and such an immense
sufficiency and power of helping them accordingly, that to make, or to
presuppose, created either Saints or Angels fit persons for to be prayed to, is
to make or to presuppose them to be Gods. And this is the true account,
wherefore calling upon God, is reputed an Honor given to God, Call upon me, and
thou shall glorify me, Psalm. 50.15.23. because it implies, and in very deed
acknowledges the Immensity, the Knowledge, the Mercy and Power of God: not
calling upon him, is Atheism, Psalm. 79.6. And so calling on them, who are not
Gods, is downright Idolatry.

The truth is, you may call upon a Saint, without any danger of Idolatry, if he
be in such a distance whence intelligent Creatures may without Miracle hear one
another: thus the Prophets were not afraid to speak to Angels, Dan. Chapter 10. and
Chapter 22. Zachar. 1.9. If you did pray a Holy Man whilst he is with you, to pray
for you, and to recommend you to God after he is dead, perhaps this exceeds not
much the ordinary power of a Saint. Thus St. Cyprian Cyprian. l. 1. Ep. 1. sub.
fin.
entreated his Friend Cornelius, then Bishop of Rome, that he of them two who
should, by suffering Martyrdom, step the foremost to Jesus Christ, would being
with him there, continue his wonted Prayers for his poor Brother, whom he knew
to be left behind. And, as I take it, the same Father asks the same favor of
his Holy and Devout Virgins, against the time when their Virgin Zeal and Piety
Idem. de Habitu Virg. Tract. 2. sub fin.
should be crowned with its due Honor. Thus far I see nothing at all, that an
humble Christian may not wish, and a created Saint may not perform: and if such
Prayers have any defect, it is not Idolatry, nor Superstition perhaps, it is
only they want an Example. Nor is it any Idolatry to pray to your Friends by
letters at any distant whatsoever, for St. Paul in his Epistles does often so:
and therefore I would not blame our learned Papists for dedicating their Books,
and writing Dedicatory Letters to the most Blessed Virgin Mary, if they had
Expresses to carry them. But if you can fancy a Saint of such an unlimitted and
universal Intelligence, as, tho he be but in one place, yet to be able to see,
and hear what all Mankind can say or do, or think, or write, or suffer, all the
World over: and that St. Nicholas for example, hearkens and provides where he
is (in Heaven I hope) to what one Seaman prays in a Shipwreck at the Streets
of Magellan; to what another wishes for, when he is becalmed in the South Sea;
to the cries of another, who sees a Hurrican by the Barbado's; to the private
desires or another, who fishes for Pearls by the Guyney shore, or Herrings by
our English Coast, or for Whales hard by Green-land, or for Trouts in our small
Rivers; and whole thousands of Passengers, who cry to him being Catholics, and
perishing in as many places both at once, and always, as he is called upon in
all these places, and in all these times, and by all at once; and if you do
fancy withal, that he understands besides all this, in these both numberless
places and exigencies, what they do both think and deserve, in order to the
returning of suitable reliefs and helps: I say, you fancy in St. Nicolas an
infinite Omniscience: wherefore they that pray to him on this account, do give
him what belongs to God, and make him a complete Idol.

Here Roman and sacred Authors are at a great distance the one from the other.
Those will have the Saints being departed, to know whatsoever is said, thought
and done under the Sun: and these nothing; or if something, besides that which
they must needs remember, both of the Church and of themselves, in order to
their Holiness and Thankfulness to God Almighty; St. Augustine Aug. de Cura pro
Mort. c. 15.
thinks that they have it, either of those Angels who of course converse here
and there among Men, or from the souls of the Righteous whom God takes up to
them; or immediately from God himself, reveling to his Saints above as he does
to his Saints below, that which is necessary they should know. But alas! all
this comes far short of what is required in this case: For the Papists
themselves confess, that Bell. de Sanct. Beatif. l. 1. c. 20.
neither the Angels, nor separated Souls, can be present every where, to know
and report the Prayers sent up to every Saint, and by every Worshipper at one
time, and from all Countries; and tho they were, yet could they not tell what,
or whether Men pray when they pray to them sincerely and in their hearts:
Therefore they must make use of God, and turn, as much as in them lies, his
Essence into a Looking-glass, where without any more ado, Angels and Saints may
see what they please. And when they have thus taught the simple People, and
amused them with their Gregorian Greg. Magn. Dialog. l. 4. c. 33.
Motto, that, Whosoever sees him that sees all, sees all himself: they laugh at
it among themselves, and say plainly (as well they may) Occam. 4. Sent. q. 13.
That created things have not a Being, which may be seen in God, as an Object
that shines in a Glass; witness the Angels that see God, and yet are ignorant
of many things, but as Effects in the Thom. part. 1. q. 12. a 8.
virtue of their own causes, which indeed could be seen in God, by him who
could know him perfectly, which no Man can: and so it is not true, that
whosoever looks in a Glass, sees all in the Glass. And it is fair, if the
Saints see in God the things that Idem p. 3 q. 10. a, 2.
are proper to their Happiness: And such certainly are not the cries of Men
perishing in a storm. In a Word, they all come to this, that when they say that
the Saints see all things in God, it must be understood, Greg. de Valent. De
modo quo Deus cognoscit. Disp. 1. q. 12. Punct. 6. sect. Concesso igitur.
as far only as God is pleased to represent it to them.

Now let the Roman Catholics show us, either out of Scripture, or some
infallible Author, that God reveles to St. Nicolas (to insist in the same
example) all the Rocks, the Billows and Storms, which may put his Seamen to
pray; and that the hearing of their Cries, and the sight of all their
Ship-wracks, is to this second Neptune a great addition of Happiness.

This looking-glass being thus broken, they run as to their best Refuge, to new
Revelations, which, if sufficient to the purpose which they are invented for,
must swarm up in Heaven, as thick and as continually as there are Prayers made
to Saints under the Dominion of Rome. At this rate, whenever one says Ave
Maria, or another St. Aegidi, or another some other Prayer, God must inform the
Saint who it is that prays to him, to what purpose, and with what Heart, or
else it is a hundred to one if the Saint hears a word of it. And as the whole
Trinity must be ready for a million of Miracles to do the business at Mass, so
must it be for as many, or rather more Revelations Night and Day, Morning and
Evening, to wait on the Roman Litanies: Only there is this difference, that at
the Mass the Priests are so civil, as to pray to God for his Miracles; and so
rude at the Litany, as never once in their whole life to ask for a Revelation,
wherewith he may be pleased to inform them all, whom it may concern. A very
great rudeness indeed, and such a prodigious oversight, that whole Rome, as
well as great Bellarmin Bell. de Sanct. Beatit. l. 1. c. 20. sect. atque ex his.
, may most justly be puzzled at; that a Pious and Infallible Church should not
remember, that so many, so continual, and so absolutely necessary Revelations,
if true, are true continual Favors; and that God, once in an Age, might be as
well supplicated to show and expose their Prayers, as continually as every
petty Saint is importuned to recommend them.

But here is a far worse, and I doubt not, a more impious Absurdity. I cannot
tell whether it be more lawful for Papists to set up new Mediators (without any
warrant) in Heaven, then it was for Jeroboam to make new Priests in Israel: nor
whether the making Mediatores ad Mediatorem, Grandees, who through their own
Merits, and not by their Prayers only, shall promote our Concerns with Christ,
be a lesser temerity then it had bin, if Abraham had obtruded all his servants
as Officers and Levites to serve under Melchisedec. But see how Babel can set
and unset, and over-turn all things up-side down; Christ the only Mediator, the
Advocate, and the Intercessor above to God the Father, must lay this his Office
aside, and become a kind of Mediator and Intercessor for Men with the Saints.
All the supplications and addresses which the Papists send up to these Souls,
signify to them nothing at all, unless Christ be there in the stead of either
a Prophet to revele, or of a Messenger to bring, or of a kind of Clerk, to read
to them all these Prayers. Here to make use of those Examples, wherewith both
Bell. de Beatit. Sanct. l. 1. c. 20. sect. Respondeo, quemadmodum.
Papists and S. Ambros. ad Romans c. 1.
Pagans will persuade Men to call upon their Saints; the King alone must be the
Master of Requests to his Courtiers, and the Speaker to his Commons, to inform
them of every great, and every petty trifling thing that their respective
Relations, Countries and Towns will have them put in a Bill, and then present
it to his own self. Whenever the Pope calls on S. Peter, or a Cardinal on S.
Jerome, or a Monk on St. Cutbert, or any Catholic Man or Woman upon the Virgin;
nothing is done, till God himself calls for these Saints, and tells them, Hear
you Peter, Jerome, and you Cuthert, such and such People now pray to you, that
you would pray to me, and persuade me, through your Merits, to grant them such and
such things: And to dispose you the better to be forward in this Office, I must
tell you, the Pope is old, the Cardinal wants an Estate suitable to his
Eminence, and unless you make have to solicit me for more Grace, such Monks or
Maidens, your humble Suitors, are at this very nick of time in great danger of
Incontinency. Then (and not a moment before) come up the Saints with these
Prayers, to press and solicit with God, the very same things and circumstances
which God has reveled to his Saints before. Such Wheelings and Impertinencies
as these, were ridiculous upon a Stage, much more are they so in a Church; and
how much more with God in Heaven? And what can you think of the Comedians, who
dare bring both God and his Saints as chief Actors in such a Play? Well, Prayer
to Saints includes these sins in its most plausible Practice, when it is no more
then calling on the blessed Saints, that they be pleased to mediate, and to
intercede in their Prayers for us to God, which is the cheating notion under
which Men, ashamed of what they do, would fain disguise their Praying to Souls
and Angels with the color of doing Bell. de Sanct. Beat. l. 1. c. 17. etc. 20.
no more, then when we pray here our Friends and Pastors to pray to God
Almighty for us. But, when they pray and beg at their hands, not only for
Prayers, but (as it is apparent by their real practice, and the stories of
their best Saints) for effectual Deliverances, such praying is without excuse:
for instead of the former Drudgery, which the other puts upon God, this
attributes Ubiquity, Omnipotency, and other infinite and Divine Powers to
Saints; that is, the Church of Rome cannot expect, and upon that expectation
cannot Pray, as they do, every where at the same time to the Virgin Mary, for
example to bless and help them, unless she be conceived as being both present
every where, and potent to bless them and help them every where. And this is a
double Immensity, that of being present where they pray, especially where they
pray more devoutly, and of being present where she helps. For without this
Ubiquity, how could she be seen at Harvest, wiping the Faces of Vincent.
Sperat. Hist. l. 8. c 17.
of reaping Monks; or in a Chamber, rubbing Menol. Cisterc. 22. December.
the Head of the good honest Father Adam, whilst she is elsewhere Chronicon.
Ord. Min. Tom. 2. l. 5.
burning Villages, or in a rich Abbey De Mirac. B. M. 2 Tem. Sermon. Discipuli,
Moguntiae, 1612.
Mid-wiving an Abbess, whom her Steward had unfortunatly gotten with Child? Is
it not unimaginable, that during either of the two days, when she was under a
Gallows Chronic. Deip. an. 1358.
holding up a Thief under the Feet, for fear his own weight should strangle
him, she could be then in a River Ib. an. 1134.
riding Prince Pocoldas his Horse, or upon the Walls of Poictiers beating the
English off from that Town? Or if she be so nimble as to be at the same time
under a Gallows, upon a Wall, and in the middle of a River, because all these
places are in Europe? Can she run both the East and West Indies at the same
moment of time, there to Beretar. invita Anachoretae, l. 1. c. 1.
make a Jesuit more chaste, and here to comfort Bal nghem. 11. Apr.
a poor Captain? Thus far what Bellarmin says, Bell. de Beat. Sanct. l. 1. c.
20. sect. Alii dicunt.
may very well pass for certain truth, that, to help Men in the point of need,
at Ibid. an. 1200.
the same time, and in so many distant Countries, no nimbleness can serve the
turn, nor any thing less, says he, then a true Omnipresence, which is an
Attribute proper to God. Every Saturday in the Week requires in a special
manner this Universal Presence, for then the Virgin Mary is in her own Person
undoubtedly, and by their most solemn Devotions upon that day, exalted besides
others above the highest Heavens. She is at the same time conceived to be most
present, and beneficial by her Miracles and other ways, to her Worshippers
upon Earth; and according to the promises which she has Bull. Sabbath.
passed to Pope John the 22d, she goes down to Purgatory upon that day, and
therefore she is then under ground.

This same Universal Presence, the clearest Character of God, is in a very
great mesure required in all other Saints, for she goes seldom without them;
and then they are prayed to nevertheless from all parts, not only to intercede
in Heaven (which there they might being in one place) but to assist them by Sea
and Land, in Spain, and in Armenia, which no man believes they can do, without
believing them every where. For no created Causes whatsoever, can work any
thing but where they are. If our Savior did help some sick, at a distance from
him; as Matthew. 8.12. He did it with that Divine immense Nature, that his human
was united to. And Holy Souls are not likely to have more power then the
Angels, who are personally present, wheresoever they work any thing.

If any one say, that the Saints may out of Heaven do on Earth whatever they
please, not by their coming down themselves, but by their sending down some
Angels. First, let him show, That the Saints are not only equal to, but
superiors to the Angels, and then that they have the disposal of this Celestial
Hierarchy. Secondly, tho they, or at the least the Virgin had it, yet this
sending of Angels could not be applied but to some few private Services; as
when some say, 'twas not her self but some Angel, whom she had sent for her,
but to counterfeit the Devotions, and to save the credit of a Nun for the space
of nine whole Years, when she was all the while rambling up and down in
Bawdy-houses; that it was not her self, but an Angel who ran Races, and fought
Battles in the shape of her Worshippers being then at Mass. Some are also
pleased to say, that every Saturday she goes down to Purgatory, not by her
self, but by her Proxy, for the rescuing thence of some Souls. But none of her
Historians will aver, that it was a Deputy, or any other but her self who did
hug and kiss St. Bernard, St. Dominic, and St. Alain, upon several occasions;
who did once ride behind a Knight, in the shape of a Woman, in order to
surprise the Devil; or who in a dark tempestuous night was really met by two
wandering Travelers in a Forest, with St. Michael, and St. Peter. It is she,
and not another, if you will believe what she says, who now and then will call
her self the Mother of Grace and Mercies; who comes often to visit Churches
with sweet Perfumes, or Holy Waters, or whole Baskets of Holy Roses, or white
and black Hoods for her Chaplains. And accordingly it is she her self, and not
her Angel, that is adored in all the places where she appears. No man prays
either to her, or to any other Saint or Angel, upon any considerable occasion,
but thinks to have her and them present, and so the very same conceit of an
Universal Power and Presence (essential Attributes of God) which makes them
willing to pray to Saints, must needs make them Idolaters in praying thus.

This impious worship is an Abuse of what was don sometimes to God, in the
primitive times, at the Graves of his own Martyrs: and no wonder, if ignorant
men could turn the Miracles and Mercies of God, as they can all other good
things, to their own destruction. It is well known, how many wonders were
wrought at the Sepulchers of holy Martyrs, as one at the shadow of S. Peter
Act. 13. and at the Bones of the holy Prophet Elisha 2 Kin. 13.21. These
Miracles were to those Saints in some mesure, what the glorious Resurrection,
and Ascension had bin before to their Savior, to wit, high Declarations from
above, that their Souls and Bodies, however they had appeared vile in the Eyes
of their Murderers, were precious in the sight of God; and that what they had
believed, taught and signed as it were with their own Blood, were both true
Doctrines, and good Examples in order to Salvation. And these extraordinary
Marks of Gods favor on their Persons, and Seals of truth to their belief, as
they were principally intended in behalfs of Infidels, so they mostly and
longest continued in those parts of the world, as Africa Lege Aug. de Civit. l.
22.
for example where more Pagans remained not called, or not converted to the
Faith. It is well known also, how at the same time, which was a time of
general and cruel persecutions, the holy Zeal and Death of the Martyrs, as it
was marked out, as it were, by the finger of God in his Miracles; so it was
exalted both to their own praise and to the encouragement of others, by the
Christians in all Churches. The highest strains of Eloquence, which the Fathers
had, were spent in the magnifying of Martyrs. They set down their Names in
their best Church Records; and rehearsed them duly in their solemn Eucharists
and public praises to their Savior: They gave the most honorable Burial they
could in those sad times to their bodies: and having no Churches then, they
made their graves their most ordinary Places of Meeting, to declare before all
the world, that by this resorting to their Sepulchers, they prepared themselves
to their Death. In a word they did what they could to bring both themselves and
their Flocks to love and admire those holy Souls, that so both themselves and
others might be encouraged to follow them. Bless and esteem most sincerely,
says S. Basil, Basil. in 40. Martyr.
the holy Martyrs, that you may in your course do as they did: in the mean
while in your real intention be accounted as good as real Martyrs already: that
you may without the blows and cruelties, which they suffered, attain to the
rewards which they enjoy. These zealous exhortations in times of Persecution,
and the visible hand of God confirming whatever they said, as to this point,
prevailed so far upon the People, that S. Basil. ibid.
at every particulat occasion, as well as upon solemn days, they did go and
pray hard by their Graves, and did take for a great honor to be buried, where
they had prayed: till at last their Pagan Foes began to take notice of it, and
to believe, at least to say, Cyril. Alexand. cont. Jul. l. 6. p. 202. Ed.
Paris. 1638. Maximus Madaur. ap. August. Ep. 43.
that Christians did adore dead men, as themselves did adore their Gods. This
gave an Occasion to the holy Fathers to wipe off all suspicions of this kind
from Christian Religion: and to declare to all the world (I wish that Roman
Catholics would take better notice of it) first that they did not worship
Hieron contr. Vigilant.
Martyrs at all, neither as Gods, nor as Presidents and Vice Roys Cyrill. Alex.
contr. Julian. l. 6.
of any Town or Country. Secondly, that the blessed Saints have neither
particular notice, August. de cura pro Mort. c. 13.
nor care of the Affairs of this world; and if by chance they meddled with it,
it was as extraordinary to them to do so, as August. ibid. c. 16.
as to the Water to become Wine; or to a dead Body to rise up. Thirdly, that
the Veneration and Reverence which they did bear to holy Martyrs, exceeded not
that degree of honor, which in former times was deferred to Cyrill. sup. page
204.
valiant men, after they had spent their lives for the defense of their
Country: or that is due to all the Friends Smyrnensis ap. Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l.
4. c. 15.
and true Disciples of Jesus Christ: and is of no other August. cont. Faust. l.
20. c. 21.
sort, then is that which in this life we give to other holy men, whom we think
to be endued with the same piety that Martyrs were: only our Devotion for the
Dead Saints is more confident then it can be for living; because these are yet
fighting, and those have got the victory. Fourthly that when they builded Idem.
De Civitat. l. 22. c. 10.
Monuments, and Houses of Prayer where these Martyrs were buried; the Monuments
were for the Dead Saints, and the Houses of Prayer were only for the living
God. Fifthly, that when the names of the Martyrs were there mentioned, it was
neither to pray for them, nor to them: but to keep up after Dionys. Areop. de
Eccl. Hierar. c. 3.
their death an Authentic Declaration of their continual being with God; and
(specially in these great Mysteries, where Christ is both signified, and
received) of their continuing Sacred communion with Christ. Sixthly, that these
Honors were all bestowed on them, Scriptum Smyrn. ap. Eus. Eccl. Hist. l. 4. c.
5.
both for the more solemn celebrating of their faith thro-out all Churches, and
for the encouraging of all Christians, to their Example.

This was enough to vindicate the Truth of God, and the true meaning of his
Church, as to the Honor due to his Saints. It might have bin enough also to
smother in the very birth the growing superstitions of some private men in this
case, (that St. Austin does complain of) or at the least to restrain them from
growing worse, and endangering the after Ages; if the Pagans being confuted,
some partly seduced, partly seducing Christians had not revived their quarrel,
and gone about to justify as much as in them did lie, their old Reproaches, by
propping their praying to Saints upon the two main Points, whereon the Pagans
worshipped their Gods.

The first is taken from the prudence, that humble or wise Suitors must use at
Court. You shall hardly find one Papist, but will tell you, that it is rashness
to go bluntly and directly to great Persons, unless you be presented to them by
their Officers and favorites: and why should any man pretend any easier
Chrisost. in S. Philogon tom. 5 p. 505. Ed. t. Eton.
admittance to God, without their intercession and favor, who as the Saints and
the Angels do stand continually about him? This is the very self same Argument,
which the heathenish Philosophers mainly objected to the Fathers: and to which
the Fathers gave two such Answers as at once may stop equally both the Pagan
and Roman Mouths; the one is that Ambros. ad Romans c. 1. V. Dicentes se esse
sapientes.
of S. Ambrose. We are forced to go to the King, says he, by the mediation of
his Nobles, because great Kings are men, as we are; and have this Infirmity
along with their condition, that they must hear, and understand with the help
of others besides themselves; whereas God understands every thing, which every
supplicant asks, and deserves: and as for the obtaining of his favor, we can
employ no better friend, then an honest and pious Soul. The other is most
singular, and I have it from Origin. But if you have a mind also to have the
concurrence of the Angels, Origin cont. Cells. l. 8. p. 420. Edit. Cantah.
says he, we have it, when by pious lives and prayers, we do address our
selves to God. For as the motion of the shadow must needs follow that of the
Bodies, what way soever these will turn; let us know this, that if we move God
toward us, we shall get by the same means all the good Angels, Souls, and
Spirits to be our Friends; and which is more, actual helpers, both by prayers
and other ways; for these blessed Spirits take most especial notice of men
qualified for Gods favor. And I dare say confidently, that whosoever prays to
God devoutly, has whole Legions of holy Angels at the same time praying for
him, without his desiring them to do so. This ancient Author is the first who
ventured to say, That the Saints might perhaps pray and act for us: and yet he
is as express as any other, to direct men to God by Christ alone, and to keep
them from Praying to Angels and Saints.

The other main Ground common to Pagans and Papists, for Praying, those to
their Gods, these to their Saints, is either the false Allegation, or the false
Construction of Miracles. This every one knows, who knows them both. Whereas
when the Miracles of the Saints were at the best, that is, during the three
Primitive hundred years, they never temted Christians any farther, then to go
and to pray to God in those places where they were wrought, and where Prayers
had sometimes very extraordinary returns; there they might perhaps wish to God,
that he would hear in their behalf, the general Prayers which these Souls most
probably offer to God, for the afflicted members of his Church. But where is
the worthy Prelate or Christian (says S. August, contra Faust. l. 21. c. 21.
Id. De Civit. l. 8. c. 27.
St. Augustine) who being by the Grave of a Martyr, ever said, Peter, or Paul,
or Cyprian, I offer to you this Sacrifice, whether of Prayer, or Praise, or
Vow, it is all one. The Miracles don by Holy Men did set, as it were, the Seal
of God upon the Gospel which they believed, and upon the Worship which they
both promoted and died for, therefore we must believe and worship as they did.
If they did set also, as certainly they did, some Marks of Reverence on their
Persons, and their Memory, 'twas not to this purpose, that they should be
either adored or prayed to. We do not read that true Israelites ever prayed to
the dead Prophet, for the great Miracle wrought at his Tomb; nor that
Christians ever worshipped the living Apostles, for all the signs wrought by
their hands, and sometimes at their very shadow. S. Chrysostom S. Chrysostom. ad
Pop. Antioch. Hom. 1.
assures me, that God kept them most commonly under some sensible Infirmity,
which they could not ease themselves of, as the ill Stomach of Timothy, and the
troublesome Angel about St. Paul, that the Glory of their Miracles might wholly
reflect on Christ's Power, and that nothing of it might be abused to the
admiration of their Persons. But all is in vain to save those Men, who have a
mind to lose themselves. Pagans in spite of all will worship the living
Apostles, Acts 14. and Papists will pray to dead Saints. The Miracles of God
must be wrested, to countenance these Men's folly; and to use the words of an
ancient Father S. Chrysostom. Ibid.
to this purpose, here observe the Wiles of Satan; Christ emploies both at
once, his Apostles, and his Miracles to destroy all Idolatry from among Men;
and Pagans and Papists make use of both to bring it in.

This manner of calling on Saints, is both unchristian and unjust, on all the
sides that you can take it. First, It transfers on Creatures that Prerogative
of Gods glory, and that special part of his Worship, which in Holy Scriptures
does comprehend his whole Service. Secondly, It makes Saints to be what the
Holy Ghost alone is, searchers of Men's Hearts and Thoughts, and present over
all the World; if not, How can they perceive mental Prayers? Thirdly, if you
suppose, that night and day God is reveling to them what Men do, and what they
would have, it forges another Impiety, and make God a perpetual Clerk,
Mediator, and Drudg to his own Saints. Fourthly, It intrudes into Christ's
Office, as many Mediators to intercede with God for Men, both by their
Sufferings and their Merits, as there are with him Saints and Angels, whereas
the Church knows none but one. Fifthly, It quite disables the Church from all
possibility of asserting Christ, and the Holy Ghosts Divine Nature, by their
usual Demonstrations, to wit, That God is in Scripture prayed to, and, that the
Holy Ghost is every where; or it proves Saints to have it also. Sixthly, As it
is practiced by the devoutest Persons of Rome, it complements the Saints with
such Prayers, such Expressions, and such Services, as you may safely challenge
Melchisedec, Moses, David, and all the Prophets and Apostles, to magnify God
Almighty with any better.

You may be sure that the Papists will disown this, because their own
discretion suffers them not to avow more among strangers then they think
themselves able to make good. But where Mass is the reigning Service, there
Books, and Mouths, and if these should hold their peace, the very stones of
their Altars, Churches, and Images do speak it out: and judge what Religious
Worship that is, which modest Men must flatly deny, or palliate and excuse.
Some will tell you, Georg. Cassand. Him. Eccles. in Vigil Pontec. Schol. page
242. Edit. Paris. 1016.
that all their Prayers to the Saints are but such Apostrophes, or Rhetorical
Figures, as was that of David to Heaven and Angels, Psalm 103. and that their
Litanies, Peter, Paul, etc. Pray for me, come but to this wishing, Would to
God, or how I do wish, that all these Saints should pray for me. Others who
see, what either blindness or impudence it is to say so, plainly confess, that
they directly Bell. de Sanct. Beat. l. 1. c. 19. sect. Praeterea in utroque.
pray to Saints, but mince it as it were but as to Friends, only to desire them
to pray (which yet at that distance were bad enough) and not as to principal
Benefactors: and it is upon this ground, they say, that praying to Saints in
Heaven, and praying to Friends in my House to pray for me, comes both to one.
These Men are so confident at Rome, and do think us to be so blind to all ends
and purposes here in England, that they shall persuade us these two things. The
first, That all their Breviaries and Psalters signify nothing, but what they
please: The other, That they make Saints Ibid. c. 18. sect. Nos autem facile.
to be Rulers and Princes over Nations, with an Iron Rod in their Hands, only
to pray.

This desperate Cause forces Bellarmin at every turn (the honestest and wisest
Papist of his time) to forsake upon this account both all Knowledge and
Conscience: For here you shall find him sometimes offering Bell. ibid. c. 19.
Athanasius Sermon.
proofs out of some Books, under the name of St. Athanasius, which, when he
needs them not, Id. De Scriptorib Eccl. observat. in Tom. 3. Athanasis.
he acknowledges to be false: sometimes most willingly and grossly satisfying
Bell. de Beatit. Sanct. l. 1. c. 19. sect. Eusebius, lib. 13.
Eusebius: sometimes insisting Ibidem. sect. Deinde in sexta Synodo
upon such Canons and Decrees (ascribed to the sixth Council) as in his Heart
he knows to be Binius infin. 6. Synod. page 360. Edit. Paris. 1636.
mere Forgeries: sometimes siding with the Cyrill. Alexand. Thesaur. p. 115.
Edit. Paris. 1638.
Arians, and leaving the Ibid. page 116. Athanas. cont. Arian. Orat. 4. page
260. Edit. Commel. 1600. Chrysostom. in Genes. Hom. 66.
Fathers, thereby to get some little thing, that may favor the Praying to
Angels: sometimes he says, that the Roman Church praying to Saints, makes
Bell. sup. c. 19, and 20.
them no more then Holy Men; and in the point of Vows, and such other Divine
Honors, that mere Men are in no wise fit for, he himself Id. De Cultu Sanct. c.
9. sect Tertio, quia Sancti.
makes them to be by participation nothing less then Gods. And thus the Papists
must own at last, what they did dissemble at the first. And what can you make
of such shifts, turnings, and contradictions, but that there is most plain
untruth, as well as juggling in the case? Either let them show out of Scripture,
or out of any true Record written in true Primitive Times, that any Prophet,
any Apostle, or any Martyr, have in any one of their many and great Distresses
called upon any other Saint, but God alone: or else let them show, they have
found some new Lights, and some better ways, then all these Saints ever did.
St. Chrysostom S. Chrysostom. in Lazar. Orat. 2. S. Epiph. contr. Collyrid. page
447. Edit. Basil.
takes for mere Devils, those Spirits who even in his time did appear under
human Shapes, and did go under such and such Men's names. And St. Epiphanius
adds more to this, that these Devils will, under Religious and plausible
pretenses, both make Men to appear like Gods, and induce People to believe it.
And who can warrant, that all those Souls that come creeping in Bellarmin,
first, under the notion of Gods Friends, and afterward as Gods themselves, are
none of these? However, in point of serving them, let the pretenses be never so
fair, it is not safe to venture on ways which none of Gods ancient Servants
have traced before. But the following Chapter shall tell us more: for certainly
the name of the Blessed Virgin, is unworthily abused now adays, to complete in
all respects the full mesure of Idolatry.

CHAP. V.
Of the Worship deferred to the Virgin: and all the Blessings expected from
this Worship.
THat which Rome adores under this name, deserves a Chapter by it self: It is
both the great Allurement to, and the great Diana of that Church. It is with
them the Head of all the Saints, the very Vid. infra.
Crown and Accomplishment of the ever Blessed Trinity, and therefore such a
Divinity in the Eyes of thorough Catholics, that some that had denied both
their Baptism and God himself, could never Scala Coeli.
be temted so far as to deny, and leave this Goddess.

Between the two contrary Extremes, to wit, the looking with some indiscreet
Arabians on the Blessed Virgin, as an ordinary Woman; and the Worshipping her,
as a Goddess: the Holy Fathers keep the middle way. Let the Virgin Mary be
honored, says St. Epiphanius, Epiphan. contra Collyrid.
but let God alone be worshipped. The Holy Scripture does the same, calling her
in opposition to all profane Persons, Blessed; and against all Superstitious
Adorers, leaving her among the Women, Blessed art thou among Women, Luke 1.28.
Elizabeth likewise calls her, The Mother of the Lord; as the Fathers do upon
another account, The Mother of God; that is, Mother of that Savior, (as to the
flesh) who by the Hypostatical Union is also God. And lest this Title should
seem to exalt her, as it does commonly other Mothers, to the same dignity with
her Son, the Holy Scripture sets her always by Christ (since the time of his
public appearing to Israel) rather like a Disciple, then like a Mother; witness
the manner he uses her, or answers her, at all the times when they appear both
together; as when she seeks him in the Temple, Luke 2.49. or when she put him
in mind of what they wanted in Cana, John 2.13. or when she stood without and
sent for him, Mark 3.34. or lastly (for I do not find them any more meeting and
speaking together) when he saw her standing by his Cross, John 19.26. for there
you cannot choose but observe, how little this great God and Savior was moved
with all those Concerns, even during the days of his flesh, that had their
ground in flesh and blood; and that, if this Blessed Woman deserved any
Chrysostom. in Matthew. c. 12. Hom. 44.
Blessedness, and had a gracious access to her Son, it was by being a Believer,
rather then by being a Mother. These four Passages cannot well bear any other
sense: and the severity, which some of them express besides, as some Fathers do
Epiph. cont. Haeres. l. 3. p. 447. Edit. Basil.
well observe it, stands upon Record, for a warning to keep the Church from
thinking better of Mary, then her being a Blessed Virgin, and perhaps a Holy
Martyr. Christ by this short Reply, Woman, what have I to do with thee? John
2.3. having branded that great Impiety, which he foresaw in after Ages, and
which we see to our great grief scandalously reigning in our days.

For now, at the head of ten thousand Saints, of whom some were never in being
(as far as any true Authors can tell) as St. Christopher, St. Catharine, St.
Longis; some were no better then Villains, as Thomas Becket, James Clement, and
such like, which the Pope pleases to Canonize; some are very true and blessed
Saints, but were never prayed for, nor prayed to, as long as Israel had a
Prophet, or the Church of Christ an Apostle: at the Head, I say, of all these,
appears now in the Church of Rome (what all both Prophets and Apostles may
justly rend their Garments at) the Virgin Mary under the Pomp and the very name
of Goddess. Not to mention the Worshippers, how many and famous soever, who in
their Devotions Ambros. Cathar. de Consummata Gloria, page 112. and 115.
Bernarden. Meriale 3. p. S. 5. de Nominatione Mariae. Lugdun. Francisc. Mendos.
Virid. l. 2. Probl. 2.
call her so, one Pope or two may serve for all. Leo the tenth, in an Epistle
that was published, and therefore confirmed by the Command of Paul the third,
demands some better Timber for the repair of one of her Churches, Ne tumnos,
tum Deam ipsam, etc. Petr. Bemb. Epist. l. 8. Epist. 17.
Lest by sending some useless sticks, you seem, says he, to delude both his
Holiness, and the Goddess her self.

This pretended Godhead, Deification, Petr. Damian. Sermon. 1. in Nativ. Virg.
and Divine Mart. Delrius de Divin. Milit. p. 886. Lips. de Virgin Hall.
passim. Gononus Chronic. an. 1356.
Majesty, which under several Titles is attributed to this Goddess, is not a
thin Participation, such as they allow to other Saints, whom upon this score
they call Gods: but S. Bernardin. Sermon. 61.
a kind of Equality with God, and an Infinity of Perfections, which no Creature
ever had. Some do call it Argentensis. De Sept. Excellentiis.
identity; others more plainly B. Alanus. part. 2. c. 6.
Esse Dei, that is the very same thing, or the very Being of God, besides her
other three Beings, 1. of Grace, 2. of Glory, 3. and of the Mother of God.
Hereupon the Jesuits infer (as well they may) 1. that Mendosa de Florib. l. 2.
Problem. 2. n. 11.
there is an infinite distance between the Mother, and the Servants. 2. That
the greatness Viegas Apocal. 12. Comm. 1. Sect. 4. n. 3.
of this Goddess is a Mesure in a manner of Gods own Immensity. 3. And that
therefore it is impossible to know well Gods Immensity without understanding the
Virgins greatness.

Now, if you will know, how the blessed Virgin, who was and is confessedly a
finite Creature, has attained to this real Godhead, and to the Infinity, that
attends it; they will tell you, that this great Miracle of being made Goddess,
was wrought in her,

1. By a Singular Glorification and mutation in her, proceeding from the whole
Trinity. For when once Alan. supra. c. 8. page 130.
she presented her self to the Blessed Trinity in behalf both of her self, and
her devout servants; God Almighty, they say, spoke to her thus. Esto, etc. Be
thou the noble and threefold Room, where the Trinity shall inhabit. I will be
thoroughly changed into thee: and thou shall be thoroughly changed into me, by
special and singular Glorification.

2. More especially, by an entire and essential Communication from the second
Person; for thus they make Christ speaking Guerricus ap. Mendos. Virid. l. 2.
Probl. 2. n. 11.
to her; Thou have given me to be man; I will also give thee my being God.

3. Most specially, by such a large Effusion of all Divine Excellencies, as may
Quir. Salazar. in Prove. c. 8. v. 23. n. 302.
hold up proportion with the infinite Goodness and Appetency, which the holy
Ghost has to be diffused to others. So, that as the Father did satisfy his
own desire, in bestowing his whole Divine Being on his Son: and the Son with
the Father, in bestowing all what they have upon the Holy Ghost; so likewise
the Holy Ghost has the same satisfaction, for want of a fourth Person, to
spend and to pour himself in gifts and Graces, upon Mary, whom upon this
account they dare all (and God forgive them for calling her so) Totius
Trinitatis Complementum, that is, the Perfection and Accomplishment of the
whole Trinity; and to this purpose belongs what they say, that in Heaven she
has her Throne by the Father, as his only Daughter and Mignion; or as others
say, Argentens. De Septem Excel. 7.
in quality of Gods Lady, above the Son, Ibid.
as being his Mother; and close to the Holy Ghost, in quality of his dear
Spouse.

I have no mind to trouble my Reader and my self with rehearsing what here they
babble, or rather most ridiculously blaspheme concerning the Salar, in Prove. c.
31. n. 55, 56, 57.
Jealousy between the Holy Ghost and Joseph upon the point of serving and
pleasing her best. It is enough, which they will tell you and insist upon
twenty times, that this Virgin was the chief Allurement, which in the beginning
moved God Almighty, Idem. c. 8, v. 25. n. 317.
to make the world; Bernard. Sermon. 1. in Salv.
and that Heaven and Earth were created, and all the holy Scriptures written ob
hanc and propter hanc, for her sake, and upon her account. That when in the
eternal Decree and Prevision Salazar. Prove. c. 8. v. 23. n. 269.
of God, all other things did appear but as Molehills, the great worth of this
Virgin stood before him as a Mountain. That when he put his hand to the making
of Creatures, Heaven, and Earth, Stars, Angels and Thrones, Ibid. v. 22. n. 269.
he had still this woman in his thought, to pick and choose out of every
Creature, as it came out, the very best of it for this true Pandora and true
Abbreviate of all his works. That then she was the very Ard. Hierosolymit.
Sermon. de Annunc.
Perspective through which from all Eternity God both foresaw and predestined
all Christians, S. Peter, S. Paul and all the rest; because they were not
predestined to any Grace, but such as should be conveied to them through her
hands. That when God did order the Springs, and course of Water, Salazar. c. 8.
v. 27. n. 363.
then he but studied, what way it were possible, to make Mary an Aqueduct of
all Blessings upon Mankind. That God had not set up so many Princes in the
world, nor so many Rupert. ap. Salaz. p. 246.
Kings in Israel, had it not bin to procure her a more Roial Extraction. And
finally that he made Eve, Salaz. Prove. c. 31. n. 418.
the Ark, the Tabernacle, and other Ceremonial Figures, to pass his time in
those Images and Representations of Mary; and so to amuse as well as he could
the extreme longing that he had, to possess the Original.

At last this blessed Creature being come forth, she appears at her very Idem
c. 8. v. 25. n. 321.
Birth, when she was lying in her Cradle, above all both Angels and Saints,
like a Mountain above small Hills, far holier, as they say, then Mount Joh.
Damascen.
Sina, but somewhat like Bernard. Sermon. de Annunc.
the Mount Sion, in which God was pleased to dwell; all the Angels Gabr. Biel.
in Can. lect. 80.
that are in Heaven, all the Souls that are in Hell, all the Saints and
Prophets that ever were, and all men that are or shall be, must by all means
look toward Her, as the Center and Support of the whole world; as the very Ark
of God, as the Cause of all Creatures, as the Bonavent. in Psalter.
founder of all Blessings, as the Fountain Bernard. apud Salaz. c. 8. v. 35. n.
450.
and Vein of life, and the Author of Petr. Dam. Sermon. 1. de Annunciat.
Salvation. Now lest you should think, that these great Titles (as great as God
himself and our Savior can ever have) are given her chiefly upon the account of
Christ, whose Mother she was, after the Flesh; thorough Catholics will tell
you, that before she was the Mother of Christ, she Anselm. de Excel. Virg. c.
12.
had deserved to be so: that by her own Goodness Ozor. Tom. 3. Conc. 1. in
Annunc. and Conc. 1. in Nativ.
and Grace, she had drawn God down toward her, and induced him Bernardin. de
Bust. 2. part. Sermon. 2. de Coronat. Mariae.
to take her Flesh: and that being as commonly they do term her, Negotium
omnium Seculorum, the work of four thousand years; and possessing eminently
within her self all the Perfections that lie scattered up and down in all
Celestial and subcelestial Creatures; such a complete Hostess could not but
procure, or Salaz Proverb. c. 8. v. 16. n. 106.
at least hasten the coming in of the best Guest. The Founder of the Jesuits
did commonly Salaz. Prove c. 9. v. 4. and 5. n. 144.
bless himself, whenever it came to his mind, that swallowing down Christ at
Mass, he had also by the same means some of the Flesh of this Goddess. And they
say, that on this same account Christ takes delight Judoc. Clictov. Sermon. de
Visitat.
to lie hidden under transubstantiated wafers, and to fall down into men's
stomacs; because it represents and reminds him of his Ancient being in her
womb: and that therefore she An^nymus apud Metaphrast.
would not miss a day, without taking the Sacrament after her Son was in
Heaven, that he might have that sweet satisfaction every day. But when at the
Salutation of Gabriel, she opened her Heart and her Breast to take him in, and
therein to make him her Son; that one Act of humble Obedience expressed in nine
Latin words, Ecce Ancilla, etc. Behold the Handmaid of the Lord, etc. that one
Act of hers they say, is more Meritorious, then God himself in a manner can
recompense. Christians may think 'twas no Merit of hers, but rather a favor of
God; and that all which she could do toward it, was her Duty; but Roman
Catholic Authors, and Saints too, teach otherwise. 1. That by that one Act, she
had fully Stellarum Coron^ B. V. l. 11. part. 2. c. 11.
repaied to God, for Bernard. Sermon. 2. de Pentecost.
all the things, that he ever bestowed upon men; and this they call
Retribution, and take it for the eleventh of those twelve Stars, which shine
continually about her Head. 2. That by that Act, she repaied more then she ever
received her self: and so that Methodius Constantin, Sermon. de Purificat.
God is in her debt. 3. That by that Act, she has done more S. Bernardin.
Sermon. 61. Bernardin. de Bust. Marial. part. 6. Sermon. 2. de Visitatione Mar.
for God, (or as much at the least) then God for her, and all Mankind: and that
men may say to their comfort (rather blaspheme to their confusion) that upon
the Virgins account God is more obliged to them, then they to God. This is the
most stupendous Merit, which they say, Salazar. Prove. 4. v. 13. n. 53.
Christ insisted upon, to shelter himself against the wrath of his own Father;
when, after their interpretation, he prayed thus upon the Cross. O turn thee
unto me, and have mercy on me: give the Kingdom to thy Servant, and save the
Son of thy Handmaid; that is, if thou will not save me from off this Cross for
thy sake, or for my sake; save me for her great Merits sake, who said Behold
the Handmaid of the Lord: and give me also that Kingdom, the Monarchy of the
whole World, which she has Ildelph. Sermon. de Assumt.
deserved by that Act, and which devolves to me, as being her Son. So let all
men here consider both how admirable those Merits, must be which Christ makes
his own shelter of: and how useful to a poor sinner, since they are thus
needful to Christ. We have not yet don. The Virgin Mary appears as great at her
Sons Death, as at his Conception; and if some talk of her saving men, only
because she has brought forth their Savior; thorough Catholics will inform
you, that Quir. Salazar. c 8. v. 19. n. 207.
Conceiving and Bringing forth, are two Acts, which of themselves being
Natural, and not Voluntary, cannot be much Meritorious: and therefore besides
all what she contributes, either by her Interceding, or by her having brought
forth a Savior, toward the Salvation of mankind; she has a good and proper
share with Christ himself, in the very Act of saving them; for first, as God so
loved the world, that he gave them his only Son, etc. Joh. 3.16. So, if you
believe these Roman S. Bonaventur. in verb. Sic Deus, etc.
Doctors and Saints too, the Virgin Mary can say as much: for Christ was hers
and under her Dominion, as Anselm. de Excel. Virg. c. 3.
well as under that of his Father: therefore when she gave him, she gave what
was properly her own. Secondly, she herein did more then God himself; since she
not only gave him to the world, as God did, by consenting, but by offering him
her self most really; for there, they say, she stood by the Cross, not as a
Mother to pity her Son, or as a Disciple to believe on him; but as a Priest
Salazar. supr. n. 211, 212, 213.
to offer him in Sacrifice; to help him in his Sacerdotal Function: and (mark
how far this folly goes) if the Murderers had failed, Aloys. Novarin. Sacrorum
Elect. l. 4. Excursu 49.
to Sacrifice him with her own hands. O Virgin says the supposititious
Epiphanius, Sermon de Laudib. Mariae.
the Stupendous Tresure of the Church! She is both the Priest and the Altar.
She brings both the Table, and the Bread, etc. Thirdly, they say, that she
stood there to Sacrifice her self with him. Her very standing up with her
stretched Arms was Guillelm. in Cant. 7. Statura tua, etc. n. 7.
her Cross: and the Anguish of her heart, Bonavent. de Compass. Virg. Lect. 1.
greater, as they say, or at the least more sensibly felt, then any pain which
her Son did suffer then in his Body, was her Passion. Thus both Christ and his
Mother (says another famous Doctor) had one design; and both offered to God
one and the same Burnt-Sacrifice, He the Blood of his Flesh, and she the Blood
of her Heart. Now believe them who say that Saints, and she especially, are
Mediators and Saviors only by Praying, and not by giving and working by their
very suffering the Grace and Salvation which we pray for. She was (says
Salmeron, a main Supporter of the Roman Church among the Tridentine Fathers)
cooperatrix Salm. Tom. 6. Tract. 6. sect. secundus sensus, p. 39. Edit. Col.
1613.
, that is, Christ's Fellow-laborer in the very Passion to the end, that as a Man
and a Woman did work out the utter ruin of Mankind, so a Man and a Woman
might perfect their Salvation; and as well here as there, the Woman should be
the Instigatrix, or the first Sollicitress, Eve to temt, and Mary to set the
Man to work. Thus she is, says another, Gabr. Biel. in Festo Visitat. Sermon. 1.
the Mother of Redemtion, by shedding her Soul into compassion under, as Christ
did his in Passion upon the Cross. And if Christ seem to baffle away this
Partnership, and vindicate the whole work to himself alone, in the Prophecy of
Isaiah, 63.3. I have trodden the Wine Press alone, and of the People there was
no Man with me. They have a ready Answer for him; It is true Ricard. de laudib.
Mariae V. l. 2. part. 2.
, says one, O Lord, there Arnold. Carnotens. De laud. Virg. Biblioth. Patr.
Tom. 1.
is no Man with thee, but there is a Woman with thee, who suffers in her very
Heart, all the blows and wounds which thou receivest in thy Body. These great
Sufferings and Satisfactions being her own, she may Mendosa Virid. l. 2.
Problem. 5. n. 30.
apply them to whom she pleases, without troubling her Son about it, even so
far sometimes as the Salvation, and the very rescuing damned Men from Petr.
Dam. Sermon. 2. de Nativ. Virginis.
Hell can come to; besides what some other Divines think she may do, by
offering still (in Heaven) both her self and her Son for Manual. Sodalitat. B.
M. c. 2. part. 4. page 91.
the Redemtion of all Men. However, if upon this foundation, that she is by the
Roman Catholics Salazar. Prove. c. 8. v. 19. n. 215, and 222.
called and conceived to be (which otherwise they Ibid. n. 222.
think she could not) the very Redeemer, the Cause and Author of Eternal
Salvation; the Restorer of Mankind; the Albertus Magnus, Bibl. page 88.
Mercy-seat; the Queen, Antonin. in Sum. part. 4. T. 15. c. 3. sect. 3.
the Priest and the Prophet; the Hope of the whole World; the Gate of Heaven;
the Bibl. Mar. p. 89.
Altar of Burnt-sacrifices; the Cherub Mendosa. Virid. l. 2. Probl. 2. n. 13.
of equal light with the other that represented Christ; in a word, any thing
that Blasphemers can think of, to make her, upon her proper account, quite
parallel unto Christ; and as well in the act of Salvation, as in their own
ordinary Prayers, to huddle up both the Handmaid, and the Savior, into one
Jesu Maria together.

Last of all, the Virgin Mary having so well played her Priestly part in
Sacrificing both her self and her Son here upon Earth, she was in all reason,
after the manner of Oblations, to have ascended along with Christ into Heaven;
and it is much wondered by some, Anselm. de Excel. B. V. c. 7.
as at a kind of unkindness, wherefore Christ would, when he went up, leave his
afflicted Mother behind. But they presently satisfy this scruple, by
attributing it to a kind of State Policy: For if both had made their public
entry into Heaven at the same time Ibid.
, it had puzzled the Angels, whether of the two to adore first: So it was
conceived more prudent, that he should go up before, both to prevent all
Jealousy, and to prepare for her coming the whole Celestial Court (which had
bin divided otherwise) to a more noble Reception.

Now she is there, Gods Throne is not too good for her, and her glory is not so
much equal to, as the very same Arnold. Carnotens. supra.
with that of Christ: for (if you can hear a Blasphemy) because she, as well as
Christ, humbled her self to the death of the Cross, Idiota de Laud. Mar. c. 5.
therefore has God highly exalted her, and given her the Name of Mary, (that
is, as they say, Lady and Mistress) which is above all Names, that at this Name
every knee should bow, etc. There she sits, as it becomes both the Missal.
Paris. in Purificatione.
Empress of Heaven, and the Conqueress of Hell. There both the Angelical, and
the human Nature wait on her, Bonavent. in specul. c. 3.
as the two Maids did on Queen Esther. There Saints, and Angels, and
Archangels, are all in their several Capacities her Courtiers, or her Nobles,
her Officers, or her Soldiers, and generally all one with another Salazar.
Prove. c. 8. v. 15. n. 136.
her Servants and her Salves.

The best is, that this large and wide Empire is not settled on her by God, as a
mere Donation Ibid. n. 121. Mendosa Virid. l. 2. Problem. 1. n 1.
and Favor; it is, they say, a just and proper Right of her own, grounded upon
natural Ibid. n. 131.
Equity, both as being the Anselm. de Excel. Virg. c. 4.
Spouse of the Holy Ghost: (on which account they say, Pseudepiphan. de Laud.
Mar.
she had Spiritual Gifts, upon the Title of the Wedding present, and afterward
she was to have what she has now, Heaven and Earth for her Jointure:) and as
having Anselm. ibid. c. 11.
by her own Merits saved and restored all things; or Damascen. de Fide Orthod.
l. 4. c. 15.
as being the Mother of Christ, and therefore Queen Salazar. supra n. 132.
upon as good a Title as he is King, and even as God himself. For, says
another Blasphemer, As God the Ludolphus de Saxonia, de vita Christi. part. 2.
c. 86.
Father is Lord of all, because he has created all through his Power; so is the
Mother Mary the Lady of all, because she has repared and reestablished all
things by her Merits. These things being so, as no true Roman Catholic must
doubt but they are; it concerns us all next to enquire, First, What use this
Queen of the World is pleased to make of her Power. Secondly, What kind of
Homage Men must return to that high and Sovereign Majesty, for the great Favors
and Blessings that flow continually from that use.

As to the use of her Grandeur, both old and new Papists will tell you, That
since all Power is given to Petr. Damian. Sermon. 1. de Nativ. Virg.
her, as to Christ, it is to this Blessed purpose, that all Men may receive, as
well of Antonin. 4. part. T. 15. c. 6. sect. 3.
her, as his Fullness, Grace for Grace; and that every one may take out of her
Bosom, Bernard. Sermon. de Aquae ducti.
all such Blessings as he most desires. Here the Sinner shall find Mercy; the
Righteous, all increase of Grace; the Angels, happiness and Joy; and the whole
Trinity, Glory. Among all others, Kings and Warriers are much concerned on this
account. She has a Temporal Power, both of taking and giving away of Estates.
Thus, by her help, both the Spaniards and the Portugeses discovered and Petr.
Maffaeus. Hist. Indic. l. 2.
got a good part of the East Indies. She turns Armies and Victories to what
side she pleases. Read what they say she did for Philip Nicol. Aegidius, Annal.
Franc. in Philippo Aug.
King of France, against Otho the Emperor; for Histor. Carnot. An. 1328.
Philip de Valois, and Ibid. An. 1304.
Philip le Bell against the Flemings; and for the Cities of Annal. Flandr. l.
12.
Tournay, Meyer. Annal. Fland. An. 1386.
Ipres, Nic. Aegidius, Annal. Franc. in Carol. 7.
Orleans, and Chronic. Deip. An. 1200.
Poictiers, against the English. This last is considerable; for there, they
say, she stood like a great Queen, and the Keys were conveied away by night (no
Body can tell how) from under the Governors Pillow, and found hanging in the
morning by her Image. Her very Shift being once set up as a Banner upon a Wall,
Antonin. 2 part. Hist. tit. 16. c. 2. sect. 5.
routed a great Army; and if any ones Shirt chance but to touch that Blessed
Shift, it may go near to make the whole Body (as once it Anton. Solerius de
Venerat. SS.
did) invulnerable. Her very Images will inspire strength; for when King
Arthurus was tired, Robert. Holc. Sapient Sect. 35. c. 3.
some say, that he had one of her Images, which was painted upon his Shield,
that when he looked on it, did recover him from fainting Fits. You may guess by
these Shifts and Images, what the Lady her self can do.

By virtue of this same Power about Temporal Affairs, she sends, or removes all
Temporal Blessings and Curses; Honors, Riches, and all manner of Earthly
Prosperities are in her hand; and what Gods Eternal and uncreated Wisdom is in
Scripture, Prove. 8.18. the same by a foolish Impiety now is the Virgin Mary in
Popery. Read their Sermons, and see what good use they make of all the Power
given to Christ: Vid. Quirin Salazar. in Proverb. Solom.
See the eighth Chapter of the Proverbs, she is now made blasphemously what
Christ was then, the Tresuress Idiota de Contempl. Virg. in Prolegom.
of all Gods Graces, and the very Tresure Ricard. a S. Laurentio, de Laudib.
Virg. l. 10.
of the Church. It is out of this new Store house, that the greatest Scholars
of Rome, if you will believe them, had their Learning. Albert the Great was a
Leander de viris Illustrib.
dull Fellow, and Duns Scotus a very Wadd. Tom. 1. Annal. Minor. An. 1304.
Dunce, till the Virgin Mary gave them more wit. Vdo Archbishop of Canisius de
B V. l. 5. c. 20.
Magdeburg, and St. Rupert Eradenbach. Sacr. Collect. l. 2. c. 7.
Abbot of Tuits had it the same way. But St. Thomas Aquinas, and S. Tharlevarct
are in this Point most admirable, that one Surius, F. Mart.
became an Angelical Doctor, by swallowing down his Throat a Paper that Ave
Maria was written upon; and this other got the full understanding of the whole
Bible, by drinking out of a Silver Cup, a sweet Liquor Balanghem. 25 Dec.
which she gave him. Not to trouble you with more Instances, what can you add
to what they say, that She is the very Bonavent. inspecul. c. 3.
Ahysse and Ocean, Salazar. Prove. 8. v. 27 n. 364.
from whence all Blessings flow, like so many streams into the Church: that she
is the true Mother, who keeps us always like Embrions in her Ibid. v. 18. n.
190.
Bowels, and makes us live with her own Breath: that she is both the Neck and
the Hand Idem, c. 31. n. 118.
, that is, both the passage and only means through which our cries may go up to
God, and his Blessings come down to us. They who will speak at a soberer rate,
compare the Virgin Georg. Venet. Have. Cant. 1. T. 4. c. 38.
to the Moon, which both qualifies and transmits all the Influences that come
to us from the Sun and other Planets, that is, from Christ and all his Saints.
But here to speak the plain Truth, without terms of Astrology, they do find an
absolute Decree, made by all the three Persons together (and God knows where
they can find it) whereby Salazar. Prove. c. 8. v. 18. n. 193.
God the Father has obliged himself to his Daughter; and the Son, to his
Mother; and the Holy Ghost, to his Spouse, to show no favor to Mankind, but
what she shall please to bestow on them. Through her, they say, Pet. Dam. Sermon.
de Annunc.
with her, and in her, all must be don: and as nothing was ever made without
her Son, so nothing is made now without her self.

The better to perform this vast Work, and to scatter up and down far and near
her Graces upon all sorts of Creatures, they fancy in her four Jacobus Episcop.
Genuensis. De nativ. gloriosiss. Virg. Sermon. 3.
Laps or Bosoms, which like four great Magazins, furnish the Church with all
Blessings. 1. A Lap, or Bosom of Favor for the Righteous. 2. That of Meekness,
for the Oppressed. 3. That of Mercy, for the desperate Sinners. 4. And that of
Glory, for them who die in her Service. The Bosom of Favor is reserved for few
Persons; such as are Prophets, orderly Monks, and all other devout Men and
Women, who may without any scandal be hidden Idem ut sup.
under her Mantle. The Bosom of Glory belongs to another Life: But the other
two, namely of Meekness and Mercy, are of a marvelous use for this.

Her Bosom of Meekness is open to all such Persons, as either groan under
Oppression, or are in eminent danger. As when she was pleased to come down her
self to break the Goal to Odo Gissaeus, Histor. Virginis Anic. l. 3. c. 38.
Prisoners; to sew, and to put up again the torn Astolf. de Miraculis B. M. 1.
1.
Bowels of Valentin; to refit and set on again Heads Vincent. in specul. l. 29.
c. 4.
cut off, and hanging only by a very small skin; or to set new Bzovius, Tom.
13. Annal. an. 122. 1210. n. 9.
Eyes, and new Caesarius, l 7. c. 24.
Tongues, instead of those that were bored out or pulled off; or to break the
Hangmans Halters, Hist. B. V. Montisserrati.
to save her Servants from being hanged. So when you take her to be above, she
is about some work of Meekness, either in a Chronic. Deip. an. 1116.
deep Well, to save a Boy; in a River, to lead a Miraeus. Chronic. Ord.
Praemonstrat.
Horse; or on a dark pair of stairs, Chronic. Deip. an. 400.
to keep St. Martin from tumbling down, where the Devil had scattered Pease.

To this Meekness, you may refer some other charitable Works, not indeed so
necessary, as the saving Men from the Gallows, and the healing of burst
Entrails; but yet very useful and comfortable in the way of Roman Piety; and in
this way thus far that may be true, which otherwise were blasphemous; that,
Anselm. de Excel. Virg.
as they say, the Virgin, (such as they conceive her to be), shows to the world
greater Examples of kindness, and Humility, then Christ our Savior ever did;
that is, whereas Christ is not known to have come down out of Heaven, in any
visible manner, (such as is necessary to give Example) ever since his
Ascension; their Virgin Mary does nothing else. For ever since the time, that
Popery was spread in the World, every day is blessed with some Examples of her
great Condescension, when she or something else under her Name, is as often
seen in their Convents, as if Heaven was not her Abode: when she comes down
from the height of all her Glory, to present Chronic. Deip. an. 119.
S. Alberic with a white Hood, instead of the black one that he had before: to
mortify the wanton Reins of Leander. de Viris Illust. Ord. Praedic.
Conradin, or Idem in vita Reginaldi.
Reginald: to help Women in a Chronicon. Deip. an. 1529.
hard travel: to give suck to aged Persons: to mend clothes Id. an. 1170.
under a Bed: to treat Travelers in Bover. Tom. 1. Annal. Capuc.
a wood: to serve fasting Monks with Henriquez. Fascicul. SS. Cister^. l. 1.
dict. 5. c. 12.
Sweetmeats: to hug Caesarius Histor. l. 7. c. 55.
and kiss, and marry sometimes Chronic. Deip. an. 1235.
one, sometimes another. And brutish men cannot perceive, that these
kindnessess are much below the mean Condition of an ordinary civil Woman, much
more below the high Estate of the blessed Virgin Mary.

The Bosom, or Lap of Mercy carries them farther. It is upon a quite other
account, then the having born the Savior, that they call her Missal. Romans Miss.
de B. V.
the Queen of Heaven; the Fountain of Compassion: the spring and Dispenser of
Mercy; the Gate Missal. Paris. in Vigil. Purific.
of Heaven: the Miss. de B. V.
Vein of Pardon; the Hope Miss. in Octav. Nativ.
of the World: and the Octav. Assumt.
Mother of Mercy. For it is believed amongst them, that just as King Ahasuerus
did promise Gabr. Biel. in Can. Sect. 80. E.
once the half of his Kingdom to Queen Esther, when she appeared for the Jews;
Esth. c. 5. v. 6. God the Father has really settled the disposal of his Mercy,
(the better half of his Kingdom here in the Church) upon the Virgin Mary now
appearing for Catholics. And as they are pleased to imagine Christ and his
Mother, to be represented in Genes. 1. by the two great Viegas in Apocal. e. 12.
Lights in Heaven, they do leave Christ the Sun to rule the Day, that is the
Children of Light: but the Virgin Mary must be the Moon, to rule the Night, and
to provide for the poor Children of Darkness. And therefore Innocent the 3d,
the best Scholar of all the Popes, may be thought the wisest also, when he
advises, Innoc. 3 Fest. Assumt. Sermon. 2.
sinners lying in the Night of their sins, well to look up toward the Moon. For
the Light of the Sun is too piercing: and tho, say Anselm. de Excel. V. c. 6.
they, Christ be the Savior; yet is he the Judge also: and so enquires after
men's Deserts; scorning to Salazar. Prove. c. 8. v 30. n. 394.
be the Father of any other, but just men; whereas the Mother Bernard. in
Verba. Signum magnum.
scruples at nothing; but like the Sun, which she is clothed with, Apoc. 12.1.
shines equally on good and bad: and what is most wanting to these, she supplies
it with her Merits.

This unchristian Mercifulness, and damnable Encouragement to go for Salvation
to a Creature rather then to God and his Christ, is grounded by these Catholics
upon this threefold account. 1. The Virgin Mary is a Woman, and therefore
Richard. de Laud. Mariae. l. 1. c. 2.
is by her Sex, more kind, and tender hearted: Whereas one may fear in Jesus
the Severity both of his Godhead, and Manhood. 2. She is a real Mother, not to
Christ alone, but to us all: and so more Antonin. in sum. maj. p. 4. titu. 150.
2.
indulgent to all her poor sinful Children: and these more familiar and bold
with her. 3. But there is a third reason beyond all this, which in good equity
makes her to be good and kind to them all, and especially to the worst of them;
because Salaz supra.
their Sins have made Her Mother, have made her Queen, and have made all what
she is above the simple Daughter, as she was once, of Eliakim, and of Anna. If
therefore, says Anselm de Excel. Virg. c. 1. and 12.
their S. Anselm, She has bin made Mother because of me, why should she not be
Mother to me, and other worse sinners, then I? And with what Equity could she
forbear to succor us in all our sins; since it is for us, and for our sins that
she has bin elevated to her Greatness? Upon this most filthy suggestion, they
build this most impious Doctrine; that it Mendosa Virid. l. 2. Probl. 2. n. 14.
is a much safer way for sinners to go to the Virgin, then to Christ; witness
her white Chronic. Deip. an. 1231.
Ladder, that could presently help up to Heaven those whom his red one did
shake off and tumble down: witness the heavy Plagues, which, as they Mendosa
ibid n. 16.
say, she often stops if you do but carry about her dear Image, when all
Devotions and Prayers to God did but prove vain: witness whole Hundreds of
loose Examples scattered up and down in her Chronicles, which Christ being
about to punish, this indulgent Mother did dispense with. Matter mea, etc. She
is the Chronic. Deip. an. 1360.
Sovereign in such Matters, and can dispense with the Laws of Christ, when she
sees Cause; And if she be severe, and even almost cruel sometimes, it is
commonly but in some light matters, that Crucify neither Flesh nor Blood, and
where it is easy to please her. For example, she used to plague Alexander
Alensis, Bust. Marial. 1. p. Sermon. 7.
an honest and learned Schoolman, with a great pain in his head, yearly upon
her Conception day, because he did not observe it. Once she struck down dead a
Preacher, at the very Henr. de Hassia ap. Gonon. an. 1477.
end of his Sermon: and she would have damned Chronic. Deip. an. 1430.
eternally Francis Milet upon somewhat the like account; both were very fools
for their pains; for what needed the one, to preach, and the other to hear
Discourses, and keep Papers against her immaculate Conception? Thus when she
killed Bzov. 15. Annal. an. 1383. n. n.
one once, and scratcht Chronic. Deip. an. 781.
out the Eye of another; what pleasure temted them to abuse her poor Image? I
pity more Ibid. an. 1538.
the honest Painter whom she struck blind, for having once but touched it: or
the Vincent. Specul. Hist. l. 7. c. 89.
maid, and Vita S. Otton. ap. Sur. 2. Jul.
poor Labourer; when I read, how the ones Thread did entangle it self about, and
stick pitifully to her tongue, for moistening and spinning it upon the
Annunciation: and the other fell down flat in his Field for cutting Corn upon
the Assumtion day: as also the rich Citizen's Wife, and Child, whom she
destroyed one after another; and damned the Husband besides, for having hanged
Sigebert. Chronic. p. 154. Edit. Paris. 1512.
about his Wives Bed (then lying in) a kind of Tapistry, that belonged once to
her Church. These few Persons, I say may give warning to thousands not to
displease this Goddess in trifling things, where it is so easy to humor her.
But in all other great matters more difficult to flesh and Blood, and more
essential to Holiness, let all Catholics be sure of this to their encouragement
to serve her, that there is no Sin against the Gospel, nor no Abomination
against Nature, that this Indulgent Mother cannot overcome and pardon with her
great Mercifulness. Let a Robber but hold his hand, and fast upon a Saturday;
and fall again to killing and plundering all the whole week; if he chance to
suffer for it, she will force Nature Th. Cantiprat. de Apib. l. 2. c. 29.
to make him live with his head off, till he confess, and be saved; it may be
she will go also to his Burial, Caesarius Histor. Memorab. l. 7. c. 59.
as once she did at Trent, to have it honorably don. Upon the like or easier
terms she will rescu a Blasphemer Johannes Bareleta. Sermon. Ter. 4 Hebdom. 2.
Quadr.
from perishing by the fall of a House, and leave others more honest, but not
so devout toward her, crushed thereby. She will be so merciful, as to undertake
any Drudgery even during fifteen whole years, to save a whore, Menolol.
Cisterc. 6. Nov.
not from sin, but Infamy. The worst sort of Incest, and Murder Vincent.
Specul. Hist. l. 7. c, 93.
cannot overtop her Compassion: nor make her Modesty ashamed of appearing at
the Bar, in behalf of her guilty, but otherwise devout Client. She will go her
self to the Gallows, and there hold up the feet Chronic. Deip. an. 1358.
of a Thief, being a humble Servant of hers, for fear the Halter may hurt his
neck, when he is hanging at the Gallows. At last, when such worshippers as
these come to die; she will take such care of their Souls, as either to keep
them safe, whole Bonfinius Rerum Hungar. Decad. 3. l. 3.
years, in their dead, drowned, and torn Bodies, till some Priest come to
absolve them: or if Divine Vengeance prevent the Priest; she will apply to them
Mendosa. Virid. l. 2. Probl. 5. n. 30.
her own Merits, and command her Son to do the like, (for she prays him as
Petr. Damian. Sermon. 1. de Nativ. Virg.
a Mistress not a Servant) and keep them from going to Hell. However some good
way or other (and let Ruffians be sure of this, having the grace of being
Catholics) it is morally impossible, I have a good Mendosa. Virid. l. 2. Probl.
9.
Author for what I say, it is morally impossible, that any one, who has any
true devotion for this good Lady, can be damned. For if she do not come down
purposely to make them Chaste, whether by laying her Chronic. Ordin. Min. part.
4. l. 10,
hand on their Breast; or rubbing their backs Leander. de Viris illust. Ord.
Praedic. in vita Conradi.
with something, (as I said before, she does sometimes); she will save them with
that Almighty Power which she has in Hell, as well as in their Church, of
being, as she is called, Pseudon. Ephrem. Sir. in Threno Virg.
the Hope, and Advocate of damned Persons. Do not trouble your self with this
question that your best Doctors are puzzled at, Richard. de Laudib. Virg. 1. 4.
with what Justice it is possible for her to save damned or damnable men; and to
save them after they are dead without Repentance? It is enough for you to know
Rich. ibid.
she does it. And what might she not do for these Villains, since she can with
her two Angels be a Midwife Discipulus. De Miracul. Mar. Tom. 2. Sermon. Exempl.
25. Palbart. l. 21. c. 13.
to very whores; your main Interest is to see, in return of these great
Mercies, Kindnesses, and Protections, what Services now she will have.

CHAP. VI.
Concerning the Adoration and new Ways of serving the Virgin Mary.
WHEN the Roman Doctors are among themselves, either worshipping at their
Altars, or discoursing in their Pulpits, or teaching in their public Schools,
they freely talk of adoring Vid. Council. Nicenum. 2.
the blessed Saints; they think them to be Canonized most principally for this
end, that they may publicly Antonin. Sum. part. 3. l. 22. c. 8.
be adored and prayed to: and they highly commend the Greek, who at his first
Conversion professed that he did Salazar. Prove. c. 8. v. 15. n. 114.
adore from his heart our Lady the Queen of the world. And their S. Damascen is
herein their great Goliath driving before him all the Fathers with this weapon.
Decet enim, etc. It must be so, Damasc. 1. De Nativ. and 2. de Assumt.
or it is fitting that this Mother of God should enjoy that which belongs to her
Son; and therefore the Glory of being adored by all men.

But when the Papists are amongst us, tho they keep still their hearty
thoughts, they do quite reform their Language; they are ashamed to say in
England, what they are proud to do at Rome. If you believe what they say here,
it was never heard in their Church, that they must adore any Saint, Censura
Colon. p. 228.
unless by chance it be in that sense, in which Jacob adored his Brother, and
Abigail, King David: which is no Divine honor at all; but only such a
reverence, as is deferred Coster. in Enchirid.
to Kings, or Fathers, or such honorable Persons; and therefore, (and justly
too) why not to Saints? And if you be inquisitive, and press them farther about
this Point, then they will run out into so many Distinctions and terms of Art
as will puzle any Layman: Dulia, Latria, hyperdulia; Absolute and Relative
Worship; Divine Adoration, and bordering upon Divine; Godhead essential, and
Godhead participated: so that it will go very hard with them, if they do not
leave him whom they pretend to satisfy, as ignorant, and more confounded, then
he was before. They will tell you, that they intend not, either to adore the
Virgin, or to adore her otherwise then respectively; that it is in a mere
relation to her Son: and those Intentions being in their hearts, it is
impossible there to search out, either the Truth, or the untruth of what they
say. But if you look to what they do, instead of harkening to what they say;
their most solemn and practical Devotions have such a plain and real language,
as must declare to all the world, both what their Religion is in it self, and
what you may best think of it.

1. First they bestow and accumulate upon the Virgin all the best Titles, which
both in the Church, and in the Scripture are proper to God. For in their most
solemn Devotions, she is a She God, a She Savior; the Queen of Queens, the
Fountain of Salvation, the Ladder, and Gate of Heaven, etc. And it were great
folly in us, to think that they do not worship her, according to what they call
her; since it is not in such Rencounters, that men use to play the Hypocrites.

2. Secondly, in their ordinary Prayers, and Praises and Giving of Thanks, they
do most commonly join her with God: Jesu Maria comes in one word out of their
Mouths; and Glory be to God, and to the blessed Virgin; is but one complete
Doxologie, at the end of most of their Books. Now such an Association as this,
is in the judgment of the Fathers, a clear Evidence of being God. Thus they
prove Athanas. Orat. 4. contr. Arian. page 260. Edit. Comel.
against the Arians, that the Angel, whom Jacob prayed to, when he blessed his
Grandchildren, Genesis 48.16. is the Lord Christ; because in that prayer he is
joined with the God of his Fathers: and that this Christ is very God, Ibid. p.
159.
because the Apostles join him with God, both in their Prayers and their
Praises. Grace be to you, and Peace from God the Father, and the Lord Jesus
Christ. Romans 1.7. etc. The strength of their Demonstration consists in this,
that in all those days, both when the Prophets and Apostles did write the Holy
Scriptures; and when the holy Fathers did maintain the Faith which is contained
in them; no man was seen or heard praying Athanas. supra. Cyrill. Alexand. Tom.
5. in Thesaur. page 115. Ed. Paris. 1638.
for any thing both to the Father, and to an Angel, or to any other Creature:
(for Popery was not yet abroad) nor wishing, that God, or his Angel, or any
greater Creature whatsoever, would grant or give him any thing. And they take
it for an insufferable piece of Cyrill. Alex. ibid. (...), etc. (...).
Sawciness, when the Arians dare couple, (as upon their Principles they do) any
Creature, with the Lord God. Such was the known Catholic Faith, and Profession
of the Primitive times; for otherwise judicious and learned Men would not have
produced it in that manner, as an undoubted Evidence against such subtle and
dangerous adversaries. Now both the Roman Faith and practice taking a quite
contrary way; we, I hope, are more bound to think, that the Papists, who follow
this, are Idolaters; then that the holy Fathers, who went on in that, were very
Fools.

3. Thirdly, The Papists apply to the Virgin the most illustrious Places of
Scripture, that belong directly to Christ: and by this means, either disable
all true Christians, from the possibility of proving by the Scriptures, that He
is God; or prove as well, that She is so too. I will mention out of many, but
few Instances. Every word almost of the eighth Chapter of the Proverbs, which
does describe the Eternal Wisdom of God, which by the Fathers is applied to
Christ alone; and which is none of the least cogent Mediums they stand upon, to
demonstrate him to be that true essential and uncreated Wisdom, is now turned
another way, Vid. Salazar. in Prove.
to deifie their Virgin. It is by her, namely the Virgin, if you believe those
Abusers of Holy Scripture, that Kings reign, and that Princes decree Justice.
v. 15. By her Princes rule, and Nobles, and all Judges of the Earth. 16. Riches
and honor are with her, true durable Riches and Righteousness. 18. She leads in
the way of Righteousness, she causes them who love her to have substance. The
Lord, (says she, out of these Blasphemers mouths) possessed me in the
beginning of his ways; I was set up from everlasting; when he prepared the
Heavens, I was there, etc. and so all along. They scruple not Bust. Marial.
Sermon. de Nomin. Mariae.
to say of her, what God Almighty says of himself, Malach. 1.11. From the
rising up of the Sun, unto the going down of the same, my Name shall be great
among the Gentiles. And that of Christ, Matthew. 28.18. Novarin. Vmbra Virgin. l.
4. excurs. 122. n. 1149.
All power is given unto me in Heaven and in Earth; and what John the Baptist
says, Antonin. 4. part. tit. 15. c. 6. sect. 3.
of her Fullness have all received, etc. namely, Salazar. Prove. c. 3. v. 29. n.
200.
the Sinner Pardon: the Righteous, Grace: the Angels, joy: and the whole
Trinity, Glory. And therefore, Idiot. Contempl. 1.
say they as blasphemously, God has highly exalted her, and given her a name
above all names, that in her name all knees should bow, etc. Phil. 2.9, 10. And
after the same rate, what God says of his only begotten Son, Heb. 1.6. Let
Vitis Florig. Lect. 27.
all the Angels of God worship her; and let Men boldly come unto the Throne of
Grace (from him to her) that we may obtain Mercy, and find Grace to help us in
time of need, Hebr. 4.16. It were endless to rehearse all.

4. Fourthly, They allow her a whole Psalter, Vid. Psalter. S. Bondvent.
as the Church does to God Almighty: And whatever David could say in the
Highest strein of his Zeal, toward the magnifying of Gods Glory, or the
imploring of his Mercy, or the expressing his Faith in him (Gods name being
out, and that of the Virgin in) they both transfer and improve it toward the
magnifying of this Lady. For Example, in the first Psalm, instead of Blessed be
the Man, etc. it begins thus, Blessed be the Man that loves thy name, O Virgin
Mary: Thy mercy shall comfort his Soul, etc. The second, Why do the Heathen,
etc? has it thus, Why do our Enemies imagine vain things against us? Thy right
hand, O Mother of God, shall protect us: Come ye to her, all ye that Travel,
and are heavy laden, and you shall find rest for your Souls, etc. The fourth
thus, When I did call, thou O Lady heardest me: Thou were pleased to remember
me, out of thy high Throne; for thy mercy is on all them that call upon thy
holy Name, and thy Majesty be blessed through out all Generations. Glorify her, O
all ye Nations, etc. The 16. thus, Save me, O Lady, for I have put my trust in
thee, etc. The 19. thus, The Heavens do declare thy glory, O Virgin, etc. The
29. thus, Bring to our Lady, O ye Sons of God, bring praise and worship to our
Lady. Give strength to thy Servants, O holy Mother, and bless them that
magnify thee. Let Heaven and Earth bless thee, the Sea, and all the corners of
the World, etc. The 42. thus, Like as the Heart desires the water Brooks, so
longs my Soul after thy love, O holy Virgin: for thou art the Mother of my
life, the Nurse and restoration of my flesh, and both the beginning and end of
my Salvation, etc. The 44. thus, We have heard with our ears, O Lady, and our
Fathers have told us, that thy Merits are ineffable, and thy Miracles
wonderful: Thy Virtues are innumerable, and thy Mercies inestimable. Rejoice in
her, O my soul, for many good things are laid up for them that praise her.
Blessed be thou, O Queen of Angels, etc. The 51. thus, Have mercy on me, Lady,
who art called the Mother of Mercies, and according to the Bowels of thy
Compassions, make me clean from all mine Iniquities. Pour thy Grace upon me,
and withdraw not thy usual Mercies from me, etc. The 68. thus, Let Mary arise,
and let all her Enemies be crushed under her feet, etc. The 72. thus, Give the
King thy judgments, O Lord, and thy Mercy to the Queen his Mother: Salvation
and life, O Lady, are in thy hand, perpetual Joy and glorious Eternity, etc.
The 73. thus, Truly God is loving unto Israel, even to such as worship his
Mother, etc. The 84. O how amiable are thy Dwellings, O Lady of Hosts, etc. The
92. It is a good thing to give thanks, and confess to the Virgin Mary, and to
sing Praises to her Glory: to tell of her Merits that rejoice the heart, and to
imitate her Works, which rejoice the Angels, etc. The 94. It is the Lord God,
to whom Vengeance belongs, but thou art the Mother of Mercy, who turnest him to
compassion. The 95. thus, O come, let us sing to our Lady, let us heartily
rejoice in the Virgin our she Savior. The 103. Praise the Virgin Mary, O my
Soul, and all that is in me, praise and glorify her name, etc. The 110. thus,
The Lord said unto my Lady, Mother, sit thou at my right hand. Be thou reigning
with me. Have mercy upon me, O Lady, Mother of splendour: enlighten me O thou
Mother of Truth and Virtue, etc. The 117. O praise the Lady, all ye Heathen;
glorify her, all ye Nations, for her Merciful kindness remains upon us for
ever: whosoever will serve her, shall be justified: but whosoever neglects her,
shall die in his sins, etc. The 144. begins thus, Blessed be our Lady, who
teaches her Servants to fight, etc. The 148. thus, O praise our Lady of Heaven,
praise her in the height. Praise her Sun and Moon. And so all along to the very
last, O praise the Lady in her Holiness: praise her in her Virtues and
Miracles. Let every Spirit, or every thing that has breath, praise our Lady.
This Service goes under the name of a Superangelical and Seraphical Doctor, a
Roman Saint, and a Cardinal besides, whom they call St. Bonaventura? Give this
Worship what name you please, it is all that David, and Moses, and other
Prophets, could bestow on the Lord God of Israel. Now when the same is bestowed
upon a holy Creature, how great and holy soever, yet a Creature, judge what it
is.

5. Fifthly, Lest the Lord God of Israel should receive any kind of honor from
Men, where the Lady had not her share: what ever more eminent pieces of Divine
Service they can find scattered in Holy Scripture, they will be sure to give it
her. For example, that of Moses, Deuteronomy. 32. Give ear, O ye Heavens, to what I
will speak of the Virgin Mary. Magnify her with me, etc. O perverse and
crooked Generation! acknowledge our Lady for thy she Savior: Is she not thy
Mother, that has begotten thee in Faith? If thou forsakest her, thou art no
friend unto our Sovereign Caesar. O that thou were wise, and would consider
thy last end. As an Infant cannot live without his Nurse, no more can thou be
saved without this our Lady. Therefore let thy Soul thirst after her, and do
not leave her till she has blessed thee. Let thy mouth be filled with her
praise, and sing of her greatness all the day long. That of the same Moses at
the red Sea, Exodus 15. Let us sing to our glorious Lady the Virgin Mary: Our
Lady is Almighty: Her name is next to God: She has thrown into the Sea the
Chariots of Pharaoh and his Host, etc. O Lady, thou have delivered my Soul from
the Lion. O my dearest Lady, cover thou me, as a Hen does, etc. I am all thine,
and all I have is thine: I will put thee as a signet upon my heart, etc. That
of Isaiah 12. I will sing to thee, O Lady, etc. for thou have comforted me: my
Lady is my Savior, I will trust in thee, and will not fear. Thou art my
strength in the Lord, and art become my Salvation: with joy will I draw Waters
out of thy brook, and I will call upon thy name always, etc. That of King
Hezekias, in the same Prophet, 38.9. when he was recovered from his mortal
Disease. I said, in the midst of my days I will go to Mary, etc. Father,
Mother, and Friends did forsake me. but Mary has holden me up. I will put my
trust in her, in the morning, in the evening, and at noonday. (God) had, as it
were a Lion, broken my bones: but thou, our Lady, have delivered my Soul from
perishing; my Darling, from the hand of the Dog, etc. That of the three
Children, commonly so called, All the works of the Lord, bless our Lady: praise
and magnify her for ever: O ye Angels, bless our Lady, etc. Blessed be thou, O
Crown of Kings: Let every knee in Heaven, in Earth, and in Hell, bow unto thy
Name, etc. That of Zachary, Luke 1.38. Blessed be thou, Lady Mother, etc. Save
us from all our Enemies, etc. and perform the Mercy promised to our Fathers and
us, that we being delivered out of the hands of our Enemies, may serve thee
without fear, etc. And thou Mary shall be called the Prophetess of the Highest,
by whom he has given the knowledge of Salvation, etc. By the Bowels of thy
Mercy, O Morning Star, do thou visit us from on high. To complete Idolatry with
absurdity, that very Hymn, wherewith she adored once her God, is with some
parcels of the Song of Annah, 1 Samuel 2. now turned into an Office to adore her:
My Soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit has rejoiced in my Lady, etc.
There is no Saint like our Lady, etc. Let Sion and Jerusalem rejoice and praise
Mary, for she is the greatest among the Ladies of Israel: She makes poor, and
she makes rich: She brings low, and she lifts up on high. This Lady of ours is
higher then the Heavens, broader then the Earth, and purer then the very Stars.

6. Sixthly, She is adored with the most solemn and elevated Office, that the
ancient Church could worship God with, namely, Te Deum. We praise thee, O Mary,
we Melch. Inchofern. Ep. B.M. ad finem.
acknowledge thee to be the Lady. All the Earth does worship thee, as the Spouse
of the everlasting Father. To thee all Angels, etc. continually do cry, Holy,
holy, holy, Mary the Mother of God. The holy Church through out all the world does
acknowledge thee, Mother of an Infinite Majesty: Thou art the Queen of Glory, O
Mary, the Ark of Grace, and the Ladder of Heaven: Thou art the hope of all the
world; the Salvation of them that call on thee; the Teacheress of the Apostles;
the strength of the Martyrs, etc. O Lady, save thy People, etc. Vouchsafe, O
Lady, to keep us this day and for ever. O Lady, have mercy upon us, have mercy
upon us. O Lady, let thy mercy lighten upon us, as our trust in thee, etc.
Lastly, there is added to her Honor, that Prayer which belongs to the Holy
Ghost, Veni Creator; and which, some say, the Council of Constance at their
meeting, were pleased to present the Virgin with. Come Mother of Grace, Spring
of Mercy, Light of the Church, Queen, Star, etc. come to defend the Church, to
destroy Heresy, and to make peace, etc. And in a word, to do any thing that an
honest and pious Council may better expect of the holy Ghost.

7. Seventhly, There is a whole Bible made and Printed to her Honor, Biblia
Mariae. Albertus Magnus, both a great Scholar, and a great Bishop, and a kind
of Roman Saint, is the Prophet who, as it is thought, composed it. This Holy
Book gives the Virgin all or Biblia Mariae, Tit. Page Omnia fere.
most part of what was in the true Bible either said or intended for God and
Christ. As for Example, in Genesis, She is the truth both of the Altar, which
Noah built, and of the Sacrifice which he offered: and the Sweet savor which
there was smelled, is nothing else then her Prayer. She is the Ladder which
Jacob saw, Genesis 28. wherewith Christ is to come down to us, and we are to come
up to him. In Exodus, she is said to be both the true Mercy-seat, and the great
Altar of Burnt-offerings. In Leviticus and Numbers, she is the Ark of the
Covenant, the Rock whence flow the Waters of Grace; and the Star, which Balaam
saw, etc. In Joshuah, she is the Border of our Heavenly Inheritance; the
Window, through which we must escape and be saved from Jericho, that is, from
perishing in and with the World; the Ark, which marches before us to Canaan,
that is, Heaven, there to prepare us a resting place; the City of Refuge, where
those must seek shelter whosoever flee from the Wrath of God, etc. In the Book
of Judges, she is the true and great Captain, in whose hand our Celestial
Father puts the whole Land, Heaven, all Power, and Himself. Therefore take
heed, says this Godly Bible, from going to war without her. In Ruth, she is
the true Ruth (with more probability then the Captain) who goes to the Field,
that is the Church, there to glean ears of corn left in the Field by the
Reapers, that is, some few which she rescues from Devils: Thus she gleans
whomsoever she pleases, for Boaz has charged the reaping Angels not to to
touch her, Ruth 2.9.15, 16. When she has gleaned them, she takes them up into
the Bosom of her Mercy, and carries them into the City, v. 8. that is, into the
Celestial Jerusalem. In the 1. Kings 1.2, 3. She is the fair and young Virgin,
who is to lie in the Kings or Gods Bosom: and inflames him to love and
compassion toward his People. Thus this Bible running all along to the
Revelation after this rate; at last ends with this Prayer, instead of, the
Grace of our Lord, etc. O Queen of Mercy, Grace and Glory; Emperess of all the
Creatures, blot out all my Transgressions, and lead me to the life everlasting.

8. The Virgin having Bibles, and Psalms and other Instruments of Devotion,
wherewith Christians serve God and Christ; there is no reason she should want
Churches. And she has them in so great a number, consecrated to her Service,
and Visited to her honor; and all in such a special manner, that as they
impiously are used to say, Salazar. Prove. e. 31. v. 11. n. 55.
that the Holy Ghost is jealous of Joseph on her account, because they both are
her Husbands; God Almighty the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, may justly
be Jealous of that Idol, which appearing under her Name, gets more Churches to
its Service, then God to his.

Those men cover this Shame but with Figleaves, who give out these Churches, to
be but Bell. de Cult. Sanct. l. 3. c. 4. sect. Altera solutie.
Palaces: and herein as well their own Church Books, as their very Goddess
gives them the lie. Their own Church Books; For they have not one Church
consecrated to God, since Popery, that is not with the same words and order
consecrated to the Virgin. Pontifical. Romans Tit. de Dedication. Eccles.
Sanctificetur, etc. Let this Church be Sanctified and consecrated, in the Name
of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost to the Honor of God and of the
Glorious Virgin: and to the memory of such a Saint. By which words it appears,
that, tho the Palace be pretended to be but a Memorial, to such a Saint, talis
Sancti; it must be a Church to the Virgin; or not to God. Since He an She have
the same Rank and Interest, in that main End, that the Church is consecrated
to. I say that their very Goddess also confutes their distinction between a
Palace and a Church, whenever she appears abroad for the building either of
them. Witness the Celestial Chronic. Deip. an. 1274.
Ladder, and the ascending Angels, and her self above them all, to mark the
very Ground, where she would have a Church built to her Honor. Witness S.
Balduin the Ermite; whom this evil Spirit (for the S. August. contra Faust. l.
20. c. 21. item de Civit. l. 20 passim.
good Spirits abhor such things) chid severely Chronic. Deip. an. 1112.
for not building a Church so fast, as she did wish, in a place that She had
chosen, for them that would serve her. Witness that large and square Stone of
Anis, where she declared, what she intended for her self, both in that and all
other places. Odo Gissaus. Histor. Virg. Anic.
This is the Place, says she, which I have chosen to this purpose, that here,
and hereafter mortal men may worship me and serve me throughout all
Generations. Now, I hope, such houses for Devotion, Prayer and Worship, by what
name soever you call them, are just that which we use to call Churches: by
making them stately and Roial, you may make them Palaces also: but this
Magnificency cannot unchurch them. The Jesuit Canisius is plain and downright,
(and herein more sincere then his good Brother Bellarmin), for he calls them
Templa Mariana Canisius. De B. V. l. 5. c. 23.
the Temples, or the Churches of Mary.

In those Churches they say that she will appear sometimes in a created
capacity only, either to sing her part among the Nuns like a Chorister: or to
burn Incense to Perfume Bover. Tom. 1. Annal. Capucin.
the Church, like a Diacon: or to give the Sacrament Chronic. Deip. an. 1248.
like a Priest. Visne, etc. that is, My Son Sylvester, will thou take the Body
of my Son? or to Confirm her worshippers, and cross them Leand. Albert. in vita
Jordan.
all with her Sons hand: or to sit in an Episcopal Throne, like a Bishop. But
at last her main purpose is to appear there more like her self: to proclaim
before all the world that she is the Blosius in Monili.
Mother of God, and the Queen both of men and Angels: (and upon this account
Bellarmins Palace well becomes her) to swear Henriquez in Guntelin. 13. Sept.
Catholics to her Service: to promise them Nicephor. Eccles. Hist. l. 15. c. 25.
protection, and all spiritual Blessings, upon condition, they shall pray to
her heartily, and at the Service of God both begin Chronic. Deip. 221.
and end with her Praises. Sometimes she will take this trouble upon her, of
teaching them how to do it. And this is the Model she gave and sung once to S.
Godrick, S. Maria, etc. Matthew. Paris. in vita Godric.
Holy Mary Mother of Christ, blot out my Sins, reign in my heart; and bring me
up to Happiness with God alone. God himself cannot have more, and Churches by
their usual Consecration promise no less. And to render this Consecration yet
more solemn, as the Ground where these Churches stand is commonly marked outby
the Virgin: so the Consecrating of them to her Service is now and then Odo
Gissaeus Histor. B. V. Anic.
performed by her Angels.

9. Ninthly, These Churches of hers have Altars, which are no part of a Palace;
and which are dedicated to her Service. Every Altar, even in Christ's own
Church, is consecrated to this double use, to wit Pontificat. Roman. supra.
to the Honor of God; and to that of the Glorious Virgin: and this on several
respects, either Ibid.
as a Stone, or a Table, or a Sepulcher, or a complete Altar, twenty times. But
besides this, She has as many other Altars, which are proper to her alone;
where if God have any share, it is as it were, but by the by. Such as the
Rosary Altars; Mariana Altaria, the Altars of the good Mary; and sometimes
under several Titles; Chronic. Deip. an. 1287.
five such in one and the same Church. The Holy God of Israel never had so many
in his own Temple. It is both a great disingenuity to disguise, and as great an
impudence to face out this gross and open Idolatry, with saying as they will,
sometimes, that these belong to God alone, as Altars: and to the blessed
Saints, as Sepulchers. For, first the Virgin Mary left no Bones; if that be
true, which they say, that her whole Body was taken up, and carried by the
Angels into Heaven. And if you be so simple to believe, what they talk of that
great Abundance of milk, which they have got of her, since she is above, to wit
when she is pleased to come down, and give suck (for having a Child on her Arm;
she must needs have milk to give him) these Altars are not sepulchers, for they
do not bury this milk under them, but keep it among the other Relics they have
of her, Combs, Gloves, Hairs, Shifts and Slippers, very safe as in wardrobes.
2. It is not a Grave, it is an Altar which she (or rather a quite other Spirit
under her Name) calls for. Go, says that Ambitious Spirit, and get me Chronic.
Deip. an. 1467.
an Altar built by such an Image, that it may be a spring of all Graces to
them, who shall call on my Name. Never Saint in the whole Bible spoke near this
rate.

10. All Altars being made by their general institution, both to receive, and
to sanctify the Sacrifices and Offerings which are daily laid upon them; the
Virgin has these also, and in an immense abundance. Gods Temple at Jerusalem
was scarce richer then Lauretta is on this account. Neither Gold, nor precious
Stones are too good for her Majesty. If his Holiness fear the French, as
Alexander the third once did, he will secure himself from that danger, by
Gianius Chronic. Servitor. Mar. an. 1495.
offering her a Silver statue: or as Innocent the 8th. by offering Golden Job.
Burch. in Diarie. 1492.
Medals, and Clothes embroidered with Pearls: or, as the Recineti did for
securing themselves from the plague, by offering her a Massy Crown Tursel.
Lamet. Hist. l. 2. c. 8.
of Gold, and precious Stones. They that have not so much, may offer less, tho
it were but a wax-candle, as common an Offering under this new Religion, as was
a pair of Turtle Doves under Moses. They that have nothing at all, must make a
vow of visiting some of her Churches. Such vows they say have saved many from
the Gallows, from Shipwracks, Falls, Fires, and all imaginable Dangers; tho
vows before Popery came up, were never heard to have bin made to any Saint, but
God alone. But which is more Sacrilegious then all either Vows and Sacrifices,
that which they call the Holy Mass must be celebrated on her Altars; that is,
the Son of God and God himself, as they take it, must be sacrificed to her
honor: and in that impious service, as I have demonstrated Mystery and Depth of
the Roman Mass.
elsewhere, suffer more shame and Infamy to please her, then he ever suffered
on the Cross, to save the whole world besides.

11. They allow her in every year eight holy days. Christ has no more of his
Christians; nor are they so religiously observed. Nothing but death, or some
other Judgment as bad, threatens the Profaner of them. Witness the Hill,
Bancius Annal. an. 1580.
which they say fell on the Villain, who offered to dig upon her Assumtion day:
and the terrible pain, Bust. Marial. 1. part. Sermon. 7. p. 2.
which ever troubled honest Alensis as long as he read his Schole-Divinity upon
the day of her Conception. Contrariwise, great Miracles and great Blessings,
will attend the holy keeping of these Days; for waxcandles and Tapers Petr.
Abbas Cluniac. Miracul. l. 2. c. 30.
will burn then a whole night without wasting: And Bishop Bernard may fall down
with his horse through a broken Bridge without harm, if he do but vow, while he
tumbles, that Chronic. Deip. an. 1436.
he will observe the Immaculate Conception day.

12. And lastly, The Papists bestow upon the Virgin Mary, Proper Masses,
Litanies, Canonical Hours, and both great and small Offices, in all Churches,
on all Altars, and upon proper Holy days.

Thus the Virgin, or that Goddess which they take for the blessed Virgin, has
all the Religious Services, (and more) from the Papists, that God and Christ
have or ever had from the best sort of Israelites, and Christians. If God and
Christ have not enough, then Moses and the Prophets, the Apostles, and the Holy
Fathers are much to blame, who gave no more: and if they did and gave as much
as could make up all the service, which God then required at their hands; and
which now another Spirit, being certainly a Creature, requires at the hands of
Papists; let the Israel of God be the Judge, both what that proud Creature is
that craves as much as God ever had: and what these Catholics are, that will
give it. For what they plead, is soon wiped off.

Here a Woman stands accused of lying every night with her Neighbor: She cannot
at all deny the Fact; but she maintains, that the Fact is not Adultery; because
she never lies with him, as with her Husband, but always as her dear Husbands
Cozen and dear Relation. There stands a Jew, publicly impeached of Idol-worship
by the Prophet, because he burns Incense to the Queen of Heaven. Jerem. 44.25.
The Jew for his Justification avows this; but utterly denies that: because he
burns not his Incense to the Queen, as to the King: and understands very well,
that this Queen is a Creature. Between these two guilty Persons stands also the
Roman Catholic charged with the same; he cannot deny but he has Churches,
Altars, Vows, Bibles, Psalters, Oblations and Holy days, and universally all
those kinds of Worship, which Christians can bestow on God; which for his part
he bestows also on the Virgin. But this moves him not at all; he stoutly clears
himself (he thinks) of all, by once saying, that he neither honors nor adores
with all these things the Blessed Virgin, as he does God, whom he knows to be
her Creator, but as a holy Woman, whom he knows to be his Creature. By this
Reckoning none of the three, let them do whatever they will in the way of
either Carnal or Spiritual whoredom, can be convinced of being guilty; as long
as they have but so much wit, as to distinguish, the first, a Cozen from a
Husband: the second, a Moon, from a Sun: and the third; a Woman, from God
Almighty. Whereas, by their very pleading and excusing of themselves, they are
found to be twice Idolaters. 1. By their Act, which they confess; for they
transfer on the Creature, what is due to God alone. 2. Secondly by their own
knowledge; for all what can be don to God (in point of visible worship, which is
all that men can take notice of) they willingly and voluntarily impart to
others, whom they know to be Creatures. By what they do, they stand guilty; and
by what they know, unexcusable.

Never simple men were more grossly drawn and inveigled into such sins then
Papists are. To begin first, where I ended last; of these eight Holy Days kept
and set out for the Marian Worship, not one can be called Catholic, nor bear
any primitive Date. The very Papists Bell. De Cultu Sanctor. l. 3. c. 16. sect.
Ad tertium dico duo
cannot deny it; and among them the two greatest, namely the pretended
Conception, and Assumtion, as they were the fittest to crown a most complete
Idolatry, so they came in the latest of all.

That glorious Feast of the Immaculate Conception, now so blissfull to them
that observe it, and so terrible to them that do not, was never thought on by
their Virgin, nor by themselves, to any considerable purpose, sooner then above
twelve hundred years, after the Virgin her self was conceived. It was about the
year 1300, when this Marian Goddess appeared like a Queen, both of Heaven and
all the Angels, both to revele it to S. Peter the Cistercian, who Gononus
Chronic. an. 1292.
knew nothing of it before; and to take him for her Husband, upon condition he
should keep it: which he gladly undertaking, her Son came down to the wedding;
and in facie Ecclesiae being in a Priestly Habit, and in the face of the whole
Church joined this holy Monk and his Mother in a Roman Wedlock together.

Her other Solemn and great Feast, which they call the Assumtion, and which in
the Roman account makes the Virgin as much a Goddess, as the blessed Ascension,
among the Socinians, can make Christ God, is scarce older. One of the most
skilful of all the Fathers, in Sacred Antiquity, I mean St. Epiphanius had not
yet in his time heard of it: nor had, a great many years after, pious and
learned Pulcheria; when she sought Nicephor. Eccles. Hist. b, 5. c. 14.
the Virgins Corpse in the Holy Land, not dreaming it was in Heaven. Neither
could Venerable Beda de Locis Sacr. c. 6.
Bid, or Archbishop Martyrol. Adon. 18. Call. Sept.
Ado, (men the best versed both in all true and untrue stories) tell much more:
nor had Ludulphus de Saxonia tho a great Adorer of the Virgin, Devita Christ.
part. c. 186.
yet heard of that Legend. Nicephorus, is the first Niceph. ibid.
Romancer, that can distinctly tell with what Triumph of men and Angles She
went up, twelve hundred years after it was don. The Blessed Virgin Mary kept
her self during that interval close and happy, like other Souls in the Bosom of
Abraham, and under the wings of her Savior. She never thought yet of coming
forth, either to throw Mag. Speculum. Tit. Festum. Exemp. 2.
Gold or Medals into their hand, who kept this Feast; or to bury Bencius supra.
them under ground, who kept it not. Neither mortal Ears had heard till then in
the blindest times of the Church, the Angels Cantiprat. l. 2. c. 4. n. 7.
singing their Mattins to celebrate that Festival: nor mortal Eyes seen Trees
Gonon. ex Annalib. Colmar. an. 1276.
both to blossom and bear Fruit against nature; nor Hoods and Cantiprat. l. 2.
c. 29. n. 26.
Frocks becoming as good as strong Boats, to ferry Monks over a great River,
when they would preach the Glory of that day. In good earnest, can an
infallible Church, can a true Church be drawn away to new Services, upon the
account of such Tales? Or if these Tales and hundred other, as bad or worse, be
true stories, (as they may be, and I am not he that will dispute it) what must
we think of that Spirit, which is pleased to entice us to his Service upon such
Grounds?

This matter proves as bad again, in the Point of Altars and Churches. First it
cannot be a good Spirit, if created, that calls for either Altars, or Churches.
Secondly, it is not a good Spirit neither, that calls for them, by unbecoming,
ridiculous, and juggling ways. Thirdly, It Is not a true Religion, or a true
Church that yields to that Spirit what he calls for, both on those accounts,
and by those ways.

First, Such Spirits, what name soever they take, are to be shrewdly suspected,
who call for Churches, Vows, Altars, Offerings, and all such other sacred
services, as clearly belong to God alone. And in express terms, Saint Augustine
makes no doubt August. de Civit. l. 10. c. 19.
but that they are Devils. Good Angels, says this holy Father, do then love
us, and for our sakes do rejoice, when we worship the only God; but if we do
the like to them, they are not pleased with it at all, but openly cast it from
them. And when some have thought of deferring also to them that honor, they
forbad them, and commanded them to do it to him, to whom alone they know that
it can be lawfully done. Herein the Holy Men of God do imitate the Holy Angels.
etc. Therefore, says and concludes the Ibidem.
same Father, (as well he may) when some (of those Spirits or Saints) have a
mind to be served with holy Rites and Sacrifices; and others avert it from
themselves, and order it for God alone; the very sense of true Piety may teach
any Man, how to discern between that which proceeds from true Religion, and
what from a Spirit of pride: for proud Spirits are neither good Angels, nor the
Angels of a good God. And let Ibid. c. 11.
them do what Miracles they will, even beyond the course of Nature, these are
but seducing Tricks of wicked Devils, which true Piety must take heed of. Here
the Papists cannot answer St. Augustine, nor satisfy him at all, by saying,
That no Roman Saint or Spirit was ever found calling for any Sacrifices, that
is, for the Blood of Bulls, or Goats, which here St. Augustine understands; for
then the Father will reply (and out of Porphyrius, an authentic Pagan Author)
that these proud Ibid. c. 19.
Devils never cared for the Blood or smell of slain Beasts, upon any other
account, then because such Sacrifices were in those days the Expressions of
Divine Worship; as now surely Churches and Masses are destined to the same end,
and therefore as much at the least, if not more desirable and pleasing to them.
Who doubts, but all the Gold and Silver Utensils, which you shall find at
Lauretta, may be as rich Oblations, as all that was once at Delphi? And let any
Jeweller tell me, whether one of those many precious Stones, which are daily by
formal Vows sent and presented to that Goddess, would not buy the best Bull or
Ram, that ever was at any time Sacrificed at Jerusalem? To follow the Roman
accounts, one Mass is better then all what both Delphi and Jerusalem had
together: and if the Devils anciently craved for the slaughter of silly Beasts,
because such was the solemn worship of Israel; how proud may they be now, to
see upon their Altars the Flesh and Blood of Jesus Christ, which tho in very
deed but a Wafer, yet in the Opinion of Papists, is the most solemn Worship of
Rome? You will say, that this Flesh or Wafer is not sacrificed to the Virgin
Mary: true indeed, but it is worse; for it is sacrificed to God for her sake,
in honorem Mariae. Thus, when I make much of a Stranger for my Friends sake,
the Stranger has the entertainment: and God, upon the Roman Principles, has
the Sacrifice or the Mass: but the Friend, and the good Lady, are the main end,
and the main Persons I look upon, he in the Entertainment, and she in the
Sacrifice. Gonon. Chronic. an. 1372.
Thus this she Ghost understands it: Thou art my servant, says she to a
Priest, offering the First Fruits of his Mass Priesthood, when he was singing
his first Mass: Thou art my servant, for I have chosen thee (God uses to speak
so to his Prophets) and I will be glorified in thee: I dearly love them of your
Leand. Albert. in vita Jordan. de viris Illustr.
Order (says she to her St. Jordanes that succeeded St. Dominic) because in
all their Divine Services, they both begin and end with my Praises. So, Gonon.
ib.
Go and say to that Bishop, because he begins his Sermons always with my
Praises, that I will be a Mother to him. I could bring to the same purpose a
hundred like, or worse Examples. Let the Roman Catholics show me but one, where
any good Angel ever said as much, or where any Devil ever spoke for more: If
they cannot, who may not fear, what their best Monks Chronic. Deip. an. 1476.
oftentimes do, lest the Spirits of former times, which seduced Men under the
name of God, of Christ, of Angels, and Apostles, now may do worse under the
name and the apparition of the ever Blessed and Holy Virgin?

Secondly, This fear and suspicion is sufficiently evidenced to be plain truth,
by the undecent and foolish ways which this pretended Goddess takes, to allure
Men to these Services. Commonly, to compass her ends, she comes down from
Heaven it seems, but however from above the Clouds, either with new Hoods for
Friars; or Miters and Gowns for Bishops; or Roses and Garlands for Maids; or
Pots of Holy Water to sprinkle them all. When she has overjoied them with
these Favors, that they may not want what to sing, nor what to preach and do in
her service, she tells them she is the Queen of Heaven, and the very Mother of
Grace; and that they shall find her to be so, if they go but to such an Image,
and there build for her an Altar, or sing to her honor Sancta Maria, etc. or
some other-like Godly Anthem. Often times before she leaves them, she will kiss
them, or show them her fine Breasts; sometimes give a taste of her Milk, or
acknowledge them for her Husbands; at the least, before her parting, she is sure
to perfume the Room, and stroke them on their Heads, and leave them some good
Books that will teach them to sing her Praises. The ordinary conclusion of all,
is this: after she has well bewitched them, what with favor, what with
perfumes, they must pray to her both day and night; and, if they can, build her
a Church or a Chapel, or do something to her honor. To promote this, Devout
People shall meet with Images lying here and there among Brambles, under Trees,
and under Ground, either crying, or laughing, or doing some other wonder that
needs must be taken notice of: and when Men think, that these Images call on
them merely for succor, to help them out of those obscure places into some
neighboring Church, it proves commonly a mistake; for either the little Image
grows so heavy that it is impossible to remove it; or if you remove it twenty
times, you shall find it the next Morning in the same place where it was
before: and this is the ordinary token, that there is the place where a
Convent, or a great Church, or at the least an Altar, must needs be builded.
This good Lady has in the World hundreds of Churches and Chapels, both made
and served by this device. I need not tell you where I learn this, for no wise
Catholic will deny it, or he shall do it to his shame. When the Building must
be a work of greater charge and importance, then will she take the trouble of
bestirring her self more vigorously about it; for in that case, either she will
set up some great Ladder, reaching from the ground up to Heaven, and there
bespeak a Gonon. Chronic. an 1274.
Church to her worship, or she will come down to some Wall, and there sit like
a Shepherdess, stroaking with her hand Menolog. Cisterc. 7 October.
a flock of Sheep, which shall turn speckled with black and white under her
hand, thereby to give a fair intimation, that there she must have a Convent of
Monks wearing these two colors. Or she will make Snow in Idem an. 363.
Summer, and tell the Pope of Rome in a Dream, that John the opulent Citizen
must there bury his whole Estate, for the building of St. Maria major, the
seventh great Church now at Rome. She will sometimes also show the compass her
Church must have, either by the means of a strange Stag, which she will inspire
Odo Gissaeus, Hist. Virg. Amic.
to run about, or she will show it her self with a thread Balinghem. in Calend.
B. M. 1 April.
, which at this very day is kept for a very great Relic. She counts it no
disparagement to be found roosting on the ground Vita S. Menuverci. ap. Sur. 5
Jan.
, under the figure of a Dove; or sitting down by a Pyraeus. Coron. B. V. Tract.
1. c. 12.
poor Girls scrip, whilst she goes from her to tell the People where she would
have a new Church stand. Her Churches of Montserrati and Lauretta, stand upon
harder accounts: for that is built upon a Hill, where she had taken the Hist.
Miracul B. V. Montis Serrat.
pains to keep a Maid alive in her Grave six whole Months, when her Throat was
cut: and this which stands at Lauretta, was at first a private Room in
Nazareth; but the Goddess being somewhat grieved Gonon. Chronic. an. 1292. page
179. Edit. Lugd. 1637.
for not being so well worshipped in that Country, as she deserved, transported
it thence to Turselin Laretan. Hist. l. 1.
Dalmatia, that is farther then from London to Rome, all in one night; thence
she made it jump over the Sea to Recineti; thence back upon a little Hill;
whence upon a fourth jump, it got and settled in that place where now all
Catholic Pilgrims do resort, to be cured of all Diseases. This admirable House
had bin hidden hundreds of Years out of Men's sight (otherwise Beda de Locis
Sanct. c. 16.
Venerable Bede and Arculphus might have found it:) at last, after more then
1200 Years burial, it started up again into that part of Italy, where now it
is. Most of the Marian Churches, as they call them, stand all upon such
Fabulous Foundations: and Men must not be taken for Catholics, unless they will
serve the Spirits who will play such Pranks to get them Churches.

Thirdly, I said that it is a strange Religion, that steers it self, and is
guided by such absurd Impertinencies. The very ridiculousness essential and
inherent to these Passages, might serve better then the Cloven foot, to
discover these kinds of Spirits. Men who would hearken to their own Reason, and
lay Prepossession aside, could not take her for a most holy, and a most
virtuous Virgin, that could at any time brag amongst Men of what she is, and
allure them with Smiles and Kisses, to Worship her as a Goddess. Or in case
their Reason were so weak, and so inveigled with Custom, as not to be able to
see so much; if instead of Consecrated Wafers, Holy Water, and Signs of the
Cross, which they try Evil Spirits with, and which those Devils do not care
for, they would but consult the Example of the former Ages, and the practice of
all Faithful People, much above four thousand Years; there they might see that
the Church of God ever had Angels, had Saints, had Deliverers, and sometimes
Workers of great Miracles, and yet never had one Altar, nor one Chapel, nor
one Image to serve them with: And that if the very best of all their either
Saints or Angels, had called for any such Service, they would have thought him
qualified rather for Execration, then for Worship. The Women of Arabia did come
far short of the Papists in their Devotions to the Virgin, yet St. Epiphanius
calls what they did Epiphanius cont. Antidicomar, page 445. Edit. Basil.
Diabolical; and plainly tells them, That the Devil had put them upon the
conferring of such Honors. What manner of Spirit must it be then, that falls
himself, and puts the others upon seeking and craving them. If the Blessed
Virgin, says the Pious and Learned Ibidem.
Father, have had a natural death and burial, let her sleep and rest in peace:
If she have bin slain by the sword, let her be celebrated among the Martyrs:
(for in those days, it seems, her end was not known) If she has seen no death
at all (for no man, says he, knows her end) then let her be as Elias, who also
was a Virgin, and was taken up into Heaven. None of these Saints was ever
adored; and if Id. contr. Collyrid. page 448.
God will not have the Angels, much less Anna's Daughter, that is, the Virgin
to be so. Churches, Altars, public Prayers, Vows and Sacrifices, do betoken by
their own nature, and set out a supreme Adoration, to the highest degree that
it can reach to. For if Adoration, or Bowing and Worshipping in general, may
sometimes signify no more then a kind of Civil Honor, as when it is said,
Abraham adored or bowed himself before the People, Genesis 23. Vowing,
Sacrificing, and erecting of Altars or Churches, denotes always Sovereign
Worship: these Acts, as the Jesuits themselves confess Bellarm. de Sanct.
Beatitud. l. 1. c. 12. sect. Tertia species Coster. in Enchirid.
, having in themselves this inherent and proper sense, which no private
Intention can make lower, as sometimes it does Bowing and Kneeling. Therefore
they take it for a good evidence, to prove our Savior Christ to be God, because
the Church Bell. de Christo. l. 1. c. 8. sect. Denique omnes.
honors him with Temples, Altars, and Oblations: and so, says Bellarmin, if
Christ were not truly God, never such an Idol were in the world. And by the
same reason, if the Virgin be not a Goddess with all her Churches and
Oblations, in good earnest what shall she be? Here no Grove, nor hardly the
shade of a green Leaf, covers their sin. The Whore may kiss hard her Neighbor,
and say, she kisses him as a dear Friend; but she cannot lie with him, and put
it off in the same way, saying, she does it merely upon her dear Husbands
account, because the other was his Kinsman: this saying proclames her to be a
most bold impudent Woman, as the very Act proclames her light and guilty in all
the rest. For my part, I like them better, who tell ingenuously what they do,
and following the Trade of Idolaters, think they may use as well their
Language. Sacrificemus, etc. say some of them Abbas Livriacensis in Roset.
Exercit. Spiritual. Tit. 4. c. 6.
, that is, Let us Sacrifice to the Queen of Heaven, and pour out to her
Drink Offerings, Jerem. 44.17. Here both Jews and Romans hit just upon the same
Idol: the Moon for those; the Virgin Mary (whom they represent by the Moon) for
these; and the Queen of Heaven for both.

CHAP. VII.
Concerning the daily Services bestowed upon the Virgin Mary.
THE Virgin Mary, that is, the Ghost that walks and appears under her name,
does not possess these Churches in vain: For first, They must serve for keeping
eight great and universal Holydaies, which she is allowed every Year; the
Annunciation, Conception, etc. God the Father, under the Law, had but three
such; and God and Christ at Rome have but eight. So she and her Son, are as to
this, both of them pretty equal sharers. 2. So are they too in every Week; for
if Christ has the Sunday, she has the Saturday before it, and therein that
Weekly Office, so famous among them for Miracles, and so plentiful of
Blessings; which Service is called, Officium Sabbatinum, that is the Office of
the Saturday. But do not think that there is one day, in which you may excuse
your self from some other more private daily Prayers and daily Praises to her
Honor.

1. Not from Prayers; For the best Masters of Popery say, Salazar. Proverb. c.
8. v. 34. n. 435.
that as you cannot live any one day in the week, without the Influences of
some of the Planets: so can you neither, without the special Assistance of the
Saints: and that the Virgin Mary being the true, or the Original and
super-celestial Moon, Luna archetypa and Supramundana, that both qualifies, and
immediately pours down all the Blessings, which you can expect from other
Saints, as the other Moon does the good Influences, which you receive from the
other Planets; it is more then fit you should pray to her every Day, and order
your Devotions suitably to the Temper and strength of the Star, that rules the
same day. For example, they say that upon Monday the Moon has a proper faculty
of tempering the Heat of the Blood; then come with an office short or long,
that is proper to that and every Monday; and pray to the Virgin for Modesty and
Chastity. Upon Tuesday, wherein Mars reigns, you must pray to the Virgin again,
but not so much for Modesty, as for Zeal and Strength and Courage. Upon
Wednesday, which is the day of Mercury, the Merchants must pray to her for good
Trade; and the Lawiers, for Eloquence. Upon Thursday, which is the day of
Jupiter, call on the Virgin for high Designs. Upon the Friday, because of
Venus, for loving kindness, and Charity. Upon the Saturday, because of Saturn,
for Prudence. And finally upon Sunday, because the Sun is conceived to rule
that day; you are directed to pray to her, for clear and bright understanding
about Supernatural Mysteries. You may likewise upon any of the seven days pray
for one of the seven Gifts; for tho they proceed originally from the Holy
Ghost, they do not think they come to you otherwise then through the Virgin. In
doing this, they warrant you, Salazar. ibid.
that you shall find both the Virgin Mary propitious, and the Scripture true,
which says (when most impiously misapplied from Christ to a Creature) Blessed
is the man, or, all sorts of Blessings will light upon the man, who hears the
Virgin Mary, and watches every day at Her Gates. Prove. 8.34.

2. This Goddess expects also after your Prayers, your daily Praises; and
herein this is the Method, which great men of the Papal Communion Joh.
Mauburnes in Roseto Exerc. Spirit. Tit. 4. c. 6.
mind you to observe: Meditate say they upon the Monday, those Things, that
preceded Her Birth; how she was conceived without original Sin: how she was
adored by Angels: and how S. Bernardin. Sermon. De Nativ. B. M. a. 1. c. 2.
she had sublimer thoughts, and a better use of her Reason, being yet in her
Mothers womb, then men and women use to have, when they are come to a full age.
Upon Tuesday, you must mind her Education and Course of life; how she was at
three years of age brought to the Temple: how there she was shut up like a Nun;
how there in the Sanctuary, where by Gods Law the very High Priest is not
suffered to come in oftener, then once in a year, She was fed by the Cherubims,
till she was fit for a Husband: then how much the Priests were perplexed about
either keeping her there any longer against the Law, or marrying her against
her Vow; and how being ravishingly fair, such a bright Light Dionys. Carthus l.
1. de Land. Mariae. c. 39.
sparkled about her Face, that without some help from above, no man's Eyes durst
look upon her. On the Wednesday; your task is her Fullness of Grace, and how she
is an unfathomable Abyss, whence all Angels, and Saints, and sinners must draw
whatever they want. On Thursday, you must admire her singular Privileges; her
Immaculate Conception; her Impossibility of sinning: her Dominion over all the
world, Men and Angels, Saints and Devils, etc. On Friday, make it your business
to meditate on her Passion, and on her concurring with our Savior, while he was
upon the Cross, toward the Redemtion of Mankind. On Saturday; admire all her
Joies upon Earth; when the Archangel fell on his knees, and sung to her Ave
Maria, etc. but remember that this joiful Devotion must not excuse you from one
Syllable of her weekly Sabbatin Office. On Sunday, you have a fit time to
admire her Assumtion, and all her glorious Joies in Heaven. What these are she
may best tell you them her self. First, says Henriquez Menol. Cestero. 3. Jun.
she to S. Arnalphus a huge great mignion of this Ghost, my first joy is, that
at my Assumtion there, I found a greater Glory then can be uttered or thought
of: and that my Glorious fullness goes beyond that of both Saints and Angels. My
second Joy is, when I do see the whole Celestial Hierarchy irradiated about by
me, just as the day is by the Sun. My third Joy is, to see both the Hosts of
Heaven to obey me: and the whole Trinity to agree kindly with me. My fifth Joy
is (for my Author has not the fourth) to see my devout worshippers thriving
both in this and the other life, according to my hearts desire. My sixth Joy is,
to find my self highly exalted above all Angels, and by a singular Privilege,
set close to the Trinity. My seventh Joy is, to be sure, that this great Glory
of mine shall never fail. She confirmed the self same thing, Chronic. Deip. an.
1228.
to S. Thomas of Canturbury. So upon the credit of two distinct Apparitions,
all this is as true as the rest; and you have work enough for a whole week.

3. But here is more; when you have sufficiently discharged all the Duties,
which belong to the Year, to the Week, and to the Day; you must think of the
Seven Hours. In former times, of twelve hours in the day, the Church had
appointed Seven, called the seven Canonical hours for the public Service of
God; and now since Mary is come abroad, and the Monks Dominic a Soto l. 10. de
Justit. a Jure. q. 5. a. 4.
are in request; The Roman Church thinks it no robbery to make her Lady as to
this, (tho with lesser obligation) equal to God. Pope Urban the second is the
first, that, as their Baron. Tom. 11 an. 1095.
best Historians say, instituted a proper Office to her honor upon these hours:
and if you believe their best Divines in these matters; it were great pity we
should do less. For since the Psalmist, says Al. Gazaeus de Offic. B. M. page
69. and 70.
Gazaeus, did bless himself for praising the Lord seven times a day, because of
his Righteous Judgments. Psalm. 119. why should not Roman Catholics do as much
for their Lady, their good Mother, and Protectrix, because of her loving
Mercies; knowing this that the Eternal God, as well as the King Ahasuerus,
Esther 6. will have her whom he honors, thus honored, that is at his seven
Canonical hours. And plain Catholic Reason, say their great Quell. Durand.
Ration. l. 5 c. 1. sub fin.
Masters of Mysteries, will have it so. 1. At Night, that is very early in the
Morning; because then appears in Heaven a certain Star, which they do call
Transmontana, which guides Seamen in the Right way: and so does the Virgin,
Roman Sailers, the true Sea Missal Paris. An. Domin.
Star, Stella Maris, who, if they praise her devoutly, will steer them safe out
of this World into the Haven where they would be. 2. At prime, when there
appears another called Diana, that goes before the Sun: and so does also the
Virgin Mary. 3. At Tierce, ad Tertiam, that is in our account about nine of the
Clock; because we then begin to be hungry: and it is she, as they say, that
provides for us the Bread of life. 4. At the sixth, that is at Noon, because
then the Sun is very hot: and therefore we must then praise her, and pray to
her (but why not him:) that she be pleased to inflame us with Charity. 5. At
Nine, that is at three in the Afternoon; because the Sun declines then toward
setting: and it is she that takes care of us, when we decay. 6. At Vespers, after
Sunset; because cur life being at an end, they say she then mainly succors her
Worshippers at the dangerous time of death. 7. Lastly at Completory, when it is
quite dark; because when our life is quite gone, then she intercedes for her
dead Servants, and procures them good admittance into her heavenly Mansions.

So by this (which they call officium parvum) hourly Office, the Marian and the
Christian Service, like so many Veins and Arteries, run both together through
all the Parts of the Roman life. Night and day, and at every hour, the Prayers
and Praises of the Virgin Mary never must depart from their hearts, nor if it
be possible from their Mouths too. And in the Monasteries, the great Schools of
Piety, there is no Service for God Almighty, nor any time left for his worship,
but the Lady has a share in it. And here learn from a Saint, and a Cardinal
besides, how far this Marianism, (for it is no Christianity) might well go
farther. Damian. Epist. l. 2. Ep. 14.
His Brother Marinus being full of this Roman Spirit, when yet he was but a
young man, puts off his Clothes, and instead of a halter about his Neck, with a
lethern Girdle, which before he had about his loins: he ties himself to the
Altar: Vows and gives himself up to the Virgin Mary upon the account of being
her slave: then whips him self in such a manner, as one would hardly whip a
wicked wretch: and in these words resigns himself into her hands. My glorious
Mistress and Lady, and the true Model of all Virtues, whom I have offended by
the rottenness of my Flesh; All I have more wherewith to help my self, I give
it up to thee to serve thee with. I submit the neck of my heart to the Dominion
of thy Dignity. Order thou my rebellious self: undertake the stubborn: and let
not thy Mercy reject the sinner. By this small Offering ('it was a sum of money
which he laid down at her Altar) I do now give over to thee whole Estate: and
from this time ever hereafter, I will pay to thee the yearly Rent, or Tribute,
of the same, as long as I shall live. Papists may call this as they please; the
best Israelites in their most solemn Adorations never did and said half so much
before the Lord. Deuter. 26.12. and the best Christians, can do and say nothing
to God the Savior, that expresses more.

This height of palpable Idolatry procured at several occasions, remorse and
shame to its Authors, in the very darkest Ignorance before it could be well
settled. For few years after some had brought in this Office, Gonon. Chronic.
an. 1056.
Gozo, an eloquent and acute Monk, prevailed so far with his reason upon the
whole Monastery, that these solemn Prayers and Praises of the Virgin were quite
voted out of Gods Service. But alas! presently after this voting, it fared just
with these poor Monks, as it had don once with the Jews, when they had left
worshipping the Moon. Jerem. 44.18. Since we, say they, left off to burn
Incense to the Queen of Heaven, we have wanted all things: and have been
consumed by the Sword, and by the Famine. For then it seems, there fell upon
the Country, where the Convent was situated, such a complication of wars, and
troubles (which Cardinal Damian, moved with a quite other Spirit then Jeremy
was, in the like case, interpreted to be Judgments inflicted on them by the
same Queen), that they were persuaded to worship her again: and then presently
all was well. Whosoever (then preached S. Damian) has turned Chronicon. ibid.
out of this monastery the blessed Mother of true Piety, it is fit he should be
turned out, and whirled about with tribulations, and Storms. But turn ye unto
me again says the Lord by the Prophet, and I will return unto you says the
Lord; he should have said, says the Lady; and then the Impertinency had been
complete. The like but more hellish Illusion, (if their story be true) happened
to the Carthusian Surius in vita Brunon. 6. October.
Order. For when they were as poor, as they are now rich; some of them looked on
this new Marian Worship, as nothing less then pernicious: and the others were
so much perplexed, what with it, what with the horror of the wild place wherein
they were, that they thought of leaving both the Place, and the Miracle of the
seven Stars. But then comes to them an old man, with long white and curled Hair
who assured them from God, (as he pretended) that the Virgin Mary would protect
them, if they would but read every day Preces ejus Horarias, that is her small
Office at the due hours. So without any more ado they took her for their
Patroness, and consequently for their she God: and since that time her Prayers
went on. A while after the old man, came an Angel, Chronic. Carthus. l. 5. c. 5.
who advised them to put in between the first and the third hour, Ave sanct a
Parens, and one Mass more to her Glory; and if you please to believe all,
Christ himself Anton. Caracciol. ap. Al. Gaz. page 108.
dictated a Rule to S. Briget, where he commands them of that Order, to repete
every day the said Service.

No mortal tongue can express, how much that ambitious Spirit, who assum the
Virgin Mary's Name, is delighted with the hearing of those Prayers. She now and
then will come to say Al. Gazaeus. de Offic. B. M. page 94. Edit. Atrebat. 1622.
them her self, when tired or sick Friars, as Herman was once, cannot do it.
She will come down also and leave Heaven and all to hear them, and in a
Chronic. Deip. an 1230.
Majestic Apparel will smile upon, and kiss the Choristers, if they happen to
sing them well; and if this be not encouragement enough, She will make her Son
(a Baby whom she commonly carries about), run about them, and exhort them Wadd.
Annal Min. Tom. 3. an. 1338.
to be fervent in her Service: and tell them that nothing can ever be more
acceptable to God Almighty, then is the honor which they shall bestow on his
Mother: especially when they fall upon some verses, as is in singing the Te
Deum, When thou tookest, etc. thou did not abhor the Virgins Womb, Gaz. Ibid.
p. 99.
her heart jumps and leaps with joy, and so St. Ludgard advises his friend then
to bow down to the very ground. At the words Eja Advocata, z she promises to
speak to her Son. At these words of the Antiphone, Pulcra es, and decora,
Stell. B. V. l. 12. c. 10. Gazaeus. p. 91.
that is, thou art fair and gracious, She presently came with two Angels, and
proud with hearing her Beauty praised, she took a young man from the Altar, and
persuaded him to take her for his Wife, since she was so beautiful. Hence her
Roman Chaplains argue well, Al. Gazaeus de Offic. B. V. page 8.
that if she be so taken with some Parcels of her Office, how much must she be
with the whole. It is upon this account, and her being charmed with these
Caresses, that she has nothing about her too dear for her Spiritual Courtiers.
She leaves all her Nobles above, to converse veiled and Gonon. Chronic. an. 234.
hooded, and fing like a devout Nun, among her white and black Friars; she
feigns to admire them, when they sing; she kisses them when they have sung; and
whilst she is hot and busy with an excessive Passion to divert, by all means
possible, these supreme and Divine Services from God to a mere Creature,
nothing discovers the Devil more, then this foolish overdoing.

But to lay aside these fond kindnesses of kissing, suckling, and marrying men,
and hiding them under her Coat, which a Fairess, or a white witch could better
do; the Magnificency of her Promises, backed as they are by the Roman Church,
must be a greater Temtation. For what would you have more temting then this? By
this saving Office, say they, Al. Gazaeus supra. page 69.
if you use it now, especially when his Holiness has improved it with
Apostolical Indulgences; 1. You may lay claim to Heaven, not merely upon the
title of mercy from God, but by that of Justice and Condignity, as your own
Right. 2 You may satisfy Divine Justice, both for your sins and the sins of
others. 3. What would you have more? by these Prayers whatsoever you can ask in
the Name of the Savior, and in the name of the Savioress Mary too, you shall
receive it. For who can be so incredulous, as not to be sure to have all, in
order to his real Good and Salvation, by this form of Prayer, thus approved of
by the Church; recommended by God himself: (they mean the little Baby, who bids
men to pray to his Mother) and in an especial manner consecrated to the Virgin
Mary's Service?

What a hot friend she proves to be, and how Zealous to undertake for the
silliest Fellow, that is her Client, S. Damian can best tell you Cardin.
Damian. l. 2. Ep. 14.
. A pitiful sottish Man, who had no spark of Grace in him, but that he could
sing Ave Maria, and bow, passing by her Altar, had bin deprived of his Pension
by a Bishop, who thought himself bound in Conscience to free the Church from
such a Wretch. But then the Goddess comes by night, and falls foul upon the
Prelat; and being seconded by an Angel, who had a burning Taper in one hand,
and a lusty whip in the other: What, says he, wrong'st thou my Chaplain, and
take thou from him what thou did not give? At last, after many sound
stripes, the Bishop being taught good manners, was glad to cry out peccavi, and
to restore to that worthy Man, the stipends which he had kept from him.

This is but a temporal Concern; but here is one which is Eternal. It is
somewhat long, but it concerns all Men to know it, and I have it from the same
Saint Card. Damian. supra.
. An ugly Fellow named Bassus, who died a sudden death, had the good luck to
die so in coming from one of our Ladies Churches. He having bin in his Coffin
the greatest part of the night after his death, rose up out of it suddenly,
both affrighted, and affrighting others: for with a terrible tone he cried for
Prayers and Litanies, to scare away those ugly Spirits who watched for him
about the Room: and at last being come to himself (for Ave Maria, and Holy
Water, had soon frighted the Devils away) when my poor Soul, says he, parted
from me, presently came on some black Troopers; this Fellow, said they, is our
prize, for he has ever lived after the Flesh, and never knew what the Spirit
was. His good Angel could say nothing, but that he was dead in the service of
their Mistress the Queen of Heaven, and that whosoever has her favor, cannot
perish by the power of any Judge. To this they make bold to reply, that God
being Just, would do nothing for a Sinner to their prejudice; and thereupon the
Devils grew so earnest after their Prey, and the Angels, on the other side, so
remiss in keeping their charge, that the Wretch was upon the point of being
given up, as he deserved; when, behold the Queen of Heaven came among them, and
an Army of Celestial Soldiers with her, and with such a splendour besides, that
the Devils durst not look up. Nevertheless, with reverence they protested
against the wrong which the former Angels had done them, in detaining from them
their just Prey; and that if God and she were just, they could not rescue such
a sinner out of their hands. The Queen confessed he had bin so, but yet her Son
and Lord would never suffer, that one, who had ended his days in her service,
as this Fellow had done in going to visit her Church, should ever suffer their
Cruelty: and withal he had confessed, tho he had not the time to do Penance.
Hence the Devil took a fit time to tell her what a Villain he was, and what
ugly Abomination he had never confessed (and that is true, says the revived
Man of himself) at which the Mother of Mercy started: but at last, after a kind
of modest silence in reverence to this plain truth, having somewhat recovered
her self; It is as you say, says she, but yet of course Mercy goes before
Judgment. Go back again to thy Body, says she to him, and then confess to such
a Priest (whom she named) what these Spirits lay to thy charge; and in my name
charge such Friars, (whom she named also) to take upon them thy Penance. Then
come again without delay, for I will not stir hence till thou come. The Rascal
being confessed, says the Cardinal Damian, and the Holy Friars having taken
upon themselves the satisfaction enjoined him by the Confessor, died again, but
as sweetly, as if he had but fallen asleep. A happy Sinner indeed, who can find
such a Savioress, as will give way to all his Crimes, and secure him from
punishment. Men troubled in their Consciences, and unwilling to leave their
sins, do not consider the Absurdity, tho visible, in all such Stories, but see
their own convenience; and what could please and fit then better, then such a
protecting Goddess?

Add to this Enchantment of daily Prayers to the Virgin, the Devotion of
Fasting and Hearing one Mass to her Honor every Saturday; the Temtation will be
ended, and your Soul safe. This weekly piece of Devotion on Saturday, Officium
Sabbatinum, is grounded, as they say, Durand. Rational. l. 4. c. 1.
upon three Reasons. 1. Because the Saturday and the Sunday, or the Ladies day
and the Lords day, as do the Lord and the Lady, go together. 2. Because as God
the Father rested upon that day, and kept it holy under the Law, so must the
Goddess his Daughter and Wife do the like under the Gospel. 3. Because she is
an entrance to Eternal Life, as Saturday is to the Sunday. But if you will be
so refractory as not to acquiesce in these Reasons, be you satisfied with a
Miracle. They say, Gonon. Chron. an. 770.
that in the Year 770. (it is pity it did not happen sooner, that the Holy
Apostles and the Fathers might have observed it) a great Cortin, that hanged
before our Ladies Image all the Week long, was miraculously drawn up, as they
suppose, into Heaven, from Friday at Vespers, to Sunday Night; so that the
People could see her Face for the space of 24 hours, and adore her accordingly.
This Miracle constantly veiling and unveiling the Virgin Mary on Saturday, as
well as the other, that the Night of her Assumtion made all sorts of Lights
burn without wasting, is quite abolished: But the Benefit, and the Charm to
induce you to hear her Mass, Missa de S. Maria in Sabbato, is still the same if
you believe them, and, by what Men find since, far greater. It may be now they
will not be so plain with you, as the poor Widow Thom. Cantiprat. de Apib. l.
2. c. 29. n. 24.
was with the Robber one day, to tell you; Sir, do what you please all the Week
long, only abstain from doing so on Saturday; this one days Abstinence will so
far expiate all, that either dead or alive, you shall have time both to confess
and to escape: but they will induce you to fast then, and to hear Mass to the
Honor of their Goddess, by such miraculous Passages, as must oblige you if
hearkened to, to believe more. Witness the Head of that Villain, which being
Ibidem
cut off, tumbled down a Hill to the very door of a Mass Priest, and there both
cried for, and obtained accordingly, Confession and Salvation together. Witness
also the Rose Vincent. Bellaar. l. 7. c. 102. and 103.
growing in sign of Salvation out of the Mouth, and appearing upon the Tomb of
that other debauched Fellow, who escaped Hell merely upon the account of not
having ravished a Maid, both because her name was Mary, and that it was on a
Saturday. So thankful and sensible is this Goddess for mean Services; and so
either blind and indulgent to great Abominations. I forbear the producing of
more instances to this purpose, because they may be both too well known, and
too great snares to our Catholic Proselytes. Here the Carnal and the Spiritual
Whoredom, sufficiently help one another.

CHAP. VIII.
Of another special Inducement to Popery, by a more easy way of serving the
Virgin by Beads, which they call the Rosary.
THE Rosary must needs come in, after the good Ladies hourly Service. For they
Al. Gazaeus. de Offic. B. V. page 67. and 68.
hold, that these two are the Wings in Ezekiel. 1. that carry up the Cherubims,
that is, the Devotions of Pious Souls into Heaven: and the two golden staves,
Exodus 25. wherewith the Ark of the Lord, or rather our Ladies Covenant is
carried over the whole World. And if they seem to carnal Eyes but contemtible,
thereby the better they resemble the two celebrated Gospel Mites, which being
devoutly offered to the merciful Queen of Heaven, and cast into her Tresury,
Luke 21. go far beyond all the richest Gifts. The Rosary, otherwise called the
Virgins Psalter, is a new manner of praying, which, says Navarrus, Mart.
Navar. De Rosar. Miscell. 1. n. 1.
never was, nor can ever be valued at what it is worth: for it is made up of
150 Ave Mary's, and 15 Paters tacked together with little buttons upon a
string. There was before in the Roman Church a lesser set of 50 Aves and 5
Paters, which they call Beads; and a middle one of 63, in memory of all the
years which, they say, the Virgin lived here upon Earth; which is called the
Virgins Crown, Corona Mariae. These had bin Guilielm. Tyrius de Bello sacro.
intended by an Eremite for the use of Soldiers, who had no better Books, nor
could conveniently carry them to the Holy war. But this of 150 Aves, and 15
Paters, both run over devoutly, and meditated on together, is a quite other
kind of thing, as well in worth, as Extent. They say that the Goddess her self
inspired it to St. Dominic about the year 1200. and blazed it abroad into the
world in the sight of 12000 men, with both the sound and the splendour of such
wonderful Miracles, as, if true, must needs make it most Authentic. I am as
unwilling as any man to trouble my self with Romances. But let us not be loath
to hear, what men turning Papists are given over to believe.

When first St. Dominic began to preach this Rosary, there fell a Demoniac
Legenda S. Dominici ex Jordan. Constantin. Vmberto, etc.
at his feet, and craved his aid against the Devils, who did then make him roar
and blaspheme. Wherefore the Saint being well pleased with this occasion of
confirming by some strange Feats, what he had Preached, leaves his Sermon; and
in the Name, says he, both of the Virgin Mary, and of her Service, which I
stand for, O Hellish Spirits I command you, to answer me to these Questions. 1.
You must tell me, wherefore you torment this poor Man, and how many you are in
him. Woe unto us, say the Spirits, it is not in our power to resist this
Adjuration: We have taken hold of him, both because of his Irreverence to the
Virgin Mother of God, (tho we hate her as much as he does) and because of his
unbelief: for ever since this Month and more, that thou art Preaching the
Rosary, this Heretic has continued as incredulous as before. Now we are
fifteen thousand Devils in him, because he did blaspheme against the Rosary,
whereof the Ave contains five words, and the whole Psalter fifteen Paters, that
this Rascal offered to laugh at. 2. Says St. Dominic, by this Rosary you must
tell me, Whether all that I have Preached concerning it, be true or not. Then
all the Devils began to fall to fearful Cursings and Howlings, why did we not
choke this base Fellow when we took him? Now it is too late, for this Holy Man
holds us in fiery Chains, ignitis Catenis, and forces us to speak the truth. So
hear ye all Men and Women, Whatever this our bitter enemy has spoken, either
of Mary, or of her Rosary, is very true; and unless ye believe it, you shall
perish. 3. Thirdly, says S. Dominic, you must tell me, Who is the Man whom you
hate most. Thee, say the Devils, for with thy Sermons and Prayers, thou show
every one the way of getting to Paradise, and escaping out of our Hands. Then
the Saint being modest at this, and confessing himself a great sinner: Cursed
be, say they, this civility, which puts us all to this torture. 4. Fourthly, S.
Dominic throwing his Mantle about this Demoniacs Neck, which made him spue ugly
matter; I must, says he, know of you, who is the greatest Saint in Heaven,
whom you fear most, and whom Men ought to love and serve best. At this Query,
the Devils roared so horribly, that all the People fell to the ground: O
Dominic, Dominic, said they, have some compassion; be content with what Hell
makes us suffer, and do not put us to new Torments. At the least, we beseech
thee, do not force us to answer to this publicly. (it seems they would have
condescended to an Auricular Confession.) Nay, says Dominic, but you shall
give a clear and public answer. But they being a little stubborn, St. Dominic
falls on his knees, and thus prays to the Virgin Mary: O most excellent
Virgin, by the Power of this thy Psalter, I beseech thee make these Enemies of
Mankind to satisfy my Question. At this Prayer, presently Flames of Fire burst
out at the Mouth of the poor Wretch: and all the Devils cried out, by the
Passion of Christ, the Merits of the Virgin Mary, and the Suffrages of the Holy
Church, we beseech thee, O Dominic, do not keep us here any longer. The Holy
Angels can revele to thee at any time what thou will know; and as for us, we
are such Liars, as no Christian can believe us. But the Saint fell to another
Prayer, O worthiest Mother of Wisdom, for the Salvation of this good People,
who have learned in this Rosary to salute thee, force thou these Enemies to
declare to us the plain truth. He had scarce made an end of Praying, when
behold, she comes with a Troop of above an hundred Angels armed with golden
weapons; and in the midst of them the Virgin with a golden Rod fell foul on the
Devils Backs. Then fell all the Devils to new howlings; O Damning foe, who
emtiest Hell, and make the best way to Heaven; thou do force us against our
will to speak out truth, and our own Confusion. Hear ye therefore, O
Christians; This Mother of Christ is too potent to preserve her devout Servants
from ever falling into our hands. It is she, who breaks all our Plots: and we
confess, that whosoever keeps to her Adoration and Service, can never be damned
with us; we never can prevail against any one of her People. She saves many
against our Rights, at the very moment of Death; and were it not that she
frustrates all our Designs, we might have long ago made all her Church fall
from the Faith. To say all in a word; no man who makes use of her Rosary, can
be damned. S. Dominic having by this time what he looked for, bids the People to
say the Rosary; then O Miracle never to be forgotten! at every Ave Maria, a
Troop of Devils under the figure of burning Coals, breaks out of that Heretics
Body: and being all out, The Virgin gives them her Blessing, and goes her way.
The Conclusion and design of all this is, all sorts of People from that time
applied themselves in good earnest to the use of the Rosary, and to the worship
of Mary. Christ and all his Apostles never thought of making thus the Devils to
preach his Gospel; no more did Moses, or Elias employ them so, to confirm the
Law. It seems the Rosary, as to its end, has neither Christ, nor Elias, nor
Moses, nor any true Saint to favor it; and therefore it is no wonder, if it was
helped by other ways.

Nevertheless all the World was not so generally blind and sottish, as not to
see, that the Devil could tell a ly, and juggle then with S. Dominic; and so
this new sort of service having no better ground to stand upon, then the
warranty of the Devil, made so little Progress in the world, that the same
sprite under the Name of the Virgin Mary 400 years after was fain to appear
Gonon. Chronic. an. 1476.
to another Saint, and with extraordinary Favors, (as Rings made of her own
hair; and milk which she Drew out of her own Breast) to enchant him to the same
Service.

At the first it was called our Ladies Bulla Sext. 4.
Psalter: because the Lady has there 150 Salutations, as in the Bible the Lord
has 150 Psalms. Now it is called the Rosary, either because of the Sweet
Comforts, that, Martin. Navar. De Rosar. Miscell. 1.
as they say, it perfumes Devout Hearts with: or more probably, because of a
sweet odor, sweeter then that of any Roses, which devout worshippers pretend
to smell, at such Prayers. Herman, this Ladies great Mignion, did smell it so
perfectly, that at each naming of Mary, Chronic. Deip. an. 1235.
he stooped his nose to the very ground, that so he might have it the fresher:
and they tell us of an old man of the same Confraternity, that at any time or
place soever, when and where he said his Rosary, Ibid. an. 1594.
he was revived with this Aromatical Fragrancy. Nay the very hand of Saint
Caecilia, Ibid. an. 1507.
even after she was quite dead, did smell, they say, better then any Rose, by
often touching her Rosary.

This smell is invented to persuade men of the Excellency of the matter; which
Excellency is quite other, as they take it, then could be had, either from the
breath of an Archangel, or the mouth of a Prophet. For the Roman Church has
improved it to such a form, to such an end, and to such a signification, that,
now it has a hundred Mysteries in the mouth of a Catholic, which it never had
in that of the Angel, tho you should grant as they will have it, that he Gonon.
Chronicon. page 10.
sung it upon his knees. For as they take it Ave, that is, sine vae, that is
without any thing that has any smell of Curse, is such Martin. Navar. de
Oratione Dom. c. 19. n. 131.
a Salutation, as proclams the Virgin Mary to have bin free from all kind of
sin whatsoever, from the Original in her passive Conception; from all Actual,
whether mortal or venial in her life time; and from any decay or corruption in
her Body either at, or after her death. Maria, in their Roman Construction,
raises the heart of a Worshipper to adore her both Soverain and Universal
Monarchy over all men and Angels, sometimes Missal. Paris. in Sab. Missae de S.
Maria.
over God himself too. They take and construe Navar. De Orat. Domin. c. 19.
Maria also, for that special Star, that guides poor Travelers upon the Sea.
Stella Maris, the surest defense against all storms: the best Leader into
Heaven, both by her Example and Merits: the Light of them that sit in darkness:
and the great Star, that Balaam saw. Gratiaplena, makes her in the same
Grammar, Navar. ibid.
a whole Sea and Ocean, whence the Sinners have their Pardon, the just men all
Increase of Grace, the Angels joy, and the whole Trinity Glory; here they find
in particular the seven Gifts of the Holy Ghost, the nine Miraculous Powers,
and the twelve Antonin. 4 part. Tit. 15. c. 20.
special Privileges of being the Mother of us all, the Gate of Heaven, etc.

Therefore this Ave Maria, when specially thus understood, makes the sweetest
Melody, by Chronic. Deip. an. 1303.
her own confession, that ever you can sing in her Ears. Christ himself, as
they think, or at the least say, sings Vita S. Margaritae. Chronic. S. Franc.
c. 3.
it sometimes upon the Altar: and the Virgin has it written in letters of
Gold, upon Gonon. Chron. an. 294.
her breast. Many People, who knew nothing but the three or four first words of
this Angelical Salutation, Chronic. Deip. an. 1149. Ren. Benedict. de Vit. SS.
1. Nov. Th. Cantiprat. l. 2. c. 29. sect. 9.
have bin, as they say, as well saved therewith, as if they had known the whole
Gospel. And all the Molan. Indic. SS. Belg.
Roses, and white Lilies, nay Chronic. Deip. an. 1149.
Trees sometimes with these letters upon their leaves, which the Virgin Mary,
or rather some other Spirit makes often grow upon their Graves, and out of
their very Mouths, Noses, and Ears, who did make it their business and their
whole Religion to sing it, are among Roman Catholics, a most sufficient
Evidence both of the Excellency of those words, and of the esteem she makes of
them. Besides all this Depth and pregnancy, which these words bear in their
signification; they think them to carry often also such a miraculous Ren.
Bened. ibid.
strength in the sound, they are spoken with, and in the very Ink and Paper,
they are written in, that no Charm can be stronger. What do you think of that
Ibid. an. 1598.
Infant, which, being yet not above six months old, did sing it out in a full
Church, when there was neither Clerk, nor other Choristers to do it? Was it not
a clear inspiration, that moved your Angelical S. Thomas, being yet an Infant,
as the other was, to take up Vita S. Thom. ap. Sur. 7. Mart.
a loose Paper, where this Salutation was written; and to hold it in spite of
his Mother, till he had swallowed it down? But what do you say to the little
Bird, that Bust. in Marial. 12. Sermon. 1.
having bin taught by a Nun, to prate Ave Maria, and being snatched away by a
Hawk; as soon as the Bird cried the two words (with what understanding or
devotion you may think) presently the Hawk fell down dead; and the poor Bird
fled back again to her Mistress.

Now, if these few words, an inconsiderable part of the Rosary, can do such
Feats; what may not one hope of the whole? when S. Dominic had put it all in a
Packthred, and cast it about Magn. Specul. Tit. Rosarium Exemp. 1.
ones Neck, he could overmaster any Devil. One of his Captains named Antony
(for S. Dominic was a Warrior) could Alanus de Insulis in Rosa B. M.
cause the Clouds to rain hot burning Bullets upon his Heretical Foes, by
hanging it to his Banner. And it is confidently reported, that Brave Montford
Chronic. Deip. an. 1213.
once routed an hundred thousand of them, with this Weapon.

Now you must know, (otherwise you do not deserve the Name of a true Roman
Catholic) that the Rosary with the hundred and fifty Angelical Salutations,
well rehearsed and minded together, besides the sense of every word, (which
reaches high) contains in its whole Contexture the fifteen great Mysteries,
which are Missal. Romans in Missa Rosar.
celebrated by special Masses. What these Mysteries are, is a Mystery to
Protestants, as it was to the holy Fathers; but of late times the Roman
Catholics have got them all by special Revelations from the Virgin.

Of these 15 Mysteries, the first 5 Navar. de Rosar. Miscell. 20. n. 1.
are called Gaudiosa; the 5 next Dolorosa; and the last 5 Gloriosa Gaudiosa;
that is, the first five joiful Mysteries, are the five great Joies, that, the
Virgin had upon earth, as they say she has reveled to some of her friends; the
first was, when the Archangel Gabriel got into the Sanctuary, the doors being
shut, to salute her with an Ave. 2. The second, when Elizabeth saluted her by
the title of Mother of the Lord. 3. The third, when she was delivered of her
Travel. 4. The fourth, when she presented both her and Gods child in the
Temple. 5. And the fifth, when she found him twelve years after, disputing among
the Doctors. What the remembering of these Joies is worth, you may learn by the
Experience of that holy Monk, who whilst he was muttering them by an Altar,
heard an Oracle from Heaven, Card. Damian. an. 1360.
in these words, Gaud^um, etc. thou have celebrated my Joies on Earth: Thou
shall have great Joies hereafter.

The second 5 Dolorosa, or full of Grief, are about the Passion, as at the last
farewell, when Christ went to Jerusalem: At the sight of the Crown of Thorns: At
the hearing of the Hammer beating the Nails upon the Cross, etc. They say that
a very lewd Raskal, and a Magician besides, was saved from Hell upon this one
account, that tho he cared neither for God, nor for his Mother, Chronic Deip.
an. 1360.
yet he had the grace to think of these Griess, whenever he passed by her
Image.

The last five Mysteries, which are called Gloriosa, or glorious Joies are 1.
When she saw her Son arising out of his Grave. 2. Going to Heaven. 3. When she
at the Pentecost received the Holy Ghost. 4. When she saw her self above waited
upon and courted by Christ, etc. Now if any third part of these fifteen
Mysteries, can, as you have Examples for it, sometimes rescue a Soul out of
Hell; sometimes bring down the Virgin Mary from heaven; and sometimes make
Altars speak out; how strong are the fifteen together?

Nor is this all. The Rosary one way or other involves within its proper
Extent, besides the 15 Mysteries, 165 Contemplations; h about what both Christ,
and his Mother did together: and every one of these Contemplations must be
applied to every Pater or Ave. So no man living can say how far the holy Rosary
can reach. It is but a small trial of it, to see it sheltering Chronic. S.
Franc. l. 1. c. 36.
Monks against a storm, as well as the Roof of a strong house could: or to see
Angels gathering Author Method. Admirab. fol. 210.
Lilies at every Pater, and a Rose at every Ave that is said; and making
Garlands and Posies for them, Chronic. Ord. Minor. par. 3.
who are careful to pray that way. It is somewhat more to see horrible
Blasphemers carried Lipez. de Rosar. l. 1. c. 10.
away by stupid Asses from the Gallows into Holy Churches, for once undertaking
the Rosary: or to see the Virgin her self breaking on this account Chronic.
Deip. an. 1495.
all the Halters that should strangle condemned persons; or keeping them Pat.
Archang. Gian. de Rosar.
so slack and loose that they could never stop their breath. But what can a
Villain wish for better, or a holy man find more horrible, then is what they
say of dead Whores, Alan. 5. part. c. 62.
arising out of their Graves by the power of their Rosary, an hundred and fifty
days (answerable to the 150 Aves) after their heads had bin cut off? The Woman
lived but two days after; for she came merely to confess her sins, and to have
Absolution, then being dead: after 15 days more (answerable to the 15
Mysteries, and to the 15 Paters) being in the form Ibid.
of a bright Star, (you see what wanton Ladies may come to) she appeared to St.
Dominic, to tell him what he knew before, (but such Things cannot be too well
known) that there was nothing in the world comparable to the Rosary, both to
save all sorts of sinners, and to please the Holy Virgin. I say St. Dominic
knew it before; for when he prayed against the Albigenses, Bovius Tom. 13. an.
1213.
the Queen of Mercy appeared to him, and bad him to set up the Rosary, and to
teach all men that form of Prayer as most acceptable Service both to her self
and to her Son. And besides this Instrument, says she, shall be a singular
weapon to destroy Heresies and Vices: to advance all sorts of Virtue: and to
obtain both the Divine Mercy, and my help.

All this was farther represented by two notable Visions, which a Bishop saw in
a Dream. In one he saw S. Dominic, Gonon. Chronic. an. 1315.
making a Bridge with 150 Towers upon it, to bring sinners into a Garden, where
the Queen of mercy was giving Crowns to others, but to himself a sharp Censure,
for his being not sound in the Faith, concerning that Article of Catholic
Religion. But in the other, this prelat being grown very little better, by what
he had seen in the former; he found himself and many more in a most stinking
Ibid.
Lake, and Puddle, where certainly they had bin choakt, but that both the
Goddess, and the Apostle of the Rosary let down from above a long Chain made of
150 small Rings, and some few others bigger among them, by means whereof all
were drawn out. Thus far you see, what the Holy Rosary can do; now you must
learn how to use it.

1. It is needful to begin it deliberately, Mart. Navar. de Horis Canon. c. 13.
n. 15.
that is, says the best and surest Author you can find in that Church, not to
do it like men in a dream, who may walk, and kneel and say their prayers, although
they sleep: but to begin it with a set purpose of doing what the Church
enjoines. For tho there are several Examples of men that were saved out of Hell
for either wearing Alan. Rediv. part. 5. c. 43.
a Rosary, or for giving it to Id. part. 1. c. 21.
a friend, without using it otherwise; these are extraordinary Blessings rather
granted to some, to recommend the Excellency of Rosaries, then to encourage
holy men to that abuse.

2. Tho of course, as it appears by the ordinary Gloss Clement. in Council.
Vien. de Celebrat. Misserum. Tit. 13.
upon the Council of Vienna, Rosaries might be used as well as other forms of
Prayers are, without actual attention, which manner of Praying without the
mind, is called by them the fruit Ibid.
of the Lips: and thus the Lips may do the work in reading the hourly Prayers,
whilst the heart runs another way; yet besides the first Deliberation and set
purpose in the Beginning, my more sober and severe director requires a kind of
General attention in the Progress of this Service; that is to say, you are not
bound to attend what words you say, nor to care much what sense they bear;
since neither of these two, can be well done, without some help of the Latin
tongue, which you have not. But whilst you dispatch your Aves, and tumble over
and over your Beads, you must have what they call the Third, or the Paul.
Layman Theol. Moral. l. 4. Tract. 1. c. 5. n. 9.
Spiritual Attention, that is Navarrus. De Hor. Can. c. 13. n. 4.
to remember for example, that you are at Mass: there to fancy the Real
Presence, and to pray heartily that what the Mass Priest does or says for you
(tho you do not know what it is) may be granted. My good God, or my sweet Lady
(says the Catholic worshipper, as Navar. Ibidem.
this severe Divine advises him) I do not understand what I hear: and I as
little understand what I say; yet I believe, that I both hear and say thy
Praises: and that I pray for my self, and all other Christians, after the
intention of the Holy Church. Grant me O Dear Lord, or Lady, what I desire, not
knowing what. This being done, and the men, being thus well disposed; let Mass,
hourly Prayers, and Rosaries be what they will, Greek, or Latin, Pater noster,
or la, sol, fa; all is one to Roman Worshippers. And as to the 15 Mysteries,
and 165 Contemplations, all this must not trouble his head, as it might most
really do, and it may be, c turn his Brain too, if he were obliged to care for
it: for it seems these Contemplations and Mysteries are involved in the Rosary,
as a great Tresure under Walls, to make it vastly rich and powerful, although the
owner perceive it not. Thus their consecrating Words, Hoc est enim corpus meum,
can work Miracles from the mouth of an Ignorant; and so do mostly Spells, and
Characters in the mouth of a Conjurer. Origin observes somewhere, that the
words of Abraham, Isaac, and Sabbath, that Magicians did enchant with, did work
far better in that Tongue which was unknown to them, then in their own. You may
hear of strange Fears also don by words taken out of the Latin Psalms, which
the Witches do not understand. And so must at this rate Ave Maria, Pater
noster, good and holy words otherwise, if they do such Miracles as they say,
contract likewise a strange Virtue from some Extrinsecal Principle, which is
neither understood nor thought of. Mean while, what Church is this, and where
can the Papists find such another, that dispatches the Divine Service, as
Conjurers do their mischief, in a strange Tongue?

3. To say the Rosary after the best way without distracting your self about
Contemplations and Mysteries; take me the Virgin Navar. de Rosar. Miscell. 26.
n. 2.
by her self, that so the whole strength of your Soul may the better mind her
alone: And fancy her the best you can in some of those Conditions, which her
Images can help you to; either as hearing with reverence the Message of the
Angel Gabriel, Ave Maria, etc. or looking steadfastly on her Baby, whom she has
commonly on her left Arm; or else sitting like a great Queen close to God upon
a high Throne, and there hearkening to what we say. To use your fancy to this
way, you must salute her thrice a day, at Morning, Noon, and Sunsetting, when
you hear the Bell Salve Regina; and at each time Ibid.
adore one of those three Members or parts of her, which were the seats of the
greatest Wonders. 1. Her Belly, in these or such Words: O most glorious Queen
of Mercy, I do salute the venerable Temple of thy Womb, Ave Maria. 2. Her
Heart: O most glorious Queen of Mercy, I salute thy Virgin Heart, which never
had any tincture of sin, Ave Maria. 3. Her Soul: O most glorious Mother of
Mercy, I salute your most noble Soul, decked as it is with all the precious
Ornaments of Gifts, of Virtues, and of Graces, Ave Maria.

4. Thus having got your self into some Ibid.
familiarity with the Virgin, and thereby learned to look her full in the face;
now fall to the first Ibid. Miscell. 24. n. 3.
Decad, or the first ten Ave Maria's of your Rosary, Ave Maria Gratia plena,
Dominus etc. And at the end of each Decad, fastening always your Eyes on her
in one of the three postures aforesaid, adore her with this Doxology (instead
of Glory be to the Father) Virgin Mother, Glorious Mary, let all the Angels and
Archangels, all Principalities, Dominations and Powers, the Thrones, the
Cherubims and Seraphins, now glorify you a thousand times. And we hope to see
you and adore you once in Heaven, as well as they. Amen. Then take your breath,
and at the end of the second Decad, or ten other Ave Maria's, tell her this: O
glorious Virgin Mother, let Adam and Eve, Elias and Enoch, the Patriarchs and
the Prophets, St. John Baptist, the Innocents, and all the Saints of the Old
Testament, with whom we hope one of these days to see and adore you, now bless
you twenty thousand times. Amen. At the end of the third Decad, that is as far
as to 30. Aves: O glorious Queen, etc. Let Peter, and Paul, and John, and all
the Apostles and Evangelists; let Stephen, and all the Lords Disciples;
Sebastian, and all the Martyrs with whom, etc. now praise and bless you thirty
thousand times. At the end of the fourth Decad, that reaches to 40 Aves: Let
all the Confessors, Sylvester, Gregory, Jerome, Isidor, Martin and Nicolas,
Benedict and Bernard, Dominic and Francis, all the Bishops, Monks and Eremits,
etc. bless you now forty thousand times. Ave Maria. And at the end of the fifth
Decad, O most glorious Virgin Mother, let your Mother Anna, and your two
sisters, Mary's; let Magdalen, and your dearest Martha, and Marcella; let your
dear waiting Maids, Agnes, Catharina, and Agatha; let all holy Maids, Wives and
Widows, with whom we hope, etc. now bless you fifty thousand times. Amen. By
this time you have done the third part of your Rosary, and now you may take
breath a while.

5. When you shall come to it again, (for the first part is enough to some for
a day, and to others for a whole Week) that you may both recreate and improve
Devotion with some variety: A wise and holy Man advises you Navar. De Orat. c.
10. n. 36.
to say but 5 Aves, and to put a Pater to each, and apply all to the five
Wounds which Christ suffered in his Body (for it is ordinary with these Men to
say Our Father to the Virgin, and Ave Maria to God) with this Preface: Go too,
let us sing five Pater nosters, and five Aves, to the honor of the five Wounds;
and first, in memory of the right Hand, Ave Maria gratia, etc. next, in memory
of the right Foot wounded, Ave Maria, etc. then of the left Hand and Foot in
the same way: finally of his side, concluding all the five Paters at every
wounded Member, with an Ave Maria by all means, that being as pertinent to his
Body, as a Pater can be to her Image.

6. When you have done with applying your Ave Maria's to Christ, apply them
now, which is more proper, to her self. And by all means stick close to the
direction of St. Herman (not Herman the second Joseph and Husband of the Virgin
Mary, but the Dominican, and therefore the best acquainted with Rosaries.) His
advice is, that having the Virgins Image before you, you Chronic. Deip. an.
1243.
take her whole Body piece by piece, and apply to each an Ave, beginning first
with her Bowels; then proceed to her Heart; then her Paps; after her Arms; then
her Hands; then her Mouth: in a Word, every Member that you can civilly name
and look upon in a Woman, that so all your Aves may get more Merit and
Holiness, by being applied to every part of her Body; as the Beads or little
Buttons of your Rosary do, you know, by being touched at her Image. For this
piece of Devotion, she once on a Saturday gave a gracious visit to this Ibidem.
Harman, and enriched him then with Eloquence, the gift of Tongues, and all
other Graces imaginable.

7. Another thing you may do more, which Jordan Gonon. Chronic. an. 1222.
the Dominican, and a great Saint, gave in Counsil to Bertholdus. When you are
pouring your Prayers before the Mother of Mercies, take notice of how many
Letters the name Maria is made of: it consists of five; the first is M.
therefore seek for some holy Song or Psalm, of which the first Letter is an M.
such is for example Magnificat, etc. The second Letter is an A. then say, Ad te
levavi, etc. The third is R. therefore have at Retribue, etc. and so to the
very last. After which, you must dispatch your Aves, provided (which you may
omit by no means) that before any one of the five Psalms, you sing or say, Ave
Maris stella: I salute you, O star of the Sea, etc. And at the end of every
such Song, you make a Leg, or a Courtesy, and then end with Ave Maria. This
parcel of special Worship once pleased so well this Spirit (for God forbid I
should think it to be the blessed Virgin) that leaving all work in Heaven, she
came down with a Pot full of Holy Water, to sprinkle it on these Worshippers
with her own Gonon. ibid.
hand, and to bid one of them tell all the others as from her, that she was the
Mother of God; that she loved dearly their Order for thus beginning and ending
the Service of God with her Praises; and that for her doing so, she obtained of
her Son, that no Dominican Friar shall ever defile that holy Order, by lying
long in mortal Sins. A very great Privilege indeed, and given to Monks from a
good hand. You might also do what St. Joane the Carmelite used to do Benedict.
Mattus. in vita Johannae Carmel.
, but not to that prodigious number; for she did dispatch (I hope it was not at
one time) fifteen thousand Aves; (fifteen score is enough for you) and at the
end of each hundred, she said a Salve Regina, and seven times Ave Stella, or, O
gloriosa Domina, all prime Songs to adore her with; and she called this, Our
Ladies Shift; this being her Ladyships goodness to account it, as so many
Crowns, or Ornaments, and rich Garments bestowed on her, when she is adored in
this manner. It is by the strength of such Hymns, and well ordered Repetitions
and Rosaries, that S. Dominic Flaminius in vita S. Dominic.
and S. Francis were predestined, as they say, both to restore Piety, and to
keep the World from perishing; that in all probability, so many black Friars
were admitted under the Antonin. 3. part. Hist. tit. 23. c. 3.
Robe of their Goddess; that with continual repeting the Rosary Salutation,
Eustachius Menol. Cister. 27 Mar.
the Cistercian had it miraculously written in plain Characters on his Tongue;
that with continual using and kissing holy Beads, Chronic. Deip. an. 1212.
Alanus the Captain had a brightness like that of Crystal about his Mouth, and
in his Hands; and that many Monks of all Orders, had Roses and Lilies, with Ave
Maria's in Golden Letters growing on them, or their Graves. S. Mayer. Annal.
Fland. l. 5. ad an. 1138.
Jossion, and S. Cantiprat. de Ap. l. 2. c. 29. sect. 15.
Josbert, are upon this last account great examples of her kindness.

But and if your thoughts will not fly higher then to the common Glory of
Heaven, the ordinary use of the Rosary needs not put you to half this trouble.
It is certain, that St. Dominic, the first Patriarch of this Device, and St.
Alanus de Rupe the worthy Restorer of it, both inspired by the same Spirit,
intended it Navar de Rosar. Miscell. 22. n. 1.
for the common People, Men, Women and Children together, whom they knew unable
to reach so far. And therefore these indulgent Fathers are likely to dispense
with them, who will use it at easier rates. Read it but once in a whole Week,
and at several times and parcels, that will abundantly serve your turn. Read it
with no more attention, then such as you are capable of when you Ibid. Miscell.
32.
go to the Market, or walk in a Procession, or ride abroad, or prune your Vine
Paul. Layman. de Hor. Canon. c. 5. n. 11, and 12.
, or put on or off your clothes, etc. provided that you neither read nor write.
If furthermore by chance you have lost your Beads, either you may take Navar.
de Psalter. Miscell 28. n. 1.
your Fingers, that will presently make a Decad; or observe by how many steps
you go up to such a Chapel, and run your Paters and Aves after that number;
such cursory Devotions will be enough for to save you. St. Alanus Alan. Rediv.
par. 5. c. 51. c. 59, etc. c. 62.
alone, the great Mignion of this Virgin, can give you a whole set of
Blasphemers, and Rogues, and Whores, who did not the half of all this, yet were
all saved one way or other. Now who is the habitual Sinner, who being conscious
of his ways, and of his unwillingness to amend them, would not part with any
thing rather then with such an Indulgent Mother, Rosary and Religion? But here
is yet more, if more can be.

CHAP. IX.
Of the vast Tresure of the Roman Church, and her Power to dispose of it.
BEsides the Virgin Mary, whom the Papists do look upon as their sure Tresure
in Heaven, and the most immediate Storehouse whence they get one way or other
all both extraordinary and easy means in order to Salvation; they also enrich
themselves and others with another as great Tresure, which their Church
dispenses on Earth. In Heaven, as they take it, Mary is the great Ocean, into
which all the Heavenly Blessings and Virtues, like so many Rivers do flow:
Omnia Flumina, etc. says S. Bonavent. in Specul.
one of their most Learned Saints, that is, All Rivers and Floods run into the
Sea, when all Gifts and Graces meet in Mary, to wit, the Streams of Graces that
the Angels are watered with; the Rivers of all the other Blessings, which all
the Saints of God ever had, etc. And as another of their Saints expresses it,
God has placed in the Virgin S. Bernard. Sermon. de Aquaeduct.
Mary, the fullness of all that is good, so that if we have any hope, any
Blessing and Salvation, we may be sure it comes from her. If this fullness be
not enough with what she has on her account, she can fill it up, and make it
run over with what all the Saints may add to it. For the Saints, they say, are
to Georg. Venetus, ap. Salaz. Prove. c. 8. v. 34. n. 435.
the Virgin, what the Stars are to the Moon; and those load her with all the
Fruits of their Intercessions, as these do this with their Influences, before
either of them come down to us.

In Earth, they have the use and disposal of another stock, as rich and as
necessary to Sinners, which they call the Churches Tresury. And if you compare
it as the other, to a Sea, four great Rivers continually do fill it up, or keep
it full. The first is, Mart. Bonacin. De Indulg. q. 1. punct. 1. n. 6.
the satisfactions of all the Saints from Adam and Abel, to Christ. For as the
Roman Doctors teach us, they suffered more then need was; and no use was made
of their sufferings, because during the 4000 years to Christ's Ascension,
Heaven, they think, was not open; nor had Christ empowered any Man to take
ought of this Tresure, in order to any Pardons. The second is, the Passion of
Jesus Christ, whose Blood they say, Clem. 6. Extravag. Vnigenitus.
had it bin but one drop, was enough to save all Mankind: therefore all the
surplusage, either before or at his Passion, is reserved (unless lost) in this
vast Tresury. The third, all the meritorious Sufferings and Passions of the
Virgin Mary, which, as they think Bellarm. de Indulg. l. 1. c. 2. sect. Quarta
Propositio.
, she needed not for her self; and so the Church applies to others. This one
River may make a Sea. The fourth is, the Sufferings, the Martydoms, and the
Penances of all the Saints, since the Gospel, Peter, Paul, S. Dominic, and S.
Francis, and all holy Monks and Eremits, who, tho perhaps not quite sinless,
yet had no need to do so much (as for themselves) to satisfy Divine Justice.

Here then you have to make use of, first, all the Blood which the Martyrs from
Abel to Barachias, under the Old, and from him to the last Sufferer under the
New Testament could shed, in above five thousand years. Secondly, We have of
Christ's Blood, all he ever shed upon the Cross, saving one drop; all that whole
Flood, I say, that from his Head down to his Feet gushed from his Wounds, and
the opening of all his Veins, even since his Circumcision: and by this guess,
how many thousand* of Roman Churches may be redeemed with this Tresure, if well
applied. Thirdly, You have in the same store, the hard Penances, the cruel
Persecutions, and the voluntary Whippings, whether bloody or unbloody of all
other Saints, Monks and Eremits: whatever either S. Anthony, or S. Hilarion, or
S. Paulus, so much celebrated by S. Jerome: whatever S. Zebinas, S. Julian, S.
Simeon, S. Maris, or S. Masymas, and others, celebrated by S. Theodoret,
Palladius, etc. could gain by their hard usages and Iron Chains: whatever the
great St. Francis could deserve of God Almighty, by leaving Lippom. in vita
Francisc.
all he had in the World, even to his very drawers and breeches, by rambling
naked like a Madman, or by quenching his Lust upon Maids and Women of Snow;
all this I say, and a great deal more, is to be disposed of at Rome for the use
of good Catholics: and yet all this is but one half of this Tresure. For
besides all these sufferings, all the meritorious Works of pious men from the
very first to the last Saint are gathered in; and the Roman Church has found
the way of parting a good work in two, namely, Navar. de Jubil. Bellarm. de
Indulg. l. 1. c. 2. sect. Postreme potest. Bonacina de Indulg. q. 1. punct. 1.
n 3.
the meritorious deserving side, which makes Supererogations, and gains
extraordinary Rewards: and another laborious and painful side (for the Saints
could not Preach or Pray, on do any manner of good, without taking some trouble
about it) which is put up and kept very safe for expiating other men's sins.
Hereupon Rome may safely swear, that no other Church in the whole World enjoies
the like (if real and true) privilege with her; and that she is the only that
pretends to be able to ease poor sinners from the necessity of repenting, or at
the least Bell. de Paenitent, l. 4. c. 14. sect. Respondeo Indulgentia.
from doing works meet for Repentance.

This great Tresure and Privilege, has bin lost and buried out of the notice
of Christ's Church, above thirteen hundred Years. No Christian ever thought of
it, till Pope Clement found it out. For tho there were Indulgences before, yet
they were a quite other thing, as in the time of the Latin Fathers; or they
were not taken out of this Tresure, but either out of the pretended strength of
their Blessings, or out Cajetan. and Medina. ap. Suarem de Thesaur. sect. 3.
Parag. his ergo rejectis.
of the Keys, which then Popes turned backward and forward, to shut in or let
out whom they pleased. Such were the Indulgences wherewith Innocent the third
for example did encourage the Christians against the Turks; and Gregory the
seventh, his Baron. To. n. An. 1084. n. 15.
Soldiers against the Emperors of Germany, which were but Letters of Favor, and
Testimonials and Passes as it were to God Almighty, which (however much sought
after, and sometimes dearly paid for, even in those days) cost nothing but the
Popes blessing or credit; whereas in these later times, Indulgences are Bills
of Exchange for hundreds and thousands of Years, really, as it is supposed,
paid out of this Tresury; that is, either out of that vast abundance of Blood,
which Papists say, Christ might have spared; or out of the Blood and Penances
of other Saints, which are reserved in this Tresury, and thence by virtue of
these Indulgences allowed to the sinner, as much to all ends and purposes, as
if the sinner were the Saint that had done and suffered for himself. Here are
two very great Wonders for Men and Angels to look upon: The first, How all this
Blood and Sufferings are from the remotest parts of the World, and through the
distance of all Ages fetched and gathered into this Tresury. The second, How,
when thus got home, the Pope can disperse them so well abroad.

1. To get all in, the Blood of Christ and his Martyrs cannot be conveied into
the Roman Tresury, as Rivers are down their Channels into the Sea; or as lesser
Waters are by Pipes and Spouts conveied into a Cistern: No more also can they
be kept in Bottles, as they say our Ladies Milk is; nor in Ward-robes, or other
Rooms, as they say also her shoes and shifts are; and by that means it were
possible to fetch up all from Nazareth, or from Rome, or from Venice, or from
any other Country. But as if you should see these said Bottles, Shifts, Shoes,
and other Relics, leave all of them upon their own accord their respective
usual Abodes, and flock together into one place, you would take it for a
strange Miracle, as strange at the least, as when the Chamber where they say
the Virgin was born, jumped with the Doors, Chimney, Windows and all, from
Nazareth to Lauretta; the Satisfactions and Scourgings, and other Penances of
the Saints, to meet under the hand of his Holiness, must not do less. Whether
we be bound to imagine such an Attractive Virtue at Rome, which is the Center of
their Church, to draw satisfactions to her Tresury, as there is imagined in the
Center of the World, to draw heavy Bodies to its bottom; or whether all this be
done by some other strange Conveiances: however, all the satisfactory Works and
Penances, let them be what they can, do tend, and unless hindered and stopped in
some passage, take their course toward this Storehouse. Insomuch, that Greg.
de Valent. de Indulg. Punct. 3. sect. Secundo, quia. Bonacin. de Ind. Quaest.
1. punct. 3. Proposit. 3. Layman. de Ind. c. 4. n^ 5. sect. Dico secundo.
Suarez. To. 4. Disput. 51. sect. 4. Parag. Nonnulla.
unless a Man, by a special intention, applies to his own benefit the
satisfactoriness of his Work, before it parts out of his hand, it runs
forthwith to the Tresury; and thence in vain would he have it again, tho never
so much for his own need, unless the Pope will give it him.

2. The second Wonder is about the getting out what is thus got in, and the
scattering it far and near upon all manner of Persons, Families, Buildings, and
other things whatsoever his Holiness can think upon. Let the Pope of Rome but
turn the Cock, this Fountain will cast forth its Waters what way, how much, and
how far he will; and as he may choose what he pleases, nothing hinders him to
pick out for example the works of Abel, that have bin kept close five or six
thousand years, and apply them to Gardener: or all the Merits of austere John
Baptist, and bestow them upon the course of some wanton Catholic Lady. It Is
indeed an admirable Magazine, or Storehouse, that can keep things so long for
so good ends. And, which is another great Wonder, what thing soever they be
clapped to, there they shall be as long, or longer, then the very matter which
they stick to. Let his Holiness for example, apply one of these Blessings by
way of local Indulgence to an Altar or a Church, it will outlast the very
Stones (unless recalled;) and tho Thunder or time beats them down Paul. Layman.
de Indulg. c. 13. n. 3. Suarez. To. 7. de Ind. Sect. 1. n. 8. and 9.
, it will stick to the very ground, and there be as good for a new Church, if
the Parishoners will build it up, as ever it was for the old one. Nay, the
lightest and moveablest things, as Beads, Medals, Pieces of Wax, Holy Grains,
etc. what way soever you toss them, cannot shake it off. Navarrus, a great holy
Man among all the Fathers of Trent Navar. de Jubil. Notab 15. n. 15.
, says, That he has seen the Pope bestowing out of this Tresure, as much upon
alittle Button of Wood, Globulo ligneo, as could save any one Soul, if in
saying the Lords Prayer he will but hold it in his hand; now this Blessing will
stick to it, though you throw it into the Sea: and if you did throw it into the
Fire, this admirable saving Virtue would probably stick to the Ashes: I am sure
it will lay hold upon the very ringing of Bells; and whenever Richard
Cluniacens. in Papa Joh. 22.
you hear them, in the Morning especially, at Noon, and at Sunsetting, and
have the grace to put off your Hat to say an Ave Maria, you may thereby expiate
some sins. Happy sinners, whose Churches, Altars, and the very Bells can do so
much, and the Tresure shall pay for all. But this is a fitter matter to be
abhorred, then jested at.

As this Tresure is best contrived, both for the Interest of Covetous, and the
Lust of lewd Persons, it is made up of Blasphemies, and impertinent lies
against God. The first Pope who invented it, maintained it upon this ground,
That Clemens 6. Extravag. Vnigenitus.
one drop of Christ's Blood could save mankind: whence follows, that he had no
need to die. Hereupon the Blasphemer concludes, That since God spared not his
Son, but put him to such a violent death, as forced out of him not one single
drop, but Ibid.
a whole stream and Flood of Blood, there must be somewhere a Tresury to
receive this most precious, but superfluous quantity, lest it be lost. But,

First, This impious untruth destroies the necessity of Christ's satisfaction
and sufferings, and countenances all what the old, and the new, and worse
Arrians will say against his Sacrifice upon the Cross. For if one drop of Blood
was sufficient, he shed that and more at his Circumcision, and thus far his
Passion was useless.

Secondly, It charges the Justice of God with such a foul Reproach, as can never
be washed off, as long as this Roman Tresury shall stand: For since it stands
merely to receive that Blood, which might have bin spared at our dear Saviors
Passion; it stands up as an Evidence, that whatsoever is therein kept, was
demanded of, and paid by Christ, as a tyrannous rigor above what was due, to
afflict and torment him; and that the same Eternal Judge, who, as they say, is
so merciful, even in Hell, as to take Aloys. Novarin. Vmbra Virg. To. 2. l. 4.
Excurs. 43. n. 799.
less of damned men then they deserve, was in the very acts of Grace, and the
Redemtion of Mankind, so severe against his own Son, as by most insufferable
Punishments to extort from him a thousand times more, then it was strictly just
he should suffer.

Thirdly, It throws the same Dirt upon that Love, which God bears to his only
beloved Son. For Christ never sought for Torments, farther then they were
necessary for the saving of his own Flesh, that is, Mankind. Contrariwise,
with Prayers and Tears he wished, That that Cup might pass from him: And
therefore, what kindness had this bin in God the Father, to put his Son to vain
Tortures, and to plunge his very Soul into a most shameful kind of death, when
one drop of Blood had done as much, the Popes Interest being laid aside? And
what Bowels, and natural Compassions were these, in both a Just and Loving
Father, to draw so much Blood out of his Son, as should bring him to a cruel
Death, merely to fill up Roman Purses?

Fourthly, Nothing less then blind Covetousness, could betray Men into that
blind Opinion. For what could persuade the Popes, that one drop of Christ's
Blood was enough to save all the World out of Hell, but the pretense of having
all the rest in their disposal, to save Men from Purgatory? Can any ordinary
Divine, unless blinded by that Interest, be so fundamentally ignorant, as not
to know, that what sinners deserve, the Law demands, the Sacrifices for sin did
threaten, and therefore either we, or our surety for us was to suffer, was a
real and cursed Death? And can any other then a madmen think, that a Drop of
Blood shed without Death is a real and cursed Death? It is true, one Drop of
that Blood was of an infinite value: and it is perhaps with this pretense, that
Popes blind themselves, and others, or unconsidering men in their harangues
have talked unwarily, but there are many more things in Christ, which are of an
infinite value, as for example his Prayers, his Groanings, his Tears, etc.
which yet are not sufficient for our Ransom; for no infinite thing could be it,
but such as were an infinite death: and certanly a Drop of Blood, is neither
death, nor a death of infinite worth.

Popes, or at the least Popish Divines Bellar. de Indulg. l. 1. c. 2. sect.
Tertia Propositio. Becan. de I^^ulg. q. 1. sect. Prima Conclusio.
have another Foundation to set their Church Tresure upon; which I confess is
not so impious as the former; but is as much or more impertinent. They say, and
they say well, that the Death of Jesus Christ was abundantly sufficient, not
only to save those few, who are saved out of the World; but to save all men
besides, and twenty thousand both men and worlds more, if God had created them;
and if they had corrupted themselves. Hereupon, and this is their foolish
Impertinency, they part Christ's death and infinite Ransom into two; Namely that
which has bin really applied and made use of; and that which has not bin so.
The former, they think well bestowed on them, who are or shall be really saved;
and therefore lay no claim to it. But the other, which is the far greater part,
that never was applied, because it was rejected; for fear it should fall to the
ground, they challenge it for their Tresure; and that is it, which they apply
every 25th year in a Jubilee, and every day in Indulgences.

After this rate Rome may provide for new storehouses; for they may part as
well in two, the Infinite Wisdom or power or Providence of God; and leaving
that part he makes use of, for Creating and Ordering this one world, wherein we
live; take for themselves that other share, which might have served, and yet
did not, for creating and ordering of thousand more. Did one ever hear of
madmen, that went about to tresure up that part of sunshine, that might show
the way to a whole Army, when but one man makes use of it? or to reserve that
part of Christ's Voice, as far as it might have bin heard by the seventy, where
it was heard but by the twelve Disciples? the Papists in this Poin are very
little wiser then so. The same Wisdom and Power of God, which is all-sufficient
both to create and order many worlds, is all necessary; and therefore
indivisibly and wholly set to order one: the same Sunshine which at one time
fills a whole Hemisphere, or the voice, and Sermon, which fills a great
Auditory, do not use to subdivide themselves into greater or lesser shares
after the number of Eyes, or Ears of more or fewer present persons. One Ear
has as much of the voice, (being in a convenient distance) as has the whole
Auditory: and one Eye takes as much of the light for its own use, as twenty do:
and both the voice and the light impart themselves wholly and indivisibly,
whether to one, or to fourscore. Much more does the all-sufficient satisfaction
and Ransom of Christ our Savior, which being by it self infinite, must needs
therefore be indivisible. For if you part it into shares; either these shares
are finite and limited; and so they cannot make an Infinite: or if they be
infinite and immense; then every one of these Parcels, must be conceived as
great as the whole; which is absurd, contradictory, and impossible. And tho
this infinite satisfaction and Ransom were such as could be divided; yet every
one man has need of all. As every man's sin is infinite, that is, deserves an
infinite Punishment, so must the satisfaction for it, be infinite in the same
way, that is as great as can be presented to an infinite Majesty, by an
infinitely worthy Savior. By consequent, the unconceavable Mercies of God in
Christ Jesus, and the infinite Price offered to the Divine Justice by this
Savior, cannot be distributed, as the price he was sold for, in thirty Pieces.
Whosoever applies to himself that immense value of Christ's Blood, applies it
all: and all being not too much for him; he has nothing of it to spare. This
is plain and demonstrative to any unconcerned Christian, that has but learned
well his Catechism. Now when Popes came with their new and strange Dividend; so
much to God, for them, whom this Blood saves: and so much, which is twenty
thousand times more to me, from them, whom it does not; and out of this large
portion so much must go for so many years of pardon to one, and for so many
days to another; they so tear the Sacrifice and Body of Christ, as the other
Romans would have torn his Garment; and as themselves part and distribute their
own Relics. Here is an Arm of some Saint for his Imperial, and there a skull
for his most Catholic Majesty. The most Christian King must have something; and
the devout and Holy Queen Christina likewise, a Hand, a Toe, a Tooth, a Jawbone
or what you please. This is the great Roman Wisdom; let the Jubilee come when
it will; Europe shall find in this Tresury enough to buy, and Rome to sell. And
if Protestants offer to scruple at this new Divinity; great Scholars will spend
all their wit, and the Vatican all its learning and all its Books, to justify
what Bedlam says.

The Virgin Mary's and other Saints numberless Satisfactions fill up also a
considerable Corner in this Storehouse: and the same Villains, who make God so
unnatural to his own Son as to make him suffer far more grievous Punishments,
then the severest Justice did require; make him in some proportion as bad, and
in another respect, worse to his Sons friends; as bad, if he makes them also
pay more then they owe: and worse, if he make them pay it for debts, namely for
temporal Punishments, which the blood of Jesus Christ had most sufficiently
paid for already. And the Drift of charging God with this rigor both against
Christ and against his Saints in taking of them more then the due, is to bestow
this Overplus, and superfluous satisfactions into the Roman Magazine.

First then I say, if all these second Paiments, and Satisfactions of the
Saints be conceived necessary for the satisfying Divine Vengeance; they either
wrong the Justice of God, or undervalue the Satisfaction of Christ; for if they
must satisfy again for a Debt, which Christ had already most sufficiently
satisfied for; this not only wrongs, but destroies all the best known Rules of
Justice: or if Justice demands yet any farther satisfaction, it presupposes
that it was not yet sufficiently satisfied; and this undervalues and maimes in
a very great mesure Christ's infinite satisfaction. What the Papists have here
to say, is, 1. That the Satisfaction of Christ is infinite, and therefore most
sufficient to discharge all scores whatsoever; but that Bellarm. de Indulg. l.
1. c. 4. sect. Tertia objectio. Suares de Paenit. Disput. 10. sect. 3. n. 6.
Bonacin. de Sacram. Paenit. q. 6. punct. 4. Secunda propositio.
it is applied finito modo, that is, is not applied by the Roman Church to its
full worth; as far as it could reach, but only to the satisfying for sins
before our Baptism most fully, but for the sins committed afterward, not so.
But now let them give an account, wherefore it is not: and what Power Christ
ever gave them of restraining the true immense value of his satisfaction and
sacrifice, in such a mesure as may reserve both for Popes and Mass Priests as
much as they can sell both in Masses, and in Indulgences. 2. They are pleased
to say, or rather they are not afraid to blaspheme, that our Saviors immense
satisfaction, as they presume to restrain it, is but a remote and Layman. de
Indulg. c. 1. n. 3. Suarez. de Thesaur. Disput. 51. Sect. 3. n. 17.
general Cause to help and qualify what we do, when we satisfy for our selves
(which they may say as well of the Father and the Holy Ghost, who satisfy not
at all) and that men's good works and Penances when applied either by themselves
during their life; or by others, when they are dead, are the proper and
immediate ibid.
Causes, which do the Deed. Only the satisfaction of Christ helps men's good and
satisfactory works, somewhat like as Ambregris can help Sweet Drugs rather by
actuating and reviving them to perfume, then by perfuming of it self. For here
Bellarmin will tell you, that there are not two Bellarm. de Purgat. l. 1. c.
14. sect. Tertius modus.
satisfactions, the one of Christ, the other our own: but one actual
Satisfaction only, and that is ours. Thus far either men or Saints are more
properly Redeemers to themselves and others, then is Christ himself: and thus
full this Roman Tresury must be filled up with men's Blasphemies, and Christ's
merits plundered from him. Secondly, from this Blasphemy our Tresury comes to a
squib or cracker, and what stinks so in men's Nostrils, bursts as an emty sound
in their Ears. They say, that these human and superfluous satisfactions, which
their Magazasine is furnished with, to satisfy Divine Justice, are only that
Redundancy and overplus of great labors and hard penances, which their Saints
first had no need of, for expiating their own sins; and secondly which they
made no use of, for expiating the sins of others. Now first, who warrants them
that their Saints had no need of this Surplusage? It is certain, that S.
Francis has bin sometimes troubled with lust; and who can tell whether S.
Bonavent. invita Franc.
the Wife, and the two Daughters, and the two Maids he made of snow to ly with
them, was more then he needed to cool himself? who knows but the five Stigmes,
that is the wounds, which a Seraphim as they say, made in his thin Body may
have bin a fitter devise, to assuage burnings, then to make him blasphemously a
Parallel and companion in Christ's work of Redemtion? Can the Popes give an
exact account, what quantity of satisfactions might have bin spent about those
sins, that their Predecessors were guilty of, when Victor Eusebius. Eccles. Hist.
l. 5. c. 25.
turned Photinian: that is denied that Christ was God) and Zepherin Tertull.
contr. Prax.
a Montanist; and Marcellin Damasus. Libr Pontif. in vita Marcell.
an Idolater: and both Liberius Id. in Vita Liber.
and Foelix Hieronymus de Scriptorib. Eccles. Acacius.
were Arians: and Honorius Council. 6. Act. 16.17.18. Conc. 7. Act. 7. Definit.
Synod.
a Monothelite? Do they know better, how much must go for the expiating of ugly
sins, as for applauding Bloody Phocas, Greg. Magn Regist. l. 11. Epist. 38.
which was the sin of Great Gregory: or for following the Devils Advise, which
was Matthew. Paris. an. 1086.
the Guilt and the public confession of another great Gregory and great Founder
of their Papacy? The truth is no man can tells us, neither what those Saints
did owe; nor what they were able to pay; nor therefore how great Legacies they
might leave for this Roman Cash. Secondly, but suppose, that some owed little,
and may leave much, as for Example the Blessed Virgin, John the Baptist, etc.
who knows whether they have have left it, for this Tresury; or whether they
have not applied and spent it all, about their poor Friends, who wanted it.
They say, that she converted St. Paul Chronic. Deip. an. 34
from a Persecutor to an Apostle, both by her Prayer and her Merits; and why
not with a considerable part also of her own Satisfaction? Or if she would do
so much for one, who was not of her own Tribe; how in conscience and charity
could she spare them from her nearest Relations, the Sons of Joseph her
Husband, who all incurred great Penalties, before they would believe in Christ?
I appeal to the best Catholics, whether the Mother of Mercies could keep long
by her self that overplus of Satisfactions and Merits, which to her were
superfluous, and not bestow them upon those, to whom they might be of so great
use? not upon her most dear Abbess, Pelbartus l. 21. c. 3.
to whom she would be a Midwife, when her Steward had lien with her? nor to her
Maphaeus. Devita Ignat. l. 1. c. 2. Ribadeneira. Vita Loyolae. l. 1. c 7.
Dear Loyola, for his former Debaucheries and Vanities before he came to be a
Saint? nor to either of her Dear devoted Servants, whom she protected so
visibly; the one from being burned by course of Law, for Magn. Specul. Titul.
Confessio. Exemp. 7.
having destroyed her own Child after she had got him by Incest; and the other
from being Pelbart. Stellarii Coronae. l. 12. c. 3.
troubled at all for enticing her Neighbors Husband? As these Creatures had all
along to their lives end, a very great share in her Favor, can you think they
had none at all in her satisfactions for their sins? Is there any reason to
think, that she would throw all the satisfactions she had into the Roman
Tresury for the use of unknown Persons? could she foresee that the Roman Popes
might a thousand and three hundred years after her abode on earth better
dispose of them then she could her self? There is the same improbability
concerning all other true Saints, S. John, S. Paul, S. Peter, all the blessed
Martyrs, etc. The Roman Saints may come in too; For who reads the earnest
Addresses, that S. Dominic S. Briget Revelat. l. 13. c. 17.
makes to his Goddess, for his dear Children the black Preachers; and can
believe, he could forbear the applying all what he had to the necessary wants
of his Order? or if he had reserved any of his great satisfactions, and daily
Whippings for some others; is it not more then probable, that he bestowed them
on such Persons as the Whore was, (I mean his dear Miss Catharina) Bovius Tom.
3. Annal. an. 1221. n. 10.
who heard all his Sermons so devoutly, and yet continued a Trade that had need
of all he could do? Was St. Bernard unkind, or St. Francis unnatural, that, not
to apply to his Nephew all he could spare, for preventing all those Torments,
which he saw did attend him in Hell, because he had left his Convent? and this,
not to do the like to his own Father, who certainly could not fare better, tho
there had bin no sin in him, but this of beating St. Francis, and turning him
naked out of doors for a mad Fool? In all likelihood the Roman Cash is quite
emty, if there is nothing else to fill it up, then the satisfactions of such
Saints; and his Holiness deals not truly in either selling or giving away to
some, that which the Saints have bestowed on others.

Thirdly, it is the like, or rather a greater folly, to think as Vid. supra.
they do, to scrape off from every good Work don by the Saints, the labor and
pains they took in doing it; and so, to think of filling their store with such
scrapings, instead of good satisfactions. For first, not to scruple at their
Language, that which is Meritorious, and that which is Satisfactory in a good
Work, are commonly so close together, that it is impossible to part them
asunder otherwise then you may part one and the self-same thing, in some
considerations and respects. Thus the same gallant Action in an Officer for
example, who was cashiered for some mis-behavior, will be satisfactory in
respect of his former Guilt, for the procuring of his Pardon; and in another
who is guiltless, it will be Meritorious by way of Service only, and 'twill
procure him not a Pardon, which he needs not, but it may be, some considerable
preferment. And if the Service of the Guilty be much greater then his Offense
was, and such it may be, Abners case was, when being in a Rebellion before, he
brought the ten Tribes to the King; the overplus of this satisfaction, shall be
allowed by David to be thus far Meritorious, and thus far also to have a
Reward. After this rate, no part of the gallant Service shall remain behind for
the Tresury, but the whole shall be taken up and accepted for its full worth,
tho partially, so much to procure his Pardon by a Commutative; and so much to
procure him another Reward, by a distributive Justice. A good King, I say, will
observe these Proportions with his Subjects: and I hope, at the last Day, God
will not deal worse with his Children. 2. When it happens, as it does
sometimes, that the laborious and painful part is so extrinsecal to the good
work, as to be easily severed from it; as when S. Paul Preaches in the Chain,
or when S. John looses his Head in a Prison for his Preaching; although the Chain
and the Preaching be two different things in their nature, yet they cohere and
are close together in the Eyes of God Almighty: there the holy Work of
Preaching shall sanctify the cruel Chain; and the hard Chain shall improve the
price of the Holy or Meritorious Preaching. And if David can well consider not
only what Service Abner did him, in bringing Israel to him; but also, that he
lost an Army, or part of his Estate in doing it; there is no fear, but God is a
good God, and will extend his Mercies as far, both on what his Servants do in
his Name, and what they suffer in those Services: For I say unto you, that
every one that has forsaken Houses, or Children, or Lands, etc. shall receive
an hundred fold more, etc. Matthew. 19. And when every little parcel of the
Suffering is recompensed, as well as the Meritorious part, with so liberal a
Reward; What can Popes scrape off from it, that remains unrewarded, to spend in
satisfactions for more, and to lay up in their Tresury? It seems these crafty
Shavers would have the Meritoriousness for one thing, and the pain of
performing it for another: or in more homely terms, they would give the Money
for the Purchase, and the trouble of telling and paying it, for the discharge
of some other Debts; whereas the sum well told and paid, can scarce suffice to
buy the first, much less to leave any overplus to satisfy the second Account.
3. Lastly, Whenever Crosses and Hardships fall upon one, not in order to any
good Work which they do precede or follow, but because they are sent from God,
for Chastisements, or Curbs, or Trials; as the Tribulations of Job, the
buffeting Angel of Paul, and the Sickliness of Timotheus were: or because they
are voluntarily fetched in, and undertaken by some Saints; as the hard Diet of
John the Baptist, the often Fastings of Anna, the low and narrow Lodge of
Hilarion, the seeming barbarous Mortifications of some ancient Holy Persons:
What is all this to the Popes Tresure? Did ever God at any time lay these
Afflictions on the Righteous, in order to make the Pope richer, or his own
Children humble and better? And when these laid them on themselves, can the
Roman Church well think, but that they intended them rather for mortifying
their own Bodies, and securing their own Salvation, then for discharging other
Men's sins? What and if God and they laid more then was necessary for these
true ends, Are Roman Divines ignorant, that God, who made Job twice as rich as
he was before he made him poor, will most abundantly remunerate all such hard
surplusage, if there is any? And when all accounts are made even, whatsoever
Burdens are charged either by their Savior, or themselves; St. Paul tells
them, That the sufferings of this present life (and it is with these, if some
could be found unrewarded, that this Tresury should be stuffed up) are so far
from superabounding, or equalling, that they are not to be compared with that
Glory (immense reward of all Sufferings, and not only of all good Works) which
shall be reveled in us, To. 8.18. Or if by chance Clement the 6th, and the
first Founder of this Tresure, better understood this Balance, and saw in some
corner or other about S. Mary, S. Stephen, and other Martyrs, some unrewarded
Afflictions which S. Paul took no notice of; in Conscience are we come to this,
that Roman Popes may fetch them out, and apply them to whom they please? That
poor John the Baptist shall see from Heaven his austere Life and hairy Clothes,
shelter Herod's and Herodias lying securely together? That most vile and unclean
Persons, shall with the unspotted Holiness and Chastity of the Blessed Virgin
Mary, buy off out of Purgatory, and sometimes out of Hell it self, the very
Whores who Luitpr. l. 2. c. 13. Vid. Ieron. ad an. 908.
made them Popes? And that the Martyrs shall be in the disposal, and for the
use of so many dissolute Monsters? And to this comes the Church Tresury, that
makes so much noise in the World; and like a Drum, is as emty as it is loud.
Let us see what they draw out of it.

CHAP. X.
Concerning Roman Indulgences, the most general Inducement to Popery.
THE Church Tresury, the Jubilee, the Indulgences, are words capable of a good
sense, if the Roman Church would allow of it. For really, the Church of God
possesses a very great Tresure, namely, Jesus Christ in Heaven, and in his Holy
Ordinances. All sinners, whosoever they be, if contriti and confessi after Gods
way, that is, really and truly penitent, and turning from their sins to good
Works, such as become true Christian Faith and Repentance, may without the
Keys of the Pope open this Heavenly Tresure, and thence take out as much of
Christ's Blood, or, to make use of the Roman terms, as much of the satisfactions
of Christ, as will make up a full and a most plenary Indulgence; that is, Mercy
and Pardon without Money, and plenteous Redemtion both from the Spot and the
punishment of all their Sins. John the Baptist, Jesus Christ, and the Apostles,
are the first Men, who at the very Birth of the Christian Church did Preach
abroad these Indulgences: and among them Peter is the first (not Boniface) who
proclaimed at Jerusalem the great Christian Jubilee. You have his Bull in his
Sermon, Acts 2.38, 39.

The Church of Rome, for her own ends, has much abused this good Tresure, as
well as these great Indulgences: and if you look into what she has to brag of,
you shall find her Tresury to be but a broken Cistern, and her Indulging Bulls,
instead of Living Waters, to be but Puddles. With all the Blood shed on the
Cross, one drop whereof in their judgment could have saved all, they say that
Christ has not fully satisfied for any actual sins after our Baptism; and that
besides the Eternal Torments in Hell, for which he has immediately satisfied,
there remain other not less grievous, tho not so long, for which we our selves
must needs satisfy, either in this Life, or near about Hell, in a place under
Ground which they call Purgatory. Their Mass Priests and Bishops, with all
their ordinary Power, cannot absolve their Penitents, tho never so contrite,
farther then this: and to have more, they must either procure it to themselves,
by their own works, or send to Rome for Indulgences.

All this is packed and contrived with great Wisdom for the best advantage of
Rome. His Holiness gains much by it, for all that Blood which might have paid
for all the pains, as well as for the vicious Acts of sin, is spared for his
Tresury: and all Catholic Souls being affrighted with Purgatory, out of which
Christ has not redeemed them, and which none but Saints or Martyrs are likely
to escape; there is no fear he can want Money, as long as he will help Men out
with his Tresure and Indulgences. The other inferior Clergy also are not
loosers, for tho their Power be much shortened from giving full Absolution, this
Restraint may be looked upon as a rule of good Husbandry; for if they did
pardon all at once by their Keys, as God does by his Ministers in his Gospel,
who, unless some simple Ignorant, would care for any of their Masses? But both
Christ, and all Christian Souls suffer much, by what others gain. Christ is
visibly defrauded of the Honor that he ever had of being the only Redeemer,
which he is not at the least at Rome, a but in a large fense; since both others
and we, may very well redeem our selves, and satisfy Divine Vengeance in a
very considerable mesure by our own personal Sufferings. Christ also suffers a
second and gross Injury, to see the most part of his Blood under the indiscreet
hand of a Pope, who squanders it at their pleasure who will buy out his
Indulgences. Christian Souls are not used better, being by these Indulgences
drawn aside from the true ways of Salvation, to spend their Devotion and their
Money upon that which avails nothing; and which, if relied upon, will certainly
prove a great deal worse in the event.

The main ground of all these Devises, is a Complication of Blasphemies, and an
open Profession, that Christ has not by his Sacrifice on the Cross, fully
satisfied Divine Justice; or that God demands from Penitents and Believers,
that which he was satisfied for; and that our sins are neither fully nor
properly remitted in the Blood of Christ. These three Antichristian Assertions,
being involved and wrapped up in this, which both their Purgatory, and all their
Indulgences stand upon, that God in Christ remits the sins, without remitting
the punishment; that is, that God in Christ remits our sins without remitting
them at all. For if God in Christ remits sins, why, being fully and properly
remitted, are they (unless redeemed by Indulgences) punished in Purgatory? How
comes God to demand of his Children that they be burned and tormented in order
to satisfy his Justice, if the Sacrifice of his Son has satisfied it fully
and properly on that account? And what Justice is this to exact of me the same
satisfaction and payment, that Christ my Surety has fully given already? They
say that Christ has fully satisfied Divine Justice for our sins, but not for
that part of the punishment, which either Purgatory does inflict, or the Popes
Indulgences must dispense with. Against this, it is easy to prove, and common
sense will tell them so, that both Christ has satisfied Justice on all
accounts, and God remitted sins likewise as to the satisfying of Justice, if
Justice have in Christ's Sufferings all it requires from guilty Persons, upon
the score of suffering. For what is it, that Divine Justice can demand of the
worst and guiltiest sinner? Is it that the sins which he has committed, may
never have bin committed? that is impossible, and a plain contradiction; and if
God remits sins upon such terms, he remits none. Is it that the sinner may not
sin hereafter? So much did Justice demand of Adam before his fall; and so much
demands it yet of the blessed Angels, to whom nevertheless God remits or
forgives nothing, because Adam was not yet, and these are never Trespassers.
The Question is, What it is which the severe and holy Justice of God can demand
of Trespassers? Sin, as to this, denotes two things, to wit, the Vice or
Illness of the Act, and the punishment due by the trespass for that ill Act.
Divine Justice requires not the ill Act, or the Iniquity of it; contrariwise,
it shuns, detests, and forbids it: What therefore Justice does and can demand,
is all due, and sufficient punishment. Now pardoning, or forgiving, or
remitting, is to pardon, or to forgive, or to remit, what Justice demands of
the sinner and for his sin, and this is the punishment only. And so when Christ
did on the Cross satisfy Justice for our sins, and did take our sins from us
upon himself, it was not by taking upon him our Vices, or ugly Acts and
Dispositions, God forbid! Christ took all our sins upon himself, when he took
and paid fully all the punishment due for our sins: and God remits and
forgives our sins in Christ, when he accepts of that punishment of his in lieu
of ours. Therefore whenever Papists talk of sins remitted, as to the trespass
of the Fault, and not as to the punishments due for the fault; or that Christ
has fully satisfied for those and not forthese, it is either such a piece of
nonsense, as if one should say, That he forgives me all my Debts, on condition
I shall pay them: or a Blasphemous Raillery put upon Christ, as if he did fully
satisfy Divine Vengeance for all our sins, when, except those before Baptism,
he satisfies so for none of them. And so the whole Frame of Purgatory for
punishing, and all the Jubilees, and Indulgences, and daily Masses, for
absolving Men from the punishment of remitted sins, that is, the whole Fabric
of the Roman Church, is built upon these impious Bulls.

It is true, God may, and often does lay heavy Chastisements (call them
Punishments if you please) on his Children, even after he has pardoned their
sins, but it is never to satisfy Divine Justice in any punishment it requires
more; but either to keep the forgiven sinner, by what he feels, from sinning
more; or to affright others from it by such Examples; or for removing the
scandal, which otherwise might well arise from all unchastised sins. Which
considerations agree not at all with the Torments of Purgatory, where Souls,
Bellar. de Indulg. l. 1. c. 7. sect. Quarta Propositio.
as they confess themselves, are neither better in themselves, nor either more
exemplary, or a whit less scandalous to others by what they suffer. There these
poor Souls burn and howl in long and terrible torments, with the Faith of
Christ above them, and the Blood of his Sacrifice upon their pretended remitted
sins, just as notable Rogues are hanged and quartered sometimes with their
Pardons about their Necks. Papists would be much displeased to hear that any of
their devout and contrite Dames should suffer so much in spite of one plenary
Indulgence; and Christ must not be so, to see his true and lively Members
tortured in Purgatory in spite of his Redemtion.

These Indulgences were never heard of, till the silly World had bin frighted
with these Flames of Purgatory, which as their most ingenious Authors confess,
was very late: and then the Roman Clergy had a fair opportunity from the false
Apparitions of Souls, and tremblings of simple People, to look to their own
private profits, by selling vain Securities to protect against vain dangers and
fears. The very sound of a Latin word, Indulgentia, without its proper sense
and use, was ground enough for crafty men, to build what they would upon it;
and how far they have abused it, and more abused their Church with it, one may
guess by what here follows.

It was, and should be still, the Practice of the Holy Church, to expel from
their Society Scandalous and known sinners: and since the Church could not
always keep Hypocrites from coming in; she could not take a better course for
asserting both her detestation against all sin, and her credit with God and
men, then to keep them off, when duly known; and to shun them, in their holy
Meetings especially, till many and great Evidences both of their sorrow for
what they had done, and of their Amendment for the time to come, had procured
them Readmittance. They were Council. Ancyran. Can. 16. Council. Nicen. Can. 11.
enjoined to pray, to fast, to curb and to mortify their Flesh, to afflict
their Souls for their sins, and to apply themselves to all such works, as might
both improve and declare their inward sincere Repentance. These long and holy
Exercises did pass among all Christians for Satisfactions to the Church; and in
some manner Cyprian. l. 1. Ep. 3.
to God too. Before the Church most properly; because that was all which the
Church Discipline, and Ecclesiastical Canons did require; and before God in a
lower, yet a very true and proper sense; because, tho all such works of
Repentance be far from being a price equivalent to what Divine Justice demands
(which can never be had, but either from the eternal death of the sinner, or
from the infinite satisfactions of Christ for him) yet it is the main
Condition, which God requires of Offenders, before the grant of his Pardon, and
which he is in his Mercy both satisfied and pleased with, when they sincerely
perform it.

This was not all, 'twas not enough to have don it, they must do it a long
Council. Ancyr. supra.
while; some a whole year some two, some ten, some according to the Enormity of
the sin all their life long: and the surest Proof the Church could take of
their real sincerity, was in the length of their Performances. By this, it
seems, the holy Fathers had a great care, that in the management of their
keys, whether to shut out, or to let in, their Church might keep time with
Heaven: so that they might neither retein, nor remit here upon Earth, but what
and when they might well judge, God would retein, or remit above. It was not
then, as now at Rome, where Dispensations, and Licenses are presently got at a
small Rate; a Ravisher of a Virgin was in the year 1520 (I hear it is now much
raised, as well as the Rate of Moneys) about six Taxa Cancellar. Apostol. Fol.
36. page 2. Edit. Paris. 1520.
Groats: the Ravisher of his own Sister was but at five: and the heaviest
severity, that these Villains must undergo, is that it is impossible for them,
how penitent and contrite soever, to be released without some Money. Pauperibus,
etc. Ibid. fol. 23. p. 1.
that is, they cannot have the Comfort of these Mercies, whosoever brings in no
Money. In such Occasions of Scandal the Roman Church, whilst a Virgin, was as
severe, as now she is become remiss: and what the Whore gives for twelve pence,
the honest Virgin had scarce granted for a penance of twenty years. So careful
were they in those days to clear the Church from foul Scandals: and so afraid
were they withal in the exercise of their Power, to break correspondencie with
Gods Justice; to unloose them whom he kept bound; and to bind themselves before
God, S. Ambros. De Paenit. l. 2. c. 2.
by a rash unbinding of others. You may read in S. Cyprian Cyprian. l. 3. Ep.
14. Ep. 15. Ep. 16. item Sermon. de lapsis.
and Ambrose how both sinful and dangerous, this loose and remiss indulgence is
in their opinion.

Nevertheless there now and then happened such causes as not only permitted,
but moved them also to be more free. As when the excommunicated Sinner gave
signal proofs of an extraordinary sorrow: when upon dangerous occasions he
stoutly owned and defended the Christian Faith: when in times of Persecutions
all Christians were to be encouraged, and strengthened to Martyrdom: and when
valiant Confessors (who ever before their Death, were reputed for true Martyrs)
did intercede for some of their friends; on these and other like rational and
pious Inducements, the holy Fathers thought they might, Conc. Ancyran. Can. 5.
and 12. Conc. Nic. Can. 12.
either ease such Penitents of the length, or sometimes quite discharge them of
the whole Burden, that excommunicated, but withal contrite persons did lie
under; and so before the time prescribed, readmit them into the Church. And
this Relaxation of Ecclesiastical Severity, some Latin Fathers Cyprian. de
Lapsis Sub sin. Tertull. de Exhortat. Castit.
call once or twice in their writings, by the Name of Indulgence.

Tbis was enough for cunning Cheats, to ground their Indulgences upon; and for
silly men, to entertain them. So that as one word Missa could serve their turn,
as I have showed in another Book, for introducing that great Abomination, which
they call Mass: so does this other Latin word Indulgentia, used once or twice
by some ancient Authors in a good sense, and now turned to a quite other; for
countenancing all the Impostures, that now a days are bought and sold under
the name of Indulgences. Here you may whenever you please, discover Romes
either Knavery, or Folly, or both by these two distinct Characters. The first
is, that when the Fathers thought good to use any Indulgence, it was to
shorten, or to moderate their Ecclesiastical Censures, before Reconciliation
and pardon: whereas the Roman Indulgence is for another sort of Punishments,
which Mass Priest are pleased both to inflict on the Penitents, and to moderate
or quite take off after their Absolution. The second is, that the holy Fathers
never either thought, or attemted to moderate or to take off any other Censures
or Punishments, then such as had bin imposed: whereas the Pope by his
Indulgences offers to moderate or take off all, bo^ what is laid on by his
Church, and what is or shall be laid on by God himself.

As to the first Mark, to distinguish the Primitive Relaxations, from the
present Roman Indulgences; The Church of Christ never used upon any occasion
whatsoever, this unnatural and popish way of inflicting punishments or
Ecclesiastical Censures, after Pardon: and therefore they could not have
occasion of ever granting such Indulgences, as should ease men after pardon,
from such Censures. When notorious and public Offenses had turned the sinner
out of doors; the Holy Fathers did lay on him several Degrees of Rigor, before
they would take him in again, as antecedent Preparations to make him fit to be
taken in. 1. The Sinner was enjoined Greg. Neocaesar. Epist. Canon.
to stand without; and there with cries and tears Ambrosius. De Paenit. l. 1.
c. 19.
to beg them who came in, to pray to God for him. 2. Some years or months
after, he was admitted within Doors, but in a remote Corner of the Church,
behind the Catechumens, that is, the not Christened Proselytes, where they
might hear Sermons, but not Prayers. 3. After such other time as they thought
fit; he was suffered to hear and pray with the Christians, but not to take the
Holy Mysteries. These with some other Mortifications and trials were all the
Penalties inflicted by the Church upon scandalous Offenders; the Satisfactions,
when undergon, given by the Offenders to the Church; and when humbly and
sincerely performed, upon good grounds were also thought in the sense above
said, acceptable to God himself. And here among these performances was the only
time of Indulgence, either to shorten the time, or to mitigate the Rigor of the
Hardship, that they were under. 4. This don, either with, or without favor; at
last the sinner was at the time appointed for his Readmission, brought in into
the Church; there he kneeled, and there the Bishop coming to him, as the good
Father in the Gospel to the lost Child, fell both himself and all the People
upon their knees: then after holy Prayers and a holy laying on of hands, gave
him Sacerdotal Blessing, and complete Absolution: raised him up from kneeling:
for conclusion of all, he was admitted at the same time, both to the holy
Communion, and the Churches Peace. The Penitents being thus reconciled neither
under-went other Punishments, nor needed other Indulgences. And if that Holy
Mother the Primitive Church used to chastise her stubborn Children, and upon
their amendment to kiss and embrace them afterward; we do not read in any
Father, that it was ever her Method, first to kiss, then to correct and punish.
It is an extravagance proper to Rome, to absolve her Penitents and after
Absolution, to have them punished thereby to satisfy Divine Justice: and so
consequently are all her Indulgences, to ease men of such Punishments, Tricks
of their own invention. Our Savior did not plague sinners, after he had bid
them, go in Peace: and if God kept them afterward humble, and sensible of
their former sins by Fatherly Corrections, as you read often that he did; Psalm.
89. Hebr. 12. 1 Corinthians. 11. Roman Indulgences are but both idle and saucy
Toies to take them off. And this brings to the second visible Character, by
which you may discern the Primitve Relaxations, from the present Roman
Indulgences.

1. Therefore as to this second; the Fathers of the Primitive Church never
intended with their Condescensions or favors to moderate or to take off any
other Punishments, then that which they had laid on by their own sentence and
Censure: They knew that the Power of reteining, and the Power of remitting,
which God allowed them in his Church, are both Suares de Indulg. Disp. 50.
Sect. 2. n. 5.
proportioned and relative, the one to the other: and that they could remit
nothing, but when they had bin able to bind. This appears so by the very
Contents, and Form of their Warrant, Whatsoever you shall bind on Earth, etc.
Matthew. 1.16.19. and 18.18. and John 20.23. Where the power of Loosing and
Remitting, follows close to that of Retaining and Binding. This is exercised by
Excommunications and Censures, that, by taking them away in the reconciling of
Offenders; and both Keys turn in the same wards, that is, within the same
compass, within the Ministerial Pale of the Church, and within the bounds of
this Life. Roman Popes are the first Hectors, who durst break out beyond these
Lines, and roving into Purgatory, there overruled Divine Justice, and pull out
thence out of Gods hands the Souls, whom, they say, his Vengeance does burn and
torment. This is then the drift of the Popes, and the second visible Mark of
their best and most authentic Indulgences; that whereas the Fathers of the
Church never attemted to dispose of any other punishments, then such as they
had inflicted: the Popes stretch their hands much farther, even as far as to
reverse the Judgments, which, (as they presuppose it) God inflicts. Now let
Rome ransack their Learning, and procure from any corner of good and known
Antiquity, one precedent for such Indulgences.

In the mean while laying aside Antiquity, which in true Conscience cannot but
shame this new attemt; it is a business worth enquiring, what these Roman
Indulgences (whether new or old) are in themselves. They are intended for these
Bellarm. de Indulg. l. 1. c. 7.
two ends. 1. The easing of true Penitents from the Penalties laid on them by
their Confessors, after their Absolution here in the Church. 2. And the
removing of more grievous punishments, laid on them by God Almighty, yonder in
Purgatory. And certainly it is hard to say, in the which of these two you shall
find less, both Impiety and Extravagancy.

1. The Indulgences for the first end, are both foolish and impious upon
several accounts: What rebellious attemt is this, to bind to punishment those
(Men, as it is supposed, contrite and truly penitent for their sins) whom the
Gospel of Christ looses and absolves? May not one as well curse, whom God
blesses, as retain or bind whom God remits? And if one may bind the Penitents,
whom God absolves; may he not as well unbind the Faithless and Impenitents whom
God has bound? If so, we know where the Antichrist lies; yet he should go and
learn Manners from the Example of Balaam, Number. 23.8. They say, that what they
bind their Penitents to, is not a Punishment only, but an useful Correction
also. Then, I say, what they do in binding them whom God does loose, shall be
as far a Rebellion, as it is a punishment; and as far unlawful and unchristian
to take off, as it is an useful Correction, and as it was good to lay it on. And
have the Popes no better ways to fill their Coffers, and to maintain their
Holinesses, then by such a Trade of Indulgences, as dispense with Men against
their own good? 2. There is yet more; to justify their Penalties from being a
resisting of God, and a retaining what he remits; they say, that after
Absolution they lay no more on any Man, then what a sincere Penitent d is both
willing to undergo, and obliged by the fear of God, and the sense of his
Conscience to do or suffer; and that this is it properly and directly, what the
Indulgences do ease Men from. Do not then call this, if you please, Rebellion
or Resisting God: but you cannot choose but perceive, that if this same
penitent Soul lies not between a cruel binding Confessor, and a gracious
remitting God; she now falls into another as bad or worse condition. For here
is within the sense of Conscience, that charges her to do or suffer such a
thing; and there is without, a Bull from Rome, that discharges her from both
doing and suffering it: Do you not think to see this Soul, as the Body of Moses
was once, between a good and a bad Angel? Here God impresses a pious Fear, in
order that the Penitent may do ot suffer such a thing; and there the Pope shows
an Indulgence, that he may do but what he pleases: Do you not see God, and the
Pope contesting still about Moses, and struggling one against the other, what
way shall be taken by this honest Soul? If the Pope have the better of it, then
his Indulgences come to this, and the Satisfactions and Blood of Christ, which
the Pope wraps up in these Bulls, have this good end, namely, that Men need not
be perplexed for Gods Fear, nor for the motions of Conscience. Certainly, not
to do what both the fear of God, and the sense of an honest Conscience do move
us to, is a fearful omission: and if any Indulgence can wash it off, it must
exemt Men not only from a punishment, as they pretend, but from a very great
sin also, which they do not. 3. This scattering and abusing the Blood of Christ
by Indulgences, will better appear, if you consider in retail what these
Penalties are, which this Blood applied to us by them, must free us from. These
Penalties are chiefly these three, Bellarm. de Poenitent. l. 4. c. 6.
Fasting, Prayer, and Almes-giving. The very Aristot. Moral. ad Nicomach. l. 1
Pagans can tell you, that the exercise of Moral Virtues is even a Sovereign
Happiness: How then come good Catholics to imagine, that the exercise of
Christian ones may be to them a punishment? In conscience, is Praying, Fasting,
and giving of Alms, the punishment, or part of it, which sin deserves? Did ever
Gods Law reckon Prayer and Charity amongst its Curses? Or did ever the Gospel
of Christ impose this Holy and Blessed Exercise, under the notion of
Chastening? Is it likely, that the Apostles, who often plagued Men with
Blindness, with Death, with delivering them over to Satan, ever inflicted
Prayers, and Exercises of Almsgiving, as strokes of their Apostolical Rod? Did
the Lord Jesus shed his Blood to be applied in Indulgences, that you should not
Pray, or Fast at all? Or that we should not Pray, or Fast so much? And if this
be none of the true ends of Christ's Death and Satisfaction; I do not say, how
unprofitable, but how both unchristian and Antichristian are the Indulgences,
that trifle away this Sacred Blood to such contrary purposes? 4. Lastly, to lay
this impious abuse aside, and to let Fasting, Praying, and charitable giving of
Alms, pass at Rome for hard and painful Punishments; yet they are, neither the
Death that the Law threatens sinners with, nor the Hellish burning in
Purgatory, which, as they say, the Justice of God requires, that they should
suffer when they are dead: they can be at the most, but an emty shadow of these
pains. And tho they were (what they are not) a full Equivalent for them; yet
are they no satisfaction in any Balance of Justice, unless God will accept of
them for due payment. Therefore let Roman Confessors show now to their poor
Penitents, either when, and where God has told them, that he will accept of
their Prayers, etc. instead of Purgatory Burnings, which is their proper
punishment: and let the other greater Cheats, the Popes and Bull-sellers of
Rome, assure any others but Fools, upon any probable ground, that God is both
pleased and resolved to accept of their Indulgences, in lieu of Fastings and
Prayers, and good and Christian giving of Alms.

2. The second end, that Roman Indulgences are intended, and so bought for, is
the removing of that Judgment, which condemns Roman Catholics after this Life
to dreadful Burnings and Tortures, unless (which few besides Saints and Martyrs
can do) they can satisfy otherwise. This hot and terrible Torment is not
imposed on departing Souls by Popes or Priests; for if it were, it would be no
wonder that Popes and Priests could remove it. It is none of those voluntary
Chastisements, which one may take upon himself to prepare him for Gods Mercies,
since it is confessed by them all, that no Body grows better for them. It is an
unavoidable Punishment lying on them for the satisfaction of Justice. It is,
they say, decreed by God Navar. de Jubil. Notabil. 15. n. 11.
himself due and demanded by Gods Law, grounded and radicated upon the
essential right of Nature: and by this you may judge how indispensable this
Purgatory punishment is, since, as they say, God Almighty will rather see his
own Children burning many hundreds of years in hellish Flames, when even their
sins are pardoned, then to break his Law to take it off. Yet the Almighty Pope
dares do it: and if you cannot go so far as to Rome, Rome will in a manner come
to you; and give you such an Indulgence, that is in their own language, such a
juridical Absolution, as shall reverse all Judgments whether of natural
Justice, or God himself: and thus get you clear on all hands. Heaven and Earth
cannot afford the like Example. A Hostler, or a Porter making Acts of Oblivion;
or a Prisoner at Newgate granting Decrees to stop the Judges, and their
Proceedings at Westminster, are nothing to Pope Sixtus the 4th, nor to
Alexander the fixed, nor to any of those Villains, who send Indulgences from
Rome, and from the Embraces of their Harlots, to obstruct the Course of Divine
Justice, and to order judicially, to what degrees of Punishment it may proceed;
or whether it shall proceed at all. This is far worse then what they say the
Russians do, when upon the breast Wolfius Cent. 16. an. 1580.
of their dead Friends, they send a Mandat to S. Peter, charging him, that at
the same moment, when he shall have received their letter, he fail not to admit
the Bearer thereof, whom they have absolved from all sins. For the Popes
Indulgence is a formal Sentence, and as they call it, a Juridical Absolution
directed to and served upon God himself against the usual course, as they
conceive, of this ordinary Supreme Justice.

I have read of a conceited man, who, even to the endangering of his life,
keeping himself from making water, for fear of drowning the whole World, at
last was persuaded, it would not be so, by the experience of his weakness upon
a poor small Cottage, set on fire, which his friends had called him to quench.
If His Holiness in this respect were not twenty times more incurable; twenty
thousand experiments of the like nature might have cured him. Let him and all
Papists but consider, what a most plenary Indulgence, or even a whole Jubilee
can do toward the preventing of the least other temporal punishment for sin,
for example, want, sickness, or death; and thence let them guess, what it can
do against the greatest, and, as they conceive the most fatal, the burning of
Souls after Pardon. Let them try, what kind of Relief these Bulls can afford to
contrite and repenting Robbers against hanging, in an human Judicature; and
then hope or despair of what they are boasted to do, against the Sovereign
Divine Justice. Nay let the wisest of all the Papists hearken to their own
sense and reason. If an Bellar. de Indulg. l. 2. c. 1. sect. Quarta Objectio.
Indulgence, says Bellarmin, cannot so much as take away the Punishment, which
an Inferior Magistrate condemns a Thief, or a Murderer to; how much less able
shall it be, to take of that Punishment, which God has decreed against
Sinners? And what do they conceive Purgatory Burning to be else? They Ibid.
acknowledge also, that, the Pope by his Indulgences cannot pardon any
Punishment, which is inflicted by God as Judge, in an Exterior and criminal
Judicature. If so, in good earnest does not God Almighty act as a Judge, when he
condemns men to Punishment in order to satisfy his Justice? And is not that an
exterior and Criminal Court of Justice, wheresoever men are condemned to such
grievous and long, and outward Punishments? Or if you call it inward; why
should the Judgment of God be less, and the Power of the Pope more regarded, in
Gods own internal, then in his external Judicature?

Here the Popes are pleased to juggle, as the Fellow used to do, who bragged,
how far he could jump at Rhodes, where he knew no man had seen him. But says
one, if it be so; come friend, here is as good ground as at Rhodes, let us
therefore see what you can do. The Popes brag much, how bravely they can save
men from all the dangers in a Place, where no body tells us the truth of what
they are pleased to brag of. But here in the Course of this mortal life, where
we see so many temporal Judgments of God, so many Plagues and Penalties
inflicted by God Almighty upon absolved sinners for their sins, my Rhodian
Boaster cannot jump: the Popes Bulls save from none of them: and by their own
Confession, their Indulgences Bellar. de Indulg. l. 1. c. 8.
can help no man against any kind of Miseries, whether for Original sins such
as are Infirmities, Diseases and Death; or for any actual sins, such as Plagues
upon men, and Countries. It is in vain, when men go to Rome for a Bull against
any kind of Tribulations whatsoever, either in their Soul, or Body, Relations
or Fortune. No Indulgence can reprive from any Punishments that we can see:
only that one which we see not, the being tormented in Purgatory for sins which
God has forgiven; and there only my Jumpers can work wonders, and their
Indulgences are worth Gold.

If the compassing of these two Ends, namely the easing you from pious
Exercises, whenever you are troubled with them; and the removing of Gods
purgatory Justice, be both impious and impossible; the manner of attemting it
by laying out the blood of Christ in Indulgences, is not much better. At first,
when the Fathers of Trent talk magnificently of opening their great Council.
Trident. Sess. 21. c. 9.
Celestial Magazines, and of drawing out thence, by the means of their
Indulgences, Christ's Blood, and all sorts of Blessings; all this makes show of
a great matter. But if you will come but somewhat near, you shall find it what
Eneas did, when being in the Heathenish Limbus, he thought to see and embrace
his Father; it is but an emty Phantome, which has neither flesh nor bones,
that you can hold. 1. For first this Celestial Magazine is not locked and opened
at Rome, as the Vatican Library is, whence the Pope and his Officers may lend
to Baronius what Ancient Records he calls for, there to find tales for his
purpose; and sometimes Truth against himself. Nor is it like the Tresury where
His Holiness keeps his Moneys, when it comes in from selling Bulls, under the
pretense of Holy Wars, etc. and goes out as they Aventin. Annal. Boior. l. 7.
say sometimes it does, in real truth, to arm Turks against Chrians. Nor is it
like those more holy consecrated Repositories, where their holy Relics are
kept; and whence they may at any time show all what you have a mind to see, the
Head, or the Toe of a Saint, the Milk, or the Hairs of the Virgin. It were
fair, if this Tresury, where Christ's Blood and Ransom is kept, were but like
their Holy Mass Pyx; where the whole Body lies still at hand, for any man that
may want it; for then it were easy for the Pope, to take in and out what he
pleases. They say that this whole Tresure is laid up in mente and acceptatione
Divina, Suarez. De Thesaur. Deip. 51. Sect. 1. n. 6.
that is, in the very mind and acceptance of God himself, where no sober man
will imagine, that any Roman Pope can reach, as he must in the present Case.
The Case is this. The Pope must have to dispose of, as much, or as little of
the blood of Christ, as he intends to make his Indulgence to be worth. If it be
an Indulgence for 40 days, any Bishop may take as much; so very little of this
blood may serve: if the Indulgence be for 40, or for 4, or 500 years, he must
proportionably take so much the more; for all Indulgences being supposed to be
really fraught with Christ's Blood; and to be effective Paiments made by the
Pope, to God himself, out of his Sons satisfactions and Sufferings; here first
you must admit another such business as in the Mass Sacrifice. First the Pope
reaches to part of this Celestial Tresure, which is with God (above any human
reach one should think) otherwise how could he pay it, and having it (I leave
to others to determine what way the Pope can come it) supply all Exigencies,
especially at the Jubilee, and generally at any time. I ask any Christian
Conscience, whether these satisfactions and this Blood, supposing true what
they fancy, should not be much better left in the hand of Christ himself; then
in the disposal of a Pope, who, when we may have the greatest need, namely when
after Death we must all stand above at the Bar, is at a great distance from us;
knows neither our Danger, nor our sins: nor what Judgment shall pass on us; nor
what we want to secure against that danger. Were not this better in his hand,
who has shed it, and presented it already to God, who sees our need, and who
stands there to help out? Were it not better left in Gods own hand to whom
Christ first presented it? And who is the Judge to whom, they say, the Pope must
present it back again? Is the Pope being at Rome more willing or more able,
having this Blood under his key, to help with it remote and unknown Souls, then
Christ who is present, to save his Members? And whether of the two is more
merciful and more likely to use it best to our Salvation, the Pope at a
distance, in applying it to strangers, or God the Father being there present,
in applying it to his Children? Is it that Christ's Redemtion must come to Rome,
and there be ratified by some Bull, before it be good against Burning?
Secondly, this Payment, however reached to, is, they say, presented to God by
the Pope. It is so in all Indulgences, but in those especially, which his
Holiness grants for the dead. For there the Pope rescues no man from what he
suffers, but by offering as much to God, of Christ's Sufferings, that so
Justice, they say, Bellarmin. de Indulg. l. 1. c. 14. sect. Tertia Quaestio.
may be satisfied by the exchange. And herein lies a most impious Absurdity. 1.
For what is this, to offer up again what Christ, by his eternal Spirit offered
before? Was not Christ's once offering it, sufficient? Is the Popes Offering
more acceptable? and since Christ alone can by the Law of Mechisedecs
Priesthood, offer up his Body, and Blood; what is the Popes second Offering in
every Bull, but a most sacrilegious Boldness? Will they say, that this Offering
is merely intentional, such as every Christian may do by prayer? then say I,
the Indulgence which the Pope sells with this kind of Offering, is a mere
Cheat; if it be more, it is the Sacrilege. 2. Secondly what a rude
extravagancy, is it to offer to God for Payment his own Money? and to present
him with that which he had already from an incompatably better hand? Is this
fair and honest dealing, to pay one out of his own Purse? and what Piece of
Courtship is it in a Subject, to present his Prince with nothing else, then his
own proper Roial Jewels?

This is the truth of Christ's Satisfaction: and Pope and Papists should either
learn, or teach it better. Christ having once offered to God a Ransom most
sufficient to redeem all men, both from all sins and all the Penalties which
attend them; God the Father has accepted of it, for such, at the hands of his
Dear Son. Now the way of applying this great and infinite Sacrifice: and of
rendering it as well all Efficacious to us, as it is all-sufficient in it self,
is not to return it up to God, either by ordinary Priests at Mass, or by Popes
pretending to repay it him in Indulgences; (for this were rather the way of
applying it to God, who gives, then to us who must receive it) but to beg it of
God through Christ by continual Prayers; to thirst and long after it, by the
sense of our wants, and unworthiness; to qualify our selves toward the
receiving of it, by repenting; and then to embrace what God according to his
mercies and promises will give; to embrace it, I say, with faith, and secure it
to our selves by a constant course of holy life. Or to say the same in Roman
terms. The Church has an infinite Tresure, both of Satisfactions and Merits:
out of which you may have as many Jubilees and Plenary Indulgences for all your
Sins, and all the Penalties, whether eternal or temporal that attend sin, as
you shall want. This Tresure of Satisfactions has already bin both so
sufficiently, and so efficaciously offered to God, by Christ and accepted of by
God for you, that without any farther Offering by Mass Oblations or Popes
Bulls, it stands always before God, in his mind, and acceptance. God is
pleased to offer it you, full as it is in his Gospel; His Holy Sacraments, and
his gracious Promises are both his Bulls and Indulgences, and be sure that you
shall gain them, if you are but willing and earnest to have them: Only know
this, that Christ, who is the Steward, and the Dispenser of the Tresure, throws
it not a way undiscreetly on every sinner, that bids money. None of his
Indulgences are to be had sine Causa rationabili, as the Bull-mongers use to
speak, without some reasonable cause, which is leaving the Pope, to come with
repentance and Faith to Christ: instead of bowing to a Rosary Altar or an
Image, to humble your self, and walk uprightly both before God and before men.
Now have you got the whole Tresure upon these reasonable terms; you have the
keys along with it, as far as your private concern reaches. Impepenitency, or
continuing in any sin, are the two ordinary keys, that lock it up: holy Faith,
and true Charity are the keys that get it open. There are keys of another
kind, that belong to public Persons, S. Peter, S. Paul, and all the Lawful
Officers in the house of God. These public keys are to lock out of it all such
wretches, as stand in the Church to shame it: and to open it to them again,
when after due proofs of Amendment, they shall watch and knock at her Gates.
And this is more then perhaps you think; for although directly they belong only to
the Church, they do also consequently both lock or open Gods good Tresure, and
in some manner Heaven it self. For tho Christ properly be the keeper of, as
well as the way and the Gate of this Celestial Palace; take it for certain,
that his Keys do shut or open his Kingdom, whenever Paul or Apollos, or any
other Lawful Bishop, Lawfully shuts or opens the Church; and whenever also
your private ones shut or open your own Tresure. If Rome trespass against the
rule (as her keys may turn wrong, and not in the wards of the Catholic Church)
your private ones shall serve your turn, and the keys of Christ will second
them. These keys every true Christian, as Tertullian p says very well, does
keep and carry about him: and may with them attain unto the tender Mercies of
God, and the satisfaction of Christ for all his sins, without the Bull of any
Pope. The very Papists do confess it, tho they do it in other words, when they
say, Becan. de Sacram. c. 31. sect. 1. Parag. Tertia Conclusio. Layman. de
Sacram. Poenit. c. 1. n. 8.
That there is no mortal sin but may be remitted by true Co trition, without
the Sacrament of Penance. Only for fear of beggering themselves, they keep in
their own Power the remitting of Temporal Pains.

This one Reservation makes all the trouble about Pardons, and so secures all
the profit. It makes all the trouble for Pardons; for let the foulest sinner go
and confess, the meanest Mass Priest can absolve him from all his sins, and
from all the eternal punishments in Hell: and if some Repentance be required
(tho some Sylvester. Verb. Confess. 1. c. 21. Soto. in 4. Sent. d. 14. q. 4. a.
3.
think it scarce necessary) it will go hard with the Penitent, if a very small
sorrow be not counted Attrition, and by the power of their Keys be not
elevated, that is made to pass into such a degree of Contrition, or Roman
Repentance, as shall secure the worst Livers from Eternal Destruction. And God
knows, how many Wretches both are drawn away to that Church, and there
emboldened to sin by this sweer Enchantment. But when you think to have done
all (for who is the honest Penitent that might not think to have done enough,
when he has freed himself from sin, and from the eternal Misery that follows
it) there remains still the temporal, which may make you burn for every one of
these sins you think pardoned, in a Fire as hot as Hell, some say seven, some
ten, others twenty Years, for every one of your Mortal Sins. You may hear God
protesting by most of the Holy Prophets, That if you turn and believe, He will
not so much as remember your sins any more. But Romes Purgatory Vengeance tells
quite the contrary. You hear an Apostle preaching among the ancient Romans,
That there is no condemnation at all for them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans
8.1. That is true for Hell, say now the Modern Romans, but not for Purgatory.
You hear another Apostle telling you, That the Blood of Jesus Christ cleanses
you from all sins, when you have committed any, 1 John 1.5. but not, says the
Roman Church, from all the Punishments and Burnings which you must suffer. Nay
more, these will tell you also, that Bell. de Indulg. l. 2. c. 7.
Christ has most fully satisfied for all Sins and Punishments, both in Hell
and in Purgatory: What can they say, and you wish more? one should think so;
but they only mock you. For Christ, say they, has satisfied so for you, but
it is upon condition, that you shall satisfy also for your self. Good God! I
thought my Savior had satisfied fully for all my Debts, if by Repenting and
Believing, and leading a Christian Life, I should make my self capable of his
full Satisfaction. Now it seems he has satisfied Divine Justice, in case I do
satisfy it my self; he has freed me of all my Debts, if I pay them; he has
obtained the full pardon of all my sins, if I be sufficiently punished for
them. So I receive and may expect this favor, that I shall not be punished
neither so long, nor in Hell; and that I shall not be drawn and quartered on
Tower Hill, if I be hanged at Tiborn. This certainly is no full Pardon, nor
full Satisfaction, nor full Payment. They say, it is, if you apply it well. It
is full to all ends and purposes, when it is applied by Baptism; it is full
after Baptism for all Mortal Sins and Eternal Punishments in Hell, if it be
well applied by temporal and worldly pains. So I need not trouble my self for
Hell or Sin: But what must I do to free my self from Purgatory? Here therefore
is the Corner, where you must pay the utmost Farthing: Here in good earnest
lies all the trouble, and hence the Roman Clergy gains the profit.

For after you have bin at the trouble of continual Pilgrimages, Fastings,
Scourgings, and great Expenses, no body can well assure you, that seven Years
of such hardships in this sad Life, shall Soto, in 4. Did. 21. q. 2. a. 1.
save in Purgatory one hours burning. You must have your recourse to Masses,
and redeem your self out of that terrible Fire with whole thousands of these,
as they call them, Celestial Victimes, for they properly are intended for that
purpose: and many rich Men every day grudg not to destitute their Children, and
to bestow their vast Estates to this good end. How much this has raised up the
Roman Church, you may see by those vast Lands and Patrimonies which she
enjoies: and how little it can help poor Souls, you may see also by this, that
after Millions of Masses so dearly bought, none of the Priests will think their
Founders Souls so free from the pains of Purgatory, but they will sell and sing
as many more, for their greater security.

In a word, after all is done which both Mass and Mass-Priests can do, there is
no safety but in the Pope and Indulgences. If you will know what they
Blaspheme; Christ himself with his whole Body and all his Blood, tho a hundred
times Sacrificed in a hundred Masses, is far short of what the Pope can do in
one plenary Indulgence; and, what Heaven and Earth may tremble at, his Roman
Holiness sometimes applies more of Christ's Blood in a single piece of
Parchment, then Christ himself will do in three or four thousand
Mass-Sacrifices. Therefore besides all you can get of the Mass-Priests, with
their Supercelestial Victims, the Pope promises you far more out of his
Celestial Storehouse. This he can open as wide or little as he thinks fit: So
you may have Bulls of all sizes; some for 40 days, Quadragens. Afterward they
grew to one Year, as that solemn one which Baron. an. 1177. n. 49.
Alexander the third bestowed in Ferraria upon St. Georges high Altar: Some
other grew to seven, some to ten, some to twenty years; but all things well
considered, these small Indulgences proved too weak and insignificant to help
one out of Purgatory: For alas! who can tell us, whether one sin may not
require as much or more, to be burnt out? therefore you may have larger
Indulgences, even for hundreds and for thousands of Years: such is that which
Pope Boniface Job. Diacon ap. Caes. Reston. l. 2. c. 14.
granted, when he dedicated the Chapel Misericordia, being worth one thousand
Years to the Romans, two thousand to remoter Neighbors, and three thousand to
them who came to it from beyond Sea.

This is nothing; ten and twenty thousand Years came to be an usual rate for
every Month in the Year, and sometimes Indulgentiae Romans Italice. Edit. Veterb.
1645.
for many days in some Months. Read the Account of Roman Ibid.
Indulgences, there you shall find some of thirty three thousand Years. In one
of the Altars of the Lateran Church, which they call Ara Maxima, Caes. Reston.
de Basil. Lateran. l. 2. c. 14. p. 207.
there is one of 48000 for every day. They say the Venetians have one granted
to them by Benedict the 11th, which extends to above fourscore thousand; at
last they are grown, and in one Church, for example in the Lateran, to a
Ibidem. page 204.
number beyond all calculation: and they who think to guess best at it, do not
find them less then the many small grains which you may find in a good handful
of Sand; or the many small drops of Water that can fall in three whole days
and nights of Rain.

This way of mesuring Indulgences by a greater or lesser number of Years, is,
as it were an old Rag of the old Relaxations, which the Popes are pleased to
tear off, either to blind or to countenance the newness of their Indulgences.
The Primitive Church sometimes did punish scandalous Men with Censures, that
lasted, some five, some ten, some fifteen, and some twenty Years: and if she
saw reason for it, she used to remit more or less of this time of humiliation,
according as the Penitent seemed to make better use of it. Now the Pope by his
Indulgences remits another kind of Punishent, not that which the Church had
laid, but that which God himself will lay on them; not in this life and in the
Church, but after death and in Purgatory; not to make them a whit the better,
but only to please his Justice. So because they know well enough, that these
new Indulgences of theirs are quite another thing then Navar. de Jubil. Notab.
11. n. 7. Suarez. de Indulg. Disput. 49. Sect. 2. n. 7, 8, 9.
what the ancient Relaxations were, they will borrow something of those to cover
with it the newness of these; and having changed the very Substance, they do
what they can to inveigle themselves and others with some emty Shadows and
Forms. Only they must betray themselves, when to make Indulgences more
precious, they multiply twenties into thousands, a number as inconsistent with
the Censures, as with the Lives of Penitents in the Church of God, but
compatible with their new ways of Penance in Purgatory. For whereas one, or
two, or some few Years of Ecclesiastical Relaxation, did tend only to take off
some Years of their Ecclesiastical Censure; our Roman Relaxations and
Indulgences intend to take off quite, or to abridge Gods Judgment, which may
last upon burning Souls longer then the longest Bulls. And this is the sense
and meaning of their extravagant Calculation. Sir, you have from his Holiness a
Bull of forty thousand Years; that is, a holy Privilege, by which you shall be
Layman. de Indulg. c. 3. n. 1. Suarez de Ind. Disput. 50. Sect. 5. n. 12.
exemted from as long and as hot Burnings in the other World, as you might have
freed your self from, not only by scourging your back every day of your natural
life, but every day of forty thousand Years, if you were able to live so long.
Every one of your Mortal Sins deserves by some ancient Canons a Bellar. de
Indulg. l. 1. c. 9.
Mortification of three, of seven, and some of ten Years and more: think how
many such lie upon you, and then peradventure you shall find, that tho an
Indulgence of forty thousand Years goes very far, it may be yet too short for
you.

But if you be not pleased with this mesuring of Indulgences, because how long
and wide soever, it is upon many Suarez. supra.
accounts uncertain, whereas the sum which you pay for them is not so: take at
your choice either partial, or plenary Indulgences, and then you shall know
what you take. If you take a partial one, choose what piece of Pardon you
please, whether to be freed from the Penances that your Confessor puts you to,
or from the punishment of venial, or for half, a third or fourth part of Mortal
Sins. I say this, because beyond Sea I have known some great Persons, who would
not take Pardon for all, being informed by their Directors, that God would be
better glorified, if they should expiate some part of them by Burning
themselves along with them in the Purgatory Fire. However, the Pope now has
the Blood and the Satisfactions of Christ so perfectly at his command, that he
may and will let you have of it, for as much and as little as you please. But
if you have a mind to make clear work, and to be quit with Gods Justice upon
all scores, take a total or a plenary Indulgence. A plenary Indulgence, (God in
his great mercy forgive, and undeceive them who Blaspheme so) is thought
equivalent to Holy Baptism, and able to convey as much of Christ's Blood upon
you, as will wash you clean from all your Sins; or at the least, clear you from
all Debts, from the very date of your Baptism, to the taking of the Indulgence.

Yet this total or full Indulgence, admits of several degrees. For in Pope
Extravag. Antiquorum.
Boniface's account, there are some that are more then full, Pleniores; some
others yet fuller then these, Plenissimae. Some of the Roman Champions are
puzzled at this gradation, and do not know how to take it, unless it be for an
exaggerating Expression, to swell somewhat the business, and to lighten the
Buyers purse. Nevertheless there is in the case ground enough for these, and
more Gradations. 1. You may think to have gained a total Indulgence, because it
releases you of all the Punishment which can be laid on you by the Church; when
you want another, to release you from all other punishments, which may, either
in Purgatory, or in some other place be laid on you, by God himself. 2. Suppose
your plenary Indulgence remits both these, Ab injunct is, and debitis; it
commonly remits them no farther, then the time when it is applied to you, when
being in great danger of dying, you are absolved by it. But in case you live
longer, tho it were but a Fortnight, your total Indulgence is spent; you want
another, that may remit the sins which you may fall into before you die.
Therefore there is a fuller one, Plenior, that may serve you to your last
breath. 3. There must be another yet fuller then this, for when you are in such
an extremity of either sickness or danger, that apparently you cannot live,
Articulus mortis praesumtus, that is, the point Felin. de Indulg. n. 16.
Antonin 1. part. Tit. 10. c. 13.
and last term when you must use it; then if you escape this danger, you see
you are to seek of another, against both the point presumed, Navar. de Jubil.
Notabil. 3. n. 18.
and the point real, when you shall die; unless you take their good advise Id.
Notabil. 11. n. 7.
, who are for two distinct Indulgences; one for the presumed end of your life,
which for greater security you may use in any danger; and the other for the
real term, when you shall die in good earnest: for thus, they say, you cannot
fail to end your days in a Baptismal Innocence. 4. But yet you may perhaps
want a Priest to say your Absolution: For tho these kind of Officers be common
enough, even five or six in a Parish, yet they may be all singing their Mass,
when you are at home groaning to death. And in those barbarous Countries, where
Mass-Priests are not so frequent, what will avail all your Indulgences, if you
chance to die at Durham, when your Mass-Priest is at New Castle? Therefore
there are other fuller then those, and most full and fullest, Pleniores and
Plenissimae, that can secure you from being burned, tho you want a Priest:
which is done two manner of ways, either by impowering you to make your Groom,
or the next Man or Woman that you meet with, a lawful Officer to absolve you,
because these Indulgences are such unsacramental Pardons, which may be as well
applied Suarez. de Indulg. Deip. 49. Sect. 3. n. 6.
as granted, without any Priestly Character; or by wording your Indulgence in
such terms, as shall require no Body at all Ibid. Disput. 56. Sect. 1. n. 3.
to apply it; and in that case, they say, the Pope himself is the immediate
Priest, who absolves you at any distance. 5. When you have this, you have not
yet all; for there is another sort of sins that this Indulgence, how large
soever, takes, it may be, no notice of; to wit, all the sins which you may
hazard your self into, by presuming on the strength of this Indulgence. Some of
your best Directors tell you, Navar. de Jubil. Notab. 34. n. 6.
that nothing is a sin, which you are emboldened to do by the hope of the next
Jubilee, or of a most plenary Bull, such as Friends and Money can easily
procure you from Rome; or at the least, that what you do, tho the venturing
were a sin, yet it cannot at all debar you from the benefit of this Pool, that
washes all your filth away. Yet I hear of some other great ones, and Saints
too, who will except presumtuous sins, when they apply these large Pardons. For
thus runs the Absolution, Archiep. Flor. 1. p. tit. 10. c. 3.
Authoritate, etc. that is, By the authority of the Apostolical See committed
to me, I absolve thee of all thy sins, excepting those which thou have
committed by relying on this Indulgence. Get therefore your most full
Indulgence to be made fuller, by the addition of those sins, and then die when
and how you please, your Soul is safe. 6. But and if you would be so good, as
to get in by the same means somewhat to pleasure your Friends with, call for an
Indulgence, such as you find one Rosar. Viterb. 1645. p. 216.
at St. Laurence without the Walls of Rome, on Easter Wednesday; or at St.
Athanasia Ibid. page 212.
the day before, an Indulgence with 18 or 28 thousand Years of true Pardon, and
as many Quarantins: and withal, the power of rescuing any Soul from out of the
Flames of Purgatory. Thus by this large accumulation of good and Ghostly
Privileges, you may take the full Indulgence for your self, save Father or
Mother out of Burning, and bestow the Quarantins and other odd Years on your
Friends. 7. If his Roman Holiness be graciously pleased to add to it these two
Clauses, Ad instar Jubilaei, and, Quantum se Claves extendunt; that is, After
the manner of a Jubilee, and, As far as the Keys of the Church can reach; this
is absolutely a Plenary, and more Plenary, and most Plenary Indulgence. With
this, for ought I know, you may save all the World and your self: however, you
may secure all the Crimes, and Incests, and Sodomies, which you find expiated,
and paid for in the Popes Apostolical Taxa Cancellariae.
Chamber. For who can tell what that is, which St. Peter's Keys cannot fetch
in? And what is too much to be taken out of an infinite Tresure? and to be
given Suarez. Disp. 50. Sect. 1. n. 2.
out of it, by an unlimited Power? Quaecunque solveris, etc. The main
difficulty of the business is, that such a large and comprehensive Indulgence
is like to stand you at a high price. For such gracious Concessions, as you may
see at large in the Roman Taxa Cancellariae. Edit. Paris, 1520.
Chancery Office, must all be granted after the proportion of what they give:
So much for having killed Ibid. Page 58.
your Father; and so much for him that has ravished Ibid. p. 57.
Sister and Mother: but there is no Dispensation or Mercy for him who has a
mind to pay S. Antonin. 1. p. tit. 10. c. 3.
nothing. You may be absolved from sins, which you have not actually confessed,
if you had a mind to confess them; and your Indulgence on this account will
accept of an intended Confession: But so cannot the Roman Office of an intended
payment; the sum, such as it is, must be laid down. Papa non debet, etc. says
a great August. de Anron. de Potest. Pap. q. 3. ad 3.
Man, The Pope ought not so to grant Indulgences to them who would fain pay, as
to them who pay actually. And in this case, says he, the rich Men have the
Ibid.
better Title to the Blessedness which the Pope gives; as our Savior says, The
poor have it, to that which he is pleased to give himself, Luke 6.20. Quia Taxa
Cancel. fol. 23.
non sunt, etc. says his Holiness, Book of Rates. Whosoever has no Money,
cannot be comforted with Pardons: and if you will have it in other terms, Such
full Indulgences are Jewels for Kings and great Persons, let them be never so
profane: not for poor and private Men, let them be never so pious.

But nevertheless, do not despond in this good Catholic way, for the Pope takes
care of you, in the care he takes for himself. You must not think that some few
Grandees are able to make up the vast sums which he raises out of Indulgences:
It is all that whole Europe can do. Therefore besides those few Indulgences,
which you shall find in some great Houses; as in Corporations and Cities, not
only for the Lord, the Lady, the Children, Male and Female who are living, but
for many Generations, and hundreds of Years after them, so the Protestant
Heresy may never creep into these Houses; besides these great and hereditary
Indulgences, I say, which are proper to some Families; the Pope scatters others
as good for their present occasion, throout all the Catholic Countries.

1. Sometimes Princes will engage for all, and accommodate his Holiness with
Histor. Council. Trid. l. 8.
a good lusty sum of ready Money, suppose 200 thousand Ducats, that they may
sell them in retail, and at small rates among their Subjects; or the Pope will
engage those Princes with some Polyd. Virgil. l. 26. page 602. Edit. Basil.
1534.
considerable share in the Profits, to countenance his Officers, if he will
retail them himself. Thus all passages being made free, Friars will run all
over the World, of whom you and every Man else may have their Merchandise for a
small matter. If your Parson will take as much as he thinks may serve his
Parish (as heretofore Rectors Flor. Raemund. de Orat. and Progress. Haeres. l.
1. c. 8.
and Curats used to do, in hope of gaining something for their pains, and for
the ease of their poor Flock) you are like to have it cheaper. Whether the
Blood of Jesus Christ follows both forward and backward all the motions of
these Merchants, or whether God, in whose hand is the Church Tresure, will
punctually send as much of it, as makes the Indulgence worth the buying,
whether and whenever the Pope of Rome, for his own ends, will send his Bulls,
is not the Point in question. But however, these great Indulgences, full or
emty, such as they are, can by the means of these Hucksters, both return
Millions back to Rome, and come home ready to your hands for eighteen pence.
Over all Spain, and the Kingdoms appertaining, says Navar. de Jubil. Notabil.
15. n 5.
Navarrus (and think not that England fares worse) a full Indulgence of all
Sins, with many other Faculties and Privileges added to it, such as the liberty
of eating Cheese on Saturday, etc. may be had by every one (Prince or Pesant it
matters not) for two small pieces of Silver.

2. There is not any poor country Church or Chapel, but, as it has a Saint
for its special Patron, and an anniversary Feast for the day on which it was
consecrated, has also some special Graces out of the Roman Tresury, to wait
both upon the Saint and the Feast. Thus one needs not to go farther then the
Parish, to get at the least twice in a Year the benefit of Indulgences.

3. If you be not content with what your Parish can afford, the Pope has so
judiciously scattered great Sanctuaries over all his Catholic World, like the
Moazim in Daniel, and the High places in Israel; that there is scarce any
Country so unfortunatly seated, but it can supply all Catholic Inhabitants with
all they can want in this case. In Spain you have the Chapel of Angels
Conformit. S. Franc. Conf. 14.
, where by the Virgins special favor, you may save one Soul every Year (you
might have done it every day, if the Pope had not grudged at it) if you will
but step into the Church. At Venice you have the Chapel called The Lords
Sepulcher, and therein some think, fourscore thousand Years of Pardon. Padua,
Perusium, Florence, Montserrat, Lauretta, etc. do not come much short of this.
In France you shall find it may be more, if you go to St. Denis, St. Michael,
Limoges, and a hundred other famous Places, which it were needless to mention
here. You may be sure that Germany, and the Low Countries, do not want such
Commodities as these are.

4. Besides these local Indulgences that are fixed to Altars and Churches,
which you may easily resort to, his Holiness has taken care to fasten some
other, and large ones too, upon certain moveable Suarez. de Indulg. Disp. 52.
Sect. 1. n. 3.
things, which are brought ready to your hand. For as there are privileged
Altars, Masses, and Churches, made fast to certain pieces of ground; there are
Prayers enriched with the like Favors and Indulgences, flying up and down the
Roman World, as light and nimble as Paper can be, that can afford you upon this
score more then you can need. Buy but a little Book, such as I have an old one
by me, containing the Suffrages of the Saints; there you shall find in one
short Ave Maria Suffrag. fol. 74. alias 85.
said to the honor of St. Anna, St. Mary and her Son, ten thousand Years for
your Mortal, and twenty thousand more for your Venial Sins. In another
Salutation, Suffrag. fol. 9.
Ave Valnus 4000 days; in the Prayer Dirupisti 6000; in the Prayer Suffrag.
fol. 64.
Domine Jesu, ten hundred thousand Years; in the Prayer Adoro te, Suffrag. fol.
52.
32755 Years of Pardon. And if this be not enough, Pope Sixtus the 4th was
pleased to add to it a great deal more, even so much as to double it, and the
15 Oo's of St. Brigit, that is, in a Prayer made of 15 Ejaculations Suffrag.
fol. 49.
, all beginning by O Jesu; forty five huge great Indulgences, and extraordinary
Powers, namely, fifteen to deliver from Purgatory any fifteen Souls you please
to name of your kindred; fifteen, to convert to a good Life any fifteen Men or
Women, that you may find among sinners; and fifteen, to keep fifteen more
honest Persons, safe and constant in a good way. And the Rubric adds more, Ibid.
that whatsoever you shall desire, if it be for the good of your Soul, you
shall have it. And what can you not expect of Salve Regina, Ave spes, and such
other more solemn Prayers? When you are weary of Prayers, take your Beads.
Videmus, etc. Navar. de Jubil. Notabil. 15. n. 5.
says a most Learned and Pious Author in the Roman way, I my self, says he,
have seen small Buttons, or Beads of Wood, so powerfully blessed by the Pope,
that whosoever had one in his hand, in saying but the Lords Prayer, was
therewith enabled to save a Soul. Any Meddal, when rightly consecrated, can do
as much; it is but getting some of those rusty Pieces, which Pope Sixtus the
Fifth found once under the rubbish of an old Wall, then presently you are
Cardinal. Raspon. l. 4. c. 11. page 347.
fitted with Suffrag. fol. 6.
rare Indulgential Privileges. The Agnus-Dei's, as I will show you anon, that
is, pieces of Wax sealed with the Image of a Lamb, and consecrated accordingly,
go beyond this. But observe what I tell you, and admire the blessedness of
being a Roman Catholic; by that time you are grown so weak, or so lazy, as not
to stretch your hand to a Book, in order to the gaining these Indulgences; the
very Bell of the Parish will sound them into your Ears. Pope John the 22d is
the first I know, who Ricard. Cluniac. in Joh. 22.
being at Avignion, assured twenty days of Pardon upon the toling about
Sunset; and since that time, these 20 were out of the Church Tresure Suffrag.
de Beat. Mar. fol. 42.
by Pope Sixtus improved here in England, into 300 days of pardon at every
days toling 3 times; this they call the Ave Bell. Thus, unless you stop both
Heart and Ears, you cannot want every day a fair proportion of Indulgences.

4. If you will drink at the Fountain of all these good things, go to Rome. As
that Town is by the Testimony of her Alvar. Pelagius de Planctu Eccles. l. 2.
Art. 2. Platina in vita Marcel. S. Bernard. de Considerat. l. 4.
own Friends acknowledged to be the durtiest Nest of all sorts of uncleanness;
she has, to wash all clean, a whole Ocean of Indulgences. There the seven
great Churches, not to name a hundred more, can upon their own account afford
more Propitiations, then the greatest Villains can commit sins: for there is
Scala Sancta, that is, those 28 Steps, or Marble Stones, that once belonged to
Pilate; but now have in them such a measure of Holiness, that the Popes think
it Devotion to kneel on them: And that of late, Queen Christina is much
celebrated Card Reston l. 4. c. 10.
by some for having bent her Roial knees, and, what she never had done in her
Country, expressed much Devotion, by creeping up those Holy Stairs. There is
that most Holy Chapel, which they call Sancta Sanctorum, where Men at the
first stepping into, find wherewith Ibid. c. 19. page 373.
to expiate all sins: and Women, at the very looking into it (for they are not
suffered to come in) get even as much through an Iron Grate. This is the most
Holy Sanctuary, more Holy then Heaven it self, since it is too Sacred and Holy
for his Holiness Ibid. p. g. 384.
to approach near its Altar, and for the very Body and Blood of Christ there to
be offered at Mass. Agreat Holiness, you may think, which will admit neither of
Christ's Vicar, nor Christ himself. There finally are the four Gates, Portae
Sanctae, which stand open all the Jubilee long, to let all People into Heaven.
The way of it is admirable, and I have it Martin. Navar. de Jubil. ad fin.
from good Authors. His Holiness comes to St. Peter's, with a silver Hammer in
his hand; and being followed by a great Pomp and Procession of Cardinals, and
best Grandees of the City, he strikes the Wall with his Hammer, and bids the
Temple to lay open its eternal or everlasting Gates, that the Righteous Nation
may come in. Then presently Masons appear to pull down the Stones, that that
Holy Gate was Walled with. The Roman people throngs to help, and thrice happy
is the poor Wretch, who gets one bit of the Ho^y Materials, which was touched
with the Popes Hammer.

Ibid.
What is don by the Pope at S. Peter's, the same is don at the same time by some
of the best Cardinals, at S. Paul's, S. John's of Lateran, and S. Mary's the
Major. And the 4 Breaches are the four strait Gates, through which the Roman
Catholics by the strength of their Indulgences break into the Kingdom of God.
It is beyond the power of men, says the Cardinal Cardinal. Raspon. l. 2. c.
14 item l. 4. c. 19.
Rasponi, to tell what an infinite deal of Indulgences is given by Popes on
these accounts. But without these Extraordinaries, the ordinary and daily
Allowance of these Ghostly Helps comes to that point, (unless my Italian
Authors, and Public Authority deceive me) that there is neither a Month in the
year, Arch. Carract. de Rosario. part. 4.
but Rome can afford you out of her very walls and stones, wherewith to save 25
or 30 Souls besides your own; nor a Day in the Month where any one may not with
little trouble, gain Hundreds and Thousands, and ten, and twenty, and sometime
three and thirty thousands of years; besides the many Quarantins, Moities, and
thirds, and half Moities of forgiven sins, over and above.

You may justly wonder at this vast Affluency of Indulgences: but you may
better wonder at and bless the Pope for the light and easy terms, that he
throws upon you his Tresure at. You do purchase all these Pardons, neither at
the rate of the Gospel, Pluck out thine Eye that offends thee; Cut off the
Hand, and be renewed in the inner Man: nor at the old rate of the first Popes,
who began with these Indulgences; Go, and fight against the Turks, or against
excommunicated Heretics: or if you will not be at the hazard of Loosing your
life; go and be at the charges of keeping Soldiers for this Service. But
Attritus, and Confessus, with a small tincture of Sorrow, which the Sacrament
of Confession changes presently into Repentance, go to which Confessor you
please: eat or rather swallow down one piece of a consecrated wafer; then go
and bow to such an Altar; or if you must salute five, you may stand in such a
Place, whence you may see, and salute, and say your Ave Maria before all the
Arch. Carraccio. De Rosar. part. 2. c. 9.
five at one time. This is enough in conscience; for you may find almost
everywhere, says Navarrus, Indulgences with all the Pardons, that Rome
affords, (consider what a deal that is) without Navar. de Jubil. Notab. 15. n.
5.
any mention of Prayer; if you will but visit three Churches, or three Altars.
Nay, stand but at a convenient distance from one of them, as for example before
S. Peter at Rome. When his Holiness like Suarez. de Indulg. Disput. 49. Sect.
5. n. 3.
a great King scatters his Roial Blessings and Favors among his Catholic
Subjects: or Carraccio. De Rosar. part. 2. c. 8.
carry hallowed Beads at your Girdle (one day perhaps you may be bidden as well
to wear a Feather in your hat, or to cock your Beaver, or to cut a Caper, or to
dance a civil Sarabrand) these and such like are the Conditions put upon you as
proper Means, for gaining the greatest Pardons.

In the mean time, to complete the Impertinency, and to crown it with Impiety;
God and his Christ must be called in, not as Spectators only of, but as Actors
subservient to these Doings; there to provide, and to distribute a
proportionable Quantity of his Satisfactions, that lie by him, whenever, and
what way soever the Popes of Rome utter their Bulls. For, if you believe what
they are at, Christ ordinarily meddles but little with applying to any man his
own Blood or satisfactions. If he did so, there might be some danger indeed,
lest Saints, when importunatly called upon, or undiscreetly merciful, might
intercept, and make use of the Tresury, without the help of Popes, and Masses:
and by that means praying to Saints would ingross all; and, as to the Churches
interest, would most really undo all. Therefore it is thought more Suarez. De
Suffrag. Sect. 5. n. 10.
convenient, that Christ of Course should do nothing in the management of these
Affairs, but by the intervention of his Ordinary Instruments; and when it
happens otherwise, as when once the Virgin, as they say took a drop of Blood
from her Sons side to apply to one of her ugly Chaplains; it is looked upon, as
one of those very strange things, which if she does, it is seldom. Witness the
case of Pope Innocent the 3d whom, she would never pull out of the direful
Flames, where S. Ludgardis saw him Surius in vita S. Ludgard.
burning, for three fearful Crimes he was dead in, and in good justice had bin
damned for, had not the Mother of Mercy saved him; She would not I say take him
out thence, but by obtaining, (which is the ordinary course, she takes, in the
Salvation of damned men) that he might come up abroad a while, for to acquaint
his Friends with his Pains, and to beg mercy by their Suffrages. So the
ordinary course is this, that tho God have the Church Tresury by him, yet he
dispenses not the good things which it contains, specially in the matter of
Indulgences, but according as the Pope his Deputy is willing to dispense his
Bulls. There God somewhat like a Factor sits by the Cash, to pay out of it,
great and small sums, according as the Chief Merchant draws upon him great or
small Bills. In order to this Law, you may remember, that when the Queen of
Heaven once had a mind to invest the Monks called Carmelites, with a privilege
that does free them every Saturday without failing, out of Purgatory, She Vid.
Bull. Sabbat.
first addressed her self to the Pope John 22. Christ himself, (that is, the
Spirit, who took Christ's name) did the like for S. Francis; for before he would
grant what the Saint would have, namely the saving of every Soul, that after
Confession should step into his little Chapel; he sent him to Pope Lib.
Conform. S. Franc. Conform. 14.
Honorius 3d, who much disputed the case in a full College of Cardinals: and
after a long debate whether he should ratify that favor; at last he thought
more convenient to restrain it, from every day in the year, to the first in the
Month of May. Whereas we never read, that Christ ever took upon him to restrain
any Popes Bulls, no not the most exorbitant of them. Here then both God, and
Christ are made the Drudges, as well of every Pope at every Bull, as of every
Mass-Priest, at every Mass. At Mass, whenever the Priest says the words, Hoc
est enim Corpus meum, Christ by their Law yields his Body, and God the Father,
his Miracles, to make the Transubstantiation: and tho the Priest minds nothing
more, then Witchcraft, Mischief, and Profaneness, as I have showed it in
another Book, both Christ's Body, and Gods Power must be rather subservient to
the Abuse, then not subservient to the Mass. And in the case of Indulgences,
which, if worth any thing, are nothing else then gracious Favors of the Pope,
and real paiments out of Christ's Purse; Christ is supposed to be ready to part
with his Blood, whenever the Pope parts with his Bull; and tho these Bulls be
intended, as it happens very often for quite other Ends then they pretend;
Christ's Blood and Satisfactions must wait on them, whether for pardoning men's
Sins, or for s emtying poor German Purses; for arming Christians against the
Turks; or the Turks against t the Christians: for the Building up of Palaces,
or for enriching the u Nepotism: for indulging Divorcements, Adulteries, and
very Incests; for these and such other good Ends I say, Christ is presupposed
to be as free to make good such Bulls with his Blood, as the Pope is, when his
own interest will have it so, to make them pass under his Seal; However good
Catholics when they buy them, believe it so. And this Belief is one of the
greatest Allurements, that draw new Proselytes to Rome.

CHAP. XI.
Concerning the procuring Pardon of sins, by the means of holy Confraternities,
and Friends.
NEXT to the Popes Bulls and Indulgences, the help of any honest Friend, that
will take our Guilt upon himself: and the having ones Name entered into a Holy
Confraternity, are two ready and easy ways of procuring Atonement. And the
Roman Religion is commodious in nothing more, then in finding out expedients
either for removing quite away; or for shifting from one to another all
personal Punishments. Have you committed Adultery, Extortion, or any Crime of
this nature? Such grand Sins in the Auricular Confession deserve at the least
Fasting, and giving of Alms: but if you are not either willing, or able to do
it your self; it is enough, if some of your kindred will do it for you. One
shall fast, Medin. de Satisfact. q. 5. Sotus in 4. d. 19. q. 1. a. 4.
the other give some small relief; if they intend it for you when they do it,
it shall all turn for your own use: and God, they say will take it so, as well,
and in some cases, even better, then if you had don it your self. And this is
the best of all; others shall suffer all the hardship, when you enjoy the sweet
of sins. And if you want such honest Friends, as will do it out of kindness;
you cannot want them, who will do much more for money. All the World knows, what
upon this account is don at Rome, in Spain, and other Catholic Countries;
there men are publicly hired to do Penance, and to whip themselves to the
blood, for the discharge of other men's sins. Only, look well to these two
things. 1. That the poor fellow, whom you hire to perform this Service for you,
be an honest likely fellow to be in the estate of Grace; in statu Gratiae; for
fear his Fastings and Lashings otherwise, may chance not to be accepted either
for you or for himself. 2. Get you before hand b the Consent of your Confessor,
who in that Case both will and may capacitate the self-whipper: and by the
Power of his keys, improve every lash he gives himself, into an expiatory and
c Sacramental Satisfaction for you. The custom is in some Countries to get a
miserable Raskal on Ashwednesday to Volateran. Geograph. l. 7. Sect. Vltra
Albim.
turn himself out of the Church: and to walk all that day and night barefooted
about the Streets. After that, every Body invites him home, gives him money, and
lastly he is brought again, and absolved in the Church. After the Absolution,
the man, whom they have thus made their Proxy, is called by them Adam,
Belforest. Hist. Mund. l. 3.
and is thought to be made again by this Penance both as innocent in himself,
as Adam was before the fall: and as able to expiate the whole Town, into as
spotless a Condition, as Adam had left his Posterity in, without that fall.

These good Services and Suffrages done in behalf of Catholics, either by
Friends or Hirelings, are of Suarez. Tom. 4. ln 3m. Disput. 38. Sect. 9. n 2.
Medina. Tract. 2. q. 84.
a quite other importance, then all the best helps which Christians ever begged
or expected one from another, by Prayers, Intercessions, and any Endeavors
whatsoever, that are usual among Fellow Members in the communion of one Body;
which at the most, come to no more then to pray day and night to God, for what
is unknown and uncertain, whether they shall obtain it or no. Some few Ap.
Suarem de Suffrag Dis^. 48. Sect. 2. n. 1.
more sober Papists indeed would fain understand it so; and this is it which
they call in their School Language, Far Suffragium, etc. to Vote for their
Friends toward God, by way of Impetration, or Petition, or mere Congruity. But
alas! what these simple Men suggest at Rome as a Cloak for their modesty, is to
be baffled by all the rest as dangerous Ibid. n. 4.
Innovation. These Suffrages, as the Catholic current Tenet takes them, are
nothing else then good, real, and lawful Paiments or Satisfactions, which both
the Sinner may rely on, and which God is obliged to accept of, in lieu or
exchange of all other punishment. For here the kind Undertaker addresses not
himself to God for his Client, with a mere Petition to beg favor; but as if I
went my self to the severest Creditor with ready Money in my hand, not to
defire him to spare my Friend, or to release him gratis, but fully to discharge
his Debt, and thus by course of Law to get him out. For it were an idle thing,
as these Catholic Divines do think, Ibid. supra, ^. 9.
to sue for Mercy and a gratuitous Release, as long as Men have suitable
Penances, and satisfactory Works, wherewith they may discharge what their
Friends owe, and thus acquit them with Justice. And least, Presumtion should
want Blasphemy; they dare compare these Suffragants with Christ Ibidem.
himself, who redeemed us from punishment no other way, then by satisfying and
paying down that punishment. So the Roman Catholics have the happiness (and
it is a huge one if it be true) to have as many Redeemers as Friends. Now that
God will accept of the Ransom, which these Friends offer in behalf of guilty
Persons, they put it above all doubt, and allege these two grounds for it. 1.
Because the Penance which the kind Neighbor is pleased to offer, is equivalent
Ibid Sect. 3 n. 5.
to the punishment, which the guilty person should suffer. 2. Because, as they
pretend, God has bound himself by his own special Ibid. n. 10, 11, 12.
Order and Promise, infallibly to accept of as due satisfaction, that which
shall be thus offered for the Sinner, by the Sinners Friend. And if you should
think to beat them off from this persuasion by plain Scripture, That every one
shall bear his own burden, Galat. 6. That every one shall receive the things
done in his flesh, according as he has done, whether it be good or bad, 2 Cor.
5.10, etc. They will grant you this to be true Ibid. sect. 2. n. 16.
, when he has no Friend that will bear the burden for him, or undertake for
what he has don amiss; but if he have, they make no question at all, but
honest Men. Catechism. Pii. 5. De Sacram. Poenit. n. 61.
may pay to God what others owe, and so bear the burden one of another. Yet
more, they do not scruple to say, That the good Work being offered for another
with true kindness, is more Thom. 3. cont. Gent. c. 58.
acceptable to God in some respects, then when it is offered for ones self.

Here if you desire to enquire into the ground, which, by their own confession,
the whole business depends upon; to wit, whence they have, or know any such Law
as should admit of a Proxy in personal Punishments, and enable a Man against
Scripture to deliver his Brother, and to make agreement unto God for him, Psalm.
49. they will answer you, Suarez. sup. sect. 2. n 5.
that they have it not from any Reason or Justice; that it must be thus ordered
of God by some special Constitution of his; that this special Constitution
Ibid. n 6.
cannot be evidenced by any convincing Text of Scripture, because whatever is
brought out of Scripture to this purpose, proves no more, then a mutual help of
Prayers to God by way of Impetration and Favor, which God may either grant or
deny, as he pleases; and not by way of a sufficient Satisfaction or Payment,
which he is obliged to accept of. In a Word, that the common Opinion and sense
of the Church, (that is, the present Roman Clergy) is the only Evidence they
have for this Constitution. But if this ground seem too Sandy, to bear any
great weight with wise Men, several Revelations will be brought in to
strengthen it; and tho these Revelations be neither from Christ nor his
Apostles, what would you have better then the Virgin? I have told you already,
how among many of her dear Villains, whom often she suffers to live and to die
most disorderly, she rescued Bassus out of Hell, and brought him up to life
again, that he might have time to confess, and to get Friars in her Name, to
undertake Al. Gazaeus. de Officio B. M.
for him the Penance; which the Godly Monks did presently, and so the Raskal
was freed of all.

Upon this, and such other Examples, the Roman Priests are directed Layman. de
Sacram. Penit. c. 15 n. 13.
, when they have heard their weak Penitents; to exhort their Friends to such
Works and Penances in their behalf, who cannot do so much for themselves. And
the Confessor being desired, may, upon due consideration, undergo all the
Penalties, which, being best transferred on others with his consent, as it is
said, are better born out by himself. And that which is a great deal more, and
may better please the Sinner, some Confessors will go so far, as to take upon
themselves the very sin. Thus did, for Example, that both skilful and
charitable Jesuit Vid. Practice of the Jesuits, Edit Land. p. 123.
, who meeting with an old Sinner, but withal a Rich Nobleman, notoriously
laden with Crimes, and resolved to confess none, eased him of all, both by
charging himself with all his sins, and transferring over upon him in exchange,
all the Satisfactions and Merits of his good Works. So upon a sudden, here is
the Villain in the former case of the Holy Jesuit, and there the Jesuit in the
case of the Villain; and both happy, as it appeared soon after in a clear
Revelation, that assured them whom it concerned, that the dead Nobleman had
not any the least Offense to answer for; and that the charitable Jesuit had all
both sins and penalties clean wiped off, and a great deal of thanks given him
besides, for his extraordinary kindness. I know by what I have heard and seen
my self in great Houses, that the ordinary Complement of Directors among
Ladies, is, Icharge my self, and lay upon me your sin, Madam. So familiar and
easy means Rome can afford for expediting poor Sinners.

It is in this management of sins, and transmitting and borrowing at discretion
mutual Helps, Satisfactions and Merits, that consists most principally the
great use of Confraternities.

The Confraternities are in the Roman Church, what Corporations are in a
Commonwealth, to wit, Companies and Societies, both of Monks, and other devout
Catholics, united together by free consent, and encouraged by great Indulgences
and Spiritual Privileges, toward the undertaking or improving some special
piece of Roman Devotion. There is scarce any Order of Monks, or any petty Roman
Saint, but has a Confraternity; and if the Saint be more famous, it is hard if
one Confraternity can serve his turn. The Virgin Mary alone has as many, which
are scattered over Europe under several notions, as may people the largest
Kingdom. Where she is believed to have appeared, there commonly she has a
Church, or a Chapel, or an Altar, or an Image, and a Confraternity to honor
her. The very Courtiers Urban. 8. Constit. 31. Pastoris aterni.
and Musicians Id. Constitit. 33. Pietatis.
at Rome, two holy Orders of Men you know, have their proper Confraternities,
and consequently their proper Spiritual Privileges, and extraordinary
Indulgences.

Now the Benefit of any one of those Societies is such, as must needs please
any Sinner, who stands in any fear of Hell. The whole business comes
principally to these three Heads. First, The Duty which must be performed, such
is for example, the saying de Profundis, Clemens 8. Constit. 29. Ex debito
nostri.
for Souls vexed in Purgatory; in the Arch-confraternity of the Blessed Mary de
Suffragio, allowed by Pope Clement the 8th; or Worshipping an Arm of S. Andrew,
a Toe of St. Paul, and a Finger of S. Catharine Sixth. 4. Constitut. 14.
, in the Confraternity of the Holy Ghost; or in visiting a certain Altar and
Chapel Pius 4. Constitut. 16.
, as in the Confraternity of St. Rochus; or in kneeling with an Ave, when you
hear a certain Bell Paul. 3. Constit. 20
, as in the Confraternity of the Holy Sacrament; or praying before a little
Image found by a Shepherd in an old Tree Lipsius. Virg. Hall. and Astericoll.
, as in the Confraternity of our Lady Hallensis, and of Montague. And who can
doubt, but these and other such elevated Devotions about Bones, Bells, and old
Images, may much Spiritualize Christian Souls, and advance them to Heavenly
Things?

2. The second advantage of these Holy Confraternities, consists in an infinite
heap of Indulgences, which the Popes call, Gregor. 13. Constit. 38. Pastoris
aeterni.
the Spiritual Sweetmeats, Spiritualium Alimentorum Esca, wherewith Men are
allured and baited to Christian Perfection. At your first step into a
Confraternity, all your sins whatsoever (Heresy and Rebellion against the Pope
always excepted) shall be most fully forgiven: at your stepping out of it by
death, you have as much; and as long as you live in it, you scarce can do any
the least thing, as to go to Church, walk after a Procession; or in case you
must keep your Chamber, say a short Paul. 3. Constit. 20. Dominus noster. Paul.
5. Constit. 29. Postulat ratio.
Ave when it passes, or when the little Bell rings, but you shall be rewarded
for what you do, with seven, or ten, and sometimes a hundred Years of true
Pardon. Besides all this, by entering into a Confraternity, you enter at the
same time under the Protection and special Favor of some great Saints, St.
Sebastian, St. Hubert, etc. and most commonly our Lady her self, who, you may
be sure, will look well to her Family, and make good what true Catholics daily
teach and hope of her, Franc. Mendosa. Viridar. l. 2. c. 9.
namely, That it is absolutely impossible for any one of her Servants to be
damned. And hence swarm out most, if not all, yet most of the Revelations, the
Miracles, and wonderful Deliverances wrought in behalf of the Brethren, whether
Monkish, or Lay and Secular Persons of every Confraternity.

3. But the main Benefit indeed, and the most earnestly sued after, by them who
give their names to these admirable Companies, is that of exchanging their
Guilt and Sins, with other Men's Satisfactions and good Works. The Protestants
never understood well, how the Roman Church is skilful in shifting on and off
good and bad Deeds from one Man over to another. First, There are in every
Confraternity Saints, and other more common Brethren, endued with so many and
great Merits, and satisfactory Works, that they have much to spare to others.
Secondly, There are, as they say, in every one of these good Works two several
distinct Virtues, to accommodate a poor Friend with; to wit, a Meritorious
Influence, to procure him Grace, and an Expiatory Quality, to secure him from
Punishment. Thirdly, they can order both Influences to go just what way, and
upon what Person they direct them. If the Owner feels any need of them for his
own use, it is fit they should stay at home; but if he wishes them for a
Neighbor, this very wishing and actual Intention will so appropriate the whole
business to whomsoever he pleases, that when he Prays, Fasts, Whips himself,
and does any act of like Piety; all this shall make the poor Sinner both as
acceptable to God, ex Congruo, that is in equity, and as safe from Punishment,
ex Condigno, that is, in due course of Justice, as if he had done all himself.
But in case the Holy Man designs by his work nothing else but to please God,
and so thinks neither of his Friend nor of Himself; then it must be
presupposed, that he is always for the good of his Corporation: and this,
which they call Implicit or Virtual Intention, conveies all the Merit and
Satisfaction of what he does, not into the public Tresury, whence the Pope
takes his Indulgences; but into these more private Magazins, which are proper
to each Company, whence every Member takes what he wants. And if you compare
these two together, the Tresure of the Church may afford more Satisfactions to
shelter one against Purgatory: but the stock of Confraternities is more proper
for investing him with Merits, and advancing him to Gods Favor: Therefore Papal
Indulgences, Navar. de Jubil. Notabil. 31. n. 24.
says their best Doctor upon this Matter, may be more certain to keep off
vengeance; but the entering into a Fraternity (which all Catholics of all Ages
and sorts may do) is the better way to procure Grace. For whatsoever great
Saints have ever deserved of God in their life times, as S. Francis in teaching
of Birds, and St. Dominic in making Beads, and all others in like holy Feats
(besides their Intercession and Patronage) is reserved in, or has a direct
Influence upon their respective Societies; that is the reason wherefore now
adays all sorts of People, both high and low, Husbands and Wives, Nobles, and
common Tradesmen, throng to get in, and to have their names entered into these
visible Sanctuaries. And who is the ignorant or mad Sinner, that would not
there provide himself with other Men's Satisfactions and Merits, when he knows
he wants his own? Tho these saving Harbors be grown, and growing more and more
beyond numbering, I will recommend to my Catholic Friends but these three.
Namely, 1. The Confraternity of St. Francis his Holy Rope. 2. That of St.
Simon's Scapulary. 3. And that of S. Dominic's 150 Beads.

CHAP. XII.
Concerning three special Means of Salvation; the Holy Girdle of St. Francis;
the 150 Beads of St. Dominic; and the Scapulary of St. Simon Stock, in their
respective Fraternities.
First, Concerning the Holy Rope, or Girdle of St. Francis.
PIOUS and Learned Authors have of late sufficiently informed the World, what
kind of Saint S. Francis is. He is the Man, whom the Pope in a Prophetical
Dream saw S. Bonaventur in vita S. Franc. ap. Lippom. c. 13.
supporting his Lateran Church from falling. He is the Man, whose Soul roving
abroad as bright as the Sun in darkness, and like Phaethon in a Chariot,
whilst he was at his Prayers, gave from that time Ibidem c. 4.
a clear Omen, that he was born to be the Light and the Chariot of the Roman
World. He is the Man, who taking on himself this vast Province, as he was by
two special Revelations directed to save it, not by Praying only, (to which his
simple Genius inclined more) but by Preaching. First, Ibidem c. 12.
He began stoutly with teaching Beasts, and with Catechizing Swallows and
Larks: And Ibidem c. 8.
the Sheep, which he instructed first to bleat when they sang the Canonical
Hours; and afterward to kneel also at the Elevation of the Host, was an
indubitable proof of his extraordinary skill in Teaching. Lastly, When he had
rambled over the World by the space of eighteen Years with many such Fabulous
Wonders, living all the while with his Followers on what they begged, and so
eating, as he did call it, the Bread of Angels; he was, as they say, carried
upon a certain Hill in Avergne, Alverniae Mons, at the time when he was Fasting
to the honor of St. Michael; and there and then a Seraphim Ibidem c. 13.
showed him a Crucifix brought from Heaven, and wrapped about with six bright and
burning Wings. This glorious Apparition soon rendered good S. Francis perfectly
like this Seraphical Crucifix, and gave him those five famous Wounds, to the
Memory and Honor whereof, the Popes have granted several Bulls, and all the
Roman Church scruples not to sacrifice her own God by an Anniversary Missal.
Paris. and Rom 17 September.
Mass in November. These Noble Sores troubled him two Years, and made him pine
away to skin and bones: till at last, finding himself disabled to live any
longer, he lay flat and naked on the bare ground, that all the World might be
witness, how he died just as he was born. Then came the Fowls, but more
especially the Larks to this spectacle, not to feed on his Flesh, for he had
none, but to take their leave of their Tutor; and by their fluttering and
singing about him, gave him thanks Gregorius 9. Constit. 12. Alexander 4.
Constit. 4.
Bonav. in vita Franc. c. 14.
for his good instructions. Thus this Superangelical Doctor in the year 1226
ended his days: but so did not the strange stories of his Miracles. During his
life, which was a time, when Beasts could learn Christianity, and men discourse
of any thing; among all the wonders he did, he had a special faculty to render
pregnant and powerful any thing that had bin near him. I can justify by
Sanctus Bonav. in vita Franc.
good Authors, (however the best that wrote his life) that his spittle restored
sight to a blind Maid: that the water, where he had washed his Feet, could cure
all sorts of diseased Cattle: that any Crumb of Bread, which he had bit, did
prove a Remedy against all Evils: that a small Piece of Paper written with his
hand, did preserve an honest man, as long as he had it about him, from being
disquieted in his mind: that the Sign of the Cross with the stroking of his
finger, did expel all infirmities from the Body, that he had touched: that a
small handful of the Hey devoutly taken from his Mule, delivered once a woman,
who was dying in hard Travel. But the Frock, the Rope and the long Breeches,
which had touched his holy wounds, were the most wonderful of all. I will lay
aside both Frock and Breeches, the Rope or Girdle being more pertinent to this
purpose: and more then sufficient besides, to amaze men at Gods Judgments
against those, who leave plain Truth, to seek after Superstitious ways.

This is the Cord, that St. Francis had about him, wherewith one of his
Disciples, and which is more wonderful, a very discreet man withal, made once a
shift to cure a whole Multitude of sick people. His Method was, to dip in
Bonavent. ibid. c. 12.
water the end of this Rope, and which you may well wonder at, the water sucked
in out of the Rope, if you believe them, such a Blessing, that being carried
from house to house, and some few drops of it taken inwardly, it cleared the
Town at once of all manner of Diseases. This was don when he was alive; when he
was dead blessed was the Franciscan, that had a small piece of the Rope, for
then it had rubbed against the wound he had in his side; and this Rubbing, (you
may well think) added great Virtue to the Relic. Poor Beatrix had a happy proof
of it. For she, after Ibid. c. 13.
fearful pains and pangs, having her Child dead in her Womb about 4 days, and
her self being even at Deaths door, after a devout motion called for some Relic
of S. Francis; by good chance a small bit of this Girdle of his was brought to
her: and it was no sooner applied to her Belly, but she was presently well: the
Child came forth of it self, and I cannot tell whether it came not to life also.

Well then, it is to the Memory of this Rope, and to the Honor of the great
Saint who made it his Girdle, that his Holiness Pope Sixtus the fifth thought
himself bound in conscience, and by the Sixtus 5. Constit. 13.
care he had of all Christian people, to erect a famous Confraternity of men
and women, whosoever will vow and give their Names for the wearing of a Rope in
outward fashion somewhat like to his.

The End, which this Institution aims at, as it is expressed in the Bull, is
the greater Worship and Veneration of S. Francis. Gregory the Ninth is the
first who made him a Saint; with this Character besides, that by his illiterate
Gregor. 9. Constit. 2.
and simple Preaching and as Samson did before him, with the Jaw Bone of an
Ass, he had don all. Sixtus 4th and Alexander the 4th afterward thought good
to Canonize his five Sores also, but with a handsomer Character, Alexand. 4.
Constit. 4.
to wit of a Giant pulling up all men out of hell. Now Pope Sixtus Supra.
the fifth has honored his Rope: hereafter it may be, his Holiness will do as
much for his old Shoes, or for his Breeches. Mean while, the work and task of
this Confraternity in order both to conferring greater honor upon the Saint,
and the better facilitating the Sixtus 5. Constit. 13. n. 2.
Eternal Salvation of our poor Souls, is to wear instead of a silk Girdle, such
a Cord as he did, about our Loins.

This venerable Badge of being (as well as Sheep, and Asses were) some of S.
Francis his Disciples, is to them that wear it, a Cord twisted of three
infallible Blessings. 1. The Protection of a great Saint. 2. The Title to all
the Pardons, granted by Popes. 3. The happiness of being accommodated in time
of need, with all the Satisfactions and Merits of this great Confraternity.

1. Their hope is, that the Protection of S. Francis cannot fail them, who wear
this Rope. For although it be not the self same that rubbed against his Flesh and
Wounds: yet it is thought to be like it: and the devotion of wearing it upon
this account, may enough and enough supply the want of being the same. Saint
Cardinal Bonaventure, who was one of his best Disciples, can inform you
sufficiently, how great a lover this Saint was in his life time of any thing
that came near him; be it man or Beast, Hare or Partridge, Sheep or Lamb or
Wolf, or what you will. And at his Death this Love increased, according as his
Power did; so that you can scarce think of any Miracle, that he would not do,
to help a Friend upon this score. I am not good at telling stories, and if I
were, I would not thus trifle away time; but you may take it on my credit, that
if the best popish Authors be true; it is but crying out, S. Francis help: or
trying, whether he can help, when other Saints can, or will not: or Giving a
poor man any thing, when you need it as much as he: or promising to cover his
Altar with a clean Cloth; or to keep his holy Day, or to do some such like
pretty thing to any thing that relates to him; if he be still as kind, as he
was when the Pope Canonized him; you may safely look for at his hands the
greatest deliverances. It is upon such and meaner terms, that he was used to
Aloys. Lippom. ad Finem vitae S. Francisici.
raise the Dead: to enable Women being fourscore years old, to be milch-nurses:
and to help men and Beasts promiscuously from the most desperate Dangers. Among
other things you may admire his Nimbleness to come, when called. For how many
men and Children has he saved from touching the Ground tho they were fallen
Ibid.
already from the high Loft or the window, before he was called? Commend me now
to such a Saint for all sudden purposes and turns; and doubt not, but he that
can but say, S. Francis look here, I wear your Girdle, may be as sure of his
Favor, as he that said, O good Father remember now, that once I lent you mine
Ass.

2. The second great Blessing in order to Salvation, which this Cord can pull
down on the Catholics who wear it, is the great Abundance of Pardons, even as
great, as both the greatest sinner can want, and the Roman Tresure can afford.
It seems the Popes having some ground to be jealous, lest wiser Ages should
neglect either such a Saint as S. Francis, or such a means of Salvation as this
Rope; have secured both, the best they could by encouraging men toward both,
by large supplies of Indulgences. 1. At the first taking of this Cord (when it
is blessed and consecrated by the Superior of the Order) a Catholic may be as
sure to have all his sins Sixtus 5. Institut. Archiconfrat. Choxdiger. n. 3.
forgiven him, as any faithful Proselyte may be at his Going to the holy
Baptism. 2. Let one relapse to his old sins, or fall to new; he is sure of a
new Jordan streaming all along down the Streets, where Naaman may wash, and be
clean; I mean a most plenary Indulgence Id. Extens. de Constit. n. 3.
waiting on them, who walk after the Monthly Procession. 3. If this be not
enough, (which it is impossible, but it should,) they have for greater security
all the Pardons, that ever were granted to the whole Order. And this is not a
simple Jordan, but a whole Sea; since by this means all the Privileges and
Indulgences, which upon any account whatsoever, are granted to the Recollects
and Capucins, and to the very Chapel of Angels, may run into this Channel. So
the sinner being let down with his Cord, has wherewith to wash over head, and
ears both himself, and whom he pleases. 4. Moreover and above all these
Pardons, which belong to the Franciscan Order; they may accommodate themselves
with all those, that are granted to the Confraternity Idem Constitut. n. 3.
of Confalo; and the Stations of Rome besides; which is heaping Sea upon Sea;
however more then a thousand times enough, to wash Rome and Sodom, and whatever
may be therein proper Fuel for the Purgatory Fire. 5. Finally to make all this
safe; these full Expiations attend the Rope, and the persons who do wear it, to
the last moment, they can sin in Ibid. n. 3.
Mortis Articulo. And now let the Devil if he dare, venture upon true
Catholics, having about their Loins such a preservative.

3. The third great Benefit, and therefore the most looked after by this Corded
Fraternity, is that which the Brethren and Sisters have, of accommodating
themselves every day with the Merits of other men, as the Jackdaw did it once
with the Feathers of other Birds; when they have none of their own. This great
Arch Confraternity has ever bin blessed with great Saints, and consequently
with great stores of satisfactions and Merits. It is likely their first Founder
alone, great S. Francis, has by his prodigious Mortifications merited more,
then the most dissolute can ever need, to secure their worst Debauches; and if
you consider well, what an heroical Feat that was in him to throw and rub
himself against Bundles of Thorns, and Women made of Snow, merely to tame or
cool his Flesh; you will confess that a great deal of this must needs come to
their share, who cannot do so. Hereafter Catholic Ladies may safely exchange
Churches for Play Houses; S. Rose, and Santa Clara, the first Virgins, who took
this Order have left Devotions for them more then they want. And suppose that
the Well could ever come to be drawn dry; this Confraternity never wants great
and living Saints, who supply it daily with fresh Waters. And he is an unlucky
Ruffian, who cannot get one of these Fathers, to lash and cut his poor old
skin, for all what young Flesh may deserve. Only let the young Villain, and the
Sweet Misses be devoted to S. Francis; have his Image in their Closets; and
wear his Girdle. But and if this wearing be troublesome, especially to tender
Ladies under their long and straight Bodies; a prudent Confessor can soon put
them in another way of attaining Salvation, which shall hurt neither Back, nor
Sides: and that is the Scapulary, the gentle wearing of S. Simon, which of my
especial knowledge the nicest Persons now beyond Sea, have commonly about their
Shoulders.

CHAP. XIII.
Concerning the second special Means of Salvation in the Confraternity of Mount
Carmel, by wearing the little Mantle or Scapulary of S. Simon Stock.
THIS Confraternity, among Persons of Quality passes for the most gentile, as,
I am sure, it is the easiest. The Badg it gives which is called the Holy
Scapulary, is made of two small Pieces of woollen Stuff, about the extent of a
hand, hanging by two little laces down from the Neck upon both the Back and the
Breast of the devout person who wears it. They say that among a great many
Things, which the Virgin Mary brings from Heaven, when she appears, as Books,
Gloves, Images, etc. once she was pleased to come down with this Tool of
Salvation: and to bestow it upon S. Simon, an English Saint, in the year 1265.
This Simon was, they say, Johan. Pitsaeus. De Illustrib. Angliae Script. an.
1265.
a most retired Eremite; and so great an Enemy to all human Conversation, that
to the age of 80 years he kept himself most of his time in an old hollow rotten
Oak, and hence he was called S. Simon Stock, or Stoch, because this Stock was
his lodging. All this while in his old Tree, he was night and day entreating
sometimes God, sometimes the Virgin, that they would be pleased to direct him,
what kind of men he might more safely join himself to. At length, as the story
says, there came over to England a Company of Monks from Mount Carmel, who
made him their General, that is the General of their Order. Never since that
time did the good Saint miss one day, without praying his Patroness for some
special Mark of her Favor upon his Flock. Flos Carmeli, Fasti Carmelit. an.
1250.
Carmelitis, etc. that is, Flower of Carmel, Star of the Sea, send a token to
thy Servants the Carmelites.

Monks will tell you of thousands of Apparitions, whereby she uses to come to
kiss them, or give them some other favor and expression of kindness. Whether
this Lady who appears to them to be so free and profuse of her Favors, be the
Virgin; or rather some wanton Devil, that takes her Name as it is usual, to
countenance Superstition; is not the present Quere. Certain it is that the
Spirit which commonly appears for her, will bring them sometimes very fine
Things: Lightsom shining Garments, as to Myraeus. Chronic. Praemonstrat.
the Bernardin Friars: Scarlet-Robes Carthagen. Tom. 4. de Mirand. Deip. sect.
233.
shut up in a Box, as to Thomas of Canterbury: Rich Drinking Balinghem, de
Viris Illustr. 25. December.
Cups, as of late to St. Tharlavaret: sometimes, but more seldom, good Gregor.
1. Dialog. l. 1. c. 9.
Money, as to Bishop Bonifacius: fine ever burning and never wasting Pyraeus. in
Corona. Tract. 1. c. 12.
Lights and Tapers, as to the Procession of Arras: Fine bread, open Lilies, and
Books, as to the Archang. Gian. De Initio Servit.
seven Servites: and among others the story is remarkable, when the Cistercian
Order was yet in its Infancy, and had need of this Patroness, She appeared
among them all, when they were singing their Mattens, Gonon. Chronic. an. 1109
with a fine white Hood in her hand, wherewith she hooded their Abbot: and as
soon as he had it on, to their great joy and amazement, they presently saw
their former black Hoods or Capuchions turn pure milk white; and the good Lady
added besides these words. Ego ordinem, etc. I do undertake to favor and defend
this Order to the worlds end. Well, old Simon was day and night begging for
some such favor, till he had it. For after much praying to this Flower of
Carmel, at last she appeared unto him with a great multitude of Angels, having
the 2d Scapulary or little Rocket in her hand; and This shall be, said she,
G^nonus ex Fastis Carmel. Chronic. an. 1250.
both to Thee, and to all the Carmelites a Privilege. Whosoever dies in this
Habit, shall not suffer the Eternal Fire. Whosoever dies in this, shall be
saved.

This was Encouragement enough to allure People, to this happy Confraternity;
yet these Carmelites were strangers, and as it is usual, envied by the
Mendicant Orders growing much about the same time, they had much ado to take
root, till the Virgin Mary appeared for them a second time and to a much better
purpose. The Roman Catholics, for the most part, if they have but time to
confess, are not much afraid of the eternal fire in Hell: but they terribly
fear the Temporal Purgatory; to this effect therefore came the same Lady from
above; and declared in the presence of Pope John the 22th, then residing at
Avignion, that once a week, about every Saturday night, she hereafter would not
fail to come down Bull. Sabb.
to Purgatory; and thence pull all and every Soul, which she shall find to have
worn that sacred Habit. This being proclaimed by an Authentic Bull, and by a
Pope, for those days of great Learning, brought the Scapulary into great
request. And since that time men may be thought to deserve well all the
Purgatory Burnings, whosoever would be so untoward, as not to prevent that
danger, when they can do it upon so reasonable terms: Especially now, when it
is made most easy and commodious in behalf of Persons of the greatest quality,
for wearing, under the gentilest Doublets or Bodies. There are some words, and
Forms of Blessing, to consecrate this little Habit into a saving Apparel. There
are also some few Restraints put upon them that do wear it; a Maid must keep
her Virginity: a Wife, Conjugal Faith, and a Widow, her Chastity, etc. But if
they happen to trespass; they all know, when and how and where, to be easily
absolved. For the putting on of this Habit, procures a threefold advantage in
the way of Roman Salvation. 1. An Indulgence and Pardon of sins. 2. All the
Favor and Protection of the Virgin of Mount Carmel. 3. A plentiful supply of
all the Meritorious and Satisfactory works belonging to the Society.

1. As to the Benefit of Indulgences most Confraternities equal or exceed this;
and here you may find the Popes backward, or much saving, in the distribution
of their Pardons. For, whereas other Confraternities have seldom less then a
full Indulgence of all sins, at the Entrance; this has but a third part of
them in the great Sabbatine Bull. They allow but 40 days Pardon for saying
seven Paters and Aves to the honor of the seven Joies: but 100, for the little
Office: but 300, for eating no flesh on Saturdaies: but 500, and some few
Quarantains, for waiting on the consecrated Host. Many other Confraternities of
far lesser importance then that is, have much more. Witness that of S.
Benedict, S. Scholastica, and S. Rochus. And yet tho the Popes on this account
did so little; they did it for the most part, but when they were forced to it
by strong and irresistible Impulses. The Virgin Mary, as they say, Palconydor.
Antiquit. Carmelit. l. 3.
was fain to threaten Honorius the 3d, and to tell him of two chief Officers of
his, who had bin already destroyed by Gods Vengeance, for neglecting her
Carmelites, before this Pope could be brought to confirm their Order: and
Innocent the 4th had an Express a while after from the same Lady, before he
would do them Right against their envying Neighbors. By this it seems the Lady
had done for them so much before, that the Popes were unwilling, for their own
profit, as in the case of the Chapel of Angels, to do much more.

2. And the truth is, if these Apparitions to S. Simon and to John the 22th be
true; the Scapulary Confraternity has abundantly enough in her Bosom, to
enrich all her neediest Members, without any begging from Rome. The Scapulary
alone well applied to the Breast and Back, is by it self a great Jewel. It may,
as they say, preserve men's lives better then the strongest Armor, against all
temporal Dangers: and if you hearken to them all, they will come to you with
hundred stories, what of women delivered, some Vid. The French Book entitled.
Alliance spirituelle avec la Vierge.
of Childbed, some of a Cancer, some of Leprosy, some of a Fever by appling
this blessed Badg unto their Flesh: what of men, who could not be choked by
Devils, Fasti Carmel. an. 1368.
nor drowned after they were bound hand and foot, and thrown into the bottom of
the Sea, because they had the Scapulary. But neither God nor the Pope ever gave
the Church any thing comparable to it, in all Spiritual Concerns. They are not
ashamed to call it a Mark of Eternal Salvation, and a Spiritual Covenant with
Gods Mother; by which Covenant you have a clear Title to all what in favor and
Mercy she can do for you. But without resting on men's sayings, because the
honestest Monks we know are sometimes temted to say strange things, you have as
much from her own Mouth. In hoc moriens, etc. i.e. He that dies with this
Habit, shall be saved, and shall not suffer eternal Fire. S. Simon, and a great
many Angels are Witnesses that she said so: and, as to Purgatory, the terror of
Roman Catholic Souls, she her self engages solemnly, Ego Matter Gloriosa, etc. I
the Glorious Mother of God will come down in Person and fetch them out. And of
this you have no meaner witness, then the Monarch and visible Head of your
Church, Pope John the 22d. Here is his Authentic Testimony in a Bull of his,
called the Sabbatina, or Saturday Bull, as I find it in Latin, in an Authentic
Benedict. Gononus. Chronic. An. 1321.
Roman Author, with the approbation of both the Dominican, and the Carmelitan
Order. And I thought fit to English it, that every one may take notice what
Spiritual ways Rome can afford for saving Men, beyond what Christ and his
Apostles were ever known to be able to do.

The Bull of Pope John the XXII. for the Confirmation and Approbation of the
Holy Scapulary.
JOHN, Bishop and Servant of the Servants of Jesus Christ, to all and every
Faithful, etc. While I was Praying upon my Knees, the Virgin of Mount Carmel
appears to me, and spoke unto me in these Words. O John, O John, the Vicar of
my dear Son, as I will deliver thee out of the hand of thine Adversary (the
Emperor Lewis the 4th, whom he had Excommunicated) and make thee Pope, so I
will, that thou should grant to my Holy and Devout Order of Mount Carmel,
founded by Elias and Elisha, the grace of a full Confirmation; namely, That
whosoever being professed, will observe the Rule given by my Servant Albert the
Patriarch, and approved of by my wellbeloved Innocent, the true Vicar of my
Son, giving his consent upon Earth to what my Son had decreed in Heaven; viz.
That whosoever shall persevere in that Holy Obedience, Poverty and Chastity,
and shall enter into this Order, shall he saved. And that any other Men or
Women, whosoever shall enter into this Holy Religion, wearing the sign of the
Holy Habit (to wit, the Scapulary) calling themselves by the Name of Brethren
and Sisters of the said Order and Confraternity, shall be delivered and
absolved from the third part of their Sins, from the day of their admittance;
promising withal, Chastity, if she be Widow; Virginity, if a Maid; and Conjugal
Fidelity, if she be a Married Woman. And as to the professed Brethren of this
said Order, they shall be delivered both from Punishment and Sin. And when they
shall part out of this World, making speed to Purgatory, I the Glorious Mother
of God will come down thither the next Saturday after their death, and will
rescue whomsoever I shall find in Purgatory, and will bring them up into the
holy Hill of Eternal Life. But these Brethren and Sisters of the said
Confraternity, must say the Canonical hours, after the Rule of St. Albert; and
if they be ignorant, they must abstain from eating Flesh every Wednesday and
Saturday, unless some necessity hinder them, except on my Sons Nativity. Having
said thus much, that holy Apparition vanished away. Therefore I John aforesaid,
accept of this Holy Indulgence, and do confirm and strengthen it on Earth, just
as Jesus Christ has by the Merits of his glorious Mother granted it in Heaven.
Therefore let no Man presume to annul or contradict this Page or Writ of our
Indulgence: or if he dare, let him know, that he shall incur the indignation of
God Almighty, and of his blessed Apostles Peter and Paul. Given at Avignion,
Indict. 3. and the first Year of our Pontificat. This being so, I wonder who
would wish for more, or who would not leave all, to have so much.

3. Nevertheless, although the best Indulgences of Rome, or all other such Roman
Pullies cannot do more then this; viz. to pull a burning Soul out of the
Purgatory Fire, up to the Hill of Eternal Life; yet if this happy Soul had a
mind to appear there more Gentile, then her own Works will allow her, she has
the advantage of borrowing from the Confraternity wherewith to make her self as
spruce and neat as one can wish. Let but any Man imagine, what stock of
Mortifications and holy Works Elias did leave behind for Jezebel, and John the
Baptist for Herod and Herodias; or our Countryman S. Simon for all other such
as those three were, in case they will all humbly come, and devoutly wear about
them this holy Scapulary; Who is the ignorant or blind Buzard, that will not
leave any Religion, Gospel, and Protestant Churches, to run himself and all his
sins under this blessed shelter?

CHAP. XIV.
Concerning the third means of obtaining Salvation by the Confraternity and 150
Beads of St. Dominic.
SAint Dominic and S. Francis are the two Saints, which, as they say, our Lady
Mary pacified Flaminius in vita S. Dominic.
her own Son with, being about to destroy Mankind; for there she past her
honest Word, that these two Doctors should, without fail, reform the three
sorts of Sinners, the Proud, the Covetous, and the Carnal, whom he hated, and
so set up again true Holiness through the whole World. You may guess what Francis
has don on that account, by what I have said of his Girdle; and you may hope
likewise, that S. Dominic may do as much or more with his 150 Beads. However,
these two are, by his Holiness Bulla Aurea. Sacri Praedicatorum.
Sixtus the Fourth, voted to be both the two great Seraphims, that help Men to
flee up to Heaven upon the Wings of Divine Contemplations and Raptures, and the
two loud Trumpets which fill Heaven and Earth with their Holy sound; and
therefore to their honor is this Privilege duly granted, that whosoever will
but visit any of their Churches or Chapels, shall receive Pardon Ibid. sect. 6.
for a hundred Years; and if any of them being dead Ibid. sect. 9.
, will be wrapped up in Frocks, or be buried in a Church yard belonging to either
of their Orders, shall in all probability have as much more. Judge you by this,
what these Confraternities of theirs be worth, and what value you may well set
upon their two most Sacred Standards or Bodies, the Rope or Girdle of St.
Francis, whereof enough; and the 150 Beads or Rosary of S. Dominic; of which
you must now learn something.

This new and admirable way of praying to God, by saying Ave Maria, has, as
they say, proved in their Church so successful, for raising Hearts to Devotion,
sanctifying Men, extirpating all Heresies, and propagating Catholic Light, as
it appears by Pius 5. Constit. Consueverunt.
many Bulls, that most Popes from Sixtus the Fourth, 1479. have thought
themselves concerned in their Consciences, to raise it to a Confraternity as
Universal as their Church; and to make it as the Sun is, (to use their words)
common to all Men in the whole World. For this brave Corporation is not as the
most part of others are, some for Men only, and not for Women; some for great
Men, and not for mean People; some for the Religious, and not for the Secular;
some for the sound, and not for the weak: Archang. Caraccius. De Rosar. 1. par.
c. 1.
this great and comprehensive Society takes in all sorts and conditions of Men;
and to say all, as it shall appear hereafter, even the very dead may come to it.

Whosoever will be admitted as a Member of this vast Body, and march Idem 3.
par. c. 5.
, as they love to speak, under the B. Virgin and St. Dominic's great Standard,
he must go first to Confession, and take the Consecrated Wafer, then he must
appear in Person, if he can; or by a Proxy, if he cannot; and there either
himself or his Proxy being prostrated before the Altar Del Santissimo Rosario,
of the most holy Rosary, declare what great desire he has, to be enrolled
under St. Dominic's Banner. So the Officers, being duly qualified to that
purpose, shall take his name, and acquaint him with what he the new Brother is
to do; especially how he must once every. Week run over the whole Rosary, that
is, the 150 Beads, Ave Maria, and the 15 Pater nosters, solacing him at the
same time with this most gracious assurance, that he must not think it a Sin,
Ibidem.
nor a breach upon his Conscience, if at any time he shall fail in the
performance; and that the whole duty consists of such things, as never were
commanded by God, nor practiced by his Apostles; so the omitting of them must
not disquiet his mind, only he must be content to lose the good Indulgences,
which his Roman Holiness was pleased to grant upon such terms. After this, he
gives him a Consecrated Rosary of Beads, and the Consecrating of them comes to
this. After some short Prayers and Responsals, the Mass-Priest begs at the
hands of God, this great and Blasphemous Favor; Idem part. 3. c. 5.
namely, That to the honor and praise of his Sons Mother, would he be pleased
to infuse into those Beads, so much strength of his Holy Ghost, that whosoever
shall either carry them abroad, or reverently keep them at home, and there
devoutly pray with them after the way of the holy Confraternity, may abound in
Devotion, may have his share in all the Graces, Privileges and Indulgences
granted to the said Society; may as long as he lives be protected every where,
against all Enemies whatsoever; and at last, may be presented full of good
works to God by the Blessed Virgin Mary. To which is added, the other Blessing
by Holy Water, and as it were a second Baptism, In the Name of the Father, etc.
Next to the holy Beads thus impiously Consecrated, and devoutly delivered into
the hand of the new Brother or Sister, comes the Holy Candle. This Holy Candle
is of great use, when you walk in Procession, when you go to Burial, when any
one of the 15 Mysteries (you may remember what that is) is solemnly celebrated,
and especially when you die; for there, but especially here, if you do hold
this holy Candle lighted in your hand, you may be sure that all your sins are
forgiven, because Pope Adrian the Breve. Illius qui Dominicam.
Sixth has ordered it so. But the Candle must be Consecrated, as solemnly as
your Beads were, and with a Form to this purpose: That through the Intercession of
the Blessed Virgin Mary, and the 15 great Mysteries contained in the aforesaid
Beads, Christ the true Light, that enlightens every Man that comes into the
World, will enlighten also this Candle, with the true light of his Grace, etc.
Then is the Candle sprinkled with Holy Water, in Nomine Patris, etc. This is
not all, you must have a Holy Rose, for it is of a singular Virtue; and
besides, Rose and Rosary are of a kin, especially as soon as it is Consecrated
with this execrable Form of Blessing, Deus Creator, etc. the sense is, That God
the Creator and Giver of spiritual Grace and eternal Salvation, be pleased to
bless the said Rose, which is presented unto Archang. Caraccius. de Rosar.
part. 3 c. 6.
him, for the worship of his Mother: and to infuse into the Rose by the virtue
of the sign of the Cross, such a Celestial Blessing, that to what Infirmities
soever it be applied, and in what houses and places soever it be devoutly kept
or carried, the said Infirmities may be cured: and that thence all Devils may
flee away. This Charm is likewise completed with the usual Baptism of Holy
water. With these Tacklings you may hereafter reckon your self most fully
incorporated into this Heavenly Body. What you have next to think upon, is well
to discharge those duties that belong to a Heavenly Member: and to fall lustily
to that incredible and strange way which S. Mary and S. Dominic her Husband
have in the latter times brought into the Roman Church, of serving God, by
saying Ave Maria.

To the great encouragement of the said Brethren and Sisters, this way of
Devotion is called the Crown, the Psalter, and the Rosary; the Crown, because
whenever you say fifty times Ave Maria (as my Italian Caraccio. Part. 1. c.
13.
Author observes, and I may prove it many ways) the so saluted Goddess, is
pleased to take it, for so many Crowns, and Garlands of fine Flowers, that you
do adorn her Head with. 2. The Psalter; because the Church of Rome does think
it fit, to worship the Lady of the most Holy Rosary, with 150 Salutations, as
King David the Prophet did, to adore the Lord God of Israel with 150 Psalms;
and because, as David's Psalter was an Instrument, wherewith he could ease the
Spirit of Saul, when it was troubled by the Devil; so do Catholics with these
Aves, defend themselves, and charm all the Powers of Hell from doing any harm
to their Souls. 3. It is called the Rosary; because as with Roses you make
Rose Water, Oil, Sugar and Honey Rosal; so do the Brethren and Sisters of the
Rosary make with it admirable Confections, Drugs and Syrops to Physic their
poor sick Souls; to soften the hardness of sin; to dispose Roman Catholic
Hearts, toward all Graces; and to say all with them, Caelum ridet, etc. that
is, the Heavens laugh, the Angels dance, the Church keeps her joiful Festivals,
Hell trembles, and all the Devils run away, when they say or sing Ave Maria. I
much wonder they should excuse or exclude all the prisoners in Purgatory from
jumping or cutting Capers; since they hold, that the Dead are as much concerned
as the Living. Therefore when one goes to enter a Name, he may Caraccio. De
Rosar. Part. 1. c. 13.
put in as well any Soul of Father, Son, Uncle, or any other Relation, as his
own. Only thereby he binds himself to say the holy Rosary, and to perform all
other Duties for them he puts in; that so they may wheresoever they be, above
or under ground, receive all the Profits and Pardons of the Society. And if he
put in two Names; he must perform the Duty twice, once for himself and once for
his Friend. This double work is less troublesome because you may speed it away
at any time you have little else to do, as when Id. part 3. c. 3.
you dress and undress your self; when you walk, stand, sit, ride abroad, or
wait: and for more ease and more Merit too, you may join more hands to one
work, when for example you are with two or three Neighbors walking and
traveling together.

I did forget another Duty, which you must by no means forget, it being as
indispensable as it is easy; and it is this: both the Poorest and the Richest
must needs contribute to the Charges of setting up a near Altar, Id. part. 3.
c. 12.
and adorning it with a Standard, bearing the Picture both of our Lady giving,
and S. Dominic receiving on the other side the holy Psalter from her Hand. They
must be likewise at the Charges of having the fifteen great Mysteries fairly
painted both over and on each side of the great Altar. Besides, you must pay
your small share for both the wax and the Oil, that burns night and day before
the Rosary Lady: and least you should grumble at such expenses, be you sure,
that one Mass upon, or one Ave, or one Pater before such a privileged Altar,
especially on solemn Days, is better worth then a thousand whether Masses, or
Aves that you may hear or say elsewhere.

This being done, you may confidently look for all sorts of Blessings, and
Privileges must needs from all parts flow toward you.

1. Rome opens in your behalf her whole Celestial Tresure; a full Pardon of all
your sins at your first coming to this Society: at your going out, when you die:
at all and every holy Day kept to the Ladies Honor, through the whole year: at
all and every solemn Day kept for any one of the fifteen great Mysteries: at
Christmas: the Sunday before Epiphany: holy Thursday, and good Friday: the 3
holy days at Easter: at the Ascension: the three Holy Days at Whitsuntide:
all the first Sundaies of every Month, etc. And all this, both for sick, and
sound, for the absent, as well as present, at Sea or Land, in prison, and at
Liberty, so that there be a just Impediment, that detains you from the Duty,
and from visiting the Altar; you can hardly make three or four steps, or open
the Caraccius de Rosar. part. 2. c. 7.
Mouth to say Jesu, or Maria, but you shall get by it a considerable
Indulgence. When you devoutly Ibid. c. 8.
take your Beads: When you hear Salve Regina (it is a short song to the Ladies
Honor:) when you walk after the Procession: when you march after the Banner, at
a Burial: when you visit a sick Brother or Sister: when you wait upon the Host
in the street, etc. you gain hundreds of Days, of years, and some Quarantains
or Quadragenes to boot. And if all this be not enough; all the Stations and
daily Indulgences of Rome are at your command and mercy, if you will but visit
a Rosary Church, with saying three Aves in it: or in case of too much throng,
stand at a distance before one, or the five Rosary Altars; (and you may stand
sometimes before them five, tho you do not stir from one Place:) however my
Italian Ibid. c. 10.
Author, assures me that diverse Popes have granted all these huge Pardons both
by Bulls, and by word of Mouth, Oraculo vivae vocis, which is the Roman
Church's Oracle, upon these terms.

I hope that by this time you have enough for your own use. But if you please
also to pleasure your Friends, you may weekly rescue out of Purgatory two of
their Souls, one on the Sunday, Ibid. c. 5.
the other upon the Wednesday following, and Eleven other souls more upon other
special days; which I leave out to spare you trouble. Only you must take the
pains to visit the Rosary Altar, and of saying at it this short prayer. O Lord,
I pray you to accept of the Indulgence, which has bin granted by your High
Priest, the Steward of the holy Tresure, to the soul of John, or James: or if
he the said John or James have none or little use of it, to such a soul in
Purgatory, which I am most obliged to; concluding all with a Requiescant in
pace, thereupon let them rest in peace. This way one may help in one year some
115 souls; and she is a woman of large correspondence that has more friends
yearly to care for.

2. Besides this incredible abundance of Privileges, and Pardons coming upon
you from without, they say that this Rosary Confraternity enjoies within it
self the greatest Tresure of the whole World, namely a real and perpetual
Participation of the Merits and Penances of all and every one of the greatest
Saints since Adam. Consider what vast Abundance of Good works S. Dominic left
in this Magazine, by whipping Caraccio. De Rosario. Part. 1. c. 3.
himself to the Blood thrice every day; once for his own sins, which, it is
verily thought, he had none: once for the sins of the World: and once for the
sins of the souls burning in Purgatory. Calculate what Saint Vincent might
hoard up for the use of his Brethren by converting 8000 Turks, and 25000 Jews.
Think what Tresure might Agnes bequeath to her Society, with those incomparable
Jewels which Bov. Tom. 13. Annal. an. 1317. n. 9.
she had partly received from the Virgin Mary; and partly got and stolen from
her Son, when he had bin in her own lap. What can you not hope of S. Osanna,
another sister of this holy Confraternity, who being yet Balinghen. Calendar.
B. M. 17. Jun.
a Child, had the Virgin for her School-Mistress: and being come to riper years
had the Holy Babe for her Husband? What shall I say of St. Alanus of Dinam, for
whose Deliverance the Chronic. Deip. an. 1212.
Rosary Goddess destroyed his Enemies at land with 150 Thunderbolts; and raised
out of the deep Sea, as many Mountains, (an equal number to his Beads) to make
him a Bridge to run away? and what of the other S. Alanus de Rupe, the Restorer
of Rosaries, the true Ibid. an. 1476.
Husband of this Goddess, and withal her bosom sucker? Have these and all, whom
I could name, Popes, Cardinals, and other Grandees of the same Confraternity
cast nothing into the Tresury? And if all these did not cast in enough; take
all Gods Saints from the very beginning of the World, to the year 1431. for if
Roman Revelations be at all true, they Arch. Caraccius. De Rosar. part. 4. c.
35.
all without exception use and sing out the Rosary. Take along with them all
the Angels, and as they love to speak, the whole Celestial Court; for every
good Roman Catholic is persuaded (unless they offer to contradict B. Alan.
parf. 1. c. 19.
both S. Alan and his Virgin) that they also sing in Heaven the Rosary: and
that both these, to wit, Saints and Angels, make up but one Arch-Confraternity
together.

Now the Custom of this Society Navar. de Psalter. Miscellan. 9. n. 4.
being so free, as to limit no favors at all (as others most commonly do) but
to allow to every Member, a full Communication of all; what a huge deal of
wealth is all this to every one, be he otherwise never so poor? All the
Intercessions of Saints above: all the Merits of more Saints below: all the
extraordinary showers of Privileges, and full Indulgences from Rome: all the
watchings and helps of the good Angels: and that which must be reckoned above
all things, the continual favor and Countenance of the Queen of Heaven her
self; in this vast Concurrence of all the Saints and holy things from Heaven
and Earth together, what can the wit of man fancy, that both this Confraternity
may not contain, and the Rosary Brother well expect? Are you for a shelter
against public Calamities? The Holy Rosary is good for it. They think that by
the strength of this Weapon the Gregor. 13. Bull. Monet Apostolus.
Turks were beaten from Europe: the war ceased from Leo 10. Bull. Pastoris
aeterni.
Cologne, and Arch. Carac. de Ros. part. 1. c. 17.
Genua: and the great Plague Id. part. 4. Miracul. 19.
from Pavia. Are you troubled with private Distresses? Friar Amat had no better
way to Chronic. Deip. an. 1538.
choke a Devil, nor S. Salvator Ibid. an. 1567.
to cure the deaf, nor S. Dominic Bov. tom. 13. an. 1213. n. 9.
to procure Children, and cure Barrenness; nor General Montfort and Captain
Anthony, Alanus de Insulis in Rosar.
to rout Armies; nor the two Spanish Women Archang. in Rosario. part. 4.
to escape hanging. What they say of the Spanish Ass, is most pertinent to this
purpose: This Beast is often in that Country made use of to carry condemned
Persons to the place of Execution, and it is not heard, but the innocent stupid
Animal performs quietly this Office, except one time, Lopaz. de Rosar. l. 1. c.
10.
when it grew so intelligent, as to perceive, that the Wretch who was on its
back, related to the Rosary: then it was wonderful to see, how quick and nimble
this slow Beast turns back again from the Gallows, and galloping through all
the Guards, who attended the Execution, and all the common People, which then
was thronging to see it, carries her dear charge to the Church, there lays it
down most devoutly before a Rosary Altar. You must conceive, that either the
Grace infused into these Beads at their Consecration, works out these ordinary
Miracles; or that the Rosary Queen, whom they call the Mistress of the World,
and the General of this Order, is always present and active upon all great
Exigencies, wherein her Officers are concerned, especially when she sees them
bearing up, or marching under that which she takes Caraccius de Rosar. part. 1.
c. 10.
for her Banner. Nevertheless, tho the essential Riches of this potent
Confraternity be so extremely considerable in all Secular advantages (even
sometimes so as Navar. de Horis Canon. c. 19. n. 160.
to make Men fortunate in Wives, and all other Bargains) yet its great worth
lies more in all Spiritual and Eternal Concerns. St. Alain, who never was seen
without the Ring, which our Lady Gonon. Chronic. an. 1476.
twisted for him of her own Hair; nor without that Heavenly Chain of Beads,
which she put about his Neck at the same time, does assure us upon this
account, that to be enrolled in the Book of this happy Confraternity, is Beat.
Alan. part. 1. c. 17.
to be enrolled in the very Book of Life: that the benefit which they receive
from being thus registered Id. c. 18.
, is no less then to be chosen and adopted for Gods Children: that such
registered Persons are much better, then the hundred forty four thousand were,
in the seventh of St. John's Revelation: and that all Friends and Promoters of
this admirable Society, do set up for all sinners as good as the Ladder, in
Jacobs Vision, to scale Heaven. And as for themselves, they shall be there
glorified, not only as Abel and Abraham, and the other Patriarchs are, but as
the noblest Angels of God. And let none be discouraged from this great Hope,
for feeling himself but a sinful Wretch, since as the same Father says, if
true, Qui propriis, etc. that the very Reprobates, as to their proper and
personal Demerits, are made the Children of God by the communion and benefit of
this Society. For as a Rosary had in the hand of S. Salvator the virtue of
curing Quartan Agues, when it was laid Chronic. Min. l. 5. tit. 4.
upon ones head; so it had in the hand of St. Dominic a greater Gift, namely,
that of infusing Grace; or however, expelling Vice, when laid Bovius Annal. to.
13. an. 219. n. 12.
at Night under ones Pillow. For my part, I know no fowler Villain, then that
Noble Man at Paris was, who was sanctified by this means. Where ever was a more
prostitute Whore, then fair Catharina at Rome, who both in the heat of her
Lust, and her Zeal for this blessed Rosary, was converted also; and in such an
extraordinary manner Chronic. Deip. an. 1221.
, as is not fit for me to relate?

But tho Registered Brethren or Sisters should not care much for Conversion; and
tho their good Goddess Id. c. 33.
and Mistress would Indulge them their liberty, as she often does, as long as
they shall enjoy their life, yet, which is the sweetest of all, none of these
worthy Members can perish, but either the strength of their Beads, or the
kindness of their Lady, or some like thing or other, shall save them from Hell
when they are dead. Who can be more wanton then Alexandra of Aragon was? And
yet she was raised from the dead, absolved, and visibly saved, as they say, 150
days (the just number of her Rosary Beads) after her Head had bin chopped off,
and thrown into a deep Well? Was ever a Man in the whole World more fit and
likely to fall into Hell, then was the desperate Robber, whom some others
stronger then he, had suddenly killed in his Sin, and whom the Rosary Princess
revived and kept so long under Archang. Caracc. de Rosar. part. 4. Miracul. 16.
ground, till St. Dominic heard him calling for help, and both dug him up
and absolved him, two whole Years after he had bin buried? This Highway Man,
it seems, had heard of Saint Dominic's Preaching, and therefore had made use of
his Rosary, purposely to venture himself more safely, to all the hazards of his
Trade; and he did well, for as soon as he was absolved, his Body fell down to
the Grave, and his Soul fled up to Heaven. An Indulgent Mistress indeed, who
will allow her dearest Mignions, during their life, their Belly full of all
Plesures; and when they die, all the Joies of her Paradise. Let good Catholics
have but as much Devotion as a public Robber, or a common Whore are capable of,
then a Scapulary, a Rosary, or St. Francis Girdle, all three together, or any
one of Chronic. ibid.
them by it self, shall save them all. And among all these Impertinencies,
sober Papists cannot perceive their own weakness, or the irresistible Charm of
a besotting Religion.

CHAP. XV.
Concerning diverse other Instruments of Blessing and Salvation.
SAint Simous Rocket, S. Francis Girdle, and S. Dominic's Rosary, are but three
of the numberless Inventions, which the Church of Rome has found of late to
promote Grace and Salvation: The poor Protestants have no ways to help
themselves with, but such as Christ and his Apostles did leave to all the World
besides, Faith, Repentance, Perseverance in well doing, etc. happy Catholics
have an hundred other, both more commodious and more taking; and it is fit,
that all Christendom should know them, since they do prove such useful means,
both to keep and to draw the common People to their Faith.

These gracious Tools are of two sorts; some are supposed to have had a being a
good while ago, but were of late discovered, or however put to the new use
which now they have. The others are made new every day, by Roman Popes, Bishops
and Priests, in the same way that other Tools are made, and brought to what
they are, by the Master of every Craft.

Of the first sort, are the Tacklings which now the Roman Church gives out for
Relics, and which of late have got the credit of procuring what every one asks.
For if the vast store of supposed old holy stuff, which S. Peter's, S. Paul's, S.
Laurence, and other Churches keep in their Sanctuaries at Job. Diacon. de supr.
Sanctit. Eccl. Lateran.
Rome, had a being in ancient times, it was unknown. Neither Josephus, nor
Philo, nor Origin, nor St. Jerome, nor any other of those great Men, and most
versed in Antiquity, can tell us where to find the Rod, wherewith Moses did
strike out Water; nor the Altar, where Melchisedec presented to God Bread and
Wine; nor the Golden Censer of Aaron; nor the Ark of the ancient Covenant, etc.
which now they show in the Vatican. The most pious and ancient Fathers had bin
amazed to hear Men speak of the first Shirt that Christ put on; or of the
Bottles which the Virgin used to fill with her own Milk; or of the Hair, the
Shift, the Shoes, and the very pareings of her Nails, which she left with them
when she went up. If all these things, I say, had a being, either it was hidden
somewhere with those many Crosses and Images, which the Monks have dug up
from under ground, or in the bottom of some deep Well, where none but Angels
Gonon. Chronic. an. 1116.
are heard to sing; or it was kept in some of those Ward-robes, whence the
Virgin brings out her Veils, Hoods, and such other Favors, when she has a mind
to hearten her Monks. And tho some Men had known something of their Being, which
is not true, yet no Man ever had hitherto any experience of their Virtu. For
who of all the Fathers ever knew, that any Shift which the Virgin had left
behind, had the power which that of Chartres, as they say has, of disabling S.
Anthonin. 2. p. Hist. tit. 16. c. 2. sect. 5.
an Enemy from going backwards or forwards, and of imparting the same quality
to any Shirt, Histor. Carnot. an. 1060.
which touches the Box wherein it is kept? Did ever Men dream, before Pope John
the 22d, Medida del Pie Sanctissimo, etc. impress. cum Licentia.
that her Slipper being kissed and adored with some Aves, should procure
Atonement for many sins, and a Pardon for 700 Years? Who may not wonder that
these Utensils should have bin kept so long, that is, above a thousand Years in
the dark, and now in these last Ages should swarm abroad so thick, and
admirable, to all ends and purposes every where? Most of them, Baptist. Laurus.
De Annulo pronubo.
says the Popes Protonotary, have bin kept hidden a great while, and from hand
to hand delivered, either to ignorant persons, who knew not how to value them;
or to profane and negligent Trustees, who did not care. They think 'twas upon
this account, Horat. Tursel. Lauret. Hist. l. 1.
that our now Lauretan Lady kept her self above 1200 Years obscure and unactive
in Nazareth, till at last she forsook her Country to show her self in Italy,
where she meets with more pious People, and worthier to see her Miracles, then
the Apostolical and Primitive Golden Age was.

1. First begin, if you please, with this prodigious Relic, a whole Room with
Walls, Roof, Windows, where the said Lauretan Lady assures a Bishop, that she
was born, and had received the Salutation of the Archangel. There also they
show the Altar, which, they say, St. Peter consecrated; a Crucifix, which the
other Apostles had set up, and chiefly her own Picture, which, as she says,
her admirable Painter Luke had drawn. This famous Domicile was brought with
these Appurtenances in one Night from Nazareth over Seas and Lands by mighty
Angles; and can, if honored with a Visit, with an Offering, or with a Vow, cure
in a moment all Diseases.

2. Hence walk to Perusia, there you shall find the Virgin Mary's Wedding Ring;
a very homely one indeed (such as might be expected from a Carpenter) of Iron,
and a small whitish Stone to it; but having passed through many hands, and at
last being discovered what it was by three great Wonders; namely, 1. The
Apparition of the Virgin, who owned it. 2. The Destruction of a young Prince,
because it was not valued enough. 3. And the Resurrection of the same, at the
time of his Burial, both to chide his own Father, for his profaness in
neglecting that Sacred Ring, and to give all the World warning how they should
use it afterward. This blessed Ring shall make Joh. Baptist Laur. de Annulo
Pronub.
your Finger as stiff and as dry as a very stick, if you dare rashly put it on;
but it will restore the sight, reconcile the greatest Foes, drive out all fears
of ill Spirits, if you adore it reverently. And that you may never doubt of
this, take but a Ring of Ivory (it must be of the same bigness) and let it
^ouch this Virgins Ring, it will contract from it such a Virtue, as to ease one
of the Sciatica, and to help Women to an easy Travel, if they put it on their
right Finger. By this, judge what her shift can do, what her Gloves, what her
Comb, what the broken pieces of her Glass, what her Girdle, much more precious
then the Cord of St. Francis, and the German. Orat. in Advocat. Zion. Virg.
very Heaven it self, what the vast quantity of Milk, which she gave when she
was a Nurse, and which she has given to forty Persons, Men and Women, out of
her own Breast, since the Papists have made her Queen. Catholics may look on us
all, like as so many poor Raskals, who have none of these Jewels.

3. They may do it much better upon the account of Christ himself: for tho all
other Christians have his Gospel, and his active and passive Justice by his
Passion and Holiness; the Roman Catholics look upon this as the common
Materials, and do believe them as things of course; but in the mean while, they
mind quite other things, and make use of quite other means of going up to
Heaven, which certainly Protestants have not. As besides the Blood of Christ
shed on the Cross, which no body has nor can have; being, as one of their
Learned Saints affirms, Thom part. 3. q. 54. art. 2.
re-entred into his Veins, and ascended to Heaven with him: they have to show a
great deal more of other Blood, all that which St. Nicodemus took in his Glove,
all that which has bin received in Bottles, and now they say is carefully kept
at Mantua; and without going any farther, all that which is upon Easter Day
Biel. in Canon. Lect. 5. L. B.
most solemnly adored at Rome. Now to argue according to Pope Clements Bull.
Vnigenitas.
Divinity, if one drop of this Blood was enough to save all the world; What
obdurate Papist must he be, whom now Joh. Diaconus. ap. Respon. l. 1. c. 10.
page 48.
Bottles full of the same both Blood and Water could not save? What will you
think of the Cradle, the Shirt, the Ibid. l. 4.
Coat without seam, the Coat of Purple, the Barley Loaves, the Table, the Stool,
the Towel, the Communion Bread, the Spear, the Sponge, the Nails, and other
Utensils relating to his Life and Passion, which a Romanist has all, and looks
upon both as Objects of his best Worship, and great Instruments of Blessing? Do
not forget the Holy Rood, nor all the great and small pieces of Wood, scattered
and adored over the Roman World, whereof as much as a small crumb, when hanged
about a Catholic Neck, is in their conceit all in all.

How far these and other Relics set one forward toward Heaven, you may judge by
two Characters; namely, both by the Opinion that the Papists, and the care that
sometimes the very Devils have of them. In the Opinion of the Papists, they are
able to sanctify what or whomsoever they can touch; Coster. Enchirid. c. 15.
so that whosoever touches the Bones of a Martyr, becomes in a manner a
partaker of his Justice and Holiness, through the Grace issuing out of their
Bodies; which surely is a great encouragement for one to keep such things close
to his skin. And besides this, they are looked upon as a great means of
engaging the Saints to mind and favor them who kiss these Bones, or any thing
else relating to their first estate: and therefore those are in the right, who
do bestow Stapleton. Promtuar. part. 1. p. 292.
the like honor on the Relic, as on the Saints; since from both, they hope to
receive (as they shall) the like advantage. Thus if you kiss St. Thomas Beckets
Breeches, (they say you may Navar. de Horis Canon. c. 18. n. 26, 27, 28.
adore them too) you are forthwith sure of a Saint, who shall thus make you
twice happy, both by his Soul protecting above, and his Relics which sanctify
and save below. And how were it possible for these Saints not to befriend them,
whom they see kissing and worshipping their very Shoes? Upon this reason are
these Relics devoutly laid under the Altars, and there as devoutly called upon:
insomuch, that you can hardly tell, which of the two Papists do pray to;
whether the Saint, as assistant to his Relics, or the Relics as nearly relating
to the Saints. Sub Altar Dei, etc. Pontific. Romans sect. De Consecratione
Eccles.
O you (whether Saints or Relics that are seated under Gods Altar, intercede ye
to God for us. If you make the least doubt of it, read the public Office of the
Church; what better Author can you wish? and by what this Church solemnly
prays in behalf of the very boxes or shrines, see what you may hope of the
Relics. We beseech Ibid: sect. De Benedict. Capsaram.
you (says the High Priest, and the Prayer of the Church you know cannot be in
vain) so to sanctify these small Vessels, (Vascula) by your free Grace; and so
liquor them (perfundere) with your Celestial Blessing, that whosoever requires
the protection of your Saints, and embrace their here enclosed Relics (here is
their use) against the devil and his angels; against all Thunders, Lightnings
and Storms; against the corruption of the Air, and the Plagues of Men and
Beasts; against Thefts, Roberies, Invasions; against all sorts of evil Beasts,
and against the devices of wicked Men, may obtain of you through their
Propitiations and Prayers, strength both to overcome all harms, and to find all
profitable things.

This is in all likelihood (to come to the other Character of saving Relics)
what the Devils at Rome did consider, when, Pauius de Angelis. Descript. Basil.
Vatican. c. 55.
as an Authentic Roman Author reports it, they took once especial pious care,
lest these saving means should be stolen away from Rome. The History is
remarkable, and it runs thus: About the Year 250, under the Popedom of
Cornelius, some Greeks who were at Rome attemted to steal thence away St. Peter
and St. Paul's Bodies; then happened a great Earthquake, and all the Devils
soon perceiving what these Sacrilegious Thieves were doing, presently bestirred
themselves out of their Temples and Images, running up and down through the
Streets, and crying with a mighty Voice (as concerned in the business) Come out
Romans, come out, for the Greeks in all haste are now carrying away your gods.
At this huge Cry met together both the Christians, for the securing of their
Apostles (for so they took the Devils Language, as now the Papists do speak it)
and the Pagans for their Heathenish gods. So the Greeks being closely pursued,
ran away, and threw their Booty into a Well, whence Pope Cornelius soon took it
up. But hereupon a main difficulty troubled the Church, to know which was the
Body of St. Peter, and which the Body of St. Paul; at last, after much Fasting
and Praying, a great Voice was heard from above (whence the Queen of Heaven
uses to appear) Majora Ossa, etc. The bigger Bones belong to the Preacher, and
the other to the Fisher.

By this good care of ill Spirits, both all the Bones and other Relics, which
the Roman Church has now, are since multiplied to such a number, as may
deservedly call again both the Christians and Pagans together, to wonder at
this Improvement. No Rats or Mice can multiply so fast in nasty Houses, as
Relics will in foolish Churches. Erasmus says, In Matthew. 23.
That the true Cross, which once a Man could well carry upon his back, is since
that time multiplied to so many pieces, that, if they were all put together,
might very well load a good Barge. It is most certain, that our Savior was
never Circumcised but once, that St. Peter had but one Body, and St. Denis but
one Head, while they lived: the same is true of the Wise men, or the three
Kings. But now see where their Relics are best kept, to wit, at Rome, Bruxels,
Paris, Milan, Ratisbone, and other places, whether now, when they are dead,
they have no more. It seems the Roman Church has a notable faculty of making
Bodies, Heads, and Teeth, and all other such things to breed, while she keeps
them in her Bosom. This faculty is neither by Transubstantiation, as when they
put one individual Body in a thousand places: nor by simple Division, as when
they break one of their Consecrated Wafers into parcels, whereof one, and even
the least, conteins as much as the whole does; this is performed by a certain
Efflux and Transmigration of Roman Grace, such as you see in a burning Candle,
when it lights as many others as you are pleased to bring to it.

For the Roman Church thinks to know by infallible Experiences, the gift, which
their Holy things have of imparting their good Talent, to any thing which comes
near them. If they but put their Beads, or any such little thing on their long
stick, as the Jews did their Sponge on a Reed, and then with a low bowing, make
it kiss our Ladies Image; this gentle touch is a Blessing: and I am sure all
Medals and Beads, which have had it, are bought and sold at a good price. If
this touch be between such things, as are of the same or like nature, then the
Transfusion of Holiness is much stronger: and for example, a burning Taper,
which will perhaps but heat the finger, will presently light a Candle. And to
this purpose is the Danish Suffragan Matthias's public acknowledgment, when he
declared solemnly, That he had from his Holiness a Commission to hallow, or to
consecrate any Bone, even of a Hog or a Sheep, if it were of the like member
with that one which he had, into Relics fit for Altars. Here I cannot forget
that Monsieur de Cerisy. In Low Normvndy.
Honorable Gentleman, whose prosperous and pious Family is still in Normandy, a
great Ornament to that Church; whose Father, as he told me, had the first
distaste of Popery, when, being with the French Ambassador at Rome, he saw a
heap of Bones, taken out of a very common Churchyard, and solemnly Consecrated
for the Altars of Hungary, which the Turks, much wiser then they, had cleared
of such pitiful Trash. This large Transfusion of Grace was sufficiently tried
by the Noble Knight Chronic. Deip. an. 1060.
, whose Shirt kept him Invulnerable against all blows and wounds whatsoever,
after it had touched our Ladies Shift: and by many Men and Women, who are cured
in Italy both of the Platu. supra.
Gout, and many other painful Diseases, by Rings of Wax and Ivory gently rubbed
against our Ladies Wedding Ring. Doubt not, but that if you can get some,
either of that Biel. in Canon. Lect. 50.
Straw which St. Martin did lie upon, or of the Hey Bonavent in vita Franc.
, which St. Francis Horse was sadled with; and if you did mingle other with it,
both shall prove to be fit alike, either for working Roman Miracles, or being
Objects of Roman Worship. Thus Rome is guilty of no Cheat, whenever she gives
more then one Head to one Body, and many Bodies to one Saint, to be worshipped
in several places. And whether Queen Isabella, or Pope Clement the Fourth, have
the right Head, which S. Paul had on his Neck; this has very small reason to
grumble as he does Clem. 4 ap. Caesar. Raspon l. 4. c. 19.
at that, or that to complain at all of this, since they have both, if not the
same, at least as good.

2. But and if by chance neither the care of the Pagan Gods could save, nor the
craft of Roman Monks invent as many Relics, as may satisfy all the World, the
new Romans shall supply that want, with other as good means of Grace, which are
of their proper making.

First, They will give you an Agnus Dei, that is, a godly Lamb made of Wax. The
Original of this new Device, was first found out by the Masons, who laid the
Vatican Foundations. For, as they say, Marian. ap. Cardin. Raspon. l. 2.
with much digging, they met among many Medals and Rings, the Figure of a Lamb
made with Wax, enclosed in a Golden Case, engraved with these conjuring Words,
Maria nostra Florentissima, Michael, Gabriel, Raphael. Archangel. and Vriel.
The Pope then Reigning (they cannot tell who, nor when it was) presented the
Empress with this Relic; and a good while after, the Popes being not able to
find more such Subterranean Jewels, were fain to counterfeit some like them.
Urban the First, is the first Pope who sent one of his own making to the
Emperor of Constantinople, commending the Virtues thereof in a fine Copy of
Latin Verses, Balsamus and cera, etc. The way of making such an Agnus, is this,
Take Virgin Wax, charm it with the Cardin. Raspon. de Basilic. Lateran. l. 2.
c. 8.
usual Blessing; mingle it with the Ointment which they call Chrisma, and some
Balsom added to it: put this Past into the shape of Lambs, carry them in a
Silver Basin to the Pope at Procession, saying these Words, Ibid.
Holy Father, these are the young Lambs that bring the good Tidings. Allelujah,
now they are going to the Fonts, ad Fontes. At which the Clergy is to answer,
Thanks be to God. Allelujah. Then his Roman Holiness, abusing most horribly the
Holy Ceremonies of Baptism, dips Ceremonial. Romans
them all into the Water, out of which, he, or some other present Bishop, takes
them; and thus all being Baptized, Omnibus Baptisatis, the Pope himself
Consecrates them with a Prayer to the Holy Ghost, O Alme Spiritus. etc. that
is, as He (the Holy Ghost) has ordained the Holy Sacrament of Baptism, to wash
all sins away; so these Lambs (pretty Children to bring to Christ) being washed
with the holy and living Water, and anoiated with the holy Ointment, may be
blessed and sanctified with the abundance of his Grace, against all Devils, and
ill Spirits. And that whosoever will devoutly carry about him one of these
Lambs, may never be troubled with any storms; nor overcome with any Adversity,
nor Plague, nor ill Air, nor Shipwreck, nor Fire; that no man may ever have the
Dominion over him. (So Catholics must have still the better.) And that if a
woman wear it in Childbed, the Child may be kept safe with the Mother. The
great Sacraments of Christ's own institution, namely the Holy Baptism, and
Communion have not the half of this: and yet, both for the great encouragement
of Popery, and the greater horror of all true Christianity, you may have more;
for the first Pope who made them, and therefore knew best what they were good
for, makes their virtue like to Christ's Blood. Raspon. supra.
Balsamus and Cera, etc. I present you, (says he to the above said Empress)
with an Agnus or Lamb of God as a great Gift; for it scatters away Devils, and
storms, etc. (as in the consecrating Prayer) and besides all this, it breaks
and choaks all mortal sins, as the very Blood of Christ does. Commend me now to
such a Church, that can upon her own account make for her friends such
Sacraments.

Secondly, Hear what she can make in another way, of this same wax, especially
upon Easter Eve. In the Morning Pontificat. Romans sect. De Off^c. Sabbath. San^.
at six a Clock, strike you as much Fire out of a Flint, as may serve you to
light CharCoales without the Church: put the lighted Coals in a Censer: and
throw on them, five Grains of Franckincense, while this Incense is a burning,
put out all the Lights of the Church: put three wax Candles at some triangular
distance upon the top of a long Pole. At the first stepping into the Church,
light one of them at the new Fire: then lift it up: and let the People say Deo
gratias, God be thanked, there is Christ's light. When you come to the middle of
the Church; light the Second; and falling down upon your knees repete the same
words somewhat louder: and when you are come in so far, as to the High Altar;
then light me the third Candle, and cry out as loud as you can, Here is Christ's
light. This done, go up to the Pulpit; and there with one of the three before
said Candles, light a fourth, but a huge one, which is called Cereus, and must
be burning the whole night. This great Candle, or Cereus is good as they say on
Easter Eve to bring the holy Ghost into that water, which it is thrice dipped
into; the first time it must no more then touch the water: the second, it must
go in somewhat deeper; but the third Missal. Romans Sabbath. Sanct.
time, it must sink unto the Bottom. Now sprinkle a little of this holy water
upon your self, or whom, or whatsoever you will; it will do Marvails. Once the
Virgin brought down from Heaven one such Taper, Pyraeus. Coron. B. M. Tract. 1.
c. 12.
to dip in water; whether she learned it from the Roman Church, or this from
her, I cannot tell; but however all the Inhabitants of Arras, who drunk but a
little of this water, being troubled before with sore diseases, were upon their
drinking thereof, on a sudden recovered. It were exceeding worth trying,
whether the other lesser Candles could do the same, if they were dipped; for
Roman Catholics find in the water a marveilously great aptness, to impregnate
it self with all the virtue of Holy things. Witness that water, (whereof mention
was made before) where S. Francis did wash his feet: and the other water in
Flanders, which did cure Balinghem. Calend. B. M. 10. Sept.
the Palsy, when the little Image of Montague, Montis acuti, had soakt in it.
But however without any water, these small Candles do great Effects, if the
prayer to hallow them, be not as vain, as, I am sure, it is extravagant; namely
Misal Roman. Fest. Purificat.
that God would be pleased to Sanctify all these Candles through the Intercession
of the Virgin, and the Prayers of all his Saints, for the health of Souls and
Bodies by Sea and Land: and to this purpose to kindle them with the light of
his Celestial Blessing, and the infusion of his Grace, that all the People who
have a mind to carry them devoutly and decently in their hands, may have their
Prayer heard in Heaven. This said and don, then presently come up the People to
the high Altar: and there down on their knees do kiss the hand of the
Mass-Priest, who gives to every one of them one of these Candles. When some
Body is like to die, this blessed light is held before him, when he cannot hold
it himself; and the benefit of it is this, that whosoever holds, or has this
Candle held before him, when he dies, especially if a Rosary Brother, dies
Archangel. de Rosar. part. 3. c. 6.
with the Pardon of all his sins; what would you have more?

Thirdly, from the Wax you go to the Oil; for the Church of Rome makes of it
three other great Organs of Grace; 1. One to prepare and qualify young People
to all spiritual Graces; Oleum Catechumenorum. 2. Another to introduce the Old,
or the Sick into Heaven; Oleum Infirmorum. And the third, to strengthen both
young and old, from the time of their Baptism through their whole life, against
all Temtations whatsoever, Chrisma. For the making of these three Means of
Salvation, which are best don on holy Thursday; Pontifical. Roman. in Caena
Domini.
Take me three Bottles full of the best and purest Virgin Oil you can get:
cover them well; the two former, with silk of any Golor: but the third by all
means with white; then when the Bells have rung a while, and all things are
ready for the Office; let one Subdeacon, or more, bring the three Bottles
orderly one after another, on his left Arm, (where the Lady carries her Babe)
and deliver them being decently covered, into the hand of a more noble Officer,
who shall name what Bottle it is; as for Example Oleum Infirmorum, Here is the
Oil for dying People: and so set it before the Bishop, upon a little Table near
the Altar. At that moment the Bishop shall rise up: and with a pretty low voice
(not so low nevertheless, as when he changes Bread into Flesh) thus conjure and
consecrate the Bottle set before him. I conjure thee, shall he say, O thou most
unclean Spirit, and all you Apparitions, and Incursions of the Devil, to get
forth out of this Oil in the Name of the Father, etc. that it may become a
Ghostly Unction, fit to streng then the Temple of the living God. Then follows
the solemn Consecration; that God would be pleased to send down the holy
Comforter, out of Heaven into this Fatness of Olives, that it may scatter all
the Pains, all the Infirmities, and all the sorrows both of the Soul and Body:
and that it may be a safeguard and restoration to them, who shall be anointed
with it. After this, must the two other Bottles be brought up, on the left arm
likewise, but with more Ceremony; for the Chorus must sing the Verse or as they
call it the Charm, O Redemtor, etc. four or five times: and the high Mass
Priest must consecrate the Balsam, and mingle it with some of the Oil, in a
lesser Dish or Patin. This don, he blows three times cross-wise over the Mouth
of the greater, otherwise called the Chrismal Bottle. After him twelve other
Mass Priests, but of an inferior Dignity, who stand ready for the same purpose,
blow each in order thrice, and cross-wise on the said Bottle. Then here follows
the Conjuring Consecration. Exorcizo te, etc. that is, I do exercise thee by
God the Father Almighty O thou Creature of Oil, that all the Armies of the
Devil, and all the Incursions of Satan may flee away out of thee: and that thou
may become to them, who shall be anointed with thee, an Adoption of Sons, by
the Holy Ghost; in the Name of the Father, etc. Having thus conjured and
prayed, he falls upon singing the Praises of this Chrismal Oil, calling upon
the Trinity, as impertinently, as before, that the Virtue of the Holy Ghost may
be mingled with the Fatness of this Oil, just as he (the High Mass Priest)
mingles what is upon the little Dish, or Patin, and lets it in into the Bottle,
with a Fiat, that is wishing or commanding, that this mixture of Liquors be a
saving Propitiation, and safe guard to them, who shall anoint themselves with
it. And in full assurance that it is so, the Inferior Priest takes off the
white Veil, which this Bottle was hooded with; then the High Priest with a
threefold humble kneeling, worships the Bottle three times together, saying at
every kneeling and salute, Ave Sanctum Chrisma; but raising his voice by set
degrees (for this belongs to the Mystery) at the second, and the third time:
the rest of the present Clergy do somewhat more; for at every Ave in several
notes, as before, instead of bowing, where they stood, they must approach, and
kneel before the Bottle; call it worship, or Idolatry, or what you please.
Lastly both the High and low Mass Priests do most reverently kiss in order not
the Mouth, as before, but only the Lip of the Bottle, Labium Ampullae. Nothing
of all this is don in vain; and nothing can be don too much; for this is the
great Chrismal Ointment, which supplies the want of Baptism: and which arms the
true Catholics with all Graces, not one excepted, against all Temtations
whatsoever.

The third Bottle conteins what they call, the Oil of the Catechumens: which,
laying Balsam aside, is consecrated as the former; for the High and the 12 low
Mass-Priests, blow thrice on it; then it is conjured and prayed over, that all
the Devils may flee from it: and that so many Graces may come into their
Places, as both to adopt and to purify the Flesh and the Spirit of all, who
shall therewith be liquored. For the Conclusion they all worship the third
Bottle as they did the second, with their repeting Ave Sanctum Oleum, I worship
or Salute thee O Holy Oil. So you have all you can desire to set your Salvation
forward against the world, the Flesh, and the Devil.

Fourthly, the Church of Rome knows how to advance Salt, and water, either each
by it self, or both together, by Conjuring, them into another Pontifical. Romans
sect. De Benedict. primi Lapiddis.
saving Sacrament; the Salt, to be both the Health and the Salvation of the
Body and Soul. Salus Mentis and Corporis: and the water by it self, no less:
but when both are mixed together, then you are safe on every side: then all ill
Spirits, and uncleanness must fly away: and then the assisting Presence of the
Holy Ghost comes in good earnest about you. That is the reason, that no wise
Catholic will pass one day, if he can help it, without sprinkling himself with
this water; nor let the Chamber, where he lies, be without a little Bottle full
of this holy Preservative.

Fifthly, the Roman Church affords two other great Saving Pontifical. Romans ibid.
sol. 114.
Devises by blessing Wine, and conjuring Ashes. These Ashes, if it be possible,
must be taken Id. sect. De Officio 4 Ter. Cinerum.
out of the burning of such Boughs as had served the year before for
Palm Sunday. What virtue these Ashes have, (especially on a Catholic, when
troubled in his Conscience) guess by the prayer of the Church, who sends
expressly for Ibid.
Gods Angel, to infuse strength and blessing into them. The Wine, (not that of
the Holy Communion, for this is a Mystery, which neither Christ, nor his
Apostles ever thought of) as it appears by its consecrating Prayer, has a
great deal of virtue too. But it shows it especially, when the Mass Bishop has
mixed it with the said Ashes, Salt and Holy water, therewith to hallow
Churches, Altars, and all other Instruments of Catholic Devotion, with such
admirable Properties, as can make all Services more acceptable.

Sixthly, this is one of the greatest Perfections and Allurements of Rome; that
over and above the many Means of Inherent Blessings, to enable the deadest
Souls toward something; she can enable Marble, Wood and Stone, to raise and
quicken the least Performance. And for my money give me such a Master, as can
both animate my hand with skill and motion to play upon an Instrument, and help
me to such an Instrument, as can make most sweet harmony of the least touch of
my finger, when I come near; and this is the Case of the Roman Church, and the
great Attractive she has to make blind Souls look toward her. All, even the
meanest Country Churches, what with this admirable Confection made of Ashes,
Salt, Wine, and holy Water; what with Greek and Latin Pontifical. Rom sect. De
Consecr. Eccles.
Characters, drawn in Ashes upon the Ground cross-wise, with a Mass Bishops
pastoral Staff; what with Processions about the walls; what with hard knocking
and singing at the Doors, are enchanted to that degree of holiness, as that the
first step into them, and the least good word or thought in them, may Thom. p.
3. q. 83. a. 3.
wipe off clear your venial fins: and that some Churches if no more then looked
upon at a Distance, will clear you from Supra. De Rosar.
mortal too. All, even the most common Mass Altars, what with little
Pontifical. Romans sect. De Consecrat. Altar.
Candles burnt cross-wise; what with several sorts of Ointments; what with
Signs of the Cross; what with seven turnings about; what with old Bones, or
consecrated wafers, are conceived to have no less virtue, then the light of the
holy Ghost, and a general capacity to make all holy and acceptable, which the
Priest offers thereon: and many have the Privilege, if they be seen at certain
times, but a far off, to procure general Pardons without any Mass, Navar. de
Jubil, Notabil. 15. n. 5.
or Prayer. All Images what by being washed with holy water; what by being
smoked and suffumigated with the burning of Frankincense; are advanced to this
blessing, that whosoever makes a short Prayer to our Lady, before Pontifical.
Romans De Benedict. Imaginis.
such an Image of hers, for example, shall be saved here from all dangers: and
shall in the presence of God hereafter be released of all his sins. Some such
Images there are which go as far, and require less, even but a simple bowing,
when you pass by. All Crosses, whether of wood, or stone being washed, and
smoked in the like manner, promise the same, or greater Effects; namely Ibid.
to be a Foundation of ones Faith, a Defense in affliction, a help in
Prosperity, a Bulwark in the City, a shelter in the Field; in a word by
Consecration Id. De Benedict. Imaginis.
a Cross becomes a fit Object to be adored, kissed, and kneeled unto, even by
him, who did make it: especially when there is a Crucifix nailed to it; for
then it is both a Cross and an Image: and who, upon this double account would
not be easily temted, to adore and to kneel before the work of his own hands? A
small wooden Button, such as you may have many hundreds for two pence, (as I
have observed already) is by the Roman Popes Blessing made a sufficient
Instrument to raise one Pater to that Price, as to be a sufficient Ransom for
the buying of a Soul out of Purgatory. All Bells, and of all sorts (which in
the Roman account Durand. Rational. l. 1. Rubric. de Campanis.
amount to six) what with their Chrismal Ointment and another Oil for the sick;
what with abused Parcels of Scripture, and terrible Pontifical. Romans de
Benedict. Signi.
Conjurations; what with other Roman and distorted Rags of Baptism, are thought
to have the faculty as well of scattering storms and Devils from, as of calling
the People to Church: and of working true compunction, in the Heart, as well as
a sound or noise in the Ear. However the Roman Church among her solemn
Consecrations prays to God for no less, in behalf of her Bells, then in behalf
of Christian Souls; that these (Bells) may be blessed with all Heavenly Grace,
and thoroughly moistened with the Dew of the Holy Ghost. Moreover to oblige the
Country, they are said to be mightily useful, for the preserving Ibidem.
Omnipotens Dominator. Durand. Rubr. de Campanis.
of Corn, and Cattle.

Sixthly, and lastly (for I am loath to trouble both my self and others with
relating more Enchantments) besides these Universal Attractives, Rome has or
pretends to have, wherewith to accommodate every particular sort of Christians
in their private Relations. His Roman Holiness does consecrate Pontifical. Romans
sect. de Coronation. Reg.
Crowns for Sovereigns: Banners for Princes, and great Generals: Swords and
other weapons for Captains or common Soldiers. He knows also how to please
Queens, Princesses, and other great Ladies with Relics, and Godly Lambs of his
own making. He will part sometimes with the whole Carcass of a Roman Saint.
When they happen to be with Child, they may be sure of holy Clouts. As for his
own ^elf, his custom was to consecrate Cardin. Raspon. l. 2. c. 9.
a Bit of a patch either of Silk, or of Cotton: and to do it in this manner. At
the end of every Station, an Acolythe (an inferior kind of Officer dips this
pitiful patch, into the Oil of a burning Lamp: and having wiped it as clean as
he can, comes to the Pope for a Blessing, Jube Domine benedicere: who does so,
and gives it him again; then the fellow cries out at another station at such a
time, and in such a Church which now salutes your Holiness, etc. and so
presents the blessed patch: which his said Holiness joifully accepts of, and
heartily kisses, in veneration of the Saint, who happens to be the Patron of
the Church, where they are to meet. The Chamberlain lays all these Bits one
upon another in a safe place, herewith to make a little soft Pillow for his
Holiness to rest his head upon, when he is dead. And why may not this pretty
Devise, as well be thought a Saving Pontifical. Romans de Benedict. agni.
Sacrament for a dead Corpse, as the mixing of Salt, and water is, in the
Consecration of a senseless Bell? and why may not silk or Cotton under a Roman
Popes head, as well as Gold, Silver and Steel upon and about a Princes Head, be
raised, by the same Power, to strange Spiritual Performances?

These, and many more of like nature consecrated Inventions coming from Rome,
and being recommended by men of parts, as so many special favors of an
Infallible Church, may very well take, and enchant both wise and unwise
Romanists: and for my part I do much wonder, how all such of our Protestants,
as have more Conscience then knowledge, are not more temted then yet they are
with these Means of Salvation. We all know how much Flesh and Blood is apt to
be drawn with Objects, and Operations of its own kind: and how far it is easier
for men and women of loose lives, to amuse themselves with Scapularies, Beads,
Ropes, Agnusses, and sprinkling their Bodies with Holy Water, then to lift up
pure Hearts to God. And what hard matter can it be for an old Sinner on his
Deathbed, either to kiss a Crucifix, or to hold a consecrated Candle, when
contrariwise he finds it an unsufferable task to repent? Who, in the days of
Romulus, would have run the hazard of being hanged, when he really might, or at
least thought to escape it by running into his Asylum? And who of all the Sons
of Adam, if they do see their nakedness, and hear the Thunder, will not again
seek Fig Leaves? Such imaginary means of Grace, both keep Papists nailed to
Rome, and might draw more People that way, were it not for some remainder of
common Sense left in Mankind, and even sometime in the worst Sinners, which in
part discovers the Folly, the Profaneness, and if there is any reality, the
visible Witchcraft of these Babels.

1. I say the Folly: For what is there more impertinent, then to think either
of scaring the Devils with Salt, Ashes, and Water, or of inviting the Holy
Ghost with Perfumes, Balsam and Oil? These weak Ingredients, I do confess,
might have some use in the Levitical Service; but yet this use was to signify
and to represent; it was not to perform, or to bring any thing to pass. If the
Papists did intend nothing, but for example to represent Innocence, by their
Holy Water; or the Glory and Joy of Heaven, by their Burning Candles and Lamps:
Men are allowed sometimes to express things by such Emblems. And if their
Ceremonious framing and scrupulous Christning of Bells, or their Mystical
burning of great Torches did tend to nothing else, then those many Allegories,
which Durand Durand Ration. l. 1. de Campanis. l. 6. de Bened. Cerea.
and others seek about them; the only great abuse, for ought I know, were in
exceeding all sober use; and by that excess, in filling the Church with an
intolerable Pageantry. But I pray you, What has this Bell more then a Drum,
proper to working Repentance? Or this Taper, more then a Tallow Candle, to cure
Diseases? Or this Rose more then a Tulip, to ease of the Quartain Ague? If this
Wax, or Roses, or Boughs, had bin brought down to us from Paradise, as they say
that admirable Branch of the Palm Tree Cosmas Ves^itor. ap. Pelbart. de Obit.
V.M.
was, which an Angel gave to St. John, to adorn the Virgin Mary's Funeral; the
Celestial Ground where they grew, might dispose one as well to believe, that
the Leaves of that Branch did glitter like Stars, and that its Fruit did
restore the sight, or raise the dead, as to believe the whole story. Or else if
this Wax, and Roses, and Boughs, had bin recommended to the Church by God, or
any undoubted Prophet, as Water is in Baptism; and as the Rod, the Lamb, the
Blood, etc. were in Moses his days, it were very easy to conceive, that the
same God, who had instituted these Signs, would by some way or other, however
unknown to us, make good their signification. But since these begarly Elements,
as the Apostle calls like and better things, have neither Institution from God,
nor Original from an unknown place, nor any thing in the whole Earth, to
recommend themselves withal, but that they grew in my Garden, and were taken
out of my Hives, and then were blown upon by a Pope: upon this pitiful ground,
if I think they can do great Feats, I may promise my self as well very great
Wonders from the Juglers, Hocus, P^cus, which I am sure were great folly: or if
some great things usually happen at such pitiful Ceremonies, as there is
neither strength of Nature, nor Ordinance of God to cause them, my Belief is
worse then Folly; there must be some Devil in the case, whom an open Abuse and
Profaness in taking in vain Gods holy Name, does usher in.

2. For what worse abuse can there be, then to call on the Holy Ghost to infuse
his Light, his Grace, and the Dew of his Blessing into Ashes, Stones, and
Mortar made of Water, Lime and Sand? In Conscience, are these dirty things
capable of any Grace, and Spiritual Infusion? Or is the blessed Spirit of God
become to us so contemtible, as to be called into this Dirt? 2. What impudent
attemt is this, to pretend, either by our Prayers, or by the help of light
Gestures, to raise up filly Elements to high prodigious Effects? And what
visible temting of God is it, to call on him for Help, Grace and Blessing, upon
this prostitute boldness? For when we call upon him to Bless or to Sanctify
what we have, it is to improve it to those uses, which by its nature it is fit
for. And when we bless the Elements, either for holy Baptism, or for the holy
Communion; it is to procure then a Blessing in order to those Spiritual Ends,
that he himself has ordained both Baptism and holy Communion to. So whenever
we Bless or Pray, we have always a Natural, or a Supernatural ground of God,
to bear us up in what we ask. So had Moses, when with a Rod he offered to
divide the Sea (...) Joshua, when he bid the Sun to stand still: and all the
holy servants of God, when by the laying on of their Hands, or any other weak
Ceremonies, they wrought some Wonders. There and then the Men of God neither
spoke nor did any thing, but when moved by his Spirit: and without such Grounds
and Principles, whether natural, or better, all our Prayers are but Faithless,
and our Blessngs and Consecrations unchristian. Now what of all this, can a
Mass-Priest or Bishop pretend for all his Conjurings? If Lights and Lamps can
by their Natural propriety scatter Darkness, or by an human Institution
represent Glory and Joy: Can they also procure Blessings, and cure Diseases? Is
there any ground in Nature, whereupon one may pray to God, that such a Bell
(call and Christen it as you please) may work Compunction of Heart, or preserve
the Cattle and the Corn, otherwise then by scattering perhaps some Clouds? Is a
rag either of Silk, or of Cotton, being at a certain time dipped in Oil, like to
give ease and refreshment to a dead Pope lying on it? Or if Nature fail them in
this: What Divine Institution, what true Revelation have they to make them
think, that their three Bottles, if a Mass-Bishop will breath on them, shall
fetch down Graces from above? and that one little drop of this Oil, mingled
with Wax and Balsam, shall save People against all Dangers? Why should one
think that his Parish Church is better freed from ill Spirits, by some few
Greek and Latin Letters made with a stick upon spread Ashes, then his Room is,
if he writes Slut with his Finger upon a nasty or dirty Board? And what ails a
Tulip more then a Rose, or an old Shoe more then a Girdle, not to be as well
consecrated to great Marvels? 3. As it is to these and other such idle purposes,
that the Holy and Dreadful Name of God is by them all taken up, and called upon
at every turn; if in truth, as it should, in Justice and Judgment, let them
show by some good Precept, Promise, or clear Revelation that it is so: and if
not, let them now tremble both at the horror of their attemt, and at the
dreadful Voice of God threatening, that he will not hold them guiltless, but
look on them always as Sinners, and abominable guilty Persons, whosoever do
take his Name in vain. Read who will Roman Service Books, there he shall find
the whole Trinity as frequently and as formally called down on Bells, as on
Children; as dreadfully named and conjured, (Per Deum vivum, etc. By the true
God, the living God, the Holy and Almighty God) upon Salt, Stones, Ashes, and
such Trash, as on his Sacred Ordinances. The whole Service of Rome, from end to
end, is pestered with such Conjurings.

3. But if such Conjurings be not thought to be taking Gods Name in vain, but
seem sometimes to work out something, you may justly fear that they be worse. The
Jews had an Art of casting out Devils, and curing many Diseases, some with
Rings, and Roots of Joseph. Antiquit. l. 8. c. 2.
Herbs, which, they said, they had from Solomon; some by Suffumigations Justin.
Martyr. cont. Tryph. p. 91. Edit. Steph. 1551.
and Conjurings. The ancient Pagans did the same with Flowers Eusebius. Praepar.
Evang. l. 5. p. 117. Edit. Rob. Steph.
, with Figures, and with Words, which themselves did not understand. These for
the most part were Scripture names, Sabbath, Origens e cont. Celsum. l. 1.
Adonai, God of Abraham, Isaac and Israel, etc. The truth is, abused Scripture
and Medicine have ever bin the two common Ingredients of Black Arts: this finds
out Herbs, Roots, Gums, Perfumes, etc. that furnishes sacred Words, sacred
Figures, and holy Days, to make up the Enchantment. Thus the Devils are best
pleased, when they trample both on Nature and Grace, both on Gods good
Creatures, and Christ's sacred Ordinances. You can no where find more of this
then both in the Jewish Talmud, and in the Consecrations of Rome. No Salt, no
Wine, no Smoke, no sound of strange Words and Characters, can be out of their
way and use, in order to true Popery: and if Christ, and the Primitive Fathers,
ever used any of these Creatures to a Moral and Mystical sense, the Papists
will first stretch it out to extravagant Allegories, and at the conclusion will
abuse it for the working out of strange Feats. Thus the use of Oil, which by
the Fathers was applied to represent the Graces of the Holy Ghost, falls into
the hands of Papists to cure Diseases. Thus the ringing of the Bells is
improved from calling the People to Church, to make Corn prosper in the Fields:
and thus the Bones of dead Saints, and the very Sacrament of the Lord, from
being kept as holy Memorials; to be thrown to quench the Fire, and to save
Houses. And as the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, and such other Names of
God proper to his ancient People; so must the Holy Trinity, the Living God, and
such other Expressions of the blessed Divine Nature, which are more proper to
the Christians, among other names of Saints and Angels be now brought in, with
many Crossings and Figures to conjure their Business, and, as Cardinal Rasponi
ingeniously expresses it, to make a Respon. de Lateran. Basilic. l. 2. c. 8. p.
147.
Charm of Blessing. With this, a little Bottle of Holy Water, hanged at or by
the Beds Tester, is conceived to keep the whole Chamber both from Fire and evil
Spirits; and as much as a small Peper corn of Wax, sowed and wrapped up with Silk
in the Figure of a Heart, and carried about ones Neck, is a stronger
Preservative then all the forbidden Council. Laodicen. Can. 36.
Phylacteries. And as these great and sacred Names did not conjure so well, as
when pronounced in Hebrew; (for the Devil did not care for the word, unless it
was said Sabbath, or Adonai, as Learned Origin well Lib. 1. cont. Celsum. p.
20. Edit. Cantab.
observes) all the Pontifical Consecrations and Exorcisms are in Latin, Per
Deum Vivum, etc. and this may he thought a good reason for celebrating their
Mass in a Tongue that few understand, for fear the Consecrating words in
English, or other known and common Languages, might not work out the great
Miracle, which they call Transubstantiation. Therefore whenever Serpents, or
Floods, or Quartan Agues are conjured; or when to the same good purpose Spells
and Papers are given out, all is said and written in Latin, out of their vulgar
Version. See their Book called Flagellum Daemonum, full of Enchantments to
scourge the Devils; or their other Book, called The Tresure of the dreadful
Conjurings. Thus, it is the Fate of corrupted Religions, whether Jewish, or
Mohammedan, or Roman, to end in Witchcraft and Sorcery: and who can wonder, if
such continual abusing Gods Holy Name, and Scripture, proves a strong
Invitation to any other Spirit rather then his own. But of this, you shall hear
more about Images.

CHAP. XVI.
Concerning the most general, and most sensible Inducement to Popery, by the
means and in the use of Consecrated Images.
BOTH the first scope and most difficult work of Christian Religion concerning
Mankind, is to raise up their Souls from low and gross visible Creatures, to
God himself and all Spiritual Objects. Contrariwise, the main business of
Heathenish Superstitions, was ever observed to consist in depressing Men from
God, and all supercelestial thoughts, down as low as ever they could, to gross
and sensual Idols. This second is the easier Task, because human corrupt Nature
(all good or bad Religions being laid aside) is apt and prone to move
downwards, by the very weight of its Principles. Men naturally do love as
little to look up, or to employ themselves about invisible Matters, as to gaze
at random on emty Air: and being guided only by their Senses, it is exceeding
hard for them to take any other way, but toward what they see and touch. Hence
Rome has taken the advantage to fit her own Religion from what true
Christianity prescribes, to what sensual Men can or will do. For as to what
they can; if to love God with all their hearts, and to adore him in Spirit, be
much above their Moral strength; to bow passing by an Altar, or to sprinkle
themselves with Holy Water, or to stand or kneel demurely at the lifting up of
a Wafer, are such acts of Devotion, as any one, who has but some health, and
the natural use of his Members, has sufficient ability to perform. And as to
what they affect, although all spiritual Exercises and mental Elevations, be to
them unpleasing; and all pure and eternal Objects very far above their sight,
and farther yet above their care; yet they will kiss a Crucifix, salute a
Cross, carry most devoutly a Scapulary, an Agnus, or a set of Beads about them:
and these and other like Devotions, as I have showed in many Instances, go far
in the Roman Account. And as to the great Zeal and Passion which the Gospel of
Christ requires, tho few Men can force themselves so much, as patiently to hear
one Preaching upon any Essential Article of the Christian Faith; yet all of
their own accord, especially upon certain days, will throng both to see and to
worship St. Paul's Head, or St. Peter's Tooth. And without any great teaching,
Men learn presently any where, what most Israelites learned in Egypt; when they
care little for God or for Moses, whom they see not, they will gape and run
lustily after the Calf, or any thing which they can see. Thus evidently, Let us
make Gods to go before us, is the most corrupt natural wish, and the most
universal Religion of all Mankind. To this purpose, the Holy Fathers have
observed this Enchantment in Images, that the very Men that should best know
what stuff these Idols are made of, yet will stand in some S. August. Epist.
49. Quaest. 3.
awe of them, when they see them bravely seated over the Heads of a multitude;
and that either such is the Charm of these dead figures Idem in Psalm. 113.
Conc. 2.
, to make Men's Souls stoop unto them; or the natural weakness of Men, to let
themselves stoop to these shapes; that the very Men who see the Sun, and
believe it to be their God, will turn Ibidem.
their back to their own God, and turn their Face to his Image. The truth is,
carnal Worshippers, such as naturally all Men are, are all for present carnal
Objects: and if these have also human shapes, in St. Augustins Judgment, this
likeness becomes to them so great a Charm, that, as the same Father observes,
Men shall not be discouraged from following after Images, by seeing them both
Deaf, Blind, and Dumb, but will take them for friendly Gods, because they see
them have Ears, Eyes, and Mouths. Whatever this Reason be worth, this
Experience is most certain, that, the People of God excepted, all the World
besides has bin drawn to their respective Religions, by the help of these
gross Images: and if by chance, any Temple or Nation happened to have none,
that is observed by most Historians as extraordinary and singular. All the
Provinces of China, however full as they say of Teachers, who think of God,
much above all what an Image can represent; yet never draw up their Trained
Bands to any Religious solemn purpose, but still march with such Standards; and
the true Israel of God, and the Primitive Church of Christ, are the only two
Societies that both had not, and detested Image Worship. Not to speak of the
Israelites according to the Flesh, of which there is no question, the Church of
Christ, as well at Rome as every where else has, for above six hundred Years
after her first Institution, best lived, and best served her Savior without
Images, as to any Worshipping account. If there were Images at all to be seen
among Christians, during the three first and most Virgin Centuries, they were
either kept useless in private hands, or used by the Followers of Simon the
Iren. l. 1. c. 23.
Magician, Carpocrates Ibid. c. 24.
, and such Infamous Heretics: and if by any Christians, it was by such weak
Superstitious ones, as in S. Augustins Augustine. de Consens. Evangel. l. 1. c.
9.
Judgment deserved well to be deceived, for their offering to learn Christian
and Apostolical Faith from painted Walls. When first Images crept into
Churches, which was about the sixth Century, it was on a civil account, either
as Ornaments of Christian Temples, or as Memorials of Holy Stories. Pope
Gregory the first, and the first Patron of Images, Gregorins Magn. supr.
never pleaded farther then this against Serenus for his Clients, which stood
200 Years in this posture; till the second Nicene Council, with much
opposition, and more scandal, advanced them a step higher. Then soon after came
the ninth Century, noted by all for the worst, the saddest, and the ignorantest
Age of the Church, which drowned the Gospel with Popery, and which, as their
best Authors Baronius, an 900. n. 1.
confess, began in good earnest to set up the Abominable Desolation foretold by
Dan. 9. in the Roman Church. And so Images had a fair opportunity to come in,
when both the Holy Scriptures were kept unknown, under the Bushel of Ignorance:
and when all other things were managed by new Revelations and new Miracles.
Here I do not undertake to show, how far Roman Images lead worshippers into the
way of plain Pagan Idolatry; since able men have done it before. But what is
proper to my purpose, and is not so generally known; I will insist 1. upon
their Roman Original. Secondly, upon their use among Papists. Thirdly, and most
principally, upon what good, or bad accounts, Roman Images are grown so lovely
and so taking.

1. First, as to the Original of Roman Images, it imitates that of Roman
Relics. So the Papists have them two ways; for some are made by the Roman
Church; others have an unknown Extraction, as being supposed either made by
some Saint; or brought down from Heaven by Angels; or however found out one way
or other by some extraordinary Providence. The Images made by the Roman Church,
are made this way; the Carpenter cuts down a Tree, or the Mason digs out a
Stone: then a Carver works this Stone, or Tree into an Image: and the
Mass-Bishop consecrates both, into a Saint, or a Virgin, or a Crucifix. In the
joint labor and concurrence of these three Craftsmen; the first finds the
Materials: the second adds the shape and Figure: and the third, that is the
Mass Bishop, puts in the Essential form, the very Soul; and by his powerful
Consecration introduces it into the Body of the Image, in this manner.

When the Church wants a Crucifix, the Bishop puts off his Miter; and in a
pretty long Office, declares or explains to God, what he would have, that is,
what it is that he has a mind to set up; namely Singular Signum, Pontifical.
Romans sect. De Benedict. Nov. Crucis.
a special Standard, which by a special Blessing may be a saving help to
Mankind; a supporter to Faith; a Means of Proficiency in good works; a
Redeeming Instrument for Souls; and both in the Town, and in the Field a
protecting Shelter against all Enemies, whenever a good Catholic shall come,
and humbly kneel before it. If the Crucifix be made of some better matter then
common Wood, as of some fine Stone, Brass, or Silver; it is intended and prayed
for, that by the Merits of this Crucifix, all devout Worshippers may be
cleansed from all their sins, as the world was by the Holiness of Christ's
Cross. In order to these great Designs, the Bishop makes use of Holy Water; not
such ordinary holy water, as Mass Priests make every Sunday, for every body to
keep off Devils and Diseases: nor such, tho nobler, as is used at every
Christening of Children: but that noblest sort of holy water, which a Pope,
Layman. l. 5. tract^t. 9. c. 13. n. 12.
or a Bishop only can make, to consecrate Altars and Churches; with this
admirable Water, I say, the Bishop washes and Hallows the Cross; next he takes
Fire and Frankincense (a Drug able in their judgment after it has had three
crossed Blessings, to cure all manner of Diseases, and to drive away all manner
of Devils, if they but smell the Smoke of it) and perfumes it well with the
vapor; and both in the Name of the Trinity, and the virtue of three Crossings,
he commands the Grace of the true Cross, where Christ had once his holy
Members, to come and rest on the Crucifix, to this effect, that whosoever will
bow before it, may thereby find a sure Relief, both for his Body, and his Soul.
For conclusion, the Mass Bishop devoutly Pontifical. Romans supra.
kneels before this his new Crucifix, and both adores and kisses it: so do all
other Catholics in their greatest Devotions, specially in time of Distress: and
so all may, if Crucifixes be such helpers.

All other Images, especially that Pontif. Romans de Bened. Imag. B. M.
of our Lady, are consecrated in the same way, with the same noblest holy
water, and the burning of Incense; only they have this special Prayer more; to
wit, that God Ibid. Item sect. Bened. Imag. aliorum. S. S.
Almighty would be pleased so to sanctify the said Images, that whosoever
shall pray before them, may never want the Mediation and Intercession of that
Saint, who owns the Image, to promote all what he prays for. Where by the bie
you may discern Blasphemy and Impertinence coupled together; A Blasphemy, in
calling upon God to bless that which in his service he so professedly curses
and detests; and the Impertinency, in praying Backward and forward; forward to
God, to move or get his Saints to mediate: and backward to move or get their
God to the hearing of all the Requests, that shall be made before their Image.
A Mathematical Device indeed an Image is (and who would not have such an
Instrument) to turn God down to any Saint: and to turn up any Saint to God; and
both God and Saints, to what one says, when he kneels before that Figure.

To spare Gods Name out of the Case, (for it is both a most fearful boldness to
go to God for a Blessing upon what he hates and condemns, and a most desperate
folly, to believe that He will grant it) a very Child might see both in the
drift, and the manner of these Consecrations, that the main design of Images is
not, to set up Resemblances or Memorials (as Pope Gregory Regist. l. 9. Epist.
9.
said to Serenus) where unlearned People might see, what they could not read;
but to contrive such kind of Engines, wherewith Christians might call in and
presentiate their Saints, as the Pagans had to call in their Gods. For Holy
water, and Frankincense are quite extrinsecal, you know, and impertinent as to
the procuring of representation, and likeness: but they may perhaps conduce
much to making and procuring such a neat and sweet Abode, as both in the
Papists and Pagans opinion, might invite to it a great Saint. But if you will
go to the practice; the common use made of Images shall tell you most plainly,
what is the true end that they are made for. No Worshipper goes to Lauretto, to
S. Denis, to S. Michael, etc. there to learn and read upon Images the Face, or
the Mine of such Saints: nor would he think it worth the trouble and the
charges of a long Journey, to go so far merely to instruct himself more fully,
whether our Lady has an Aquiline Nose; or whether S. Michael has wings in his
back; or S. Francis, a deep long Hood, or S. Dominic, a bald Pate: the main
Motive, that drives Pilgrims to those Churches, where Images are, is to find,
not the Resemblance, but the very Presence of the Saint. So when they say, as
they may truly, that these Images are consecrated to represent Saints; it is in
a much higher sense, then when we say, that Pictures do represent Faces; for it
is also, (and chiefly too) as when we say, that Ambassadors and Nuncios
represent Kings, and Bellar. De Imaginib. l. 2 c. 20. sect. 3. Distinctio.
Roman Popes; and upon this account it is that if you chance to misuse the
Image, thereby you do misuse the Saint as really, as they did whip Henry the
great, whosoever whipped stout du Perron, representing at Rome that Kings Person.
Contrariwise, kneeling, praying, and bowing before the Image, thereby you
kneel, and pray, and bow as really before the Saint, as our Kings under Popery
did submit all to his Holiness, when they did it to his Legates: or as poor
Frederic the Emperor thought really to put his Neck under the Feet of S. Peter
himself, when he put it under the Popes. Thus are Images set up in Churches
with a twofold Capacity; the one, as formal Representatives to be served with
all the Worship, Prayers, Masses, burning Lamps, consecrated Tapers, and
Candles, and all such other Formalities, as the very Saints can be served with:
and the other, as Sacred Seats of their assisting Presence and Power (Divum
Numen) so that whenever you touch or pray to the Image, this must be don as
with the same Devotion, so with the same hope of Relief, as if you did touch
and pray personally and immediately to the very he or she Saints themselves:
the Images in such occasions being joined, Ibid. c. 23. sect. Quod autem.
as they say, or even identified with the Saints, and the Saints clothed, with
their Images.

Now, how Saints, and Images come to be so nearly related, and concerned one
with another, is a Mystery, that goes beyond any Christian Apprehension. When
Princes allow or resent what is don to their Ambassadors, ill or Good, as don
to themselves; it is because they out of their own pleasure, have chosen and sent
them abroad as their own Representatives: and if they concern themselves in the
wrong don to their Statues, as the Emperor Theodosius once, which Bellarmin
Bellar. De Imag. l. 2. c. 12. sect. Theodosius.
stands much upon; it is because they did set them up as Roial Marks of their
Sovereignty: And if God would have those Israelites that had bin bitten by
Serpents, to look up toward the Brazen Figure of a Serpent in the Desert; or in
their public services to turn their Faces toward the Ark; as now Christ will
have Christians come with reverence to his Table; it is because God for certain
Reasons, Typical, and proper to the Law, had ordained those Ceremonies, as now
Christ under the Gospel has ordained his Sacraments. But what is all this to
this Roman purpose? and for Gods sake what is the connection between Gods
Saints, and Romes Images? First did ever any one of Gods Saints, express any
desire of being served, or prayed unto, after his death? Secondly, suppose this
untruth, that they did? have they declared in what, and by what sort of
Representatives they would be served at a distance? Can any Papist show, that
the Virgin ever cared more for Images, then God does, who abhors them? And
should we not suspect those Saints, if by chance were found any such, who had
any love for that worship, which in all the times of true Saints, none but
Devils were pleased with? And if for any thing that we can certainly tell, the
Saints of God are altogether strangers to Images; why should we think
Image Worship to be so dear, and so Charming a Service to Saints? and therefore
when the Mass Bishop prays, and believes after his Prayer, that all Blessings
may and do light on them, who bow or kneel before an Image or a Crucifix; can
he not pray and believe as well, that they may and do light on them, who to the
great honor of those Saints either whip a Top about a Room, or drink claret in
a Tavern? Since these last ways of Worshipping, are not more destitute of Gods
word, and Institution then those: and those more unlawful, and more expressly
forbidden in all holy writings then these. And so much of the first known
Original of made and consecrated Images.

2. There is a second sort of Roman Images, which need no Consecration; being,
as it is thought, sufficiently consecrated, either by the hand that made them,
or by some other extraordinary Extraction. Such are,

1. That Image, which Christ, as they say, made of himself, when King Abagarus
sent him a letter, and a Painter, Joh Damase. De Fide Orthod. l. 4. c. De
Imaginib.
who being not able to look Him in the Face, much less to draw well his
Picture, because of the Glorious light which dazzled his Eyes; Christ, says the
Romancer, took his own Cloak, and by applying it to his Face, took a perfect
Copy of it, and sent it to Abagarus. But long before Images were used in the
Roman Church, Pope Gelasius accounting this pretended Gelas. Conc. Romans Decret.
de Libris Apocryph.
letter to be false: it is much, the story of the Painter, and of the Picture
can be true.

2. You have another Image of the same worth, and of the same Impression, which
Christ, as they say, gave to Berenice, called otherwise Veronica. The story
goes, that this woman gave a Handkerchief, wherewith he wiped off the Sweat and
Blood, which was on his Face; and thus his Resemblance stuck to the Cloth; and
it is this which at this day is both so solemnly showed, and so devoutly adored
at Rome; and you have to this purpose the whole legend Baron. An. 34. n. 139.
carefully kept in the Vatican.

3. To these may be added that wonderful Image, which they call, Caes. Raspon.
l. 4. c. 19.
made without hand; which Catholics keep, and adore at Rome in the Chapel of
S. Laurence.

4. All those Images which of late times are supposed to have bin either made
by God himself, or however brought down by his Angels. Witness that fine
Picture of the Virgin, Balinghem Calend. B. M. 27. Maii.
wrought curiously in a Saphir stone, with her Baby on her left Arm, which Pope
John saw first in the Sky, and then all the Bells of the Town rung of
themselves, while the Angels put it in his hand. Witness another brave Image,
which two Frenchmen being in Prison, found in Chronic. Deip. an. 1100.
a night made to their hand, when the evening before they were thinking how to
make one. Witness that other more glorious one, at Tungres, Pyraeus. Tripl.
Coron. Tract. 1. c. 12.
which the Angels left in a Garden. If you ask what good it did there; they
will tell you, how coming down, it turned the Night into a bright day: and
cured the Earl, who owned the Ground where it was left, from an inveterate
blindness. Witness that other Miraculous Image near Florence, which the
Archang. Gian de Initio Ordin. Servitarum.
Painter thinking to make, found in the Morning made to his hand, and to all
the Worlds amazement.

5. All the Images, which at this day are believed to have bin made by St.
Lukes hand, both of our * Lord, and our Lady, and given Sim. Metaphr. in vita
Lucae.
away to his Friends, and so dispersed Niceph. Catist. Eccl. Hist. l. 2. c. 43.
over the World. Some think that St. Luke made them of Wax; others, that he did
it in Colors; but take it either way you please, he is as like to have bin a
Plaisterer as a Painter; and both, as either of the two. Some are so curious,
Bened. Gonon. Chronic. an. 33.
as to enquire both after the places and the time, where and when he handled
the Brush: and so they find, that in the last Year of Christ's Life he made two
fine ones; at Malta three, and in two Years at Rome many more: one of them with
a Ring in the hand, is, they say, at St. Mary's seated over the high Altar,
just in that place where his Chamber was, when he made it; another at the
greater St. Mary's, S. Maria major, which Pope Gregory had about him, when
there he stopped the raging Plague: another, the most Bovius Tom. 16. an. 1433.
miraculous of all, which came from Constantinople, and now is adored in Mont
Guardia in Italy. It is a great pity, and a greater wonder, that these Images
were yet unknown to all the Churches in the World about 800 Years at the least,
when the second Council of Nice met together to set up Image Worship. For if
these Fathers had had the least hint that St. Luke had bin a Painter, and that
the Virgin Mary had blessed some Benedict. Gonon. supra.
of his Pictures, they might have left abusing and even profaning holy
Scriptures, to introduce their strange Worship: this one Precedent of St. Lukes
Preaching the Gospel one day, and the next Morning Painting Images, had bin (if
true and known to be so) a ground more then sufficient both to confound their
Adversaries, whom they called Breakers of Images; and to justify upon some
probability, what they offered to say as the Papists do now, upon a mere
account of boldness, that the ancient Tradition of the Catholic Church stood
for Images. Therefore since they did allege nothing of such a visible
Importance for their own Cause, it is a Demonstration they did not know it; and
that S. Lukes skill either in Painting, or in Sculpture, was not yet so much as
heard of, no more then all his Images which it seems were kept in the dark, and
as it were under the heap of those thousands which durst not appear abroad,
till far worse times.

6. For the greatest part of those Images, which now the Papists set up and
adore on their Altars, sprung and started up from under ground in the darkest
times of the Church, like so many Toadstools and Mushroms in a foggy Night.
Such is that Marble Statue of Christ, which was so long Cardim. Kastpon. l. 1.
c. 14.
unregarded, sine Cultu, under a Porch, and now is so bravely set up and adored
for its Miracles in the Lateran Church. Such is that old rotten piece of
Timber, which the Sacrist of S. Roman thought only good to burn, and to bake
his Mass-wafers with, till it cried out, Bovius Annal. Tom. 19. an. 1513.
What thou Villain, do thou not fear the Queen of Heaven? Not to speak of
that which Baronius. an. 57. n. 112.
Baronius says he has seen at Rome, Images dug out of Churchyards, to the
great amazement of the Romans; such is (and of a deeper Extraction) that
Archang. Gian. Cent. 3. Annal. Servit. l. 5. c. 13.
Stone-Image, which the strength and swelling of Water bubled up once by Night
from the bottom of a deep Well upon dry ground, and which now they do worship
under the notion of that Stone that our Savior, they say, stood upon by Jacobs
Well. Of the like worth and extraction are all those miraculous Images, which,
they say, were found by poor Herds-men, some among Thorns, where their Cattle
Pyraeus. Coron. B. M. Tract. 1 c. 12.
would be still feeding; some upon the tops of Mountains, where Ibid.
Grass grew faster then it was eaten; some within deep holes under ground,
above which Cows did die Bovius Annal. Tom. 14. an. 1313.
and rise again; some under good arable Fields, where the best Astolf. Hist.
Universe. Imag. B. M. l. 10.
Oxen could not draw the Plough. Others have bin found by Shepherds, some in
Chronic. Deip. an. 1620.
Valleys full of fine Flowers just at Christmas; some among Thorns Franc
Hierasc. in vita Hen. Sylv.
where those Images did cry for help; some among Nettles, working Trithem. l.
2. de Miracal. B. V. Viteciti.
Miracles among an unexpected Flock of Pilgrims. Poor Colliers have Balinghem.
Calend. B. M. 19. Maii.
had the grace also of finding some among old Woods: Therefore it is no great
wonder, if Hunters having lost the Hare, met with some, Chronic. Deip. an. 1150.
hard by dangerous Clifts, and Precipices. Eremites have bin sometimes Inspired
to go and to take up some Gonon. de Patrib. Occident. in vita S. Manion. Oniez.
out of hollow Trees; and some out Niceph. Eccl. Hist. l. 14. c. 46.
of the thick boughs of a Cypress. The 38 Knights of Navar have their Noble
Order from those fine Images, which were found by Pyraeus supra.
Night growing upon the Stalks of white Lilies. As for old doting Lipsius, he
found his two dear Just. Lipsius. Diva Hallens. and Diva Aspericol.
Goddesses in no better place then an old Oak. But what a thrice happy
Rencounter was it, to find three Stone Images at once in the Bowels Michael
Pius de Viris Illust. Ordin. Praedic.
of a dead Woman? The first was the Queen of Heaven, with a Golden Diadem about
her Head; the second was little Jesus, lying between two Beasts in a Manger;
and the third was old Saint Joseph, with a Dominican Virgin at his Feet.

These, and all such Images, were not known to; and if known, had bin detested
by all Primitive Antiquity, as to any Religious use. If you read in Tertullian
Tertull. de Pudicitia.
, of the Figure of a Shepherd carrying a Lamb on his shoulders; that Figure was
in the bottom of a Cup, no fit place to worship Images in. If Eusebius tells
you of a Statue Eusebius. Histor. Eccl. l. 7. c. 18.
of Christ, and a Woman kneeling before him; he tells you withal, that it was
not seated in a Church, and that it had bin made and placed where it stood,
both by an Heathen Woman, and after an Heathenish custom. What Bellarmin
Bellarm. de Imag. l. 2. c. 9.
is pleased to bring both out of S. Nazianzen, and S. Basil, is on my certain
knowledge either a very weak mistake, ill becoming a good Scholar; or a most
perfect lie, worse becoming an honest Man. St. Epiphanius came many Years after
those two, and yet Images were to him so strange, when seated in a place of
Worship, that when by chance in his Travels he found one in a Country Church,
he presently tore it to pieces, and desired the Bishop of that Diocese to look
better to such Abuses. St. Jerome, whom the Papists take for their first Roman
Cardinal, liked so well both the Admonition and the Censure, that he put in
Latin the Greek Epistle which contains both. St. Augustine, somewhat junior to
St. Jerome, declares abundantly, in the place which I have already cited out of
him, how he thought this use of Jmages both dangerous and unlawful.

But after those great Lights were out, Pictures came to be more frequent, and
to be ushered into public Places, upon this double civil account, both of being
a kind of Instruction to Ignorants, and a considerable Ornament to Walls; a
most lawful use certainly, as long as it could be kept harmless: and harmless
also in it self, when made use of in times and places, and among Men not likely
to misapply such things. Images stood upon this foot some hundred Years (as yet
they are among the Lutherans) till the Empress Irene, who, after she had
blinded her Son (an usual Cruelty in those days) blinded both her self, and
some hundreds of her Bishops (the Pope of Rome was one of them) in a worse and
more Spiritual way. For in a great Meeting of her Clergy, now called the second
Nicene Council, she brought out these Images, from their civil Historical and
harmless use, to a downright Image worship; and made, as well she might, most
of her ignorant Subjects as generally Idolaters, in the account of other
Councils, and of the Truth it self, as the Emperor Constantius had before her
made them Arrians. Ever since those days, things grew worse and worse, until
at last both Christian Estates, and Churches, fall into such a general and
horrible Disorder, as made most sober Men to cry out, That the Matthew.
Parisiensis. Additam.
Antichrist was surely coming, and that the World could not last long. This
thick Darkness having put out all Light and true knowledge of the Gospel,
proved to be a most fruitful Womb for all new upstart Saints and Images; and
the Black, Gray, and White Friars, Midwived them out so dexterously, with their
Revelations and Miracles, that the Original of whole thousands, I mean of these
Saints and Images, is among their very Worshippers at this day, either as
unknown or uncertain, as the breeding of Romulus was, whether of a Wolf or a
Whore; whether of seducing of Spirits, or pitifully seduced Monks. Only this
you have for certain, as I have showed by some Instances, that these Monks
found out their Images, where the Prophet fore-tells that the Babylonians
should throw their gods, among Bats, and Moles under ground: and hence pulling
them up as fast as the present occasions required, out of their Holes, and, as
the Crocodiles were out of the Mud, both had the same good luck; these in
Egypt, and those at Rome, to be preferred to Temples and Churches.

Now, what holy use and purpose these Venerable Images stand in Chapels and
Churches for, appears upon a double account. 1. Of the great Honor they
receive. 2. And of the great Blessings which they are thought commonly to
procure.

As to the first account, I may the better speak of the great Honors done to
Images, because I understood those Mysteries, as much by sight, as by reading.
The Image, that of our Lady, for example, whether found by a poor Shepherd
under a Tree, or brought and bought by a Pilgrim in the Holy Land, is set up
over the Altar, which in their account is no less then the Tribunal and Throne
of Christ. Lamps and Tapers burn before it; and if great Churches are often
built from the very ground in their behalf, it is no wonder if Mass-Priests,
and other Officers, are kept also to attend their immediate Service. At your
coming into the Church, the first Object you bow before, is the High Altar and
this Image; next, if you be well disposed, a Holy fear and trembling Lipsius.
Diva Hallens.
seises on you, as when Jacob saw Heaven opened, Tursel. Histor. Lauret. l. 2.
c. 6.
and said, How dreadful is this place, etc. And Men, as they say, Idem l. 1. c.
6.
can never feel a greater apprehension of the very Presence of God (praesentius
Dei Numen) then when they appear in that place. If you come nearer, look what
you do; for many have bin sore plagued for not behaving themselves as they
should. Witness that wretched Jew at Rome, whose Face was turned back to his
Neck Jov. in Epitom. l. 21.
, and so stood ever after, because he had not looked reverently enough to the
Image. Witness the Painter Oliver. de Miracul. B. M. Montser.
, who lost his sight for three whole Months, because under the pretense of
mending, he had rashly touched with his Brush, the Lady of Montserat in the
Face. And take you here for a good warning, that sign of Indignation against
the Scholars of Doway, when a very Statue of Stone did stretch Chronic. Deip.
an. 1563.
out her hand against them, because they played where they should kneel. So the
Roman and surer way is for Worshippers, when they come near (and for Pilgrims
at any distance, where first they can but see any part of the Steeple of the
Church) looking up devoutly on the Image, to pour out to the Lady their Heart
and Soul with a Salutation, Ave Maria, etc. or with some other Prayer, as Salve
Regina, etc. O Intemerata, etc. or a Pater noster; that is, to say Our Father,
to our good Lady: for grave Doctors approve of this seeming Absurdity. If the
Image be the Veronic, that is, that wonderful Copy which our Savior left of his
Face, when he wiped it with a Handkerchief, you must look the Image in the
Face, and say to it or her, Salve Sancta facies, etc. I worship thee, O thou
holy Face, make me clean of all my sins. O thou happy Figure, lead up to
Heaven, there to see the pure Face of Christ: Be thou to us a safe shelter,
asweet Comfort, etc. If it be that other Image of Christ, when he was just 33
Years old, which, they say, was made Caes. Raspon. l. 4. c. 19. page 369.
by St. Luke at the earnest desire of his Mother, and since improved and
perfected by some Angels, because this same Image is upon good experience
believed to be, tutissimum Ibid page 374.
Propitiatorium, both a most sure Seat of Mercy, and an infallible Instrument
to procure it; you must, especially upon solemn days, proceed with more
Formality. At the first opening of the place where it is kept, serve the Image
with this Prayer, Salvator Ibid. p. 383, 384.
Mundi, etc. O Savior of the World, save us all thy poor Servants, and grant us
all, that by the Merits of the two John's, the Baptist, and the Evangelist, we
may appear guiltless before thee. Moreover, serve it with a yet greater Pomp,
when carried in Procession to the other Image of St. Lukes making, at S. Maria
major. There its Tabernacle is adorned with Ibid. p. 375.
very rich Tapistry, rich Garpets and Cushions, Deorum Pulvinaria (both for the
Holy Image to lie, and for the devout Worshippers to kneel upon) which cover
the Seats and the Ground; there Bened. Canonic. S. Petr. ap Raspon.
the Pope and his Cardinals must approach upon their bare Feet, kneel seven
times, or at the least make seven bowings, facit septem Genua, and so kiss the
Feet of the Lord; that is, of this said Image. Then all sing the Te Deum (as
well they may if this Image be the Lord indeed) We praise thee, O God, we
acknowledge thee to be the Lord. Among all these Divine Honors the Cardinals
take up the Image, and 24 great Lights marching before, and the best Roman
Nobility coming after; they carry it from S. Laurence, through all those
streets, where they say the evil Spirits were used to plague and infest Rome,
to the other Image at St. Mary's, which as they say was also made by the same
Painter. These two Images being together, are so well pleased with their
meeting, and with the Divine Honors which attend it, that (as it is confidently
Petr. Abbas Cluniac. Miracul l. 2. c. 30. Caesar Raspon. l. 4. c. 19.
believed by People, who mistrust nothing but the Word of God in the Scripture)
all that Night they do most miraculously either provide or multiply more Wax,
then all the Lights or Flames can burn: so that in the Morning all the Tapers
and Candles being weighed, prove oftentimes much heavier then they were, when
lighted the Eve before. All this service is very little to what another Image
of our Lady was used to receive near Tungres. This Image for two Days and
Nights, namely every Monday and Tuesday in Easter Week, is (or at least was
before the Protestants came to disturb Devotion) adored after this manner. As
soon as this Sacred Image has bin brought out with Divine Hymns and Paschal
Songs, from its Chapel into the midst of the great Church, Henr. Sedulius. de
Virgin. Mosae Traject. c. 21.
whole thousands of People fall to their Prayers about it; and in that huge
thronging, thrice happy is that devout Soul, that can creep under, or somewhat
near to worship it. In the solemn Procession, which is a considerable long way,
the People are marshalled into an Army. First, march as it were in the Van,
whole Regiments of Men and Women, girded about with the long Ropes of St.
Francis: After them, other Troops follow, of Men, Women, and Children together,
running both forward and backward all barefooted, and in Drawers, with lighted
Candles in their hands: After them quite naked Bodies, laden with Iron Armors
and Chains, and in that cruel Equipage, crawling on their Knees most part of
the way: Then come another Train of People, whose Order and Confraternity is,
as the Jesuits do teach them, to scourge themselves; the very Nurses, with
their poor Babes; and old Wives, not being able to crawle, are carried upon
little Beds, rather, then to lose the Blessing that does attend as they think,
their appearing before the Image. Close before it, and after these march both
the Order of St. Francis, singing Praises, and Benedicta es, etc. to the
Goddess; and other Officers with Torches. At last comes the Goddess her self,
being carried upon the shoulders of the best and noblest Virgins, which the
Country can afford. Next to them follows the Troop of true Penitents wishing no
more, but that the good Image may see their unfeigned Contrition, in their poor
Members torn, as they are, and bleeding most pitifully, under the hard weight
of their Chains. Then follow the Magistracy; the Lieutenants, and Nobles of the
Country, who bear up the consecrate Host under a brave Silk Canopy, being
followed in the Rear with Multitudes of all conditions. Yet after this long
Procession is gone and come, the Zeal and Devotion is not over; for during
eight days and nights more, the People will run to and fro upon the Track,
which they guess the Holy Image was carried over: thus to gather up the
Blessings, which they hope the good Lady has scattered in that way. Now call
you this Devotion, as you please, whether Duly, or Hyperduly, or Indirect, or
Reductive, or Reflected, or Anogogical worship, which is bestowed on such
Images; and puzle into Idolatry poor ignorant Souls, with what words and
distinctions you think fittest; this worship is for certain so great, that none
so great was ever so visibly bestowed on Christ: and if all Gods Saints should
appear, no greater could be bestowed on God himself.

2. As to the other use of Images, which consists in procuring Graces; you may
be sure that the Blessings, and Advantages both spiritual, and temporal, which
the worshipper expects from them, are at the least both as numerous, and as
great, as the Devotions which he bestows. I could tell of hundreds of Images
adored here and there by Papists, which are more regarded and trusted to, then
ever was the Image of Pallas at Troy; or that of Diana at Ephesus, or any one
of the greatest Pagan God any where else. When Turks prevail on Christians, as
when they infested Negro Pont; or if Rome her self be sore distressed, as when
once Aistulphus came to take it; His Holiness Paul the second's best Refuge was
to supplicate the Image of Raspon. lib. 4. c. 19. page 374.
Christ, Effigiem Salvatoris, and to carry it about a Church in a solemn
Procession. Pope Stephen the third showed himself yet more devout in the same
way, as being concerned nearer home; for Ibid. page 375.376.
he walked upon his bare feet, and carried the Image on his own Shoulders; the
Covenants which had bin broken by the Enemies hanging upon a Cross before it,
that it or she might better see, and upon the sight be more sensible of the
wrong don. So by this means, says my Author, (and with the help of the French
too) Aistulphus his Forces were soon routed, and Romes honor and Interest kept
safe. But if in the most desperate necessity you will apply yourself to both
Images; there is no furer way, Ibid.
says the same Cardinal, in the whole world, of attaining the Peace of Heaven,
and the greatest Mercies of God. It were a long tedious work, to relate here
the hundredth part of great Blessings, and both public and private
Deliverances, that Roman Images have bin, and still are admirable for, when
devoutly served and adored. It was with carrying Images about, that Rome the
Mother and Nurse of Images, was once Antonin. 4. part. t. 15. c. 24.
freed from a raging Plague, Health and pureness of wholesome Air following the
Procession most visibly: Witness the Pope, who both saw the Angel sheathing his
Sword over the Castle of S. Angelo, and heard a Troop of other Angels,
applauding the Queen of Heaven, when her Image made by S. Luke was so
processionally followed about. It was by setting up, and worshipping of an
Image, whereof no notice was taken before, that in the year 1570. another such
most Hierascus in vita Sylv.
fearful Plague, was suddenly stopped at Padua; and lest you should take this for
a chance, or for a religious mistake; the Virgin her self appeared to some holy
men, at the same time, and assured them, it should be so. What shall I say of
the Images at Chronic. Deip. an. 1529.
Bayeux, Caesarius. Dialog l. 7. c. 2.
Montpellier, and Chronic. Deip. an. 1529.
Sens, which constantly, they say, cure all Diseases, and ease the poor
Physicians of all practice? Ask the Mass Priests of Lauretta, Monserrat,
Florence, S. Denis, Compostella, Ardilliers, Halls, Tungres, and thousand like
Places, whether they know any sickness too hard and desperate for their Saints,
when prayed and adored at their Images. No Tongue so perfectly Manuus. Histor.
Rev. Memorab. c. 86.
cut off, no Breasts Tursel. Lauret. Histor. l. 2. c. 18.
so cruelly run through, no Bodies Ibid.
so quite unbowelled, and emtied of their Entrails, but the praying before an
Image, or even bowing at a distance to a Saint, which the Image stands for,
shall restore, and make all whole again. But in the wars, and great Conquests,
their Images show best what they are. For as Images carried about, so it be
with devotion, will in time of need both bring in Villan. l. 4. c. 6.
showers, and keep off Ciaccon. in Paul 2.
Storms: so will they now and then defend Towns, and drive away Enemies.
Witness the often mentioned defeat of the poor English men Chronic. Deip. an
1200.
at Poitiers, when the Ladies Image had the keys: Witness also the fearful
Cloud, whence Angels broke out against the Tartars, as soon Id. an. 1385.
as they had hurt an Image. They say that the Emperor Heraclius with two
Images, which were carried always Baron an 622.
before him, defeated once the Persians, whom the Romans could never beat. The
brave Emperor Comnenus with the same conquering Machins did no less Nicetas ap.
Baron. an. 1123. n. 617.
against the Tartars: and so he publicly professed, what he owed this Victory
to, when he set both these Images in his triumphing Chariot, and walked by them
himself a foot. A considerable Part of the East Indies is said to have bin
conquered this same way. Witness the great Island Cuba, where one of their
petty Kings is thought to have won great Battles, Cartagena De Mirand. Deip.
sect. 70.
because he kept among his Captives, one, who wore still about his Neck a small
Image of the Virgin. Many hundred years before him, old King Arthur most
successfully used the same Devise: for he had still a shield most curiously
painted with the Image of the same Saint, Gononus Chronic. an. 640.
which revived his Spirits and strength, whenever he found himself fainting.
And doubtless this is the reason, why S. Lewis, when tired with hunting, or
otherwise distressed, used to alight, and to hang Eened. Gonon. Chronic. an. 815.
an Image, which he carried still about him, to the first Tree he met with, and
there kneeling and praying to it, had presently what he wanted: and it is
believed that by this Means he recovered his Estate, which his Children had
taken from him, when they kept him close in a Cloister.

3. Now, which is the third, and the last, and the most considerable Point to
examine; what is or may be the matter in or about all these Images, which can
procure these quick Returns, and herewith, upon all occasions, temt men to pray
and worship them, is more then the Roman worshippers can or dare distinctly
tell.

All that you find in an Image, must come to some of these three Things. 1. The
substance that it is made off. 2. The outward Bellarm. de Imag. l. 2. c. 21.
sect. Quarto, in
Shape or Resemblance, that makes it in men's conceit the Image of such an
Angel, or such a Saint. 3. The Consecration, that makes it a holy Image.

As to the first, the matter or substance it self, to wit Marble, Brass, or
Silver, etc. can do no more, then to make the Image more or less fine, rich and
costly: and tho it were a Saint Christopher (that is a huge great statue, like
a Giant, which stands in most of their Churches) of Massy Gold; it might draw
men to admire the Price, but not the virtue of the Image. For when Images are
consecrated, it is not as in the case of Mass-wafers, which in five words are
presently transubstantiated from what they were; the Marble or Brass or any
substance whatsoever remains still the same: and thus far Pagans and Papists
may be equally credited, when, whatsoever their worshipping be, they solemnly
disown Gold, Wood or Stone, for being either their Saints, or their Gods.

The second considerable thing in an Image, is the outward form and figure
intended to represent either among the Pagans a God, or among the Papists a
Saint. Upon this Point, tho Roman Images were so ancient and so happy as to be
undoubtedly acknowledged for Pictures of S. Nicodemus, or S. Luke, or a very
Angels drawing: and tho they should most truly represent the Blessed
Virgins-Face and Features; the utmost they could temt men to by this most exact
Resemblance, were perhaps to go a good way purposely to see and view them: yet
no sober men on such accounts could be temted to worship them, much less to
hope any great matter, from having seen and worshipped them. Figures, Shapes, and
Proportions which make Images like, or unlike, are of themselves, you know as
uneffectual and unactive on other scores, as bare words, Ciphers, or letters
are: and therefore the Resemblances which result from them, can produce no
effect at all, but, as sacred or profane signs may, by some either Divine, or
human Institution. Thus once the Israelites might well hope to keep off the
Destroier, by sprinkling their Lintels with Blood; or to recover their former
health, by looking up toward the Serpent, because God had instituted these two
signs, and had promised such Blessings, if the People did use them so. Thus the
subjects of the ancient Roman Empire might hope, besides the performance of
their Duty, to get the favor of their Princes, by standing about their Statues,
or by their low and civil kneeling, when their first Ministers (as once Joseph
was in Egypt, or Mordecai under Assuerus) chance to pass by; because these
Sovereigns had resolved and declared, it should be so: and because it is in
their power, as to challenge their Peoples Duty, so to dispense their own
Favors, at any time, at any Place, and at any mark, sign, or token, which they
will choose. For tho great Kings cannot appear in their own persons every where;
yet will they some other way appear as Sovereigns, and be acknowledged so every
where: and if any private person, or any unruly Multitude take down what they
were pleased to set up as the Ensigns of their Empire, or of their declared
Pleasure (as they did, who pulled down the Statue of Eudocia, which Bellarmin
Bellar. de Imag. l. 2. c. 12. sect. Theodosius quoque.
is pleased to make a foolish plea for Images) they do affront the Emperors and
Kings themselves.

Now to bring all this home to the Case; 1. Who knows that Roman Images, are
either drawn by a Saint, whom no Scripture says, to have bin a Painter, rather
then by Pilate, or by Simon the Sorcerer, who perhaps Iren. cont. Haeres. l. 1.
c. 20. etc. 24.
were? or drawn so true, as to invite so much as sober Curiosity to look on
them? Is it certain that Christ, or his Mother were just such as they are now
represented, she with a delicate Italian Face; he with the Corpulency of a
Dutch Boy? 2. When there is little to satisfy a curious Eye, is there more for
a pious heart? what Sacred Institution of either Christ, or his Apostles about
Images can either give ground to a due lawful worship, or supply the expected
Blessings, which neither shape, nor likeness can? Did ever any one of Gods
Saints intimate some where in their lives, that they would take it very kindly,
if they were prayed to before Images? and did ever the Virgin promise to any
Body, that she would either come, or send to save Towns and Countries from
plagues and wars, when ever they would set up her Statues? whether of the two
ways is more likely, to bring her to what we desire; the carrying her Pictures
about, or as it has bin successfully don sometimes, the plain Antonin. 2.
part. Tit. 14. c. 2. sect. 3.
threatening her with drowning it? Are the saints come to be of the Devils
mind, who perform most effectually what Magicians enjoin, when they treat
Chaeremon. ap. Eusebius. de Praepar. Ev. l. 4. p. 117.
him with rough Language? If both supplicating and threatening be alike
uncommanded, and impertinent for this Purpose; is the looking toward the Ark,
or the looking up to the Brazen Serpent, which had both a Commandment and a
Promise, so fit a Precedent, as they Bellarm. de Imag. l. 2. c. 12.
pretend, to countenance praying or looking to Images, which for certain had
neither of these? Therefore since neither the Matter, nor the external Form of
Images have any strength, either themselves or of any known help conferred by
God, to enable them toward any manner of work; let us see what the
consecrating of this Matter and Form can do. For if this last can do little, or
nothing in order to those great and extraordinary Operations, which are
attributed to Roman Images, you must needs seek farther for some other both as
great and extraordinary Principles.

The Consecrating of Images, as the Roman Church practices it, may be
considered either as a Prayer, or as an ordinary, or extraordinary Power. If
you take it as a Prayer; 1. What Ground of faith have they for venturing upon
such Prayers? and what Promise, Precept or Precedent for Blessing Images, in
hope of being afterward blessed by them? 2. With what Christian and sober
modesty, can they wish and devise Instruments, which no holy man, or Scripture
ever thought of, to put both God upon hearing, or his Saints upon mediating and
promoting, what we shall pray for, before Images? 3. And as to more special
Blessings, which are looked for at the devout using of these Engines; what silly
fancy is this to call upon God, for making wood, stone or any other materials
that Images are commonly made of, after they have shaped it after their own
way, happy and powerful Instruments to keep houses and Vineyards; to keep off
Hail and Devils; to give women an easy labor; to procure good Husbands to
Maidens; or to kill them who are not so? For I am sure many Images are renowned
and sought after for such Blessings. 4. But what horrible Boldness is this to
conjure God in these consecrating Prayers through his holy Names and Titles in
behalf of such strange Purposes, so far against the ordinary Course of his
Providence, and farther beyond his Promises? And what Returns can they expect
of such faithless sinful Prayers, but Vanity? and if something else, but Gods
wrath and their own Confusion?

If you take this Consecration, as a Power; I pray, when and where appears it,
that God ever bestowed this Power either on his, or the Popes Church? Christ in
the first times of the Church invested both his Apostles, and other Servants
with many great and extraordinary Gifts, for casting out Devils, for curing all
sorts of Diseases, for removing even Mountains; but where, either for enabling
Images, or for the doing either good or harm with Images? They bestowed the
Gifts of the Holy Ghost very often, and as it were of course upon Believers at
their Baptism; but when and where upon Marbles, or curiously wrought Pieces of
Timber at their Consecration? Where and when did they consecrate Pictures, to
sink Ships, to rout Armies, to raise storms, and thunders, and Hails, as Roman
Images will do sometimes? When the blessed Apostles, with the laying on of
their hands, could endue other men besides themselves with miraculous Power
from above, in order to prophesying, and speaking Mysteries in strange
Languages; did they endue carved stones also, with power to speak, and to play,
to sing or weep, and to do all those handsome Feats which are said of Roman
Images? Did ever S. Peter leave this Power with Simon Magus, or the Pope, or
any consecrating Bishop, that on what statue or Picture soever he should lay
his hand, and sprinkle water, and pour Oil, and burn Frankincense, it should be
forthwith elevated to high and mighty Performances? If Peter and Paul had this
Power, and left it to succession; God, and his Saints must look to it: for as
Christ is at every turn liable by Consecration to be shut up in a Mass wafer,
God and his Saints are not quite free from consecrated Shapes and Images. For
the Consecration, as a Power, obliges God in a considerable manner to hear and
report to his Saints, whatsoever is prayed for at their Images: and ties as
considerably the Saints, to solicit and intercede with God, for the Request
which he reports; and often to come down themselves, to execute and dispatch
it. God is bound I say by this consecrating Power which he is supposed to
grant, both he to hear and to report what is said before the Image; for
otherwise, how could the Saints concerned in the Case understand it? and what
were the Power good for? And the Saint is put to so much trouble; For besides
the trouble of soliciting the business, which they understand they are prayed
for, at their consecated Images; how many Ramblings to and fro are they in
equity obliged to, (unless all their Apparitions, and Activities about their
Images be mere Lies) either to hear it the sooner, or to give it a quicker
dispatch? And who knows not that Roman Images, and Roman Saints, (in famous
Churches especially) are never or seldom asunder? I call to witness all the
long and holy Pilgrimages undertaken upon this score, to Lauretta, to
Montserrat, to S. Michael, etc. there purposely to meet either with the
respective Saints, or their assisting Virtue, Divorum and Divarum Numen, that
is the Godhead of the He or She Saint, which is supposed to watch somewhere,
in, or about his dear Image. I call to witness the many Vows, which are
directed from all parts to these said Saints, not in Heaven, their proper
Abode, as one should think; but to the Lady at Lauretta, or Montaigue, or to
the good Saint at Padua, Ardilliers, Montegardia, etc. there helping men and
women by their Images, in such Churches. And it is to this purpose, that both
these Images, and Churches are consecrated with the greatest Pomp; washed with
the best sort of Holy water; made sweet with the choicest Perfumes; lighted day
and night, with the clearest Lamps and Candles; dressed with the costliest
Clothes and Laces; served with the Curiousest Music; the Images specially
seated on the Eminentest Places of the Church, and (what would you have more)
honored with the compleatest Mass, to invite thither out of Heaven these Holy
guests. And let Rome search out her Vatican, and try whether in all Antiquity
she can find an honest Example for such Consecrations and Attractives, but
either among old heathenish Priests, or among old and new Sorcerers.

Now, tho by this which I have said, it appears clearly enough, that the
Matter, the Form, the Likeness, the Power of Consecration, or any thing else,
which you can find intrinsecal to an Image, is both uneffectual, and
unchristian, both as to make it a fit Object for any Religious service, or to
make it a sufficient Cause of any wonderful Blessing; Nevertheless it is found
by experience, and however it is most certain in the common Apprehension of
Roman Catholics, that a very great number of Images by being consecrated and
worshipped, have attained to such a great degree and improvement of strength
and Action above what either they are in their Nature, or can be raised to by
Art, that it highly concerns all Christians, seriously to inquire into the
hidden Causes and Principles of such Extraordinary Achievements. For my part I
do not believe, (and many Papists do not) that all and every particular thing
commonly reported of these Roman Images, is true; and, of the other side, I do
not believe that all is false. However, if all were false, they should do well
to burn out of their Church their great Pontifical, Ceremonial, and Missal
Books: and to throw away their Images back again into the same Holes, whence
they were pleased to dig them out. But if any part of what they say concerning
them be true; I make no question it will prove worse then if it were false: and
to make it good I require only the patient attention of an understanding, and
unprepossessed Reader.

Not to make Pagans, or Papists in any degree worse then they are; both disown
in the consecrating of their Images all such Cellus ap. Origin. l. 7.
substantial Change, as in the transubstantiating of Mass wafers: both
acknowledge the material part of their Images, however called, and adored by
those as Gods, by these as Saints, to be still stone, or wood, or silver, or
viler stuff: And in this case the Papists deal disingenuously with the Pagans,
when they Bellar. de Imag. l. 2. c. 3.
make these worse then they are, that they may seem worse then themselves. But
that within, near, or about the Roman or Pagan Images either by consecrating,
or worshipping them, are imported such Additionals of either inherent, or
wonderful assisting virtues, as may both help out worshippers, and well deserve
Adoration and Service; is an Article of Heathenish Faith, which the Pagans
publicly declare: and which the Papists do as really presuppose in all their
practice and Histories: nor can in truth, without belying both their Devotions
and Consciences plainly deny, however they think it more convenient to mince
and palliate it for mere shame. This is the downright Confession of the
Heathenish Philosophers. You must not wonder (says Ap. Sozomen. Eccles. Hist.
l. 7. c. 15.
Olympius to his persecuted Pagans) if you see the pulling down, and the
breaking of your Images, since they are made of vile matter, and therefore
easy to be bruised to dust. But once were within them those Immortal and
Invisible Powers, which are now gone up to Heaven. For (as another adds more
fully) Ap. Arnob. Contr. Gent. l. 6.
We take not Brass, Gold, or Silver, properly to be our Gods; only we worship
in them what holy Consecration has called into, and seated within those
Images. And this is the Religion of Roman Doctors and Saints. 1. Thom. 3. part.
q. 83. a. 3.
That these dead and inanimate things (Wood, Stone, etc.) by being Consecrated,
receive a kind of Spiritual Virtue, which makes them fit for Gods Service, and
for the Peoples Adoration. So 2. Bellarm de Imag. l. 2. c. 23. sect. Quod autem
possit.
That both the Saint, and his Image being joined together, may be Prayed to,
and Adored together also. 3. And Ibid. c. 21. sect. Nunc juxta,
if they be taken asunder, the very Images may lawfully be worshipped, both by
themselves and for themselves, besides the Worship due to the Saint. No Pagan
Idolater, for all I know ever said so much, and the Roman Practice goes yet
much farther.

First, In their ordinary Language, the Image is called and taken for the very
Saint; and in that ordinary Devotion the Image is adored, kissed, embraced and
spoken to, just as if they had the Saint in their arms. It Is you (says the
Preacher, speaking to a Crucifix) Bellarm. De Imag. l. 2. c. 23.
that have redeemed us: it is you that have reconciled us with God the Father,
etc. Just as the cursed Idolater in the Prophets, Isa. 44.9. Habakkuk 2.15.
prays to the Wood, Rowse now thy self and rescue me. There both the Devil and
his Idol, and there the Saint and his Image are hudled up in the same
Adoration. And as when the Host is carried along, all that see the Mass-Priest
at any distance, fall on their knees; and if they hear only the little Bell,
they cry, There is the good God, who passes by: whosoever goes to, or comes
from a Church, says, Either I will go and pray, or now I come from visiting
and praying to our good Lady: because as he really believes that there the
Mass-Wafer is, by Transubstantiation, become the Lord; so he believes, that the
Image which he has seen, is either by Consubstantiation, Inhabitation, or some
other assisting mode, become to him the good Lady. And I defy all the Roman
Preachers to say any thing to justify what they do upon this account, which
the Pagans may not say as well or better for themselves.

Secondly, Lest you should think, that Wood and Stone are thus adored, spoken,
and prayed to, upon the mere account of Resemblance; (in which case, any one of
our Ladies Pictures might be adored and prayed to as well at a Painters, as in
a Church) is is generally done upon the Faith and Belief of an enclosed, or at
least assisting Virtue. It is this strong persuasion that makes a Catholic
Worshipper creep reverently and trembling to our Lady, to get a touch for the
little Image, which he has newly bought of a Shop: and all Men know how much
the better their Beads will sell, when the Peddler can stoutly swear that they
have touched such a Saint, that is, his Image. By this it does appear
evidently, that the Image is conceived by them to have some prime Virtue in it
self, since it imparts it to another: and I would know, who of them all dares
say any of those Images, which he dares not scarce look in the Face, that it
has besides resemblance, nothing more then another stone. They that go to
touch the Chin, or the Toe, or some other Bone of a Saint, think it endued with
some virtue, above that of ordinary Bones, because it was, and is still the
part of a Holy Body. They who go a long Pilgrimage to rub their Clothes against
the Shift of our Lady, or their Stockings against the Breeches of Thomas
Becket, must think that the warmth of their holy Flesh have left in them some
hidden Blessing, which they do hope may be in some mesure communicated to other
things. Ask the Papists, why that Image which they do call Veronica, should
have such extraordinary virtues; they will tell you, that Christ made it
himself; and that besides this, he made it of the Sweat and Blood in his Face.
But what have other Images in their carved pieces of Wood, which may temt sober
Men to seek after, to touch, to kiss, in hope of being Blessed by such
Embraces, unless it be the assisting, or inhabitation, or some other like
commerce of Holy Powers, which the Papists call Numina, which are either
therein, or thereabout?

Thirdly, If you will have more convincing Proofs, go for example, to the Image
of our Lady in Mount Gardia Bened. Gononus Chron. an. 1433.
, which keeps Whores off, and perfumes all that comes near it, with a most
Celestial Fragrancy: or to another Image of hers, once adored in Sozopolis,
which Bozius de Sig. Eccles. t. 1. l. 9. c. 9.
sweats out of its hand a kind of Oil, to cure them who are anointed with it.
Go to a third Image of hers Baron. an. 446. n. 16.
, which, when hidden and unseen, discovers it self by its own light. Just such
another you have in Spain Ant. Yepes. Ord. S. Bened. an. 574.
, which was perceived in the same manner shining under the root of an old Oak.
But nothing can be brought more demonstrative to this purpose, then the Image
of Bardenarda: it had bin bought by a Pilgrim at Jerusalem, out of a Shop,
consecrated, when, and where, or whether at all, I cannot tell: However, after
much service and adoration, the Image it self, Baronius. An. 87. n. 63.
from a colored Board at the Painters, is grown Fleshy in its Chapel; its
Breast from being flat, is swelled perfectly into the Figure of two Paps,
whence flows such odoriferous Oil, as no Balsam is like it; and so Miraculous
withal, that it cures all sorts of Diseases. This, however it comes to pass, is
Intrinsecal and Inherent in the Image, and may draw Pilgrims to worship it,
without the consideration of its Saint. And the truth is, it is so Holy by its
self, if you believe Baronius, that no Worshipper dares touch it.

Fourthly, What will you say to such Images as have an invisible Faculty within
themselves, of either crawling or flying back- to that place which they like
better, in case you offer to remove them? And such are the most part of them,
which now a days are reported to work Miracles. Such is that of Montegardia
for example, Bened. Gonon. supra.
which fled away out of the Ship, when Thieves thought to carry it to Venice.
Such is that other of Rachietta in Savoy, which being Hierasc. in vita Sylv
removed from whence it was, into a very handsome Chapel, was found the next
Morning in its old Room. Such is that of the Servites, near Lamo Chronic. Deip.
an 1492.
, which made nothing to jump from one side of the River to the other. And to
insist upon no more, such is that famous one of Lauretta, which Turselin.
Lauret. Hist.
being displeased (at least the Saint dwelling therein) that it was not more
regarded in its Country at Nazareth, transported it self, with House and all,
to Italy, where now it is served to some purpose.

Fifthly, What can you say to common Stone and Marble Images (dead and
senseless things, as one should think) that have in them all sorts of seeming
Natural and Organical Motions? Such is that, which one of your Vincent.
Belluar. Spec. Hist. l. 7. c. 87.
Mass-Bishops speaks of, which crook'd its Finger to hold a Ring. Such is that
which another Learned Man mentions too Caesarius. l. 7. c. 34.
, which stretched out its hand to strike a Nun. Such is that at Orleans
Vincent. Hist. l. 8. c. 83.
, which held up its knee, to stop the Arrow that otherwise had killed a
Soldier. And such was that here in the North, which held forth Matthew Paris, in
vita S. Godric.
both its Arms to receive a sweet Baby, creeping out at the Mouth of a
Consecrated Crucifix.

Sixthly, These and many more Images have, besides these Motions of all their
Members, the use of all inward Faculties which can be perceived in living Men.
They will show you that they have Blood, if you wound them; witness Chronic
Deip an 1418.
our Lady at Paris, which a mad Fellow pierced with a Sword, and was whipped to
death for it; and Milk sometimes, if you touch them too hard Trithem. in
Chronic. an. 1302.
about their Paps, as once did a rude Soldier in plucking off a rich Jewel.
Some Hierasc in vita Henr. Sylv.
weep, some Menol. Cisterc. 11 April.
laugh, some Ibid.
can do both, some d sing: all Leand. in vita Hiacynthi. ap. Sur. 16 Aug.
speak, when occasion offers it self. And, which is more, all this they do with
so much reason, and to such special purposes, that it does most clearly appear,
that they are moved to what they say, by much higher then human Souls. When a
Holy Man passes by, the Image sees his Holiness; and so one Menolog. Cisterc.
18 October.
several times used to salute Holy Bernard, Salve Bernarde, and to offer him
the Babe out of its left Arm. Bernarde, etc. Henriquez. in Chronic. an. 1152.
that is, O Bernard, take you this Child, the Redeemer of the whole World, said
once our Ladies Holy Image. Another did the like honor to St. Lucia Chronic.
Praedicat. an. 1543.
, who very carefully carried it home. Contrariwise, when wicked Men approach
too near, some Images will soon perceive their wickedness; witness that Bened.
Gonon. Chronic. an. 1476.
, which said to one who had a murtherous intention, with a threatening Voice and
Face, What art thou here for, O thou Villain? Will thou kill my Servant in my
presence? They say, that there is an Image in a Convent of Carmelites in
Sicily, which, as soon as any Worshipper comes near, does presently discern,
whether he be in the state of Grace, or in mortal Sin; and so accordingly
smiles or frowns, as the Man or Woman deserves. And it is this sort of Images,
that piercing into Men's hearts, by a Prophetical Spirit, will either turn their
Backs to Apostates and Hypocrites, as once one did to Chronic. Deip. an. 1353.
that unhappy Carthusian Novice, who afterward forsook the Order, and perished
no Man can tell how: or smell out Whores, and keep them off with Thundrings and
Lightnings Idem. an. 1588.
sometimes; as the abovesaid Image of Montegardia in Italy; or be troubled, and
sweat and blow at some eminent, tho never so remote dangers; as was Ibid. an.
1160.
that Image in Germany, when all was ready above to come down, and to destroy
this Universe. St. Peter of Verona, as they say, being once in danger of being
baffled by an Heretic in a Dispute, an Holy Image helped S. Anthonin. 3 Part.
Hist. tit. 23. c. 6.
him out how to answer the Argument that puzzled him, Petre, etc. Peter (says
this admirable Teacher) I have prayed for thee, that thy Faith may never fail.
Franc. Hierasc. in vita Sylv.
And another S. Peter Caralt Eened. Gonon. Chron. an. 1474.
, had bin worse confounded by the Devil, who appeared to him under the notion
of a Divine; when having not a word to say, he begged help of a little Image,
which by good chance hanged on the Wall; and as soon as he had but looked somewhat
devoutly toward it, presently the Image turned to him, and enlightened his Soul
with such Reasons, that forthwith the Devil left him. These, and five hundred
more Images, which I could produce, if need were, are the usual Oracles of
Rome, and the ordinary Seats of Roman Saints: and when Bellarmin, with some
others say, that they do honor these Images as signs only representing, and and
not as Seats and Instruments inhabited or assisted by the invisible Spirit of
their Saints; they are confuted by these two ways, the visible Practice of
their Church, and the invisible Testimony of their own private Consciences.

What might be said more probably both in behalf of these Images, and of their
zealous Devotion in worshipping them, is what frees them from the reproach
which Holy Scripture casts on Idols; that they have Eyes, and see withal; they
have Hands, wherewith they handle, and sometimes give terrible blows: if they
have Mouths, it is not in vain, since they can cry, and laugh, and speak, and
sometimes also Prophecy: Feet have they, and thereon leap, and walk, and flee:
and if they have Noses, they smell therewith, and can tell where the wanton and
the wicked Persons are: All this, I say, from their own approved Authors. Only
the main difficulty remains (and I conjure all sober Men, as they tender their
Salvation, to look how to satisfy it well) to know what is the inward
Principle, Spirit, or Soul, which moves and animates these dead Figures, to all
and more then what living Bodies can perform with the help of their living
Souls. Here let the Roman Catholics well consider, whether to justify them by
these acts of activity from being Idols, does not by the same means both accuse
and convince them of being Devils.

The Holy Scripture warns Men often against false Christ's, and, false Prophets,
against false Apostles and false Spirits: it were strange, if we had no need of
warning, or of being wary against false Saints. I find sometimes the best Roman
Monks much puzzled, what to think of their most celebrated Apparitions: and tho
they trust too much their Holy Water (a pitiful trial God knows) in the
discernment of the good from the bad Spirits, yet they do not think it
uncatholic to demur sometimes in such matters. It is neither want of Learning,
nor want of Faith in the Schoolmen, the Primitive Fathers of Popery, which
makes them dispute now and then, whether that which they see at Mass under the
Figure of raw Flesh, or a young Child, be Christ himself, or a Phantome: and
certainly, we have no ground either in Scripture, or in Reason, or in
Experience to secure us, but that the Devils, which play such pranks both in
Apparitions, and on Altars, may juggle as well, and play worse tricks about
consecrated Images.

First, It is no small prejudice against these Roman Images, and the Roman way
of using them, that both came so late into the Church: and that in the best
Primitive Times, when the Church was a purer Virgin, none but Heretics had
Images; whereas in these later and worse Ages, when the Church is confessedly
worse too, no Roman Catholics are without them. It is also no small prejudice
against the best, as it is supposed, and the most famous of these Images, that
when they were admitted at first, as either visible Records of Ecclesiastical
Antiquity, or as Ornaments of new Walls, not one of them did work Miracles; or
if it did, 'twas in behalf of Infidels and Pagans only, as it is presupposed by
Patriarch Tharasius Nicaen. Synod. secund. Act. 4. page 626. Edit. Bin. Paris.
1634.
, the great Promoter of Image Worship: whereas now since they are become both
the Objects and the Instruments of Roman Devotion and Blessing, they generally
work all Miracles in behalf of the Romanists. The alteration in the Church, as
it is now full of Images, from the Church as it was then without any Image
Worship, as it is visible and great, must have some visible and great Cause. Is
it because the Pagans and the Heretics then, and the Mass-Priests and Papists
now understand the worth of Images, and the right use of Image Worship, better
then the Holy Apostles did? Or is it because the Holy Apostles had neither
Patriarchs, nor Prophets, nor Martyrs, to make Saints of, or to consecrate
Images to? Is it not more probable to think, that this Alteration has thus
happened, because both Pagans and Papists are of the same mind as to Images?
And because the Spirits, which Christ and his Blessed Apostles had silenced and
beaten off from most of their Pagan Quarters, having long wandered among the
Heathen, and in dry places, have at last found better shelter and emploiment at
Lauretta, Montserat, and other great Roman Oracles? What can one think else of
Images, which having kept themselves close, dumb and obscure, in the best and
Primitive days, take now their advantage to start up, and to make a noise, and
to show Miracles in these later times of the Church, when both by Christ and
his Apostles Predictions, and the Judgment Joseph. Acosta de Temporib.
Novissim. l. 3. c. 3. and 14.
of sober Papists, all must be full of false Prophesies, of strong Illusions,
and lying Wonders?

Secondly, That which aggravates the suspicion of appearing in unhappy Times,
like the coming of Thieves and unexpected Straglers in dark Nights, is the ugly
and pitiful Holes where most of these Images were at first found. For these
Images (I mean those wonderful and famous ones which the Roman Church runs most
after) were neither lately made by common Painters, nor consecrated by ordinary
Roman Bishops: they are supposed to have bin made and consecrated by no meaner
Workmen then God himself, his Christ, his Angels, and such of his Saints; as S.
Luke, S. Nicodemus, etc. were, and so left and deposited to the Christian
Church, and Catholic Tradition. Hereupon let me ask two things absolutely
necessary for any sober satisfaction. The first, When and where, if ever at
all, these Saints made these Images; and by laying on of their Hands, or
otherwise, conferred on them the Gifts of Speaking, of Prophesying, and working
Miracles; or put in them an inward or assisting Spirit, to make them speak,
foretell, and do strange things? The second, When and where having used them, as
it is supposed they have, they thought fit to bury them under Ground, and to
hide some among Thorns, some under Brambles, all in most pitiful places; as
dark Holes, and hollow Trees, where they were found, and where any wise Man
would rather look for Worms or Toads? If you say they hid them in those places,
for fear of the Pagan Persecuters; Pagans were not haters at all, nor
destroiers of Images; contrariwise, they loved Images, as Papists do. But since
they were great Burners and Destroiers of Holy Scriptures: Why would the
Apostolical Men rather hide their Books under ground, which were most
principally both hated and sought after, then their Images, which were not so?
And if they hid both Images and Books together, by what universal Mischance did
they never find any of these, where they found those? How came the Holy
Scriptures to discover themselves so soon, ever in cruellest times of the
Primitive Persecutions; and Roman Images so late, and so many hundred Years
after all these Persecutions were over? Why did not Images howl or sing under
their Nettles as well in the fourth and fifth Age, when S. Epiphanius, S.
Jerome, S. Chrysostom, and such Learned Fathers might have best judged of their
worth, as they did many hundred Years after, when Antichrist was expected, and
when all the Learning and Holiness of the Gospel was under the thickest Cloud?
If you go to Tradition, which, is what the second Nicene Council, and now the
Papists go too: as if Roman Images were come from hand to hand immediately from
the Apostles: By what misfortune comes it to pass, that the many hundreds of
Greek Prelates, all great Admirers of Images, and Boasters of Tradition, had
never one of St. Luke's Pictures, nor of Nicodemus, nor of Christ, and that now
Rome has got them all? But since these Images never came to us through their
hands, as it is certain they came not that way, Rome has got them, either
flying like Birds and Fowls over their Heads, or creeping along silently like
Moles and Vermin under their Feet. The truth is, when this second Council of
Nice was held, it was somewhat too soon for such Roman Novelties, as the prating
and howling of Images, to appear above Christian Ground; it was not then yet
quite so dark, but the Church could see about her, although it was toward
Sunsetting: Hobgodlings venture not to dance at any Light, but the Moonshine.
A deep Midnight of Ignorance, and of all other Confusions besides, which soon
after overwhelmed the following Ages, was by much a fitter time for Stones and
Images to speak, and for Spirits to delude Men. And you may judge what Ghosts
they are, who hide their Heads during the times of the Apostles, and all the
Primitive Fathers, and take their times to show them, when all is full of new
Revelations, and Dreams, and Monks; and yet show themselves in such a manner,
as marks both their Original and their Nature, appearing forth from under
ground, and watching under Bushes and Brambles, like those Spirits in Isa.
29.4. which were not heard, but muttering out of the dust. Certainly, those
blessed Spirits who are imagined to speak thus, are not in Hell, whence damned
Souls in Romes account will sometimes howl: nor in that other place, which in
their Opinion, is about it, and which they call Purgatory, whence they say that
tortured Spirits will come up to bemoan themselves; they have a most happy and
glorious abode in Heaven, whence it is not imaginable they will come down,
unless thrust out, to lurk and weep here under Hedges. The Scripture speaks of
some false Gods, which, you may be sure of it, were true Devils, who loved to
be courted under green Trees; and of some other wicked Spirits, which either
whisper with a low voice, as from the Earth, or are met with and spoken to in
some Sepulcher, and love to keep themselves and others in Wildernesses, and
about Tombs. The Heathen Rome had familiar Spirits, or Demons, Dii Lares, and
Dii Penates, which watched and fluttered about their Hearths and Houses. I have
heard of some who had traveled in the East, that in those vast Deserts between
the Holy Land and the Red Sea, especially about Mount Sina, there are many
unhappy Phantomes, that will watch and kill Men sometimes, when they find them
single, and straggling from their Convoies or Caravans. And I am satisfied by
some noble and living Eyewitnesses, that often in some Silver Mines, as for
example, near Befort in the Frontiers of France and Germany, are seen a sort of
seeming little Men, in red or blue Juppa's, Genii Metallici, playing and
trifling about Workmen, especially in the deepest Holes. These are both fit
and likely Juglers, to act their part in hollow Trees and dark Corners: But who
could expect it of Moses, of Elias, or of any Glorious and Blessed Saints or
Angels, that instead of waiting upon Christ in their Robes, about his Throne
(or if need be, as at his Glorification, upon the glorious Mount) they would
come down into base Holes, and there become Pupetplaiers, to make Images
whistle under Nettles? Let Rome find us one such Example, and second it with
some reason why the Blessed Saints and Angels, whosoever appear in Holy
Scriptures, detest and wave Adoration for themselves; and now a days under
Popery come down purposely to crave and beg it, for their Images.

Thirdly, in the judgment of the holy Fathers Eusebius. De Praepar. Evang. l.
5. p. 120. Edit. Rob. Steph. 1544.
in their Controversies against Pagans, it was a sufficient Evidence and
Demonstration against false Gods, (and it can be no less against false Saints)
to show that they did teach men, to make Images: and that they did love these
and the like Figures. And the truth is, if holy Souls may be allowed in that
elevated condition wherein they live, to fancy yet dead and gross things; it
were rather their Bones and Relics, wherewith they have fought the good Fight,
then carved Wood, and painted Boards, wherewith they never had any commerce.
For, as to Pieces of stone or wood, which are nothing to their Nature, and as
little to their Happiness; it were most strange, to see them taken with such
Things, and upon such poor silly accounts, because therein forsooth they see
somewhat like either their Form, or their Faces. Tho good and sober men may
love sometimes their Friends Pictures, none but vain fools dote on their own:
and they that laugh to see young Cats turning about, and admiring their
Resemblance in looking-Glasses, would be sorry to see their old and venerable
Friends doing the like in their Pictures. Let the great Devil Serapis brag
among his other Pagan Gods, Eusebius. supra p. 119.
of the fine Head, brave Locks, and Beard, and golden Feet, which he then had
in his Statues; How mean and unbecoming such a great Saint, as certainly the
Blessed Virgin is, were it, to see her pleasing her self, as does the Laurettan
Lady, with acquainting sometimes a Horat. Tursel. Laur. Hist. l 1.
sick Mass Bishop, and sometimes an Ibid. c. 6.
old Eremite, with the value of what she had in her Chamber at Lauretta: and
showing here the very Altar, where S. Peter did officiate; and there, the very
Crucifix, which the Apostles had set over it. But especially, says she, here
is our Image of Cedar, which Luke the Evangelist made with his own hand, to
represent my Face, as much to the life, as it was possible for a Mortal; and
all this is a Dear Jewel, both to God Almighty, and to my self. She accuaints
them withal, that it had bin long honored and with the highest degree of
worship in her Town of Nazareth: But at last their Faith and Devotion decaying,
she had removed all from thence, to receive more Honor in Italy. In good
earnest will a true Saint make such discourses? and will a true Saint tell such
a lie, as that S. Luke had bin a Painter? S. Luke was an honest Jew: and
therefore drove no dishonest Trade, such as that of making either Pictures, or
Statues was Origin. cont. Cells. l 4. page 181. Edit. Cantab.
among Jews. But will a grave and glorified Saint ever make so much of a
trifle? and leave her Station near Gods Throne, to be fluttering continually,
or at least the best part of her time, about a miserable painted Board? she
might upon a better account come down purposely from heaven to admire her Hair,
her Milk, her Combs and Gloves, her pared Nails, and all, wherein she had a
nearer Concern. But suppose that the Saints had always a fond inclination for
such Toies; can you think them also so fierce, as the Roman Saints are
commonly, to revenge them? What do you think of those poor Jews, Jovius in
Epitom. l. 21.
who had their Faces wrencht to their Backs, for following the Law of their
Forefathers, and turning their Eyes aside in detestation of an Image? Do you
not pity the case Chronic. Deip. an. 1490.
of the honest Prebend at Florence, whom this said Lady suddenly destroyed with
Thunder, because he chanced to smile a little when he saw the Rosary
Confraternity carrying in solemn Procession her dear Image through his own
Church? How lamentable was the reward of that good Lady, who being sorry Bened.
Gonon. ex Vetusto Cod. an. 1310.
to see one of our Ladies Images, both Worm-eaten and ugly shaped as it was,
and wishing for a better one, happened but to say, What is this old Dame doing
here? Few days after appears the said Goddess in Person, and taking the
affront done to her Image, as if it had bin done to her self, revenged it
accordingly, Whosoever, says she, calls me old Dame, shall be unhappy, and
shall not live long: and so it was with the Gentlewoman, for presently she was
stripped off, by her own Son, of her Estate, inspired to it it seems by our Lady,
and lived begging from door to door until she died. If these, and a hundred
more like Stories be true, as Catholics believe they are, Whether is it a Saint
or a Devil, that destroies Gods living Image, to save dead Stones and Stocks
from any show of Injury? And is this the Mother of Mercy, or not rather one of
those sworn haters of Men, that love alike both the destruction of Men, and the
preservation of Images? Take the Images at their best side, the Blessed Saints
are more earnest and serious, then to be taken with such Trifles; and if you
take them at the worst, the Blessed Saints are more holy, then to be such
zealous Hectors in the defense of what God hates.

Fourthly, Another shrewd Evidence to prove, that such seeming Saints are real
Devils, is the Magical Sympathy and usual Correspondency, that binds them and
their Images together; and this is what Image Worship is come to. The first
Christians had neither Image Worship, nor Images. Afterward, about the Year
600, Pope Gregory the first would have Images, Regist. l. 9. Epist. 9.
But no worship; and thus they stood awhile only as Ornaments to Walls, and as
a kind of Book to Ignorant People. About some 200 Years after, Gregory, by the
Forwardness of Pope Adrian (a bold Gazetteer of old Tales, as I can prove
whenever I will) and by the blind Zeal of Irene (a cruel Mother to her own
Son, and more cruel to Gods Service) Worship was fastened upon Images: and both
were in a Council packed up, as the Empress pleased, and regulated to these
terms, that the honor or dishonor done to the Images, should redound upon the
Saint; and that Saints might be conceived to have such a moral Being, or civil
Capacity in their Images, as Princes have in their Ambassadors, and private Men
in their Proxies. Hitherto the Roman Doctors dare not own or advance more then
this, in their Disputations and Schools. But alas, in their Practices, and in
their Sermons, and devout Discourses and Histories, the true Food of their
Roman People, this Moral Capacity is grown into a true Natural Inexistency or
Conjunction, both of the Saint acting and doing all in his Image, and of the
Image, as a subservient Instrument, or beloved Seat to the Saint. And from
hence comes the true fellow-feeling and mutual Sympathy between Roman Images
and Roman Saints, such as have bin always observed to be between Pagan Idols
and Pagan Gods. For proof whereof you may observe, 1. That when the Roman Saint
is either hardly used, or hard at work, his Image suffers the Symptoms of it.
Thus, if the Lady be in great distress, as they say, that she was once, to see
her Son ready to destroy all Mankind, Chronic. Deip. an. 1160.
and her self scarce able to hold him, her dear Image was seen sweating. If she
is terribly provoked, as once she was against a Preacher, who said, that she
was conceived in Sin; her Image, tho made of cold Marble, will be sensible of
that affront, Ibid. an. 1460.
and with a fierce and angry look, turn its back to him when he passes. If she
have a mind to a certain Day, as when she would choose the Saturday in every
Week, her Ibid. an. 770.
Image will correspond to her secret Intention, and constantly upon that day
put off its Veil, that all the World may thereby know, that both the Saint and
the Image have a desire to be then seen. On the other side, the Saint is
neither unthankful, nor backward in returning with advantage all good Offices
to his (or her) Images, not only by countenancing them, for that he or she does
most zealously; but also in any way that may bespeak a strict Partnership, and
friendly mutual Intelligence. For example, if one will be wedded to the Roman
Lady, let him but do Rob. Rich. in vita S. Edmund. c. 6.
as Edmund of Canterbury did, take any Ring, and with that intention put it
upon her Images Finger, she will wear the same on her own, and accept him for
her Husband. If you will well secure your Town against Wars and Invasions,
trust her sweet Image with the Keys, and you shall see, by what she did Vid.
supra.
once at Poitiers, and at Tournay, how she will lustily bestir her self to make
good the Trust. If the Image be hurt or maimed, the Saint commonly lends it
some Blood to bleed, that Men may see, that it is not a Stone that they strike
at, but a Body which is (or some other for it) sensible. Sometimes the Saint
will take on himself the very Marks of all the Injuries which have bin offered
to his Image: as when a Jew had bin so impious, as to strike one full in the
Face, and then being troubled to see it bleed, and upon that fear hiding
himself, the next day Mag. Specul. Tit. Ira ego. Exempl. 19.
the Saint (the R. Lady) appears pitifully black and blew, where her Image had
bin abused, and inspires a Blacksmith both with Intelligence, where to seek
out the hidden Jew, and with skill and spirit to fight with him in a Duel (for
it was an affront she had received, that was to be repaired by her Hectors
valor) and kill him. This one instance (and many more that might be had to this
purpose) does plainly show, that Roman Saints concern themselves in their
Images, not in a civil regard only, as Kings abused in their Envoies, or Nobles
beheaded in their Pictures or Effigies; but in a far more real manner, as if
Catholic Kings did find their Backs excoriated, when some Pope scourges their
Ambassadors; and, as if Gentlemen had their Heads really cut off from their
shoulders, when the Hangman strikes their Pictures. There is such an effectual
Correspondency between Roman Saints and Images, as is observed between Twins,
who most commonly are either well or ill together: or to come somewhat nearer
the case, as between enchanted Images of Wax, and the Persons intended by them,
who freez, or burn accordingly, as the Magician manages the business. After
this rate, as they speak Plutarch. de Defect. Oracul. ap. Eusebius. de Prepar.
Evang. l. 5. page 122.
of the Howlings of Devils, when Christ's Passion and Sacrifice turned them all
out from their old Seats; you may hear sometimes these Roman Saints weep and
bemoan themselves, sometimes in the Vincent. Specul. Hist. l. 7. c. 81.
Clouds, sometimes under Walls, when they are abused in their Images. It is
upon this same account of care and sympathy for their dear Receptacles, that as
Pagans did with threatening force their Gods to what they had a mind they should
do, Roman Saints may be led that way, if you tell them, unless they do it, that
either Mart. Polon. ad an. 715. pet. Canisius de Deip. l. 5. c. 24.
you will drown their Images, or take Caesarius. l. 7. c 46.
away the sweet Baby; as did really the Woman, who kept him so long in her
Chest, upon the loss of her Child Ibid.
whom a Wolf had run away with, till with wonderful humility the Queen of
Heaven commanded the Wolf to bring again and restore his prey, her Majesty
seeming to be exceedingly afraid of being deprived of her Son, that is, the
little Cherub whom she has commonly on her left Arm. Hence you may learn upon
what ground the Tyrians once being besieged, kept their chief Image Quint.
Curt. in obsidione Tyri.
in Chains; the Trojans secured their Palladium; the Romans their Ancile; and
now the Roman Catholics have so great care of their Images. Those were once
what these are now, dear Pawns, and as it were Hostages, to draw on any side
the Gods and Saints Franc. Hierasc. in vita Henr. Sylv.
whom these Images do relate to. Never fear that the good Lady can forget her
ancient Friend at Lauretta, at Maria major, or at Montserrat; and if she be
sometimes out of the way when Pilgrims adore those Images, it is because she
looks to some others. But if the Image be deeply engaged, either in its
Reputation, as when it had bin entrusted with the Keys and keeping of Annal.
Flandr. l. 12. an. 1340.
Tournay; or in its own preservation, as that was which the Sextan Bov. supra.
would burn to bake his Wafers; then read what Apollo did Herodot. Urania.
for Delphi, and Minerva for her little Chapel, when both were assaulted by
Xerxes; compare it with what in the like occasion our Lady did for Tursel.
Lauret. Hist. l. 2. c. 20.
Lauretta, for Annal. Fland. sup.
Tournay, for an old Image: and so upon this whole matter, judge whether Pagan
Gods and Roman Saints be not alike, as to their care and kindness to their
Images; and how unreasonable it were, if you take those for very Devils, to
take these for any true Saints.

Fifthly, The very acts of making Images to speak, is an irrefragable Evidence
of their being both ungodlike and unsaint-like Spirits. God, and his Blessed
Angels, have in times past expressed themselves several ways by Visions,
Dreams, Vrim and Thummim, Signs, Judgments, Fires, and Thunders. I leave out
Gods speaking by Men, because it is his most ordinary way of Revelation. But
let the Roman Catholics turn over either the Holy Scripture, or the genuine
Writings of any ancient Father; and then show me, where ever God, or Saints, or
Angels spoke either in the Church, or abroad in the World, Balinghem. 28. May.
by Stocks or Stones, or any kind of dead Pictures; and after they have
consulted their Consciences, if instructed with any degree of Learning, let
them pronounce, whether both speaking and working through Images, be or be not
the most universal and most constant way of Devils. Hereupon let Rome consider,
that tho Devils may and do often countenance themselves with counterfeiting the
ways of of God, God or his Saints never have disparaged themselves with using
the ways of Devils; much less such a way as the use of Images is, which God
has so earnestly and constantly disowned, and declared himself against.

Sixthly, Their own Speeches and Actings may convince any sober Man, by their
own Ridiculousness or Impiety, what kind of Spirits set them on work. To be
short, consider but this one instance, namely, the Image of our good Lady, with
a young Child on her left arm, the great Goddess and God of Rome; and at the
first entering into a Roman Church, the first and most conspicuous Object of the
Roman Adoration. Consider in this double Image. 1. The Roman Lady. 2. The
Roman, or as they call it, the sweet Baby, each by themselves. 3. Both the
Mother and the Babe together.

First, As to the main and Mother Image: What is it, do you think, that makes
Images sometimes as light as any Feather; sometimes as heavy and immovable as
any Rock; sometimes to fly; sometimes to dance; sometimes to sing; sometimes to
weep; sometimes to sweat; sometimes to tear themselves to pieces? For if all
the Pranks be true, as it is certain they are possible, do they not become
somewhat better those wild silly Spirits, that use to tumble stools and dishes,
or to skip up and down in a house; then the most Holy, the most serious, and
the most truly glorified Virgin Mary? Whosoever will be at the trouble of
summing up the Hours and Days, which since these six or seven hundred years
have bin misspent about such doings, shall find, both that this spirit
(whosoever it is) that animates this Roman Image, is oftener below, then above;
and that against the condition of all true glorified Saints, he or she fidles
away more of his time about Visions, and Drudgeries, about Gallows, Whores, and
Prisons, and about Monks, and their Images, then is left him or her to spend
with the Blessed Saints about Gods Throne, and in the Beatifical Vision.

Seeondly, what do you think of those Spirits, which help Images to be Nurses:
and which so press their Breasts with their hands, that as much Milk shall run
out thence, as an ordinary Child can well drink? They say that Abbot Bernard
has twice or thrice sucked of this Milk: and that it did sweeten his Tongue
into pleasant Eloquence, wherewith he praised the Holy Virgin. Bened. Gonon.
Chronic. an. 1152.
This story is true, or all are false; for it is reported by so many, and
confirmed by so many more, that it were folly to doubt of it, unless one
resolves to doubt of all. But the question is whence comes that Milk, and what
sort of Spirit that is, which moves and animates the hand of an Image, to
squeese the same milk out of its Paps. Boards, Marbles, and Pictures, you know,
have neither Blood nor Milk of their own. Glorified Saints have none likewise:
however S. Augustine, one of the four great Doctors of the Latin Church, and a
very great Doctor indeed, knows none; and takes it as an impertinent Question,
August. ad Consent. Epist. 146.
to ask, whether the Body of Christ in Heaven has any Blood; much more,
whether that of the Virgin has any Milk. But whether it has some, or has
none; it is certain that the Blessed Virgin, for we ought know, has kept her
self above in Heaven, during above a thousand years, without coming down to
show it. By a most just Judgment of God, the same Enchantment which is happened
about the Graves, and generally about all unlawful Endeavors of seeking God out
of his way, does visibly attend Images. When men applied themselves, as I have
said once already, to Birds, in order to know things to come, some Spirits met
them in that way, moving Ravens, Vulturs, and Eagles, to croak, to fly, and to
turn about in that manner, by which men might guess and learn as much, as the
spirits themselves could teach. As Soon as they applied themselves to
consulting, and watching Graves; these same spirits came up to them, under the
shape and notion of the dead, who were called upon. And thus by the
acknowledgment of all, as well learned Pagans, as Christians, the Sepulchers,
that, if not used this way, had nothing but their own Ashes; came to be
Temples, and to have Gods. In the like manner when men began to guess, and to
attend much to Images (harmless things, God knows, in their proper use, but
very pernicious otherwise) these proved the most general Abode, and as it were
the very Nest of Hellish Birds: and as soon as the Heathen consecrated them in
their way, in order to find God therein, the Devils met with them in this way,
making Images to move, to speak, and often to be as quick at their Miracles, as
the worshippers were at their Prayers. So it is most generally true, that men
cannot devise for themselves any Religion so absurd, to serve God with, but
these Spirits are concerned in it: and will like best, what God hates most. I
can show all this out of the Fathers in their Disputes against Pagans: and a
great deal of it, out of the Pagans themselves. To bring this home; Before the
Saints were invoked, and their Images adored at all; the Blessed Virgin staid
where she is, in the Glory and Happiness that she is possessed of, and before the
Face and Throne of God. But as soon as her Image came in, (and Image worship
came soon after) first she, or rather some other Spirit under her form, appears
as a Private Person sometimes in visions, sometimes in Dreams. As soon as the
gray and black Friars came to be strong in the Latin Church, and yet stronger
in her Service; this private spirit appears just as she was prayed and sought
after, as the Universal Queen of Heaven, and the Governess of the whole world,
with Crowns, and Saints, and Angels to attend her; and the better to encourage
her devoted Monks to her service, she came with Books, or Gowns, or Hoods, or
something else proper to their Order; and this most commonly at their solemn
Devotions in their Chapels. After, she made bold to come in nearer, by day
sometimes into their Refectory, and by night into their Cells; there to
sprinkle them with holy water, or to observe their modest lying in their Beds.
Being come thus far, the next step is to feel their Pulse, if they be sick: to
rub the Backs of some, to cure their Diseases; of others, to remove
Incontinency, the most general Disease of Monks. At last this Spirit came to
embracing, to kissing, to marrying, and for the last favor (for I dare not go
any farther) to showing those Mignions her Breast, and to refreshing them with
her Milk. Thus went she in to S. Dominic, whom she found once naked, scourging
himself in a Cavern. Here B. Alan. Rediv. parf. 2. c. 3.
she takes him into her Virgin Arms, says my holy Author, She fastens a close
kiss on him, opens her Breast, and gives him suck. Another time, when as it
seems in lieu of scourging the Devil had fallen foul on him; She washed Ibid. c.
4.
all his sores with her Milk: she took him for her own Husband: she put a
wedding Ring on his Finger, and a Chain of 150 Jewels tied with a curious
string, about his Neck, both Ring and String made of her own Virgin Hair:
Lastly she kissed him, and made him drink out of her Breast such goodly Milk,
as restored him to his full strength. S. Alain, who tells this story, Chronic.
Deip. an. 1476.
had in his time the like favor: S. Herman Gonon. De Patrib. Occident. l. 6.
more. This is the Milk, which uses to flow out of her Images. And now let
others decide the Case; whether the true and most pure Virgin forgets her self,
and all Modesty, to become I do not know what to Monks, and to turn milkmaid to
Images? Or whether that kind of Spirits, which of course are used to provide
Meat, Wine, and Dainties at their Meetings, be not fitter also to provide Milk:
and with this and other Miracles, to delude men, when by seeking God in painted
walls, or carved Boards, in the judgment August. de Consens. Evangel. l. 1. c.
9. and 10.
of the best Fathers, they deserve to be deluded. And God forbid, but I should
take all shows and Miracles whatsoever in these last times, rather for
Diabolical Enchantments, then the Blessed Virgin Mary for a servile Drudg.

This Drudg is for marrying too, (an inclination ill becoming a pure Virgin:)
and as Venus had besides Vulcan, so this pretended Virgin can admit of more
Husbands at the same time. If they be old, they must seek her: if they be
young, she seeks for them: and in order to contracting with either young or
old, her dear Image is the Proxy, that must first receive the wedding Ring,
which the Bridegroom puts upon its finger, saying (I am sure Israel, Chronic.
Deip. an. 1348.
St Brigits Brother did so) I take thee for my Dame; and therefore I hereby do
give and engage my self and my Soul to thy good Pleasure. That simple young
Prince Al. Gazaeus. De Offic. M. p. 91.
of Hungary said much less, without Ring or Intention, only reading of course
the words of an Antiphone, Thou Stellar. Beat. Virg. l. 12. c. 10.
art fair and Beautiful, etc. This was enough for the Lady, to make her come
down to him; and what, said she, if I am so fair, why leavest thou me, to take
another? Thus the young man being astonished (for he was in the Church already
upon the very point of taking a wife) at these words, and deluded with fine
Promises of becoming a great Monarch in this Devils Heavenly Kingdom; left his
other Bride at the Altar, to the great scandal of all the world, and to his own
far greater shame. Now commend me to such a Saint, who can free men from just
Promises, and put asunder to some purpose them whom God would have joined
together. If this instance be not enough; Take this other from a grave Bishop.
Vincent. Bell. Specul. Histor. l. 7. c. 87.
A young Gallant, being about to play in a Place, where the same Virgin had a
Statue; puts a Ring he had on its Finger, and after he had don playing,
thinking to take his Ring again, the Image had closed her Finger; so being
unwilling to struggle too much, for it is not safe to be too bold with some
Images, he left it there; and some few years after, he happened to get an
honest Match, with a considerable Fortune: but he is not sooner with her a Bed,
then presently another Bride fairer then she, appears to him, shows him his
Ring, which he had left on the Statue, and, as she took it, had engaged himself
to her with it before. The man takes this for a Phantome, (and so it was, and a
devilish one too) but when he thought again to sleep, the same Lady comes in
again, but much more terrible then before: and what with her angry look, what
with her fearful Threatenings (for this Mother of Mercy will prove sometimes a
dangerous Dame) she frighted him away out of his Bed, from his lawful Wife, and
his good Estate, into a pitiful Cloister. Now to judge how grave and holy this
is, and how likely to come from a Saint; compare it with this Parallel, which I
have Matthaeus Westmonaster. Flor. Hist. ad an. 1058.
from a good Author. In the year 1058. a young Nobleman of Rome, after a
magnificent wedding Dinner, goes with his Guests to Campus Martius; and being
at a hot Exercise puts his Ring into the finger of a stately brazen Image which
stood hard by, and had in former times bin consecrated to Venus: an hour after
my Gentleman being to return home, goes for his Ring; but the Statue had
miraculously shut its hand: so being loath to speak of it, for fear of being
laughed at by his Friends, he leaves it there; and when it was night, coming
back again with tools and men to get it off, the hand was open, but the Ring
gone. So, the best he could make of a clear loss, was to concele it, and to go
to Bed with his Bride. As soon as they were in Bed he felt a big soft Bundle,
as it had bin a sack of Wool, tumbling between them, and hindering them from
ever coming near one another: he heard withal a voice, Lie thou with me. I am
Venus, whom thou have taken to Wife this afternoon with this Ring, which here
is on my finger. To make short, the same both Bundle and Voice kept them ever
asunder, as often as they offered to touch one another, till with the advice of
their Friends, they went to one named Palumbus a skilful Necromancer and
Priest, who for a good sum of Money meeting the Devil in his own way, got the
Ring out of Venus hand. These two Cases are so like, that one might think them
to have bin transcribed the one from the other; the same manner of wedding
Apparitions: the same Correspondency, and Proxiship between these Spirits, and
their Images: the same Malice and opposition against Faith and Gods Ordinance:
the same base and low trifling, beneath the condition of any Noble Creature.
Hereupon in Cases so like, so unholy, so ungodly, so unseemly, let the Church
of Rome breed such fools, as to think, that the one can be a great Saint, when
the other is a downright Devil.

2. In the second place comes the Baby, whom most commonly you shall see doing
some foolish thing or other upon the left Arm of this Dame. For this little
Image is known to act as many Parts, as the great one can. It weeps, it prates,
it sings, it turns its back, it jumps from one hand to another, it stretches
out its little hand. And whereas at first it was intended, that this little
thing should stand still, as an Historical Memorial of Christ's Birth; it has
bin, since these last Ages, so well animated and warmed with the heat of Roman
worship, that it shows all the life and Activity sometimes, that can be
expected of a true natural Child, besides what Juglers can do. The inward Soul
and Principle, which actuates and moves this Image certainly cannot be a good
Angel: for good Angels are too serious for such mere Childish Motitions: Good
Angels in all the Scriptures, since their Creation till Popery, are not known
to speak in Images: and when they speak in any way, they do neither lie, nor
blaspheme; as this wooden pupet must needs, whenever he takes on himself the
name of God, Christ, and Savior. The true Mover, and as it were the Soul of
this Infantine Image, can be no other, then that Spirit, which often in the
Roman Church appears acting that by himself, which he acts by his Image: and
none is fitter nor likelier to prate with a wooden Parrot, then he that can do
it with his own Lips. For setting a side the little Image; the Papists have a
little God, whom they call in English the Sweet Babe, and more blasphemously in
Latin Puer Jesus, the Child Jesus; and whom another Spirit under the name of
Queen of Heaven in all great Apparitions carries commonly on her left Arm,
Bened. Gonon ex Antiquo Cod. ad an. 1285.
and gives to many People Flaminius in vita S. Cathar. Bonon. Menol. Cisterc.
29. October. Chronic. Deip. an. 1508. Balinghem. 17. Jun.
to kiss; to carry about, Gonon. Patr. Occident. l. 6. in vita Harman. Praem.
as S. Joseph did; to lay by them in their Chronic. Deip. an. 1561.
beds. S. Lucia Chronic. Grdin. Praedic. an. 1543.
had him once three night: and when S. Arnulphus, Chronic. Deip. an. 1228.
they say, had him but a quarter of an hour, he was so overcome with Joy, that
he was forced to give him back. Sometimes this sweet Baby will leave his Mother
and walk alone, either to publish at Mass, what Ibid. an. 1297.
he is, and to sing Ave Maria: or to run about Wadd. an. 1338.
the Church, as little Children use to do, but upon another account, for
inviting all the Congregation to praise his Mother, and so to spread a great
many Roses, and sweet Perfumes among them all. Sometimes the Child will venture
farther, and jump, or fly like a winged Cherub, as when he Matthew. Paris. in
vita S. Godric.
crawled out of the mouth of a Crucifix, and jumped thence into an Images
Bosom, and hence back into his first Hole. When S. Herman was a Novice, he did
use to give Chronic. Deip. an. 1235.
him Apples, and to be his play fellow, between Services; his Mother and S.
John the Evangelist did come down purposely to see them play. Here take my Son,
Henric. Gran. Ex Diversis. Distinct 9. Exemp. 74.
says the Lady, and play with him; a grave Divertisement, for glorious Saints.
Once a devout woman Magn. Specul. Tit. Humilitas. Exempl. 23.
found him alone, walking at Church: and thinking the poor Child had bin left
and forgotten there (for he looked, but as three years old) she asked, whether
he could say his Pater, the Lords Prayer? to which he having nothing to say;
the good Gentlewoman thought, that he was yet too young to speak: but when she
tried him again, with an Ave Maria, he found his tongue. The strangest of all
his Fortunes, was to be found Cantiprat. de Apib. l. 2. c. 1. sect. 13.
naked in the Snow, crying and bemoaning himself, because he was starved with
the cold weather, and that there was none that would help him. At last
nevertheless when a Charitable Traveller would take him up, and had him already
on his horse, the sweet Babe vanished away. The Pagan Jupiter transforming
himself into what shape he will, cannot be worse, then this Popish God, lying
thus and wailing in the Snow. However this is the Spirit (and God forbid we
should think him worth a better Name) that helps the Roman Crucifixes, and the
sweet wooden Babes to stir, to speak, to work Miracles, at last to become the
God of a special Confraternity called now adays the Religion or Confraternity
of the little Jesus.

The first founder of this Religion, as far as I can trace it up, was their
Fanatic S. Francis. This giddy Saint having a special License from the Pope,
for what he meant to do (that you should not think it a private folly)
Bonavent. in vita Francisc. ap. Lipom.
got upon Christmas Eve an Ox, and an Ass, and Hey and Oats in a Stable; there
a Multitude of Country People, besides his ordinary Disciples, flockt from all
Parts about to see the new Ceremony. The Mass is said: the Stable was the
Church, and the Manger was the High Altar. There S. Francis, after he had read
the Gospel, preached with many tears and sobs a most pathetical Sermon upon the
Duty of that Night: and at that time never called Christ otherwise, then this
sweet Babe of Bethlehem. My good Author informs me not, whether he had provided
for, and so pointed at a wooden Babe in the Manger. But however there he found
more; for it is Bonavent. ibid.
credibly reported (God permitting the Operation of Error, and the Devil of
course deluding men, who seek for God, out of Gods way) that a brave and lusty
Boy was there found lying a sleep; then you may guess, with what transported
devotion S. Francis fell to kissing, to hugging, and to worshipping the sweet
Babe, thus sleeping sweetly upon the Hey; where Chronic. Deip. an. 1508. Michel
Pius Chronic. an. 1510.
others likewise have found him since. He is the same Lad, who cried when he
was half buried in the Snow: who used to skip and play about Churches: the very
same, that does appear standing, or lying sometimes upon Mass wafers: and who
by the Mass Priests themselves is partly suspected, partly judged to be a
Devil. But let them judge, or suspect what they please; It is as far from Jesus
Christ our Glorious Savior in Heaven, to come down now to play the Child, as to
be so: and not so much as a wise grave and moral man (much less a Saint, much
less an Angel, much less our Immortal Savior) would condescend to appear in a
fools Coat. But however, this Enchantment has bin attended with such Miracles,
as have bin Ibid.
able to make it pass into a Piece of Roman Religion, for holy Truth: And the
same Hey (whereupon the sweet Baby slept) that had the virtue, as they say, to
cure sick Cattle, and to preserve Men from all Diseases, had the virtue to
bring them too into a new Confraternity, which consists much in washing,
starching, and sowing Laces, wherewith at Christ-mass to deck the Babe: a
proper employment at this very day for good Ladies. And we that have lived
among them from the Persecution of both the long Parliament, and Cromwell, had
leisure enough in twenty Years to see, and wonder at their folly, who think to
make their Peace with God for the whole Year, by dressing and undressing,
rocking, and worshipping this Child that Night.

3. Now lastly, take both Mother and Child together, you shall find between
them two, as much Witchcraft and Superstition again. These Images were not long
adored in the Churches, but there went Stories abroad (true or untrue I decide
not) that they did stir and work Miracles. The Worshipping and Adoration, of
course invited the Spirit to come in; and, by a recompense fit for Error, the
stirring Spirit brought more Worship. These seeming vital Motions, (however
extrinsecal to Images in their harmless use, when they were but Memorials
either of things past, or of Friends absent) have ever bin most proper and most
essential to Idols; and you can hardly find any one among the Pagans that is
famous, but I can show you, that upon fit occasions it did speak or move, or
seemingly do greater Wonders. All this, and in this case, has proved to be
most advantageous to the advancing of Roman Worship. For besides the first
account, which is harmless enough, when it goes no farther then representing
Christ made Man, and born of a Woman; this Image, as now it is used and
continually looked on, fixes in the simple Worshipper a sottish notion of what
he gazes upon continually, to wit, here of Christ's being still a little Child,
and there the Virgin being a great Queen. Hereupon their Speeches and Miracles
improving this imagination, and Christ appearing in very deed prating and
acting, as a dutiful Child under his Mother; or as an Infant with the Queen
Regent: and at the same time great and glorious Apparitions of seeming Angels
and Saints from Heaven, speaking and acting seemingly in their own Persons,
what these Images speak and act in Churches; the Church of Rome has bin
pleased to make her own public Prayers suitable to these three Patterns,
Apparitions, Actings, and Images. Jure Matris, impera. Missal. Paris. Miss. de
B. M.
Impera sublimiter, and imperiosissima, etc. Command the Son like a Mother,
etc. Thus the Virgin is adored as the Goddess and Queen of all; and thus at
last these fine Images recommended Gregor. Epist. ad Serenum.
by Pope Gregory, as an useful Book for Ignorants, have proved among the
Papists to be what the Prophet said they were, Teachers of lies. For this
Mother Image, when provoked, will Bryaeus Chronic. B. M.
shift and toss its sweet Baby like a Tennis-ball, from hand to hand, then give
it suck; and when St. Paula was kissing it, she once had the happiness to taste
some few drops of the Milk, that was Fesulin. in vita Paulae.
yet left between his Lips. Then the Child being full, goes to play, till the
Mother calls him back again; and in requital of the good Milk, runs about like
a little Rat, bidding all Chronic. Deip. an. 1338.
Men to praise its Dame, and telling them, how they Gononus in vita Merthildis.
must do it. When he had done, she gets him Wives, Balingben. 4 December.
whom she calls Daughters, and gives him Rings for his dear Brides. S. Mary
Razia, S. Catharine, and S. Brigit, etc. are known Instances of what I say. The
sweet Baby sometimes makes sweet returns in the same kind. For when the Mother
gets Husbands, the Child acts the part of a Priest: and, as it appears in S.
Peter the Cestercian, whom Chronic. Deip. an. 1292.
she would be espoused to, he marries and blesses them together. All these
Passages are to be seen, both in the visible Motion, and in the audible
Language of Images: and these Images are animated both to move, and to speak as
they do, by those Spirits who call themselves the Queen of Heaven, and her
sweet Babe. Now that these are but evil Spirits, what title soever they may
take (unless possibly Imposture, and the knavery of Priests may claim a share)
the very ridiculousness and unseemliness of their doings, are their Heralds to
proclaim it: and as to their being Queen of Heaven, or a Savior, or any good
Angel, none besides the Papists, but a Lucian, or a Jew, or some like
Blasphemer of Christ's Name, will have People believe they are, to shame with
this Belief, Christ's Holy Name and Religion. After that, how far these Spirits
will proceed beyond their giving and being given in Marriage, I cannot tell, as
to the act: but as to the possibility of worse, it is certain, that Spirits,
who offer to be both unholy and untrue, may be unclean too. Learned Men know,
what other Demons, Mars, and Venus, and Jupiter, and other Pagan Gods and
Goddesses have proved to be in the very heat of their most seemingly Sacred and
Religious Mysteries. For my part, I have lived too long beyond Sea, to take
Convents and Monasteries, which these Apparitions use most to haunt, for
Schools of any Chastity. Besides what I know by Books, I know particularly by
above twenty little Skulls, dug out of the Ditches of a ruinated Nunnery
(called Font-some, near St. Quintin, where we camped a while in the Year 1658.)
sad Evidences, that besides most cruel, most impure Spirits had bin there: and
it is upon a long continued Experience, that the Sins of the Flesh, and the
Worshipping of Idols, go both under one name in the Scripture, Psalm. 106. Thus
they defiled themselves with their own works, and went a whoring after their
own Inventions. To lay aside the unclean part of this Whoring, there is another
as Devilish that attends it, the Worshipping of Devils or Ghosts of dead Men,
instead of Saints; which most real and pitiful, tho most unperceived Sorcery,
has ever bin the common fate of Image-worshipping, and corrupted Religion; and
hardly ever Men left God, and turned aside from his ways, without meeting with
ill Spirits. Thus did the two Sons of Noah, when in their Posterity they turned
the Religion of their Father into an Heathenish Image Service: thus did also
the Israelites, as soon as they fell to their Idols: and thus after them have
the Jews done, by falling to their Conjurings. And, how were it now possible
for Men to escape it, who fall to both; to wit, Image Service, and strange
Exorcisms? I do not love to aggravate Burdens, which of themselves are too
heavy. But without aggravation, it is most certain, that the Roman Church
serves more Images then all the Heathens did together: she has evidently more
Conjurings, both public and private ones, then all the Jews. And so accordingly
I may challenge the best Scholar, and best versed in Antiquity, to show me such
droves of Spirits running after Men and Women, among either Jews or Pagans, as
I can show him, false Saints haunting and courting, sometimes Monks, sometimes
Nuns, sometimes other Superstitious Persons among the Papists. This being so,
no Man must wonder, if he sees Rome, since she is turned Roman Catholic, both
more defiled with all Uncleanness, and more enraged to Bloody Massacres, and
owning both impudently, then ever she was when mere Pagan. And without these
two sad Effects, that could never have bin influenced upon Christianity, but
from Hell; the Great and Glorious God and Savior Christ, is, as much as in Rome
lies, degraded out of Heaven, by the same Devils, into a Boy that sleeps on
straw, or cries and tumbles in deep Snow, or runs and plays with other Lads,
or is every day kept in a Wafer, which a Mass-Priest has enchanted. And the
ever Blessed, ever Holy, and ever Glorious Virgin Mary, is traduced likewise by
these Spirits, into a shameless Vagabond Woman, rambling the most part of her
time after some Suitors or Husbands. O Lord, how long! How long shall this
Transgression, both make desolate thy Sanctuary, and trample it under foot?
Dan. 8.13.

FINIS.
A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF R.F. his Missale Vindicatum. OR VINDICATION OF THE ROMAN
MASS.

A brief Account of R. F. his Missale Vindicatum, or Vindication of the Roman
Mass.
AT last after a deliberation of two Years, a Roman Catholic comes forth with
great Zeal against me, to vindicate his Roman Mass.

In the whole course of this his Vindication, the good Man favors me so far, as
not to answer one wise Word, to any thing that seems to be somewhat material in
my Book; only leaving his dear Jewel under all the dirt imaginable, he shows by
what he is pleased to write, how he is well resolved to make much of it, such
as it is; and like a tenderhearted Parent, to kiss the Child, tho it be
deformed.

This fondness of Affection renders all his Railings more excusable. Men, we
know, will defend what they love thus, what way they can: and Nature teaches
the very Children, when you take from them what they fancy, to scratch and cry.
Only among all his ill Language, I must find fault with his Prudence, when he
calls me an Ignorant. For if an Ignorant can produce and prove such fowl Crimes
against his Mass, as I do in that Book which he rails at: What could not a
Learned Man do? And what must he think of himself, since all along his Book and
mine, he cannot answer an Idiot?

Instead of answering the Charge, which being heavy and true, as it is,
confounds his Mass even to Hell; all he can do, is to exalt it with vain
clamors above the Sky: and when this unhappy Diana stands accused of being
nothing but Wood and Stone, to spend himself in crying out, She is a Goddess,
Act. 19.28.

Yet in this Essay, which is the main scope of his Book, he falls short of what
he aims at. Among all the Fathers, which he heaps up after Coccius, one on
another; not one says, that Priests hold or give the true and natural Flesh of
Christ, otherwise then in Sacrament; nor that they offer it up to God,
otherwise then in a commemorative Sacrifice, which is the drift of the Roman
Mass, and the Point which he should make out. But he musters out as many places
as he can find, that make any mention of Liturgy, Oblation, Holy Victime,
Incruental Sacrifice, and Mass sometimes, which no Protestants dispute against:
and whenever he can lay hold of any such Expressions (which he sees in my
Book I am not unwilling to admit) he thinks he has done great matters.
Especially as soon as he can light upon the Priesthood of Jesus Christ, or the
Blessed Communion, if alluded to, or compared with Melchisedec's Bread and
Wine, his mind runs out to Flesh and Blood. And in this vain labor does the
poor Man spend his four first and longest Chapters.

His fifth, About the necessity of Sacrifices, stands for what no Man stands
against; to wit, that Oblations and Sacrifices must needs be had in the
Christian Church. The Question is, Whether the present Roman Mass be one of
them. I have showed by most necessary Evidences, that it is a plain Sacrilege,
Abomination, etc. and R. F. cannot refute it.

His sixth Chapter comes somewhat closer to me, and what he calls my two
Inventions, to exclude the Mass Sacrifice, One is taken out of Heb. 7.9. etc.
and urged against all evasion in the 4th Chapter of my Book, which the
Gentleman is well pleased in a manner to pass by: Bones too hard for weak
teeth, and, which tho but thrown down in the way, might make Mass-Priests
tumble, if they had not the wit to leap over them. The second is about my
quoting of S. Austin de Civit. Dei lib. 10. cap. 6. and Durand concerning that
which he calls the lawful Mass Missa Legitima, and the Sacrifice continuing in
the Intercession of Christ. Whereon I will say nothing to him, but that he
should have read what he carps at, with some kind of attention, rather then
expose himself to the hazard of censuring me, like one who had neither common
sense nor Conscience.

His 7th Chapter contains for the most part a long and extraordinary Amazement,
why I should quote Bellarmin and the Schole-men, since they are all against me,
and for Mass; and herein the Gentleman seems to be so strangely perplexed about
my foolish Impertinencies, that it is charity to resolve him, and to help him
to understand that I make use of his Authors, either to show the world what
fine Mysteries, whereof Martin Luther and Calvin could not be the proper
Witnesses, are contained in his holy Mass: or to convince him how this Babel
confounds sometimes her own Builders: or to some other good purpose that no
wise man should wonder at. But when he is pleased to think that I quote them
fraudulently, or that I have not read them at all; till he can produce some
clear Instance of this my fraudulent dealing, I will leave him to his own
thoughts.

His 8th Chapter is against two gross Mistakes, which, as he thinks, I poor
ignorant am fallen into. 1. When I said somewhere they do Sacrifice Christ at
Mass, whereas they sacrifice his Flesh only. 2. When I seem to be afraid, lest
the Body of Christ should suffer harm, whenever they throw it down to the
ground, or into sinks and privy Houses. For the first, I have some hope that
the Council of Trent, and Bellarmin, whom I have there quoted to that purpose,
will in a great mesure protect me: and tho they do not, how comes this learned
man to be ignorant of their commonly received Doctrine, that the Body and Blood
are not upon the Altar without the Soul? and if the two former are there by the
direct strength of the five consecrating words, this follows them perpetually
by a necessary Concomitance. But as to my second mistake, let him read the 7th
Chapter, of my Roman Missal, and answer it. Mean while I advise him, not to
make that honest Care, which the Church does prescribe sometimes of keeping
consecrated things safe and decent, a proof of transubstantiation, lest his
very Altars, Images, Crosses, Patens, Chalices, Oiles, and other hallowed
Utensils, which he would not through negligence let fall to the ground, have a
worse luck, and by his Transubstantiation, among his wafers loose their
substance.

His 9th Chapter is spent to prove that his Miracles about Mass grow not less
for being many, which no body, for ought I know, contends they do; for they
being nothing at all, it matters not how little or big they are accounted to
be. And here the Gentleman having it seems little to do, falls foul on my
Folly, for attributing these Miracles to the Priests power, and not to God;
which I do no more then themselves: and for bringing their Imaginary Christ
from Heaven; which is the English of their Adductive Motion. At last he brings
all to this Issue; that St. Chrysostom and John Calvin make very much for these
transubstantiating Miracles.

His 10th Chapter runs all along upon a more popular Error, as if Christ's true
real Presence at the administration of his holy Mysteries, were that very
Presence, which involves within its being all the aforesaid foolish Miracles;
and which, when all is done, proves nothing better, as it were easy to
demonstrate, then a true real Absence. Then he insists on Gods Power, to prove
the being of his Miracles: and would fain have us to believe them upon their
being not impossible: (on which ground a man would believe strange things)
however it is better to disbelieve them, upon their being impertinent,
injurious to Christ as man, and in point of Faith, destitute of any the least
ground in his Gospel.

In his 11 and 12 Chapters, he makes it his whole business in behalf of the
Absurdities, which his Church takes for Mysteries, to discredit Sense and
Reason: and rails bitterly against me as a scoffing, jeering Buffoon for using
them, not as my chief Grounds and Treachers in Christian Religion (for so far
the Gentleman were right) but as good subservient helps to defend it from his
Follies; the truth is, he is the fittest man to believe Mass and Popery, who
best can disown all Reason. Wherein our Author is fairly advanced, who in favor
of this brutish Theme, is not afraid to cite St. Austin, one of the most
rational of all the Fathers, and the most full of Arguments out of Nature,
Sense, and Reason, even in those very Books and Places where he cites him.

His 13th Chapter is a Rhapsody of several Fathers and Doctors, which have bin
answered forty times: besides an Imaginary Contradiction which he is pleased to
put upon me, when I say, as I do, that Popish Mass may take its Date with
Transubstantion from their famous Lateran Council: and when he fancies that I
say, which I do not, nor ever did, that this same Popish Mass has lasted 1200.
years.

His 14th Chapter is a long and loose discourse, both against our Ordination,
and in behalf of his Priesthood, where he is so extremly discreet, as not to
name me so much as once; much less to answer that heavy Charge of Usurpation,
and Sacrilege, which upon this every account I have justly laid on his Church.

His 15th and last Chapter concludes that Mass Adoration is in no wise
Idolatry, by a formal Paralogism, that is a reasoning against all Rules ex
minore negante in prima Figura: by the Testimony of Dr Thorndike: by supposing
Transubstantiation, and confounding it with the Real Presence; by the Opinion
of Averroes a learned Turk: and by several misunderstood sayings and Practices
of holy Persons in their worship at the blessed Communion; all proofs well
becoming the case: but too weak for him to stand upon, and for me to take
notice of. Especially since he is pleased all along to leave my Reasons against
Mass untoucht, and so the Mass undefended.

Nevertheless the Gentleman calls for a Judge and a Jury; which (if not
corrupted and packt) must needs find this Client guilty; since he stands these
two years charged with such clear and demonstrative Accusations, that hitherto
no body ventures to meddle with them. Only the Gentleman promises another
learned Pen, which, as he hopes, shall do the Deed. Mean while he will end as
he began, railing at me, and wondering at my Impudence, Ignorance, Insolence,
Folly, Malice, for meddling at all with his Schole-men, Liturgies, Councils, and
Fathers. I hope the other learned Pen will be civil. So if he come out with any
thing for the Vindication of his Mass, that may be called an Answer, (the Lord
giving me some health with life) he shall not tarry long for a Reply.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 9. line 24. read divine commission. p. 12. l. 11. r. second. p. 24. l. y.
r. for if. p. 27. l. 13. r, where. p. 33. l. 8. r. Deles. p. 50. l. 11. blot
out dear. p. 51. l. 6. r. Mass Priests are of this sort. p. 57. l. 19. r. his.
p. 57. l. 22. r. Lucia. p. 61. l. 29. r. ail. p. 63. l. 17. r. louse. p. 65. l.
33. r. requires. p. 69. l. 25. blot out pious. p. 76. l. 20. put the comma
after it. p. 83. l. 25. blot out which. p. 88. l. 10. r. of a Nun. p. 97. l.
23. r. falsifying. p. 103. l. 18. r. call. p. 154. l. 23. r. on every. p. 159.
l. 32. r. my whole. p. 173. l. 7. r. 200. p. 177. l. 12. a full point after
Gloriosa. p. 186. l. 27. r. their doing. p. 203. l. 6. r. thus far. p. 219. l.
22. r. imposed by them. p. 244. l. 18. r. that it is no sin to be emboldned to
sin by the hope. p. 249. l. 1. r. have Compostella, and in Italy the p. 270. l.
21. r. September. p. 274. l. 15. r. look at his hands for the p. 276. l. 3.
blot out Purgatory. 279. l. 7. r. broad open. ibid. l. 23. r. the said. p. 280.
l. 3. r. being strangers. p. 287. l. 5. r. badges. p. 289. l. 13. r. for then
and especially. 294. l. 1. r. to say at. ibid. l. 33. she had him in. p. 316.
l. 12. r. exorcisc. p. 347. l. 28. r. where the.


