A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF THE Severe usage of Sir John Trevor to his Eldest Son.
THE Petitioner, Edward Trevor, had the misfortune not to be beloved by his
Mother, from his Infancy, who was Possessed with an Opinion of his being an
Idiot; at the Age of Fourteen he was placed at the Minister's of Chiswick, for
near Four Years, least being a Fool he might Disgrace the Family; but finding
that he would not pass for such, and that Place being too public, he was taken
from thence, and removed to his Fathers Country House, at Hamstead, where
having been instructed in the Principles of Religion, he thought it his Duty to
Receive the Blessed Sacrament, which he did, with the Approbation of the
Minister of the Place.

This being an Act no ways proper for an Idiot to perform, his Mother
Barbarously Misused him, and because he would not be a Fool, Resolved he should
be Mad, and took occasion, from this Act, to say, That the Consideration of
what he had done had driven him to Despair and Frenzy; Whereupon your
Petitioner was, by his Mother, carried in a Coach to a Private Mad-house, near
More-Fields, kept by one Mrs. Woodford, who is now living, where he was
Confined Three Years and a half, and so Ill Used, that he had one of his
Fore-Teeth broke out, by forceing things down his Throat, and ordered to go by
the Name of Edwards, but several times offered his Liberty if he would Sign a
Parchment without Reading it.

This your Petitioner refusing to do, he was, one Evening, desired by Mrs.
Woodford to go buy something for her, (which was the only time he was suffered
to go out of doors by himself) but, in the Street, he was Siezed by two
Ruffians, hurried in a Coach to the Waterside, put into a Boat with Menaces of
Murdering him if he cried out, and carried on board a Vessel at Greenwich,
which Sailed that very Night, but whether bound your Petitioner is to this day
unacquainted.

But the Vessel being Persu'd by a French Privateer, put into Ostend, where
your Petitioner escaped from them (though without Money, and half Naked) and
begged his way to Rotterdam, where your Petitioner, for want of Necessaries, was
forced to enter himself as a Servant at a Publick-house for Six Weeks, in which
time he had got so much Money as Enabled him to get for England, which your
Petitioner did (upon finding himself described in the London Gazette, with an
offer of Five Pounds Reward to any body that could give any account of him
Alive or Dead) being in hopes that his Parents were unacquainted with this part
of his Misfortunes, but having the ill luck to be Stripped of Money and Clothes,
upon his Arrival in England he was forced to desire a Pass for London, which
was granted him by the Mayor of Harwich, and Signed by Justice Rebow, of
Colchester.

When he came to London, your Petitioner well knowing the Ill Will of his
Mother toward him, would not go to his Father's for fear of falling into her
hands, but went to the Minister's of Chiswick, who happened to be from home,
and his Brother, who was in the house would not Receive him, which compelled
him to seek Relief of Mr. Haines a Gentleman of that Place.

But your Petitioner was there but one Day before his Mother, having notice of
him, took him from thence, and sent him a second time to the Mad-house
aforesaid, where he was Chained to the Floor, and had only one Arm at liberty
for a considerable time; there he remained Three Years longer, but at last
found means to escape from thence, and went again to the Minister's of
Chiswick, where, much against the will of his Mother, his Father paid for his
Board, for one Year, though without any Money in his Pocket, or ever being
permitted to see his Father, though above Seven Years since he had had that
happiness; the last Six Months, indeed, he had a Servant allowed, occasioned by
the ill stare of Health, which the Minister at that time labored under.

But before this last Year was Expired, your Petitioner had notice from Sir.
Roger Puelliston (his Brother by the Mother) that there was a Design formed,
to send him again beyond Sea, (Which your Petitioner's Mother confirmed when he
saw her) to Obviate which, Your Petitioner was Advised to Marry, as the best
Expedient to secure him from these Unnatural attempts; Which he accordingly did.

But upon his Marrying, his Father was so incensed, that he would not for some
time allow him Bread till Counselor Sloan upbraided him with Cruelty and
Barbarity to his Eldest Son, and threatened to Sue him for a Maintainnace, to
prevent which, he has ever since allowed your Petitioner 20 Shillings a Week to
be received Weekly.

Nor was this all, but when his Wife, (who is a Virtuous Woman, and of a good
Family) was with Child, his Mother sent your Petitioner word, by her own
Footman, that She was assured that he could have no Children being an Eunuch,
upon which your Petitioner was Advised (to Vindicate the Reputation of his Wife
and Children) to Suffer himself to be Searched by Surgeons; which he Submitted
to, and has their Certificae under Hand and Seal to Produce.

Your Petitioner, could not for upwards of seventeen Years, have maintained his
Family in Sickness and in health, by this poor allowance, without contracting
larger Debts then he has, had it not been for a small Legacy left him by an
Aunt, which has so far helped him, that he is at present But 60 l. in Debt, or
thereabouts; which is now so pressing upon him, that he is Daily in danger to
be Flung into Goal, which would be the utter Ruin of himself and Family.

Your Petitioner has Represented his miserable circumstances to his Father, by
the most moving and Pathetick Letters he was capable; and has also got
Gentlemen of worth and Honor to speak to him to consider his Urgent
necessities and the great Fortune viz. upwards of 40000 l. which his Mother
brought; both which, he hoped would have Induced him to have allowed him a
Competency in some measure answerable to her Fortune, But all this without any
effect:

Your Majesty is the Patroness of injured innocence.

Your Petitioner therefore most Humbly beggs leave, to throw himself at your
Royal Feet, and to Implore Your Majesty so far, to consider the hardships your
Petitioner has, and does still undergo, As to make use of your Authority with
his Father, to allow him a Maintenance fit for the Heir of 1500 l. per Annum.
(Which has been Entailed in the Family for several hundred Years) and enable
him to afford his only Child such Accomplishments as her Age requires.

And your Petitioner shall ever Pray.


