To the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland.
The humble Petition of Thomas Brewer, Gentl: And William Pawlin, Elizabeth
Quested, Widow, and Ann Beswick, Daughter of Ann Beswick, Widow, Creditors of
Ulick Earl of St. Albans, and Clanricard, on the behalf of themselves, and
other the Creditors of the said Earl.
SHOWS,
THat the said Earl being much indebted, and having occasion to take up more
money, did earnestly importune Sir Henry Compton (since deceased) Sir Lewis
Dive, and your petitioner Thomas Brewer, to be engaged with him, for whose
indemnity, he would convey all his estate in Kent unto them.

That 4th. of May 1637 the said Earl did by his Deed and Fine thereupon levied,
convey and assure unto the said Sir Henry Compton Sir Lewis Dive, and your
Petitioner Thomas Brewer, and their heirs; all his lands (by name) in the
County of Kent, to save them harmless against all such debts, as they had or
should stand engaged, with and for him the said Earl, and also with power to
raise monys, by sale or other wise for payment thereof, in case himself did not
discharge them within seven years next after the said 4th. of May 1637.

After wards the said Trustees did become engaged with, and for the said Earl,
as his Sureties in several obligations amounting unto above 20000 l. principal
Money.

But for that the said Earl did not satisfy the said debts within the said 7.
years, nor at any time after, the said lands became absolutely vested in the
said Trustees (who were accordingly seized thereof) for the purposes aforesaid,
who have been ever willing to perform their trust, as well to the satisfaction of
the said Creditors, as disingagement of themselves, but have been interrupted
by reason of the late distempers.

That about Feb. 1647. The Earl of Northumberland then of the Lords house, and
Sr. Robert Pie then of the house of Commons being two of the said Earls
Creditors) did upon the same Security, by virtue of the said Deed, obtain an
Ordinance of Parliament, unknown unto your Petitioner Thomas Brewer, for payment
of their respective debts, out of the profits of the premises.

That your Petitioner, Tho.Brewer being a Prisoner in Maidstone-Goal (only for
refusing the late Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance) where he had been detained
from Novem. 1642. was sent for in July 1649. by order from the Committee
appointed for preparing an Act for settling 2000 l. per annum upon John
Bradshaw Sergeant at law; and so soon as your said Petitioner had made answer
to such questions as were then put unto him, touching the business then before
them, he was forthwith returned back again to prison, where he remained until
April 1652. not with standing the said Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance were
10 of February 1648. by Act of Parliament repealed, made void and null.

That in August 1649. diverse Manors and Lands of the Lord Cottingtons,
together with the said Earls lands in Kent, were by Act settled upon the said
Sergeant Bradshaw, and his heirs, with a Saving to such as had any right to any
part of the said estates, So as they entered their claim before the Justices of
the common pleas, before the last day of January 1649.

Now forasmuch as your Petitioner, Thomas Brewer was a Prisoner as aforesaid,
and had no knowledge, or could come to the knowledge of the said Act, which was
never published, it was impossible for him to take any benefit of the Saving
therein contained, or to set forth any claim or title to any part of the said
estate, though never so good, perfect and absolute in law or equity whatsoever,
which otherwise he would most readily have don and so no default in him
therein. And for that your Petitioner Thomas Brewer has been, and now is sued
for many of the said debts entered into, with and for the said Earl, and for
which the said estate is made over as aforesaid, and which your Petitioner Tho.
Brewer is no ways able to satisfy or pay, but if proceeded against, his person
mustly as a pawn or prey in perpetual prison. And for that the Lord Cottingtons
lands passed by the said Act, are upon enquiry, and as your Petitioners are
informed, and doubt not but they shall be able to prove, found to be of much
better value than 2000 l. per annum, which was the yearly revenue only by the
said Act intended to have been settled upon the said Sergeant Bradshaw; and for
that your Petitioners the said Creditors, were wholly ignorant of the said Act
and Settlement, neither had they anyestate in law, in the said lands, whereby
they might put in any legal claim thereunto, accordng to the said Act, had they
known thereof. And for that the said Earls lands were so long since settled as
aforesaid, and upon so good, valuable and equitable considerations, and concern
your Petitioners the said Creditors, who are many of them poor widows and
Orphans, and who together with your Petitioner Tho. Brewer will be utterly
ruined, unless relieved by the justice of your Honors.

May it therefore please your Honors to take the premises into your pious
considerations, and to do therein what to your grave wisdoms shall seem meet,
whereby your Petitioner, Tho. Brewer ( notwithstanding the said Act) may be
indempnified. and the said Creditors satisfied (by and out of the said Earls
estate in Kent, according to the said settlement in May 1637.) Your honors
Instice magnifyed, and God in all, and by All, glorified.

And your Petitioners shall pray, etc.

A Petion against John Bradshaw December. 1654


