A Bridle for the Tongue: OR, THE Trial and Condemnation OF
WHISPERING-BACKBITER.

Being a profitable and pleasant Discourse, designed as an ESSAY to detect the
Sin of Detraction, an Evil too common in this Age.

If any Man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his Tongue, --
this Man's Religion is vain: James 1. 26. landerous and malicious words
discover the Evil of the Heart. Aristotle. have opened my Mouth in a Parable:
Psalm. 78. 2 And used Similitudes; Hosea 12. 10. LONDON; Printed for the Author,
and sold by M. Fabian at Mercers-Chappel in Cheapside 1700.

To the Cordial and Single-hearted READERS.
My Friends and Countrymen;
THIS small Tract was at spare times committed to Writing some years ago, with
thoughts of sending it out into the World, but it was obstructed by a twofold
Discouragement: First, Its vulgar Habit, or plain Dress, it being destitute of
those high strains of Rhetorical Flourishes now in fashion; this, together with
the Cost of changing the Character from Manuscript into Print, so powerfully
checked my Intentions, that I laid it by to sleep; but some having read it, and
others having heard of it, have encouraged me to awake it, and send it forth
into the World in its plain Dealing and mean Dress; so that I am willing to run
the hazard both of its acceptance and success: Knowing beforehand, there are
some hard to be humoured in point of Curiosity, and others so sour that nothing
can please. We may also meet with some that will only study to cavil and pick
Quarrels with it; but I am resolved beforehand to take no notice of it,
knowing that one of the best ways to kill an Injury is by Contempt. Cordial
Reader, to such I send it: know this, that the Tongue is that instrumental
Member, by which Words are uttered. Solomon informs us, That Life and Death are
in the power of the Tongue, Prove. 18. 21. So that it is either a Tree of Life,
Prove. 15. 4. or a sharp Sword, Psalm. 64. 3. If the Tongue be a Fire, that is,
either lighted with a Coal from God's Altar, or else is set on fire of Hell,
James 3. 6. if not guided by the Bridle of God's Word; it is only those that
have been under the Lash of that Rod that are best capable to judge of the
Smart. I would not be taken for one that measures Men's Worth by their Applause
or Esteem amongst the Vulgar: for common Report has many times a Blister upon
the Tongue. Some there are that can find no medium when they are disposed to
make others the Subject of their Discourse, but must either Diabolize them, or
Canonize them for Saints: Like those barbarous Highlanders concerning Paul,
Acts 28. 4-6. Either they are Murderers, and so the worst of Men; or else that
the Gods are come down. Some are of so unlucky a Disposition, that they can
sport themselves in playing the Butcher with the Reputation of others; like
that cruel Duke of Savoy, that took pleasure in blinding and tormenting the
innocent Birds: There are others whose Words do eat like a Canker, more
privately. Eliphas counts it a Mercy to be hid from the Scourge of the Tongue,
Job 15. 21. Yet, Reader, if it be thy lot, be not too impatient under it; it
may, by the good Providence of God, prove a Scourge to drive thee closer to thy
Duty, and nearer to him. Let me desire thee to peruse these ensuing Lines
without prejudice, and take up the same Resolution with holy David, Psalm. 39.
1. do not offend with thy Tongue, keep thy Mouth as with a Bridle. So I commend
it to thy perusal, who am a Friend to all Lovers of Truth and Peace,

E. P.

A Brief NARRATIVE of the Apprehending, Trial, and Condemnation of
Whispering-Backbiter. Written by the Author in the Country, in a Letter to his
Friend in the City.
Honored Sir;
I Give you Thanks for your last obliging Lines; I have nothing of moment to
communicate to you, save only the Detection of a mischievous Criminal, who it
seems was appearing in Disguise, admitted a Freeman of our Corporation of
Christ-Church, and has insensibly infected not only our Corporation, but also
the whole Country of Christianity. Tho I doubt not but you have heard of the
mischievous Effects of his pernicious Acts, yet I presume it will not be
ungrateful to you, if I give you a Breviate of the whole Proceedings against
him in these Parts: Which, as near as I could collect, take as follows.

1. His Father was of the City of Crete; and you know it upon Record, Titus 1.
12. that the Cretians were always Liars; and his Mother was an Athenian, whose
Custom it was to hear and tell some new thing, Acts 17. 21. They having only
one Child, who much resembled them both, they jointly agreed to call his Name
Whispering-Backbiter: and tho, Sir, you know that sometimes pious Parents have
a wicked Offspring; for Grace is not entailed to natural Descent; so wicked
Parents may have pious Children. Even so it was hoped that Whispering-Backbiter
had seen the Evil of his Parents ways, and was so far seemingly reformed, that
he renounced the Name given him by his Parents, and entered himself a Freeman
of the Corporation of Christ-Church, etc. resolving upon a Reformation, he
engaged to be a true Subject thereof, and performed his Corporation-Vow for a
time, being ashamed of his former Name, and saw that the Freemen of Christ's
Church must not act like either the Cretians or Athenians: Neither would the
Corporation of Christ-Church allow his Nature to answer to his former Name, of
Whispering-Backbiter, it being directly opposite to his new Name of
Christianity: Moreover, he had been both instructed into, and had often read
over the Charter of our Corporation. But,

2. In the next place, Christianity is an honorable Name; so many lay claim to
it, without just Title, as was too evident in this seeming Convert, who only
changed his Name, but his Nature was not changed, and he trod in the steps of
his natural, but degenerate Parents; we hoped he had been in love with the Work
in use in our Corporation of Christ-Church, namely, the mortifying of
Corruptions, and a crucifying of the Flesh, with the Affections and Lusts
thereof; Romans 8. 13. Gal. 5. 2. tho alas, he quickly grew weary of this Work,
and inclined to the steps of his Parents, tho there had been no want of Means
to instruct him, that the Snuffers of the Sanctuary must be of pure Gold, yea
and the Snuff-dishes also, to show that the Reporters and Receivers of others
faults must be sure to be innocent themselves, Exodus 37. 23. But alas, he would
pick up Reports right or wrong, true or false, and disperse them for current
Coin, tho in a disguise, till it came at last to be discovered, by that great
strangeness and want of Love that has appeared in the several Companies of our
Corporation. But there having some discovery been made of the preposterous
Criminal, Information was given to the Recorder of our City and Corporation,
the honorable Mr. Church Discipline, who gave speedy Information to the Lord
Chief Justice Fear-God, who is one ready to right the wronged, and to repair
the damaged: So he forthwith grants his Warrant, issued out under the Great
Seal, and by the Authority of our Sovereign, to seize and apprehend the
Criminal. The Warrant, as I remember, runs thus, or to this effect.

TO all Mayors, Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, Constables and Headboroughs,
in this our Corporation of Christ-Church, and Country of Christianity: Whereas
Information has been given in to the Recorder of our City and Corporation, the
honorable Mr. Church Discipline, of the unlawful Practice, and ill-behaviour
of a mischievous Member of our Corporation, who is properly known by the Name
of Whispering-Backbiter, who for sometime has gone about sowing Contention,
destroying of Unity, and breaking the Peace of our Corporation and
Commonwealth. This is therefore, by the Authority aforesaid, to will and
require you, and every of you, upon sight hereof, forthwith to make diligent
search in your respective Liberties for the Criminal aforesaid -- And when you
have seized him, have him before the next Justice of the Peace, in order to his
Commitment to the next Prison, to answer to such Crimes as are laid to his
Charge the next Sessions of the Peace, to be holden in our Corporation: And
herein you are not to fail. Signed by me L. C. J. Fear-God.

This Warrant was sent to the High-Constable of the Hundred of Try-all, his
Name was Examination; who having received the Warrant, takes with him the
Petty-Constable, or Headborough, whose Name was Prove-all: So they searched
their own Houses first, as resolving to see they were clear of Backbiter at
home, before they went to look for him abroad. First, Because they would give
no offense to their Neighbors, by any show of Partiality. And, secondly,
Because they that are clear at home, are the fittest to examine and prove
others. Thus they went, taking the Houses in order till they came almost
through the Suburbs of our Corporation; they took up one on suspicion, her Name
proved to be Mrs. Busibody; and a Man also, for this Whispering-Backbiter goes
sometimes in Men's Apparel, and sometimes in Women's: this Mrs. Busibody's House
was all out of order, and they asking her why she let her House lie so, she
said she had so much business abroad, that she had no time to set in order
things at home; so the Constable reproved her, telling her that the Lord of our
Country allows of no such Custom, Luke 6. 41. and will have his Subjects to
cast away their own Beam, before they look abroad for the Mote of others,
showing her it was dishonorable to our Sovereign. The Man they took up on
suspicion, his Name was Mr. Liar, so they examined him, and found him in many
false Stories; and then they asked him, if he knew one Whispering-Backbiter,
that lived there or thereabouts: Yes, said Liar, I know him to be a good
orderly Person, and a Christian too, and is respected and entertained by
several in our Suburbs; he is my near Kinsman, we are Brothers and Sisters
Children; my Mother was a Cretian, and so was his Father; good People, says
Liar.

Constable. Show me where your Kinsman lives.

No, said Liar, I know you have some wicked design. So they sharply reproved
Liar, and went on; and as they passed along, they met with a Freeman's Wife of
the Corporation, whose Name was Godly Jealousy: they enquired of her for
Backbiter's House; she shakes her Head, wishing that Corruption of the Flesh,
and Delusion of the wicked one were destroyed, that the Spirit may be saved in
the day of the Lord.


Constable. That is designed by our Sovereign.


Jealousy. You must go toward the outside of the Suburbs, and enquire for
Prittle-prattlestreet, and go up near the upper end, where you will see the
sign of two Faces under a Hood, just at the corner of Dissembling-Alley. So
they gave her thanks for her Directions, and went directly to Backbiter's
House, and seized him; but he huft and bounc'd, and told them he valued none of
them of a farthing.


Constable. Mr. Backbiter, the innocenter you are, the better it will be for
you. So they had him along, but he would fain have been let go, and endeavored
to make his Escape, but they were able to manage him: Then he threatens them,
saying he was not the Person. O, said Examination the H. Constable, search thy
own Heart as we have searched for thee! Ay, said the Petty Constable Prove-all,
it will appear whether thou art the Man, when thou come to thy Trial. So they
had him before Justice Order, who was also Sheriff for the Corporation and
County that year, who takes him into Examination; but Backbiter denies his
Name, and says he scorns it. And please your Worship, said he, I had that Name
given me by my Parents, but I renounced it.


Justice. Pray, what may one call your Name now?

Prisoner. Christian, and please your Worship.

Ay, said Justice Order, and a disorderly one too; I have heard you changed
your Name, but your Nature was never changed, as your immoral Actions have
demonstrated. I find you are the Person, and to Prison you shall go.


Backbiter. I entreat your Worship to accept of Bail.


Justice. Who are your Bail, Mr. Backbiter?


Backbiter. Sir, I have a Kinswoman, Madam Fawning Widow, and Henry Hypocrite
Esquire;.


Justice. No, Sirrah, I shall accept of no such Bail. Clerk, write his
Mittimus, which runs to this effect.

To Nathaniel Newman, Prison-Keeper of the Corporation and County of
Christ-Church and Christianity: This is to require you to take into safe
Custody the Body of the Prisoner Mr. Whispering-Backbiter, and you shall keep
him in close Confinement till he shall be discharged by due course of Law; for
the which this Mittimus shall be your Warrant.
Backbiter. I pray your Worship to accept of Bail: I have a third Person, my
near Kinsman, he is worth a thousand Pounds, and he is willing to be bound Body
for Body for me.


Justice. Where does your Kinsman live? and what is his Name?


Backbiter. And please you, Sir, his Name is Mr. Levi Liar, he lives in
Prating-Row.


Justice. If he were worth ten thousand Pounds, I would not take his word for a
farthing.

The Constable and Headborough conduct him safely to Prison, and deliver him
with the Mittimus into the hands and care of the Prison-Keeper, etc. Now
Backbiter is much dejected: if you had been there and put your Ear to the
Keyhole, you might have heard him mutter out these melancholy Verses.

Alas, alas, have I backbited many,
And whispered Falsehoods into others Ears?
I little thought it should be known by any;
Alas, on the Housetop it all appears!
The Mask I wore is pulled off my Face;
I think upon the Evil I have done:
I see there is coming on me great Disgrace,
And from it I can see no way to run.

THE Sessions being come, the Right Honorable the Lord Chief Justice Fear-God
is the Judge, with the honorable Mr. Rule-well Mayor, and Justice Order
Sheriff; and Mr. Church Discipline Recorder, as also the Attorny-General to
prosecute the Laws of our Sovereign against the Criminal, with the
Undersheriff Mr. Learn-Rule; with other Justices of the Peace and Quorum. The
Bench being sat, the Sheriff commands the Prison-Keeper Mr. Newman to put
Backbiter to the Bar, which is done accordingly. Then the Judge proceeds to read
his Commission, which empowered him to hear Causes, and determine Matters in
behalf of our Sovereign, and the great Charter of our Corporation and
Commonwealth. In the said Commission was also inserted, the Duty of Mr.
Rule-well the Mayor, and Mr. Church Discipline Recorder; showing that they must
act in conjunction with the Judge, the honorable Fear-God, for the suppressing
all Disorders, that Justice be not perverted, the Innocent wronged, and the
Guilty go free, but that the Right of all Heaven-born Subjects be preserved in
Life, Name and Substance, according to that Statute Law given to qualify
Rulers, 2 Samuel 23. 3. He that rules amongst Men must be just, ruling in the
fear of God: In which Diligence is required, Romans 12. 8. He that rules, with
Diligence. That they must not judge according to outward appearance, but judge
righteous Judgment; Joh. 7. 24. without knowing of Faces, or partially
favoring of Causes, etc.

The Jury being warned to appear, Mr. Ready-Scribe, Clerk of the Sessions, is
commanded to read over their Names, and Mr. Conscience the Crier to call them
by Name distinctly. The Clerk reads the List of their Names; and the Crier
calls them aloud by Name.

Hate-Strife, Love-Brother, Society, Condescension, Patience, Plain-dealing,
Faithful, Charity, Hope-well, Pray-well, Humility, Concord.
Good Men and true. Stand forth and hear your Charge.

Crier. Silence about the Court there.


Judge. Gentlemen of the Jury, you shall carefully hear, and faithfully and
impartially try the Cause depending betwixt our Sovereign and the Prisoner at
the Bar; and according to the Evidence, and the Oath you have taken, a faithful
and just Verdict you shall bring in according to the best of your
Understandings; and so the Lord help and direct you. Whispering-Backbiter, Hold
up thy Hand. Clerk of the Sessions, read his Indictment, which runs to this
effect.


Clerk. Whispering-Backbiter, Thou stand here indicted by the Name of
Whispering-Backbiter; thou wast made free of this honorable Corporation of
Christ-Church, and admitted to the Privileges thereof, as a Member of the same:
But thou not having the Fear of God so before thine Eyes as thou ought to
have had, have been guilty of many foul Crimes; not only in offering Violence
to our Sheriff, Mr. Order, and the Recorder Mr. Church Discipline, Persons to
be highly honored and esteemed in our Corporation, who are as Walls to our
City; yea, thou have been guilty of wounding of Love-Truth in his Name and
Livelihood by thy laying him on the backside; thou have broken the Peace, and
sowed and stirred up Strife in the Corporation, and Discord amongst Brethren;
thou have broken both the old and new Charters of our Corporation: Herein thou
have manifested not only the breach of thy Corporation-Oath, but also thy great
Insolency and Rebellion against our Sovereign Lord, his Crown, and Dignity.


Judge. Mr. Backbiter, What can thou say to this thy Indictment? Art thou
guilty or not guilty?


Prisoner. My Lord, I am indicted by a wrong Name; I changed my Name, as I told
the Worshipful the Sheriff; my Name is Christian Professor, my Lord.

Sheriff Order. Yes, Mr. Backbiter, you did tell me of changing your old Name
for a new; but you showed no signs of any other change, no new Birth, no new
Creature, or Newness of Life, in Qualities or Qualifications; and what
advantage is it to have a new Name, when the old Man with his Deeds is not put
off? Ephesians. 4. 22. Rev. 3. 1.


Backbiter. If I must go by this odious Name of Whispering-Backbiter, I must be
content to bear it as my Burden, but I hoped my new would have carried me above
all suspicion; or at least have preserved me from being called into question.


Recorder. It will appear in his Trial, whether he be the Person expressed in
the Indictment or not.


Judge. What say thou? Art thou guilty or not guilty?


Backbiter. I beseech your Lordship, that I may have the Liberties and
Privileges of a Freeman; there are two of the Jury especially that I have great
reason to object against, for I know they are diametrically opposite to me in
their Minds and Dispositions.


Judge. Who are the Persons you object against?


Backbiter. My Lord, there is the Foreman, Mr. Hate-Strife, I cannot endure
him; and the last Man Mr. Concord: and there is Mr. Charity, and Mr. Society,
Men that have no kindness for me; yea I can justly object against them all.


Judge. No, Sirrah, we know them to be good, faithful and honorable Persons; by
the same rule you may object against Me, the Mayor, Sheriff and Recorder.
Answer to thy Indictment.


Backbiter. I hope your Lordship will allow me to have a Counsel, for I cannot
speak in my own Defense as some can.


Judge. Yes, you shall be allowed the favor of a Counsel.


Backbiter. I thank your Lordship.


Judge. Answer: Art thou guilty or not guilty?


Backbiter. Not guilty, my Lord.


Judge. By whom will thou be tried?


Backbiter. By my Sovereign and my Country.


Attorney General. If your Lordship pleases, I shall open the Cause by way of
Breviate, and shall discover the Disposition and manner of the Life and Actions
of Backbiter ever since I was Discipline Recorder of our Corporation.


Judge. Do so; but pray with what brevity you can.


Attorney General. As for the Man, he is to be considered in the common Gender,
Man or Woman: Some of the learned in our Laws, upon that Statute, Levit. 19.
16. compare him to a Pedlar, who carries Wares about to utter and dispose of to
Customers: So he carries Reports and Tales from House to House. Another says,
on that Statute, Psalm. 15. 3. He that backbiteth not with his Tongue, etc. or
slandereth not, defameth not the Hebrew word ((...)) from whence Regel a Foot
is derived, properly notes a going to and fro, prying and spying, and carrying
Tales and Rumors; and is used for defaming or calumniating by craft or guile,
as Ainsworth says, Backbiting is used for all crafty deceitful abuse of the
Tongue. Backbiters and Whisperers, says Downham, go about after the manner of
Spies, go up and down dissembling their Malice, that they may spy the Faults
and Defects of others, of which they make a malicious relation to such as will
give ear to the Slander: So that backbiting is a malicious defaming of one
behind his back. A Backbiter speaks openly evil of another behind his back:
but Whisperer signifies privacy; the design of whispering and backbiting is,
the one to separate Friendship, the other to hinder ones Fame: Says Mr. Leigh
in his Crit. Sac. Obtrectatio or Detractio. Psalm. 120. 3, 4. A deceitful
Tongue, and a false Tongue are sharp Arrows of the Almighty, with Coals of
Juniper, which are the hottest Coals of all Wood, must be their Portion. It Is
one that by false or true report does hurt the Name or Credit of another behind
his back; and is expressed in our Charters, both old and new, under these six
acceptations; a Slanderer, a false Accuser, a Whisperer, a Backbiter, a
Talebearer, or Defamer, etc. and is ranked with the greatest of Criminals;
Romans 1. 30. Backbiters, haters of God, despiteful, proud, Boasters, etc. 2 Cor.
12. 20. Envyings, Wrath, Strife, Backbitings, Whisperings, Swellings, Tumults:
these go in conjunction. This is the Person that would fain be called
Christian, the effects of whose Actions are so fatally hurtful to the Peace and
Prosperity of our Corporation of Christ-Church, to the destroying of Christian
Friendship, as further will appear.


Judge. These are intolerable things, not to be suffered in the City or Country
of Christianity: yea, the permitting such may be of a dangerous tendency; For
he that bridles not his Tongue, his Religion is vain: James 1. 26.


Sheriff. And please your Lordship, let the Evidence against Backbiter be
called.


Judge. Mr. Clerk, let the first Evidence be called.


Clerk. Crier, call Mr. Moral-Heathen.


Crier. Mr. Heathen, O yes, O yes, Mr. Moral-Heathen. Here: Ready, Sir; but I
cannot get in. Make way for the Evidence there. He is sworn.


Judge. Mr. Moral-Heathen; Do you know the Prisoner at the Bar?


Heathen. Yes, my Lord.


Judge. How long have you known him?


Heathen. But since I came into the Coast of Christianity: And I have wondered
to hear him defame others, and be suffered so long. Socrates, one of our
Philosophers, says, there is not a worse thing than a deceitful and defaming
Tongue. Yea, my Lord, the Life and Acts of Whispering* Backbiter contradict the
Doctrine taught us. Plato says, We must not believe him that slanders or tells
a Lie of another; for in like manner will he belly thee to another Man. It Is the
Caution of Philotas to beware of Spies and Tale-bearers. Yea, when that
Alexander the Great heard of another's Defamation, he clapped his Finger on his
Lips, conjuring as it were a strict silence of another's Disgrace. Theophrastus
taught us, that it were safer to trust an unbridled Horse, than an untempered
Speech, or an unbridled Tongue. It Is foolish to let Words want Excuses or
Apologies afterward: For our Zeno taught that we should dip our Tongue in our
Mind before we permit it to speak. And Plato taught his Scholars, that if one
observed another commit a fault, he must first ask himself whether he had not
done as bad or worse? and not proclaim it abroad. Tho we were allowed to hate
our Enemies by some of our Philosophers, yet always to love our own Society:
But the Prisoner cuts with the Tongue those in the same Profession. Our Scipio
could say, that he had rather Hannibal should eat his Heart with Salt, being
his Enemy, than that Lillius his Friend should give him an ill word. So
hatefully do we resent the backbiting Slanders of our professed Friends. And
this is what I had to say at present, my Lord.


Judge. Your Testimony is very clear, and much to the case in hand, Mr. Heathen,
and I give you thanks for these Instances; you have said enough, I desire you
to withdraw.


Crier. Make way for the Evidence to go out there.


Judge. Do thou hear, Mr. Backbiter? thou would needs be called Christian,
and keep thy Freedom in our Corporation; but here is a moral Heathen has quite
shamed thee: Are they tender of one another Disgrace, and do thou dip thy
Tongue in Gall, and whet it as a Sword, and bend thy Bow to shoot thy Arrows,
even bitter words, Psalm. 84. 3. to wound and grieve thy Brother?


Backbiter. My Lord, as to what Mr. Heathen has said, he may speak it in spite
against me; for the Heathens were great Enemies to us Christians formerly, and
used to clothe us in Bearskins: He has only said this to make me odious, my
Lord.


Judge. Thou have made thy self odious in the sight of the Heathen: when they
persecuted us, they could say this of us; Behold how they love one another! But
now they may say, Behold how they hate, backbite, and belie one another!


Attorney General. And please your Lordship, let Mr. Love-truth be examined; I
know he has suffered much by the Prisoner as well as my self in that relation
I stand to our Sovereign Lord.


Judge. Call Mr. Love-truth into Court.


Crier. Love-truth, O yes, O yes, Mr. Love-truth. Here. Ready. But I cannot get
in: O Murder! Murder!


Judge. What Is the matter there?


Love-truth. My Lord, here is one of Backbiter's Friends had almost strangled
me.


Judge. What is his Name?


Church Discipline. I know him, my Lord, his Name is Carry-Tale, he dwells
under the same roof with Backbiter.


Judge. Mr. Newman, take him into custody.


Attorney General. Mr. Love-truth, pray, as you are on your Oath, acquaint my
Lord and the Jury with what you know concerning the Prisoner at the Bar.


Judge. Mr. Love-truth, look upon the Prisoner; Do you know him?


Love-truth. Yes, my Lord, to my damage: but as for the wrong he has done me,
I could freely forgive him; tho as he has been an Enemy to our Sovereign, and
has dishonored the Truth, which should be dear to us, and has grieved and
wounded our Brethren, I shall give in my Testimony against him.


Judge. Mr. Love-truth, be as brief as you can.


Love-truth. My Lord, he is a Person full of Prejudice, and very credulous,
believes any lying or flying report, especially against one that is not in his
Affections, as few are that sincerely love the Truth: And when he has got a
false Report or Slander by the end, he makes it up so that besure it loses
nothing by carriage: Thus, like a grievous Revolter, he walks with Slanders;
Jer. 6. 28. And where he comes, if there be any in the Room that will not hear,
nor take up Reports, then he puts his Mouth to the Ears of them that will, and
whispers it into their Heads, and then lifts up his Eyes and Hands as tho he
were sorry, and so begets a belief in the Judgments of the ignorant, which have
never rightly considered the Charters of our Corporation: And many times he
enjoins them to secrecy; so that when they meet the Persons slandered, they
cannot get open their Lips, but they look a squint, as tho they were casting
their Eyes over the Beans to see if the Barley were ripe; for Suspicion is
always pictured squint-eyed: Yea, my Lord, he has come with his Pack to my
House, as Mr. Church Discipline has observed out of our old Charter, Levit.
19. 16. that a Talebearer, or Backbiter, is compared to a Pedlar that goes up
and down with his Pack: So he has offered his Wares to me, but I being tender
of Truth and my Neighbor; and remembering what an ancient wise Preacher has
said, that as the North Wind drives away Rain, so does an angry Countenance a
backbiting Tongue, Prove. 25. 23. I frowned upon him, and told him he must go to
the Person of whom he heard it, and to the Person that was thus defamed, and
know the certain truth of the matter, before he run about declaring it at Dan,
and publishing it at Askelon. And upon this he takes up his Pack, and away he
goes, and has never come near me since: Yea, my Lord, if he can hear of any
fault that has been committed, if it were long since, if it has been heard,
determined, remitted and buried, yet this Backiter has been for digging it up
and reviving it, verifying a saying in our old Charter, Prove. 16. 27. An
ungodly Man diggeth up evil; and in his Lips is a burning Fire. And this,
fearing I have intruded upon your Lordship's Patience, is what I have to say at
present, my Lord.


Judge. These are foul and unsufferable Practices.


Love-truth. My Lord, I could say much more of things of this nature, how hasty
and diligent he has been in this Evil of Detraction.


Judge. There has been enough said at present, Mr. Love-truth.

The Bench arises, and the Court is adjourned till two of the Clock in the
Afternoon.

The Prison-Keeper Mr. Newman remands Backbiter to the Prison again, not
denying his Friends to come to see him. So there came Mrs. Busy-body, Mr. Liar,
Mr. Blind-Zeal, Prejudice, Hate-Peace, and several others, whose Names I took
no account of; so he sent for his Counsel Mr. Equivocator, and gave him his
Fee, telling him he was afraid it would go hard with him if he did not speak,
and his Evidence did not swear to the purpose, to justify his Proceedings.

The hour being come, Mr. Newman hastens the Prisoner to the Court. When the
Judge, with the Mayor, Recorder and Sheriffs, with the Justices of the Peace and
Quorum were sat, Mr. Newman was commanded to put up Whispering Backbiter to the
Bar; which was done accordingly.


Attorney General. Mr. Clerk of the Sessions, What further Evidence have you
against the Prisoner?


Clerk. Here is Mr. Unity subpaena'd to appear.


Judge. Let him be called.


Crier. Unity, O yes, O yes, Mr. Unity. I am here, my Lord; but I dare not come
into Court till Backbiter and his Friends are searched.


Judge. What are you afraid of, Mr. Unity?


Unity. Why, my Lord, I know they use to carry white Powder about them, with
which they use to shoot those they have a prejudice against, and it murders a
Man in his Name before he can hear the Report.


Judge. That is Treason by the Law, there dare be no such an Attempt in Court.


Unity* My Lord, They are not afraid to speak evil of Dignities; 2 Pet. 2. 10.

Being searched, it appeared they had left those Instruments at home.


Judge. Mr. Unity, Pray how long have you known the Prisoner?


Unity. My Lord, ever since there have been Swellings, Tumults, Wrath, Strife
and Debates, they all came into our Corporation with Whispering Backbiter, 2
Cor. 12. 20.


Attorney General. My Lord, and Mr. Sheriff Order, you know right-well the
Confusion that has been in some Companies in our Corporation of Christ Church;
and undoubtedly it has been for want of regarding what you and I have
endeavored to maintain in conjunction with Mr. Fear-God, namely, Discipline
and Order; if it please your Lordship, let Mr. Unity give in his Evidence.


Judge. Mr. Unity, be as brief and express as you can.


Unity. I desire to have the liberty to speak in the presence of this
honorable Court; for he whose Hatred is covered by Deceit, his Wickedness
shall be showed before the whole Congregation, Prove. 26. 26, 28. For a lying
Tongue hates those that are afflicted by it, and a flattering Mouth works
ruin. It was accounted good and pleasant to dwell together in Unity, Psalm. 133.
1. especially Brethren in one Society; Endeavoring to keep the Unity of the
Spirit in the bond of Peace, Ephesians. 4. 3. Till we all come to the unity of the
Faith, ver. 13. But, my Lord, the Prisoner has been a mischievous Instrument
in setting particular Societies together by the Ears; by him also neighbourly.
Union and Friendship has been broken. May be some different apprehensions have
been about some Sentences in our Charter; then Backbiter comes in and blows up
the fire of Contention, and sets them at work to smite one another on the
backside with the Tongue, crying out, Heretics, Idolaters, etc. because they
cannot see through their Eye-holes; as tho it were possible, yea the likeliest
way to work a Reformation by Defamation; like him mentioned by Dr. Tailor, that
seeing a Flea on his Neighbor's Forehead, goes to knock it on the head with
his Hammer, and so knocks his Neighbor's Brains out. Thus, my Lord, does
Whispering-Backbiter think to slander Men out of the faults he imagines them to
be in; when alas, instead of healing, The words of a Tale bearer are as Wounds
that go down to the innermost parts; Prove. 18. 8. Yea, my Lord, I have known
when that great Union and Amity has been betwixt two Persons, yea and
Companies in our Corporation, till Backbiter has been at work, and In carrying
his Pack with all he could pick up, has uttered or whispered what has soon
broke the Bond of Unity. Prove. 16. 28. A froward Man sows Strife, and a
Whisperer separateth chief Friends. Yea, my Lord, such Prejudice and Inveteracy
has been begot by Backbiter's means, that it has appeared next to an
impossibility to reconcile them, as Mr. Sheriff Order, and Mr.
Church Discipline know right-well. And this is what I have to say at present,
my Lord.


Attorney General. My Lord, I very well know what Mr. Unity says to be true,
and so does Mr. Sheriff also. There are other Evidences may be called if your
Lordship please.


Judge. I think there have sufficient Testimonies been given in against him to
prove him guilty according to his Indictment: And if further occasion should
be, they shall be examined. Mr. Backbiter, what Reason can thou give why
Sentence according to the Law of our Corporation should not be passed upon
thee? Thou have heard what evident Testimonies have been given in against thee.


Backbiter. My Lord, you were pleased to allow me Counsel to speak for me, and
plead my Cause; for alas, my Lord, I know not how to speak for my self.


Attorney General. No, Mr. Backbiter, you have spoken so much falsely against
others, that you have nothing truly to say for your self.


Judge. where is your Counsel? What is his Name? Let him appear.


Backbiter. My Lord, his Name is Equivocator, a Kinsman of mine.


Judge. Where is he?


Crier. Mr. Equivocator. Here, Sir. Why do you not attend your Client's Cause?


Equivocator. Here, ready, my Lord, and I am fee'd to plead the Prisoner's
Cause; and I think, my Lord, he is a good Man in the main; and tho it may be
true what has been said by these Gentlemen, that have witnessed against him,
that he carries Reports from one to another, this is no new thing, he first
receives it, and why should he keep it in his Mind? If he has heard of the
defaming of many, and others saying, Report, and we will report it; Jer. 20.
10. Why should not he take the same liberty? Besides, my Lord, if he does
sometimes add to the Report or Accusation, he has heard it is but to amplify
it, and to make it more taking and convincing to them to whom he carries it;
for what is a Report or Story if it finds no Credit in the Hearers? Moreover,
several other Circumstances should be considered, as it may be he can hear but
with one Ear, and so cannot hear both Parties, but reports it according as he
hears it; as also they whom he backbites* as you are pleased to call it, may be
such as are more esteemed and applauded in the Corporation than he, and their
Graces and Virtue excels him and his: and therefore his design may be good,
that so he may keep up his Fame equal with others. He is not the first that
has envied the commendable Fame and Deserts of others; there was David hated
others Prosperity: And I have also read a Passage out of Plutarch of Aristides*
Banishment, called Ostracism. His Accuser being asked what Wrong Aristides had
done him? he replied, None, neither do I know him, but it grieves me to hear
every body call him a just Man. If this was a cause of Banishment, well might
it procure hard words; for Men naturally hate to be out-stript either in
worldly or spiritual Riches. And, my Lord, besides --


Judge. Hold, Mr. Equivocator, you run too fast.


Attorney General. You must not think, Mr. Equivocator, to sham off the Crimes
at this rate. You say he is a good Man in the main, pray in what main? The main
of a good Man is to love our Sovereign above all, and his Neighbor as himself:
This is inserted in our old Charter, and revived in the new, Deuteronomy. 6. 5. Levit.
19. 16 - 18. and his Neighbor as himself, Mat. 22. 37 - 40. which cannot be
done by a detracting Talebearer. And again, you will see how he is resented in
our Corporation, as fair a face as you would put on his bad Cause. Envy,
Murder, Debates, Deceits, Malignity, Whisperings, Backbiters, haters of God,
etc. Romans 1. 29, 30. Pray where is his Goodness when he is a Companion with
such a Gang of mercenary Wretches? And saying, Report, and we will report, Jer.
20. 10. was the Practice of the great Enemies of our City and Commonwealth. And
whereas you would vindicate his adding to a Report; I am satisfied that he that
will add to a Report, will raise one too when he pleases, which is expressly
contrary to our old Charter and new: for it is said, Thou shall not raise a
false Report; put not thy hand with the wicked to be an unrighteous Witness;
Exodus 23. 1. Now if he takes liberty to add, what does he less than put his
hand with the wicked to be an unfaithful Witness? Again, by the same rule, he
may improve every little Infirmity into a mountainous Guilt; and the little or
small Freckle into a Leprosy. What Reputation can be secured from such, who
have their dead Flies to cast a stink on their Brethren at pleasure, to corrupt
all their odorous Virtues? And as to your Instance of Aristides's Banishment,
it is recorded as an Instance of Heathen Cruelty; but Backbiter out-does the
Cruelty of Ostracism, as far as Death is worse than Banishment: for in
murdering the Name he destroys the Livelihood; and the Greeks have a saying,
That a Life is no Life without a Livelihood. Yea a Backbiter or Detractor is a
Thief, and robs a Man of that which is better than precious Ointment, or great
Riches, Eccles. 7. 1. Prove. 22. 1.


Equivocator. My Lord, all I would further have said, was to desire that his
bad Memory, and the want of the use of his right Ear may be considered, and
that his Evidences may be heard.


Judge. Yes, he shall have all the favor that can be allowed by the Charter of
our Corporation; and if his Evidences are Persons of any degree of Morality and
Repute, they shall be heard. Let them be called into Court.


Equivocator. Crier, pray call Mrs. Busy-body; she is own Cousin to the
Prisoner.


Clerk. Crier, call her into Court.


Crier. Mrs. Busy-body, O yes, O yes, Mrs. Busy-body. She cannot leave her
Twattle. Mrs. Busy-body. Ready, ready, Sir. Why do you not attend the Court?


Busy-body. I have so much business betwixt one Friend or Neighbor and
another, that alas I am seldom at home, or rarely out of employ, my Lord.


Judge. Pray what was your Employ?


Busy-body. My Lord, if I hear of any one failing committed, it is my desire and
endeavor that no body may be ignorant of it: But I remember I have read, That
the Lips of the wise shall instruct many: And this, as my Cousin Backbiter has
told me, must be by carrying ones failings to another.


Judge. Did thou ever seriously read over the Charter of our Corporation? I
fear that thou seldom look at home.


Constable. No, my Lord, when I searched for Busy-body, I saw her House all out
of order, and she was just going out.


Judge. How did you know she was going out?


Constable. Why, my Lord, she had two Glasses in her hand, and I have been
informed of it, and that by some that had experience of it.


Judge. Hold: Pray, Mr. Constable, what Glasses were they?


Constable. My Lord, one was a magnifying Glass, and the other a multiplying
Glass; with the former she with her Cousin Backbiter makes a small failing a
great one, and with the latter one failing many.


Judge. It Is a shame that such ignorant and pertinacious Practices should be
suffered in the Suburbs of our Corporation; let her be taken into Custody.


Crier. She is withdrawn and absconded, my Lord: but I shall take care to have
her apprehended; for it is one Man's work to have a serious sight of his own
Sins, and judge himself aright.


Clerk of the Sess. Call Mr. Zeal into Court.


Crier. Mr. Zeal, O yes, O yes, Mr. Zeal. Ready, my Lord, but I cannot see the
way into Court.


Whispering-Backbiter. Pray take him by the hand, Mr. Equivocator, for he is
almost as blind as a Post. He is handed up.


Judge. Old Gentleman, what is your Name, Zeal?


Zeal. My Name is properly Blind Zeal, my Lord.


Judge. I thought so, I have heard much of you.


Zeal. Yes, my Lord, I was with Saul when he would have slain the Gibeonites, 2 Samuel 21. 2. and with Jehu, 2 Kings 10. 16. and with Saul, now called Paul, Acts
9. 1. Phil. 3. 6. yea, and with those Jews, my Lord, Romans 10. 2. Yea, my Lord,
and I know Mr. Backbiter to be a very zealous Man by this, for he cannot rest
if he hears the Report, true or false, of another's failing; alas he can rest
no more than he that lies upon a Bed of Thorns, till others know it; and this
is his Zeal, my Lord. Yea I have observed, that he and Carry-tale that lives
under his Roof, have strove to outrun each other to carry the bad News, as
Ahimaaz and Cushi did, 2 Samuel 18. 21-23. this was their Zeal, and endeavor to
ease their minds, my Lord.


Judge. Old Gentleman, you are rightly named; but I fear you never learned
rightly to distinguish about what your Zeal should be exercised in Gal. 4. 18.
It Is good to be zealously affected always in a good thing: What if it be all
false, and thou in censuring another do but sentence thy self, like David in
Nathan's Parable? 2 Samuel 12. 7. and thou show thy self rather to be an
Accuser of the Brethren, than a Reclaimer of them that are supposed to have
falled, such a Zeal will appear to be but diabolical. Application should be
made to the supposed Sinner, Gal. 6. 1. 2 Timothy 2. 25. to regain him in a spirit
of Meekness: but it is evident that Backbiter carries his Teeth in his Tongue. I
remember I have read, that Bernard said of himself, that he never saw another
Man sin, but he was distrustful and jealous of his own Heart; Ille heri, tu
hodie, and ego cras, he was faulty yesterday, thou to day, and I may be so to
morrow: But I do not speak this that Sins should be connived at or dispensed
with, but that the Order and Discipline of our Corporation may be observed.


Clerk of the Sess. My Lord, here is another Evidence for the Prisoner.


Judge. Let him be called into Court.


Crier. Mr. Prejudice, O yes, O yes, Mr. Prejudice. Here, I am ready, Sir.


Judge. Pray what are you capable to say in behalf of the Prisoner? Do you know
him?


Prejudice. Yes, my Lord, he is my old Acquaintance, I am his near Neighbor.


Judge. What other Neighbors have you that are his and your Associates?


Prejudice. There is one Mr. Fawning that lives in Dissembling-Alley, next door
to him; Mr. Illwill, Mrs. Carry-tale that lives under his Roof, and a Relation
of his that is much with us, one Mr. Liar: And if I may speak for the Prisoner,
I never knew him backbite any of us, but he is very friendly to us all; and if
he backbites any, there is Mr. Ill Will and my self are both commonly with him:
and they are such as we have no affection for, my Lord, that he backbites, and
we are sure they do not love us at all.

Mr. Liar. My Lord, I am desired by the Prisoner to speak in his behalf; and if
I may be permitted to swear, I will take my corporal Oath, that
Whispering-Backbiter and his Friends are all good People.


Judge. Hold, Sirrah, your Oath is not to be taken.


Attorny-General. My Lord, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, it is evident there
is not one Person of any Repute that appears to justify Whispering-Backbiter:
What Prejudice has said is invalid. What is Concord amongst the vilest of Men
in their Wickedness, to the true Peace and Unity of Christ's Church? Herod and
Pilate were made Friends, that they might be joint Enemies to our Sovereign,
Luke 23. 12. Yea the Insernals are at an Agreement amongst them; Satan is not
divided against Satan, Luke 11. 18.


Judge. I shall proceed to sum up the Evidences.


Attorny-General. Here is one Evidence more that appears against the Prisoner.


Judge. Let him be called.


Crier. He is here ready, my Lord.


Judge. I know him: Pray, Mr. Divine Knowledge, do you know the Prisoner?


Knowledge. Yes, my Lord, but I am a Stranger to him, I suppose.


Judge. Backbiter, Do you know this Gentleman?


Backbiter. No, my Lord; I never had any real acquaintance with him in all my
Life.


Knowledge. My Lord, he is an ignorant shallow Soul; had he but a dram of
sanctified Wisdom or Divine Grace, he would have learned of Mr. Morality, the
Porter of our City, to do as he would be done unto: And I would have taught
him, and showed him that Frowardness was in his Heart; and that sowing Discord
among Brethren is that which our Sovereign hates. But, my Lord, he scorned
acquaintance with either of us; would put his Finger in his Ear, and scorned (
Prove. 6. 14 - 19.) to hear Counsel. How could he expect to keep his Place and
Privileges in our Corporation, who has so long abused them and his Brethren?


Judge. You have given a very cogent Testimony against him, Mr. Knowledge. I
shall sum up the Evidences.

Gentlemen of the Jury, you have heard what Mr. Heathen, Mr. Love-truth, Mr.
Unity, and now Mr. Knowledge have said, as also what scandalous Persons appeared
in the Prisoner's behalf; but care will be taken to purge all such out of the
Suburbs of our Corporation. Gentlemen, you have heard some of those Statutes
mentioned that Whispering-Backbiter has broken: that Statute Exodus 23. 1. Thou
shall not raise (or, Hebr. receive) a false Report. Levit. 19. 16. Thou shall
not go up and down as a Talebearer. Yea it is condemned in our new Charter;
Luke 3. 14. Accuse no Man falsely: This is expressly against Backbiter. Yea, how
frequently is he ranked with the worst of Men? 2 Timothy 3. 3. Without natural
Affections, false Accusers, despisers of those that are good, Traitors, etc.
Yea, when the question is put, Who shall abide in thy Tabernacle? or ascend the
holy Hill of Zion? He that backbiteth not with his Tongue; or, he that takes
not up, or receives not a Reproach against his Neighbor: Psalm. 15. 2, 3. and
24. 2. You see, Gentlemen, the Evil is so great, that it shuts out of the
Celestial City, and the presence of our Sovereign for ever. Yea, that moral
Precept that is a binding Statute, of loving his Neighbor as himself, is
violated. O but Backbiter he forgets himself! never regarding that Precept, if
a Brother of the Corporation be overtaken in a fault, to restore him in a
spirit of meekness; considering thy self, lest thou should have the like
occasion; Gal. 6. 1. As Mr. Moral Heathen gave a hint of Plato's Precept to his
Scholars, if they heard a Report of Evil of another, or saw some failing,
presently to ask themselves this question Number ego feci Tale? Have not I done
the like my self, or worse? So that you are to consider how short he comes of
Morality, who endeavors to eat out the Repute of his Neighbor, as has been
witnessed. Mischief is in his Heart; yea, They sharpen their Tongues like a
Serpent; the poison of Adders is under their Lips; Psalm. 140. 2, 3. So that,
Gentlemen, as you regard the Honor of our Sovereign, the Repute of the Worship
and Devotion used in our City, and the Peace of the Companies in our
Corporation, you must find for our Sovereign against the Prisoner at the Bar:
And so the Lord direct you all.

The Jury went out, but soon agreed unanimously to bring Whispering-Backbiter
in guilty according to his Indictment, and the Evidences against him. They
return.


Crier. Make way for the Jury; make way there. They are all come up to the Bar.


Judge. Gentlemen of the Jury, are you all agreed?


Foreman. Yes, my Lord, and have also agreed to give in our particular Verdicts.


Hate-Strife. My Lord, I ever hated to see things done through Strife, Phil. 2.
3. but to my Grief I have seen Strife and Violence in our City, Psalm. 55. 9.
and I have traced home one of the chiefest causes of it to Backbiter's very
door; so that I am conscious to my self he is guilty according to his
Indictment, and evident Testimonies.


Love-Brother. I am sure, my Lord, he has been a sower of Enmity, and a
destroyer of Unity: It Is high time to take him off; for, where there is no
Talebearer, Strife cease; Prove. 26. 20. There is no greater a Demonstration
of our being beloved Citizens of Christ's-Church, than to love one another,
John 13. 35. the true Badg and Character of Christianity; and if this Backbiter
be not taken off, our Charter will be broken and lost.


Society. I assent to what Mr. Love-Brother says; for, my Lord, if he be
suffered to sow Strife as he has done, alas a Nation, City or Family divided
is brought to ruin, Luke 11. 17. And what can be a more effectual way to break
Human and Divine Society? for as a false Witness he speaks Lies, and sows
Discord among Brethren; Prove. 6. 19.


Condescension. My Lord, I agree that he is guilty; and indeed I have wondered
at his obstinacy, that such plain Convictions, not only from the Freemen of our
Corporation, but also by Mr. Heathen, enough to have melted him to confess and
forsake, that he may find Mercy, Prove. 28. 13. should not work upon him: but he
obstinately covered his Sins.


Patience. My Lord, I think he has been born with too long: tho I can bear as
much as some, yet the very sight of Backbiter in our Corporation has greatly
provoked me: And tho by an angry Countenance I have drove him away, Prove. 25.
2, 3. yet I could never drive him out of his wicked Practice. I agree he is
guilty.


Plain-dealing. My Lord, I am not a Man of many words; but to be plain, if ever
Man forfeited the Freedom and Privileges of Christ's Church,
Whispering-Backbiter has done it, for he has proclaimed his Folly: for he
that hides Hatred with lying Lips, and he that utters Slanders is a Fool;
his Wickedness ought to be showed before the whole Congregation, Prove. 26. 26.
that others may fear.


Faithful. I have long wondered at the deceit and falsehood of Backbiter;
Christians that are free of our Corporation should carry their very Hearts in
their Hands, and Meanings in their Foreheads; but his Mouth has framed
Deceit, Romans 3. 13. He is guilty according to his Indictment, my Lord.


Charity. I cannot have a good thought of him, tho I have ever been unwilling
to think any evil, 1 Cor. 13. 5. till it has evidently appeared: but, my Lord,
this Backbiter is still forging or picking up Thunderbolts, against which no
Innocence can be an Armor of Defense: He is guilty. I can have no Charity for
such a one that casts Firebrands, Arrows and Death at his Neighbou^^, Prove.
26. 18. and counts it sport.


Hope-well. I agree, my Lord, that he is evidently guilty; yet I would not be
without some hopes that the Order and Discipline of our Corporation will
effectually lash him into better manners; for tho Folly has been bound up in
his Heart, and he has wrought Folly in our Israel, Deuteronomy. 22. 21. yet the Rod
of Correction may drive it from him; Prove. 22. 15.


Pray-well. My Lord, it shall be my request, that he may learn to take heed
that he offends not with his Tongue, but that he may keep his Mouth as with a
Bridle, Psalm. 39. 1. and that he may learn to guide his Tongue, and not whet
his Tongue like a Sword; and that he may shoot no more of his Arrows, even
bitter words, Psalm. 84. 3-8.


Humility. My Lord, I agree that the Prisoner is guilty according to his
Indictment; and it is evident that it is the Arrogance of his Spirit that causes
him to despise and scandalize others, like that Hypocrite of the Synagogue,
Luke 18. 9-11. Pride, Suspicion and Envy are always for staining the clear
Fame, and casting the first Stone.


Concord. My Lord, I am clearly of the same mind with Mr. Hate-Strife the
Foreman, and do say he is a sower of Contention, and where that is, there must
needs be Confusion, and every evil Work; James 3. 16. and therefore my Verdict
is, that he may be no longer suffered in our Corporation.


Judge. Gentlemen, I am glad to see you all so harmonious in your Verdicts, and
so unanimously showed your Loyalty to our Sovereign: and indeed you have spoke
the very minds of our Mayor, Sheriff, and Recorder, namely, Rulewell, Order and
Discipline; and I perceive you have given great Satisfaction to our Corporation
in general. Backbiter, hold up thy hand, and hear thy Sentence.


Crier. Silence about the Court on pain of Displeasure.


Judge. Backbiter, thou have so disorderly acted, that thou may be no longer a
Member of our Society, Mr. Church Discipline shall cross out thy Name enrolled
in our Corporation-Book, and Mr. Newman Prison-keeper shall convey thee back to
Confinement, and in thy Apartment there he shall cause thee to sit down upon
the Stool of Repentance, and consider what thou have done, whom thou have
wronged and defamed; what Envyings, Strife, Debates and Whisperings thou have
caused, 1 Cor. 12. 20. Thy Lodging shall be upon a Bed of Sorrows; yea thy Meat
and Drink shall be the Bread and Water of Godly Sorrow and internal
Afflictions, till thou have attained to a rent Heart, and a broken Spirit, and
can demonstrate a Repentance to Life; then thou shall study to make
Restitution for all the Wrongs thou have done in causing the Reputation of thy
Brethren to lie bleeding; then he shall put thee upon the Heart-work and hard
work of Mortification, that with the sound of thy Tongue, and blast of thy Lips
thou may never cause the Reputation of thy Brethren to fall flat as the Walls
of Jericho. I have read the saying of an ancient Freeman of our City, that he
observed that there was rarely a Member in our Corporation in his day, that had
attained to any degree of Excellency, but there has been ready a black
Character by some defaming Tongue to clap upon him: So that Stars of the first
Magnitude by this means have been eclipsed. And thou Backbiter shall be taught
by Mr. Newman: till thou do learn to bridle thy Tongue, all thy Pretenses to
Religion will be vain, James 1. 16. And when thou art become a new Man, then,
and not till then, shall thou be restored to the Privileges and Immunities of
our Corporation of Christ-Church. And so the Lord have Mercy upon thee, and
grant thee Repentance to Life never to be repented of.


Amen.
BE gone my little Book, thy Message do,
Give thy Advice to all, both Friend and Fo:
Show to the World the Evil of those Wrongs
That have been done by these defaming Tongues:
And if they slight thee, let them so, and spare not;
If thou art loved by Christians, then I care not.
I know there is some will say, their Tongues their own,
And do resolve to be controlled by none;
Yet others will thee gladly entertain,
And by thy Counsel will advantage gain.
Thou speak plain to suit each Corporation,
And do afford Advice to all the Nation.
For Cato says, that both in old and young,
Virtue begins with a well-guided Tongue.
If some detracting Reader shall amend,
Then thou obtainst the Writer's chiefest end.
Lend it not, but let them buy;
The Price is low, and so am I.
FINIS.
Advertisement.
NOte, That the Substance of what is here published, was wrote Anno 92. and now
at the request of some is published in print, not to reflect upon any Person or
Persons, but simply and sincerely to detect that Evil wherever it is found,
or amongst whomsoever it is tolerated; it being confessed by all, that it is
very injurious and opposite to Love and Charity. Moreover, there are some other
Criminals that according to this method, may e're long be apprehended and
brought to their Trials.


