I PRAY YOU Be not Angry: For I will make you MERRY.

A Pleasant and merry Dialogue between two Travelers, as they met on the
Highway.

LONDON Printed by Bernard Alsop, for Samuel Rand, and are to be sold at his
Shop at Holborn-Bridge, 1650.

A Merry Dialogue between two Travelers upon the Highway, touching their
Crosses, and of the Virtue of Patience.
Fabiano and Fernunio. Fernunio, FAbian, Good morrow: How do you, and how far
walk you this way?


Fabian. I do as you see, neither of the best, nor the worst: and am traveling
not very far, and yet somewhat more than a pretty walk; about some hundred
miles or two for a breathing, to teach the dancing legs of my youth, to plod
for the provision of mine old age: and since it is no better, it is well it is
no worse: for since I have done my self more wrong, than I can make my self
amends, I must be contented with a pudding, while others may feast, that have
better fare.


Fern. Then I pray you be not angry; for Patience is a plaster for all pain,
it is the very poison of all sorrow, a preparative to all comfort, and the
only quieter of a troubled spirit.


Fab. Why how now? Have you been a Scholar since I saw you? Truly I desire
not to trouble your memory, with saying over your lesson without book: all you
Adverbs and your Proverbs, will not do me a pins worth of pleasure.


Fern. Oh Fabian! have patience, be not angry with your fortune, there are
Floods as well as Ebs: Time has his turn, and Fortune may be as great a friend
as she has been an enemy: the Stars may one day shine over your house, as well
as your neighbors: and therefore stay your hour, you know not when it will
come; and therefore take no thought: I pray you be not angry.


Fab. Well Fernunio to your sentences: let me tell you, ye you know, that I know,
that you know, that when you and I did first know one another, you knew the
world was better with me, than to let me plod up and down in this manner, with
no more Company but my Dog, and my plain Cudgel: but it is no matter, all is
one, for having played wily beguily with my self. I can thank no body for my
hard bargain: for in the time of my youth (the most perilous point of man's age)
falling into such acquaintance as were smally to my commodity, as well of the
Masculine as the Feminine gendr who so long fed mine humor with folly, that I
fell almost into a Consumption, before I found the Nature of the disease: at
length (though somewhat late, yet better late than never) remembering ye my
father left me more land than wit, and Nature being more Mistress than Reason
over my il ruled senses: and seeing the world at such a pass that I could have
well wished to have been out of it; finding my friends scorn of me, my foes
scoff at me; some few pity me, and few comfort me. I resolved to shake of my
Shake-rags, and to retire my self unto fo^e solitary place, where having left
one fool to laugh at another; one Villain to cut another throat, and one
honest man to be an example to a whole Parish; I betook me to a traveling
life, rather to hear, than to speak how the world went, and to note the courses
of the wife, rather than enter into the courses of the wicked whereof ye world
is so full, ye a man can scarce escape their intectio^: why? if I should tell you
how I have been used among the^, you would say I had good cause to be Angry
with my self, or some body else.


Fer. And yet I say, I pray be not angry: for if it be with your self, fretting
will but breed melancholy, and mela^choly bring you to such a sickness that you
may repent it when it is too late. And to be Angry with any other, if you
cannot reve^ge it it is a folly: if you do, it is uncharitable: for you must
forgive. For if I should tell you of some tricks that were put upon me, when I
was as wise as any Goose upon Bedlame Green, I should make you believe, that
although I preach Patience to you, I should have cause to have little
acquaintance with her my self: but spite of the Devil I hope to go to heaven,
though I carry more crosses in my heart, tha^ in my purse, yet I hope (with my
fellow beggar) to be in Abraham's besome, when a rich Churl shall dance with
Dives in a worse place: and therefore as a friend let me say to you, knowing
what is good for you; whatsoever fortune befall you, I pray you be not Angry.


Fab. I must confess it is good Council to have Patience, for Patience is a
pretty virtue, but ye it waits upon a number of Villainies; but let me tell you,
if a man spend all the money in his purse upon a company of unthankful villains,
and when he comes to the bottom of his purse, and there finding nothing,
entreats with his friends (as he has held them) but for an Ordinary or two;
and scof fingly put off, cannot get a penny among them: what can ye have in all
the rule of Patience? only fret at the heart, to hear men say I pray you be
not Angry.


Fer. And yet let me tell you, that when Anger will not avail him, it is better
to be Patient, than Angry; for I have heard it spoken by a wise man That he who
cannot be Angry, is a Fool; but he that will be Angry, is more Fool: for when I
was (as you said, and I may say) in the prime of my time, I may say in the
foolish pride of youth, when all the Gold in the Parish, was copper to my
silver: and my wit was beyond reason, when I was the only fool of the World:
Oh then (to tell you) I was overtaken in the half turn would make one run out of
his wits and into them again, if it were possible: for say this, if a man has
no deformity in his proportion, is no Woodcock for his ordinary course of wit,
has wealth enough to live by his neighbors without borrowing, is of parentage
with the best of the Parish is in the way of good speed with a match worth ye
making of: and leaving all honest wise, and good council sorsaketh his fortune
and binds himself Prentice, during life, to an il favored baggage, the worst
child that her father had, whose beauty is like the back of a sea-coal chimny,
and for proportion, the true proportion of a seacrab as much wit as a gray
goose, and manners as a blind Mare, and no more wealth than the wool on a shorn
sheep: besides the issue of idle drunkenness, which being grounded in all
foolishness, can away with nothing, but worse the^ nothing: whose tongue can keep
no secrets; whose heart can think no goodness and whose life is a world of
unquietness: and spite of his heart having taken her for better or worse,
(when she cannot well be worse and will be no better) must hold out his life
worse than ten deaths with her: say your self that when a man thinks of this
misery it would fret him to the very heart; but where is the remedy.


Fab. Oh! I pray you be not angry: for if a man should have a Sister whom he
loves dearly, whose beauty and virtue were a Dowry for a Prince, her Lineage
Noble, her person comely, her nature kind, her government so discreet, that by
the judgment of the wise, she was a match for the worthy: to see this blessed
creature, by ye cruelty of the fates, bestowed upon the bastard son of a Beggar
whose father was a villain, his mother a fool, and he a Changeling whose eyes
were three foot out of his head, his nose too long for his mouth, and his skin
too wide for his face, his head like a highway, with a little heath on either
side, and his beard bending to the alehouse, from thence came the Original of
his little honor: and for his under proportion, and answering to the upper
parts, whose wit was only practiced in villainy whose heart studied but Hell,
while his soul was sworn servant to the Devil; and yet this rascal Viper shall,
only with his golden claws, creep into the hands (for in the heart he could
never) of a pretty wench, and carry her away in such a world of
discontentments, that she could never leave sorrowing, till she got into her
grave: would it not fret such a brother, that had such a Sister: or chafe such
a Lover as had such a love, to see such an overthrow of his comfort, or
confusion of his hope.


Fern. Oh! I pray you be not Angry: for marriage and hanging some say go by
destiny: and although hauging is but a short pain, and marriage is a lingering
misery: where disagreement is a deadly life; yet since we cannot go against the
will of the higher powers, Patience is a plaster, that will in time draw a man's
heart out of his belly, except he have more wit to govern his passion, but
leaving love ioys, let me tell you, that if a man finding by some old writings
in his mothers chest, that his father had title to a piece of land, which for
want of a good purse, he durst never make challenge to; and say that I were the
man, and by the witness of my honest ancient neighbors, can approve it in
good conscience to be mine own in right of law; and thereupon asking counsel
and paying for words by weight, and by my learned counsel persuaded, that it is
mine past all plea: and thus playing with my nose, or rather with my purse till
all be spent: with Demurs and tricks, he drives me to beggary, with suing for
mine own right, while he goes gay with my money, and I starve with his words: a
vengeance upon his crafty tonveyance. Would not this fret a man's soul to think
on it, and cannot help it.


Fab, Now God forbid: I pray you be not angry: for Law was ordained for the
best; and though in all professions some are to blame, yet no doubt, but some
have such consciences, that they would not be corrupted for a kingdom, but
Courts must have their fees, and Scholars must not study for nothing. But for
that I am no good Lawyer, nor ever met with any bribes; I have nothing to say
to the^; but wish the wicked their reward, while the honest may take heed by
their example: and so leaving the^ all to the day of their death, I will tell you
of another matter. Say that I had a friend at least as I take him, and loving
him so dearly, that I durst, nay I do trust him withal that I am worth and
being to take a voyage either upon command or commodity, fearing some il
courses to be taken for my children if I should die, knowing women generally, so
sorrowful for a lost husband, that they will not tarry long for a new: and what
fathers in law be to Orphans, while widows sigh and say nothing, having (in
trust to my friend) made a secret deed of gift of all my estate unto him, the
rather that my wife and children may fare the better, and now I have escaped
many dangers by sea and land, and spoiled of all I had with me, come home,
hoping to find comfort yet at mine own house, with that I left behind me: and
there no sooner e^tred in at the gate, but with a coy look, and a cold welcome, I
find my wife, either turned out of doors, or so basely used within, that she
could well wish to be without: and then if I take it unkindly, be bidden mend it
as I can; and so with a frown or a frump, almost thrust out of doors, be
constrained to go to law for mine own living, while my mistaken friend having
turned Turk, rates for nothing but his own commodity; and contrary to all
conscience plays with me for mine own money, til the Lawyer and he together have
won me quite out of mine own land, and so play me the Traitor with my trust;
save me in the misery of my fortune to end my unhappy days now can you say to
this, I pray you be not angry.


Fer. Yes very well; for since you see no remedy, but God is such a God in the
world, as makes the Devil work many wonders among men, is it not better with
Patience to endure a cross, the^ to crucify the soul with impatience: but say
that you should have a wife that you thought did love you well, when she would
streak your beard, and never lie from your lips, and would speak you as fair as
Eve did Adam, when she cozened him with an Apple, would not abide an Oath for a
Bushel of Gold and be so sparing of her purse, that she would not lose the
dropping of her nose; bridle it in her countenance like a Mare that were
knapping on a Cow-thistle; would wear no Ruffs but of the small set, though of
the finest Lawn that might be gotten, and edged with a Lace of the best
fashion; would not abide no embroidery in her aparel, yet have the best stuff
she could lay her hands on: and feed sparingly at dinner, when she has broke
her fast in the bed; and missed not a Sermon, though she profited little by the
Word: This dissembling piece of flesh, making a show of lamentation, out of the
abundance of her little love, for lack of your good company, if you were but a
mile out of the Town; and if you were to take a journey, would lay an Onion to
her eyes. to draw out the Rhinne instead of tears, and having eaten an Apple,
with pinching in a backward wind, send out a belching sigh for sorrow of the
absence of her Goose-man: and then after all these, and a world of other
tricks, to bring a man in bad belief of her good mind: if you returning home a
night sooner then expected, and a year sooner than welcome should (having keys
to your own doors) come in, and find in your own bed betwixt the arms (I go no
lower) of your too much beloved, the living carcass, of a lubberly rascal, or
perhaps the perfumed corpse, of some dainty companion, working upon the ground
of your pleasure, to plant the fruit of idle-fancy to the horn-greif of your
poor heart; could you be pacified with, I pray you be not Angry.


Fab. Indeed you put me to it with an If: but I hope there are no such women,
^e for shame it were enough to make murder but Patience being the mean to save
many a man's life, and ye perhaps being her first, and she upon repentance after
a secret reprehension likely to turn honest, were it not better to steat away,
and have her maid to wake her, the matter cleanly shuffled up, and she with
sorrow rather to confess it in secret and to be sorry for it, and in shame of
her fault to leave it while few knew it, rather the^ in a fury or a frenzy
bring in your neighbors, raise up your house, beat your wife imprison the
knave, bring your wife to shame, and make the world privy to your cuckoldry:
and so she in a desperate madness, either shameless after a little shame, or
graceless, in impatience to bear her correction, either cut her own throat or
yours, or both, and so all come to confusion through lack of a little
charitable discretion: No, God forbid for rather then any such mischance should
befall is it not better to say, I pray you be not angry.

For to quit your coffeehouse, say that I should (as God forbid I should)
have married an honest woman, that has brought me many pretty children, is a
good housewife in her house, careful for her children, and loving both to them
and me, and for the space of many years, with a good opinion of all her
neighbors, and good credit with all that know her, had passed some score of
years or two with me, with as much contentment as a reasonable man might
desire: and to make her amends for all her kindness, I should either take a
whore into my house, or keep her as a hackney at rack and manger abroad, so
long till being led by the nose, to believe that she loves me, when I pay for
ye nursing of half a dozen of bastards: of which if I be the wicked father, my
conscience has little comfort in: and if any other (as it is most likely) be ye
father or fathers, how am I beguiled to play poor noddy, to let my purse blood
to pay for ye maintaining of another pleasure. And at the last if she find his
abridge my liberality, in a venomous humor come with an out cry to my door,
with a nest of her fellow beggars, and there with railing upon me, calling me
old letcher whoremonger and I know not what lay her brats down before my gate,
and so with gaping mouth go her way, leaving me to my purse only to seek the
saying of my credit, and so become a grief unto my wife, a sorrow^ children,
and a laughing stock to mine enemies, a byword among my neighbors, a shame to
my self, and an enemy to mine own soul: and thus seeing my wealth wasted, my
credit lost and impaired, and God so displeased, that I know not which way to
turn my self; shall I neither be angry with ye whore for bewraying me, nor with
my self to let her so befool me?


Fer. No; I say as I did, I pray you be not angry: for she did but her kind to
use her eyes to the benefit of the rest of her members; and you therefore being
a man of judgment, ought rather to be s^^ry for her wickedness, than to show
your own weakness, in such years to have a thought of wantonness: but sure ye
flesh is weak and the strongest may fall: better is a sorrowful repentance than
a fretting madness: and since fretting at your own folly will not get you a
foot of earth more then your grave, be not at wars with your self to no
purpose; cease from doing evil, make much of your honest wife, serve God in
true repentance, and the Devil shall do you no hurt: For is it not better to
bear your cross (especially being of your own making) than to run into further
mischief, by the wicked humor of impatience? But to the purpose: say this (to
quit you with an other proposition) put the case that I being (as you see) a
proper man, and in the way of good speed with a handsome woman, and she in
state able to do for an honest man that would love her, and make much of her,
and I have an intent to deal honestly with her, and she gives me her faith and
troth, and swears by her very soul, that I have her heart so fast no man shall
have her hand from me; and I thinking because she is old she is honest, and
because she swears, that she says true, go about my besinesse as she bids me
for some few days, and then to return to the joining up of the matter betwixt
us; and in the mean time, after I have spent perhaps more then my half years
wages upon her in wine and sugar and good cheer, and hope to come to be merry,
come and find her married to a filthy cousening knave, who by a little more
money then I had in my purse for the present, to bribe another rascal like
himself, who was the maker of the match, dwells in my hoped house, gives the bag
for my money, and has my fat old sow in such a snare that there is no getting
of her out again; when I am thus handled for my good will with this wicked old
piece of whit-leather to put my trust in an old hogs-sty for my habitation, and
to be thrust out of do^s for my labor, shall I not be angry?


Fab. Oh no in any (...) women have wits beyond men's reason, especially when
they are past a child or child bearing, more than they that are past children.
Oh I tell you, it is a perilous thing to slip occasion in matters of love; and
age is either froward or frail: and therefore you should rather have fed her
humor full ere you had left her, than to think she would be unprovided till you
should come again to her: and therefore I say as you say I pray you be not
angry. For I will tell you, say that I being a man every way to content an honest
woman, and having unhappily bestowed my self upon a woman of the worst kind,
which before I married her was neither widow, maid, nor wife but a plain
whore: and this misery of my days being by my folly brought to some better
state than she were worthy; and seeing her self in a glass grown fat through
good fare and ease, and setting her countenance even with the pride of her
folly, beginning to think better (...) the Parish besides, should chance upon a
little kindness^ grow in love with my Kinsman, or he with her, and so they grow
so great, that I shall stand like John-hold-my-staff, while they take their
pleasure: she should sit at the upper end of the table, and I at the nether
end: she lie in one chamber and I in another, and yet must not find fault with
it for fear of a stab, or a fig, or some other villainy; but with a seeming
countenance bear all, as if Pudding were the only Meat of the world while one
makes horns at me, another moes at me, another cal^ me cuckold another wittal,
and I know all to be true and cannot or dare not do withal: do you think that
flesh and blood can bear with this and not be angry?


Fer. Yes, very well, for as you have flesh and blood, so you have wit and
reason: and when your wit and reason can consider, how her trade brings more
commodity, and with less travel, than your traffic, if you be not wilful,
that you will hear no body speak but your self, or so scornful that you can
endure no companion in kindness, or so covetous, that you will not spare a
penny toward the nursing of your neighbors child or so proud that you scorn
the gift of a friend; you will find that such a wife is worth two Milch-cows:
and whatsoever the world says, you are beholding to none but her: and where
others beggar their Husbands, she has made you the Head man of the Parrish:
and then cannot you wink at a little fault that is so full of profit? Yes I
warrant you: and therefore I may well say, I pray you be not-angry.


Fab. True, it may be that some good Ass that knows not how to live without
the basest trade of beggary, will put on any Patiente for Profit: but from such
a rascal nature God deliver me. But to requite you with as good as you bring
let me tell you: if I should serve a man of great wealth, and he have a
wenching humor, and he keeping more Maidservants in his house than ever meant
to be true Virgins, and one of these mad eattel, that for the price of a red
petticoat would venture the lining of her placket, should by a mischance of her
Masters making, fall into a Two-heeled-Timpany, which could by no means be
cured without my consenting to a wicked marriage for a little money; which I by
the villainy of the Trul which would put the trick upon me must seem willingly
to yield unto, for fear of I know not what to fall out I know not why: and
(...) own hearts comfort, when (...) delivered of this mischief, hoping that
she would meddle no more with any such matters, begin to make a little more of
her than she was worthy: and she thereupon grown so lusty, that she cared not
for the Parrish so long as the Constable was her friend, give enterttainment to
whom she list, and use me as she list, set more horns than hairs on my head and
care not if I were hanged for my good will: This Rascal, roundabout, without
good complexion or good condition as ill-favored as mannered and so spoken as
wicked, being thus void of grace, careless of all credit and irremovable in
her resolution for the wicked course of her life; this (I say) hellish piece of
flesh, to domineer over me, and with the countenance of her Master, to make a
slave of her Good Man who should, be sent on Errands, while she were with her
Arrants; I should fetch wine for their drinking, turn the spit to their
Roast-meat, or walk their horses while they were saddling my Fillie: And yet
all this, and I say not what else, I must bear, as though it were no burden
for a small reckoning at the weeks end for washing of a foul shirt or setting
of my Ruffs right, or seething of a Calves head, or making sauce to a tame
g^^se, or for a nod of my Master, that makes a noddy of his Servant: for such
and such like matters to put up all matters and swallow grief in my throat,
that it is ready to choke me in the going down: is it possible to do all this,
that You could be I and not be angry.


Fer. Yes very well, for profit is so pleasing, that it puts out a great many
ill thoughts that would trouble a man that has no wit; and for honesty, it is
a good thing, I must confess: but if a man be not born rich, and keep himself
so he shall gain little by simplicity: and therefore (as I said) where Patience
brings Profit. I say still, bear with your Fortune, and be not angry. But
leaving to talk more of Female discontentments, let me say this: That I, being
a man of sufficiency to supply the Office of a good place born of a Noble
house, bred up in all courses requisite for a Gentleman, have traveled diverse
Countries, seen much of the World by Sea and Land, and through want of my
Fathers discretion, not left so good a Portion as may maintain my Reputation,
without some better matter then mine own Estate, and driven for my better
comfort, to put my (...) know not what has made rich; and being only wise in
the world, has no feeling of Gods grace, but by a thousand ill practices,
finds the mean before his death to look over a great deal of more ground than
his Grave; and this Captain of the damned crew, who is haled to Hell with a
world of chains the Son of a Beggar, and Brother to a Villain to govern over
the honesty of my heart, with the commandment of evil service; or (finding me
not for his humor, to frown upon me like an old Drying Pan, or to rate me like
a Dog because I will not be a Dovil; to be impleyed in more vileness then half
a Christian could endure to hear of: now (I say) to spend my time in this
misery, only for picking of a Satlad waiting at a trencher, looking on a fair
House, making courtesy to an old Relic, hold the Basin to the Rhume, or
hearing the Music of a cotton Cough; and after many years Patience in this
Purgatory, where all the wisdom I have learned, were but to corrupt the nature
of a good wit, either for a trifle to be frowned at, and by tricks to be
wrought out; or with a Livery without a Badge, to seek my fortune in some other
soil, to have served long for Nothing or for Worse than Nothing when
Discontentments must be cancelled, and I (for fear of a mischief) must speak
all Honor of Dishonor, and with a Merry-go-sorry sigh out my days that are no
better blessed: when I shall see a Fool graced, and better Wits put down, Honesty
scorned, and Knavery in more account then commendable; and I, cozening my self
with an imagination* that service was an heritage, where I found nothing but
loss of time and repentance have I not cause think you with all this to be
angry?


Fab. And yet I say, I pray you be not angry: For if you had so muth of the
Grace of God, as to make you rather leave the hopes of Preferment than yield to
an ill employment, no doubt, but either your private life will find some secret
contentment, or your Patience will find somewhere the advancement of your
virtues: and therefore rather be joyful of Gods blessing, than impatient with
your Fortune, and think not amiss that I say, I pray you be not angry, But to
requite you: Say that I having more money in my purse then a wise man would
part with but upon the better reckoning should be persuaded to play the Usurer,
and so with a little (...) cunning (...) should be brought in hope of gain to
take in pawn for my money some lease of a good farm, or piece of rich plate:
which being not fetched by the day of payment, would return me more then double
my money: put my money out of my hands, which I have fared full hard to get
together, and I glad of my forfeit, hoping to gain more then a good conscience
would away withal, find my lease not worth a point, by a former deed of gift
or such a conveyance as carries all away from my fingers, and leave me (for
all my cunning) in the law, to plead repentance to my folly: or my plate
challenged for some piece of pilfery and I brought in trouble for I know not
what, and to get out I know not how, till I have brought my stock to a poor
state where. I may see the just reward of Usury; when I look in my purse and
find nothing, would not this make one angry?


Fer. Not a whit: For Knaves will be Knaves, and Fools must be bitten ere they
be wise; of which if you be none, no doubt but there are enough in the world.
And since all the anger in the world will not recover a penny loss, let me say
to you as you say to me, I pray be not angry. And let me tell you that upon a
time it was my hap to have a friend (as I thought) whom I loved dearly: and
building upon the care of his conscience, that for a world of wealth he would
not play the Jew with me; it fell out, that I having more then a months mind
to a wench above a year old whose worthiness might command a far better servant
than my self, and yet it had so fallen out betwixt us, that our Affections were
so settled, that I thought (without death) there could be no remove: and
therefore fearing no Fortune relying so much upon her Love, loving (as I said)
my imagined friend more then a wise man should do (for there is a measure to be
kept in all things) made him acquainted with my serresse, iouching the intent
to steal away my Mistress from the place where she had no pleasure to be kept
in, as she had been long like a chicken in a coop; and to the performing of
this purpose, hoping to have use of his best help, deliver him a ring, or a
jewel of some value to present unto my Love, when I know his means better then
mine own, to have access unto her without suspicion; and he after a world of
Protestations sealed with too many Oaths, to deal so faithfully, carefully, and
secretly for me, as my heart could desire, when faith there was none, nor care
of me, nor care of me, nor secrecy but in kee ping all from me, when like a
dissembling Jow he uses my Jewel for a mean to rob me of my better Jewel: when
he presented it as for himself, and revealing some matter of secrecy betwirt
us, unpleasing to her, and nothing to my profit, with enchanting charms wins
her affection and borrows my money to cut my throat till having carried away
my mistress, he either laugh at me, or write me, a letter to cologue with me:
when I think how with trusting a knave. I have played the fool, in conscience
say, if ever man would fall out with himself have not I cause to be angry.


Fab. No, for as you said to me, knaves will be knaves, and in matters of love,
he that will not be the follower of his own cause, may happen to be over thrown
in his own suit, and to look for constancy in woman, especially, of a woman in
young years, when gifts and bribes are able to work great matters in those
courses, it is a mere folly: for say that some are, I know not how many, as
constant as Penelope, yet let Danae take heed of a golden shower in her lap:
and therefore I pray you be not angry. For lot me tell you to be deceived by a
friend it is an ordinary matter: to loose a wench, it is a thousand men's
fortunes: and therefore since she was so fickle to trust to think her better
lost then found, and for him get your golden Jewels and your money from him, and
let him walk with his wirked household stuff; and let me tell you of a
coffeehouse of mine. It was my hap, I may say my ill hap to cast my
affection of late on a very proper young man of a pure complexion, neither
effeminate nor course faced, neither of Lether-sellers, nor Painters comp^ny
but a good feature and well colored: and for his countenance, neither
Paul-sleeple height, nor with the fall of the tide; but carried in so good a
measure, as showed his wits no more out of order then his members: for his
voice, neither Treble nor Base, but a good mean: and his speech neither
Rhetorical, nor Logical, nor Tragical nor Colastical: but such as neither too
little nor too much answering directly to every question: and speaking
necessarily upon good occasion, wan him such commendation for his discretion,
as increasing much my affection, made me (as I thought) upon good judgment,
make him a subject of my contentment: in brief I singled him out of company, to
make him my compa^i^n, to^^ him into my house, bestowed bountifully upon him,
let hi^^^^ want any thing that was needful for him: my table to dine at a fair
chamber for his lodging, yea and sometimes made him my bedfellow, furnished
him with money, horse, apparel, books, and credit for whatsoever he would
demand yea, and in mine absence trusted him with the government of my whole
house; till my favor bred in his folly that, that at the first I saw not, such
a presumption of his own worthiness as I liked not, where contronling even my
self for a trifle, himself to blame in the self-same nature, for a greater
matter, thinking all too little that was done for him, and urging more then was
meet for him: at last, not able to suppress the venom of his pride, till his
heart made his head swell as big as a cods-head, in recompense of all my
kindness, plays false with my servant-maid, steals away my eldest daughter,
robs my coffers, cracks my credit, befools my wi^, and does what he may to seek
the ruin of my estate; is it possible that a man could think of such a
villain, and not be angry?


Fer. Yea very well, and I say unto you, I pray you be not angry* for still
knaves will be knaves, and a man had need eat a bushel of salt with a man,
before he go toe far to trust him; for he was a worldling and out of the
simplicity of your honesty, thinking him to be that he was not, might learn him
to trust his like, or any at all, at least with your house your daughter (if
you have any) or your servants, if you keep any: and having Patience with your
lack of judgment, do for your daughter as you have cause in nature and reason,
and pray in charity for his soul, what ever becomes of his carcass: and since
I hope you will take this for no ill council I say as I did, I pray you be not
angry.


FINIS.

