THE CONTINUATION OF A DISCOURSE, Lately Printed, and Entitled A Brief Account
of the TURKS late Expedition against the Kingdom of Hungary, Transylvania; and
the Hereditary Countries of the Emperor.

Translated out of Dutch.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Hodgkinson, and Thomas Mab, MDCLXIII.

WITH PRIVILEGE.

To the READER,
HAving about a Month since, Printed a small Relation in Three Sheets of Paper
concerning the Turks late Proceedings in Hungary, Transylvania, etc. with good
Acceptance: I thought I could not better Gratify their Curiosity, that took the
Peyns to read the Former, then by Seconding That Introduction, with This
Continuation of the Story: being Turned out of Dutch, and the Work of the Same
Original Author, beginning with This where the Other brake off.

A Continuation of the TURKS Proceedings, etc.
IN all This Action the Grand Vizier has played both the Fox, and the Lion,
mingling Fair words, and Threatenings; and Publishing still before the Blow,
such promises of Liberty, and Immunity to such as would range themselves under
his protection, as he well knew most likely to work upon the People, he had to
deal with. It is true, that these Overtures of Clemency, from so barbarous an
Enemy, were looked upon by the wiser sort, rather as a trick of State, then
Good-faith; yet with the Generality, This way of proceeding took effect.

The Place most in the Turks eye was Presburg; being the chief City of the
Nether-Hungary: (wherein is laid up the Hungarian Crown) A Place, considerable
both for the Goodliness of the Town, and for the Situation of it; to which
advantage the Turk was no Stranger; as appears by the frequent Alarms, he gave
to that City, the gaining whereof, would have opened him a way to Vienna, on
the One side, and to Raab, Comorra, and Newhausel, on the Other: The Danube
passing by in Two Branches, to the Island Schut, at the end whereof stands the
Fort Comorra; and Raab not far off. Nor was it unknown to Count Strozzi, (the
Governor of Presburg) how much the safety of the Whole, Depended upon the
Security of This Part, which moved him to make timely provision, for the
Defense thereof. But the neighboring Places, that lay open, as St. George,
Posing, Modern, etc. chose rather to submit, then expose themselves to the
extremityes of Fire and Sword, by an unprofitable Opposition. Neutra indeed (a
Place not far from Newhausel, nor less defensible) might have resisted, but did
not, and upon the Rendition the Garrison, according to agreement, was conducted
to Presburg. Tyrnaw, and other Towns yielded also.

The Enemies next Attempt was upon Schinta, wherein was lodged a fair
Artillery, but the Governor deported himself valiantly, and beat them off. By
this time, October was half over, and the season, called the Turk to his
Winter Quarters: who finding his time lost upon Schinta, drew off to Newhausel;
which place is now repaired, and strongly Garrisoned, the River Neutra being
brought round about it. From Thence, the Turk took his march, with a
considerable Body, to the Ship-Bridge at Gran, and caused some of his great
Guns to be passed over there, as if his purpose had been to Winter in his own
Territories. Those of Newbausel labored hard to get into the Schut, and settle
themselves, betwixt the Two Forts of Raab, and Comorra: whereupon Montecuculi
and Serini joined their Forces to oppose them.

And now the fortune of the War seemed a little to flatter the Christians;
Nicholas Serini on the 17. of Oct. defeating a Party of 300 Turks, and his
Brother Peter, about the same time falling upon a Body of about 7000 of them
near Carlstadt, on the Frontiers of Stiria: where they designed an Inrode upon
the Christians; but Count Serini, and Count Aursburg, from an Ambuscade, brake
in among them, slew 1000, and took 100 Prisoners; among which were diverse
Persons of Note, and the Son of a great Bassa: the rest dispersed themselves;
and the Victorious in this Adventure got great Booty.

The Serinies have showed themselves, in This their deportment, the true Heirs
of the Honor, and Valor of that Noble Family; and they put us in mind, of a
memorable Action, which was performed by their Grandfather, Nicholas Serini in
the year 1566, To his Eternal Glory.

On the 6th of August 1566, Solomon the Magnificent laid Siege to the Fort
Sigeth, wherein this great Captain, Nicholas Serini was Governor; who made
many bold Sallyes upon the Eenemy, took many Prisoners, and at one time caused
300 Turks to be beheaded; which so far enraged Solomon, that he plied his
Batteries, and Attempts, with greater fury then before. Serini perceiving the
New-Town to be upon the point of being entered, caused it to be set on fire, and
retreated into the Old.

A while after, the Turks assaulted the Old Town, but were so bravely received,
that in One Storm they lost 2000 men. However they attempted it again, and
carried it; whereupon, Serini was forced to retire into the Castle, against
which the Enemy planted a Battery, and gave One surious Attaque; but were
beaten off with great loss.

While This passed, Solomon died of a Bloody Flux, (Sept. 4.) but Mahomet Bassa
laboring as much as possible to keep his death concealed from the Turks,
caused the Corpse (Embalmed, and Gloriously Clothed) to be exposed in a dark
place to the People, as sitting on his Throne, and the Bassa himself, with all
his usual Ceremonies, and Reverence, feigning some singular matter of privacy,
and business with him. At length, the Bassa went out of the Tent, wiping his
eyes as if he had been crying; which gave the Officers occasion to enquire, why
he wept? To whom he replied, that It grieved his heart to think how many brave
Soldiers would be suddenly put to the Sword: for (says he) Solomon has made a
deep and desperate Oath, that if this Place be not taken in two days, every
Colonel that bears any Charge in the Attempt, shall certainly be put to death.
Hereupon, the Janizaryes fell into a direct Rage, and gave a furious Assault,
but were repulsed with exceeding loss: they had howover set fire to the
Castle, and now the Noble Defender of it, seeing his fate before his eyes,
called the small remainder of his men about him, and exhorted them to stand by
him, and resolve to dye with him. Whereupon, he Clothed himself in a
Violet-coloured Velvet Suit, took the Key of the Castle, and some Gold in his
Pocket; caused the Gates to be opened, and the great Guns to be drawn thither,
and discharged among the Enemy: and in a Cloud of Smoke, he issued forth with
his Men, among the Turks, and fought till he was shot in the head. This was the
end of the Valiant Serini. It was reckoned that 20000 Turks were slain before
this Fort. No sooner was Serini fain, but the Infidels thronging about the
Corpse, cut off his head, and set it on a Pole for one day, after which, they
sent it with a Scoff to Maximilian the Emperor. Now to resume the Story.

In October, the Count of Hollach, being chosen General of the Imperial
Auxiliaryes, came to Vienna, his Forces (amounting to 6 or 7000 men) being
Enquarter'd betwixt That, and Crembs; The Emperors Army, lying at that time
near Presburg, to recruit, being much weakened by many Inconveniences. The
whole Army, (with the Hungartans, Croatians, and Auxiliaryes, was computed to
be 40000 strong; but the several heads, of so many Nations, who at this time
were almost all in Vienna, could not (it seems) agree so well together, as not
to need his Imperial Majesty's singular Care, and Circumspect on to keep them
from flying into Parties, and Passions. There was an Intent to join 7 or 8000
men that were raised in Silesia to This Body; but the Silesian Forces would
neither march out of their native Country, nor obey any Foreign Command; so
that They stayed at home to defend their Borders, and especially, the Passage by
Jablunka.

While the Christians were laying their heads, and their Forces together, to
put themselves into a Posture, the Enemy brake up with his main Body before
Newhausel, and about the end of October, took his March toward Gran, and Offen.
The Tartars also with their Prey marched toward Tartary, carrying along with
them their chiefest Captives in Coaches, and Wagons, driving their ordinary
Prisoners along with Whips, naked; and their hair flying about their eyes, just
like so many Beasts. In Vpper-Hungary, they met with some opposition, at which
time many of the Captives were forced out of their hands, and about 2000 of
these Tartars put to the Sword. Count Nicholas Serini's Design, was to fall
upon them, at their passing over the Ship-Bridge, and followed them close,
sometime in the Rear, otherwile on the Flanck, still observing their motion
till he found his opportunity to attaque them.

Upon the last day of October, he set upon the Rear, and took from them 5
Wagons full of Captives, that they had gotten in Moravia; 200 Oxen, and 40
Wagons with Provision. In this Action, he did not only release the Captives,
but defeated also their Drivers, which were about 600 Janissaries. They fought
stoutly for 2 hours from behind their Wagons, so that Count Serini his Hussars,
were forced to quit their Horses, and fight them on foot: which they did with
excellent conduct, and success, giving Quarter only to Two Persons of Note,
whose lives were at their mercy.

Herewith, this Campagnia seemed to be at an end, and Count Serini, having in
appearance little to do further with the Enemy, let his men march homeward:
(wanting Fodder for their Horses) the Enemy in the mean while steering their
Course toward Gran, Offen, and Weissenburg, as to their Winter Quarters. The
Turks left a Garrison of 4000 in Newhausel, under the Command of Two Bassaes;
and 10000 about the Fort, partly to defend the Place, and partly to repair the
Fortifications. In Neutra, the Enemy left 1500 men, which Place was plundered
before the Army marched away. The Earls Cochary, and Tekelly, with a Body of
near 15000 men raised in the Upper and Nether-Hungary, came In to Count Serini;
which Conjunction the Turks mightily endeavored to hinder, but could not
effect it. These Forces are likewise drawn out of the Field, since that time.

The Auxiliaryes, That is to say; the Hessen, Brunswick, Lunenburg, Munster
Forces; and Others from the Rhyne (some of which, namely Those from Hessen
Darmstadt perished upon the Danube) are put into Winter Quarters on the side of
that River; but the Saxon, and Brandenburg Auxiliaryes, are to lie in Bohemia,
and Moravia; and the Silesian Forces to tarry in their own Country: for the
Council of War at Vienna, did not hold it Advisable, to Quarter all the
Auxiliaryes near together, for fear of Surfeits upon the Fruits, beside that
they would have wanted Fodder for their Horse, and in the foul deep ways they
would have found great trouble to have fetched it. Another Consideration was,
the Easing of the Hungarians, who were already sufficiently weary of Billeting
Soldiers. In Fine; there is no great Noise of Arms, and Action, at present,
but how the Enemy may be opposed next Spring, is the Consulation, and the
Question; who threatens Vienna, and the Empire, with no less then 3 or 400000
Men at the Next Campagnia.

It was now Resolved by his Imperial Majesty, to go to Regenspurg about the
end of November following; there to Advise about the Reliese of the Empire, and
indeed of Christendom: and his Imperial Majesty did likewise Resolve to send
Ambassadors to the Pope, Spain, France, etc. to Solicit Succor. From the
Pope, Monyes are expected, France proffers Men (but who dares receive them?)
Swede is willing to Assist in respect of their Interest in Germany, and they
have sent already 700 well mounted that came from Bremen: so that the Instant
Business of the Empire seems to be rather Preparation, then Present Defense;
and to look forward toward the Spring: the Grand Signior having already
dispersed his Letters of Menace, and Defyance to all Christendom throughout
the Emperors Hereditary Countries.

Upon the Turks withdrawing the Gross of his Army, from about Newhausel, over
the Danube, with a Countenance of Disposing himself to his Winter-Quarter; Men's
minds began to be a little Composed and Quiet; till Abafti, the Grand Signiors
Creature in Transylvania undertook the Turks Aftergame, with those Forces that
stayed behind; laboring his Utmost to possess himself of the Berg, or
Mine-Towns, (whence comes the Hungarian Gold) and other Frontier Places, and
Houses belonging of Right to his Imperial Majesty: which Perfidious Design
the Christians Army could not conveniently either prevent, or oppose, being
already dispersed for want of Necessaryes both for Man, and Beast.

This same Abafti; passed in Common Esteem, for a Person well-affected to the
Christians, and as One that waited only a fair Opportunity to draw his Sword
against the Turk; but his Actions have now discovered him: for perceiving what
Reputation, Presents, and other Popular Advantages, have accrued to the Grand
Vizier, and the Chief Officers of the Turkish Army, upon the Gayning of
Newhausel; he likewise turned his Study, and Endeavors the same way, not
doubting by his Interests, and Services, to draw from the Turkish Emperor as
fair a Reward; undertaking not only to keep, what was already gotten, but to
Enlarge the Conquest by a Confiderable Addition.

It being found neither commodious, nor beneficial to expose the Turks, and
other Asiatick, and African Forces, (whose Bodies have been used to a Temperate
warm Air) to the cold Winter-Blasts of Hungary: (which are sharp, though not
long) the Hardship of the Winter-Warre was rather committed to the
Mountaineers; That is; to the Abaftish Transylvanians, Moldavians, Wallachians,
etc. whose Part it is, to Mainteyn the Turks Ground at least, if not carry the
Victory further; and in Brief, to hold the Imperialists in Play, till the
Ottoman Army, may conveniently take the Field again toward the Spring. And
least the Town Neutra should be left Naked; instead of about 600 Turks, and
Janyzaryes, that were taken out of That Garrison, Others, that could better
endure the Air of the Place, were put in, and a Garrison of 115 Janizaryes
into the Castle, (a Sort of People which are of great Credit with the Turk in
Martial Affayrs; and in truth, These were the Men that ventur*d the hardest
before Newhausel.)

Janizaryes are Christians Children, which were either taken Captive, or given
in the way of Tribute, by such Christians as have done Homage to the Turks,
These Children are trayn'd up from their Childhood, in the Mahumetan Belief,
and Inured to Military exercises. They are very Numerous and Valiant; and
doubtless the best support of the Turkish Empire. As their Power is of great
use, and service to the Ottoman Emperor in some cases, so is it in others not
less dangerous, their Revolts and Tumults being seldom Iaid, or quieted without
Horrible Rapine, and Effusion of Blood. Misery of Miseryes! that the Children
of Christians should be thus engaged in so Implacable an Enmity to the Dictates
both of Christ and Nature!

About This Time; News was brought that a young Son was born to Mahomet, upon
which Tidings, such a face was set upon the Busyness, as if it had been a
Material Part of their Religion to welcome this young Idol into the world with
the Sacrifice of more Christian-Bloud.

Abafti's Aim, (as we have said before) was to work himself in among the
Mine-Towns. The two first considerable Blocks in his way were Lewents, and
Novigrad, (beside others of less Importance.) In Lewents were good Fighting
men, Backed with a Castle that was well fortifyed with Thick walls, and Firm
Turrets. In This Place, the Enemy found stout opposition, and Lost many men
before it; but at last pressing upon it with greater Numbers and no Relief
appearing within distance, they took it upon Accord. Those that Marched out
were in no sort Injured, and Those that stayed behind were disarmed, and did
Homage.

After Lewents followed Novigrad, that lies deeper in the Vpper-Hungary; which
although a strong Place, and environed with a Morasse; yet after a stout
Resistance was forced to Render to the Enemy. The Forces in it were conducted
to Waitzen, where they betook themselves to work for their Living, as the Rest
of the Peasants, and are enjoined to be ever in Readyness with their Arms. The
Governor of it, by Name, Pedami, got leave from Abafti to go to his
Countrey-House in Transylvania, and to dwell there, which soon after he did.

On the Christians side, there was no goodwill wanting toward the Relief of any
of these Places; but all their Attempts fell short, by reason of many
Fatalities, and Accidents Intervening.

These successes encouraged the Enemy to draw nearer to the Mine-Towns, and to
endeavor the making of their Winter-Quarter thereabouts, and in Vpper-Hungary.
A Rumor was then dispersed that the Great Vizier had Commanded the Magistrates
of Frystadt, and the Neighboring Parts, upon pain of death to make a
Ship-bridge over the Waegh with all speed, and to provide Victuals and Fodder
to entertain him at his coming back. Thus did new Cares and Troubles come on,
in a season, when every man flattered himself with some hopes of Respit and
Repose.

Count Serini, that till now, staid in the Isle of Schutt. put himself
Instantly into Motion, and now and then, met with some Parties, and took good
Booty from them; but alas? This would not serve to set the Balance even. Upon
November 12. He took, in a Moorish Place, betwixt Raab, and Comorra, ten Camels
and as many Mules, laden with Truneks full of Gold and Silver-plate; together
with the Conductours, who were bound for Constantinople with this Booty.

In Comorra (where the Officers were at that time under Question, and came off
well, about the Surrender of Newhausel) there were great Complaints of Scarcity
of Provision; the Country being so miserably wasted round about it. Whereupon,
at Vienna it was taken into thought, how those out-lying Garrisons might be
supplied, and the Enemy disappointed of their aim, who knew full well the
State of their Necessities. It is certain, that the Auxiliaries and other
Forces that were Quartered in Comorra, would much rather have kept the field,
if all other Circumstances would have permitted it; but those Auxiliaries, who
by too liberal Feeding on the Austrian and Moravian Fruits, had contracted
diseases, neither could, nor would stir; beside that their General, Count
Hohenlo, a Prudent, Expert, and Judicious Commander, gave many weighty Reasons
against it. No sooner had this Lord made an Acquaintance in Vienna; but ill
Fortune met with him his Chamber being Robbed of VVritings, Moneys, and Jewels,
to the value of betwixt twenty and thirty thousand; Rix Dollars.

The Swedish Auxiliaries were not yet come up; but by Advice from Leipsick,
they were then upon their March not far from Thuringen, (about the midst of
November) and 150. horse were likewise to come from Pomerania, which Forces
became the Ground of great Mistakes, happening to be in Motion just upon that
Nick of time, when the Ersordians (being then Outlawed) were in Expectation of
the Men^zish troops: Upon whom they Issued forth, and in their Return left two
Carpenters behind them, whom they hanged upon a VVaggon, which did much
inflame the tumult. but the Swedish troops, which had so much troubled the
heads of diverse People, proved to be a Force of another design, and Quality.

The Rumor of the Return of the Turkish Army, (now so late in November)
Increased more and more; at which time Filleck (Some ten mile from Cassaw) was
given for lost; So that certain Regiments were immediately sent to make good
the other Mine-Townes, which the Enemy had particularly in their Eye for a
Winter-Quarter. Those Christians which about this time ranfom'd themselves from
the Turks, speak much of the Stupendous Preparations, which are now in hand
against Christendom; Affirming it for a Certainty, that the Grand Signior is
resolved to take the field next Spring with an Army of three hundred thousand
Men, which causes great perplexities in Poband, Hungary, Moravia, Silesia, and
Bohemia; but the Polanders, being at peace with the Turks, conceived themselves
in some measure secured by virtue of that Agreement; but in the Tartars,
Moldavians, and Walachians, they have not much confidence: Especially, when
they are upon their Excursions. Many were of opinion, that the Turks were
forced upon an irregular and precipitate retreat for want of Provisions, and
that their attempts so late in the year, upon Moravia, and the neighboring
Provinces, were caused partly by the Inviting plenty of all necessaries, which
those Countries afford; and in part, by the encouragement they received from
their Correspondents in those Quarters; beside the scarcity, which their longer
continuance, upon the Danube would infallibly have produced thereabouts, to the
great inconvenience of their Armies next Spring.

Hungary lay now groaning under the burden of the Turkish Power, and longing
for aid; the Infidels over-spreading it like a dismal Cloud, charged with Hail
and Thunder: all men's thoughts, being sollicitous, for deliverance, and in
continual expectation where the storm would fall. Many were of opinion that
submission was the best expedient in this extremity; but betwixt the sense of
their Allegiance sworn to the Emperor, and the distrust they had of the Turks
Justice to his word, diverse held off.

The Enemy (who did nothing rashly, though as is generally supposed, rather
acting by Instigation then choice) counted it most advisable to draw toward
Cassaw the head City of Vpper-hungary; knowing full well that when ever the
Christians should Unite, they would make this place the Seat of War, and
settle themselves There: Wherefore the Infidels went roundly to work, removing
whatsoever might hinder their Progress, before any succor could come up to
them, which succor would however at last signify not much against so Potent an
Enemy.

About this time, the Polanders were a little Frighted with the Tartars, who
though returning homeward with their booty already gotten, might yet be tempted
by their greediness after more, to break into the Cracovian, Waywood-ship; and
from thence to advance into Silesia, according to the old saying, Si Turca
veniet in Germaniam, Ibit per Poloniam. If the Turk comes into Germany, he
shall pass through Poland. These Incarnat and Rapacious Devils, however kept
off yet, and carried their prey to their Cavernes there to divide it. One thing
is, that Cham, being the head and Sovereign of these Tarters which had been in
Moravia, was a friend to Poland, and about this time his Forces went in
abundance with the King of Poland (in person) and the Army, together with a
great number of Cossacks, against the Muscovite, marching over the River
Nieper; otherwise called Boristhenes. The Turks however went on in their
proceeding, subduing Shemnitz, Cremnitz, and other Mine-towns, and sending
threatening Letters to the Magistrates thereabout, who being over-awed by the
Terror of those Menaces, moved the People under them to do homage to these
Infidels. The taking of the Fort Novigrad, (upon the strength whereof the
People so much depended) did not a little conduce to the Subjecting of the
rest. And now they made their excursions toward Tokay, (where their Noblest
Wines grow) a strong Hold, moted round about, and always reputed as
invincible. Upon this place they practiced both subtilty and force, as they had
done before Novigrad; but honest men had the keeping of it, and so they were
forced to pass it by.

About this time the Turks caused the late subdued Lewents to be demolished, as
not liking the manner of the Fortification, and sent a Menacing Order to those
of Frystadt, to dispatch out of hand two Bridges over the Waegh, larger then
the former, and to make them broad enough for whole Squadrons to pass a
Breast; And now they began to talk loud of another Invasion into Moravia; to
which end, many thousands of the Tawny-Tartars thronged into the Camp, as if
those of the other complexion, had not yet played the devils sufficiently in the
Country; Whereupon to prevent that Inrode, a Counter-mand was sent to most of
those forces, that were now marched, or marching off to their Winter Quarters;
and Order given them to bend their Course toward the Waegh. Although this
Countenance of the Turks design gained not much Credit, in regard of the season
of the Year, it was however held for good discretion not to be too secure.

Near the end of November, came to Vienna-Baron de Goes (with leave of the
Great Vizier, and in company of a Turkish Chiaux of Offen) who long time had
been employed as the Emperors Agent toward the intended Treaty for Peace;
which Baron, Affirms that the Grand Signior with the Tartar Cham, have
resolved, with an Incredible Force, to come personally into the Field next
Spring; and Join the utmost of their power against Christendom.

Upon the taking of which Resolution, vast Quantities of Rice and Corn were
Ordered at Adrinople, and Philippopoli to be carried to Greek-Weissenberg, and
from thence to Offen. This determination and Proceeding, engaged the Christians
to use their utmost Endeavors Possible, for the bringing of a considerable
Body into the Field next Spring; and to this purpose, his Imperial Majesty
having first given Audience to the Report of the said Baron, gives immediate
Order for Preparations; taking his Journey to the Diet at Regenspurg, to Stir
up the Princes of the Empire to a General Conjunction against the Turk. In the
Interim, the Archduke Charles Joseph, being designed to keep his Residence in
Vienna, put himself upon the way thither from Lintz; but fell into such a
weakness upon the Journey, that he was enforced to go back. The Chief Officers
appointed to stay behind in Vienna, applied themselves with all diligence to
the putting their Orders in Execution.

Schinta was now provided afresh with Ammunition and Provision, and the Great
Artillery removed from thence, the Montecuculish Army, which for a long time
had been Quarterd near the Presburg Ship-Bridge, moved from thence toward
Moravia. The Count de Souches conceived some hopes of recovering Neutra, and
prepared accordingly; the loss of that place being reputed not much inferior
to the loss of New hausel: Neutra being an Ecclesiastical Seat, New-hausel only
a Seat for Soldiers, which begat a greater Zeal, and Earnestness toward the
Recovery of the Place.


