A BRIEF ACCOUNT Of the Commitment of the Earl of Sh. And the Crimes laid to
his Charge.
IT has been much admired at by the most sober and considering part of the
Nation, that those who came in these three years past to discover a cursed
Design against his Sacred Majesty's Life and Government, should be most
intimate with Persons discontented, and notoriously dissassected with his.
Majesty's Government both in Church and State; Nay, should be supported and
mantain'd, if not Instructed and Catechized by them in all their measures and
Proceedings. And indeed it is very strange, that no Informer yet appeared to
discover the Plot either in England or Ireland, but first he made his Address
to the E. of S -- before he applied himself to ^ing or Council: For it is plain,
neither his Lordships Loyalty, (which always seemed Retrograde, but when he
Governed all; nor his Religion, which in all the Revolutions of his time, he
measured still by his Interest,) could invite these Informers to Him, more than
to other Peers of the Realm. But now People begin to find out the Mystery, and
are pretty well satisfied, that his Lordship did not promote the Discovery of
the Popish Plot out of any extraordinary Zeal he had for the good either of the
King or Kingdom, but was resolved to make a good hand of this Hellish
Conspiracy, to advance another of his own: But our little VVeathercock of State
made a Pit, and dig'd it, and is fallen into the Ditch which he made. Those
very Witnesses, whom he so much extolled for the Saviors of both Kingdoms, and
endeavored to persuade to Swear against her Sacred Majesty, and his Royal
Highness, have of late positively sworn Treason, or rather a heap of Treasons
against himself; the sum whereof is as follows. I. That he has imagined to
compass and procure the Death of the King, and the Subversion of the
Government, and of the known Laws of the Land, by reducing this ancient
Monarchy into a Republic. II. That he used great endeavors to possess the
People that His Majesty is a Papist, and designs to introduce Popery and
Arbitrary Power; and to that end has promoted several Seditious and Treasonable
Libels against His Majesty's Person and Government, purposely to bring His
Majesty into an odium and Contempt with his loving Subjects. III. That He
endeavored to Levy War against the King both in England and Ireland, and bring
Bloodshed and Confusion upon His Majesty's good People, under pretense of
prosecuting the Popish Plot, and preserving the Protestant Religion, the
Liberty and Property of the Subject, as He and his Confederates have done in
the late Rebellion. IV. That He endeavored to render the Church of England as
Ridiculous as Popery, and Defamed all His Majesty's Officers both by Land and
Sea; and all others, who out of a due sense of Loyalty adhere to the Crown,
stiling them Tories, Tantivies, Masqueraders, etc. purposely to frighten them
from their Duty, and wean them from their Sovereign, to adhere to Him and His
Faction. V. That He countenanced, harbored, and hired Persons to swear against
the Queen, and His Royal Highness. VI. That He procured several sums of Money
to be Raised and Collected to carry on these most abominable Designs.


This Charge is made out against his Lordship by 15. Persons of as good Credi^
and Reputation as any of those his Lordship so much extolled and admired while
they swore as he would have them; Four are Irish, the rest English; and all
known Protestants of the Church of England; And several of them were lately
esteemed by his Lordship very fit Persons to swear against the Queen and His
Royal Highness Yet perhaps they must not be thought of sufficient Credit now
against such a true Protestant, who was as Zealous to suppress Popery in 79. as
he was to promote it in 72. and Polypus-like in all the Changes and Revolutions
of the Government always appeared of the same Religion with the Faction or
Party he espoused.

It Is well known, that whosoever swears for the Presbyterians, (though hired
for that purpose,) must be cried up for a Saint, and a Savior of the Nation:
But if ever he is touched with any Remorse of Conscience, and thereupon
discove^ the Villainous Practices of that Party, He is immediately Metamorphos'd
into the greatest of Villains, and worst of Perjurers. And it is very
observable, that among the Brethren there is a Common Purse made, and a
Swearing Office erected, where all Persons that have Conscience large enough to
swallow any Oaths, and swea^ what their Benefactors please, are frankly
entertained and liberally Rewarded.

But above all, it is worth the enquiring after, what Motives can induce the
Godly Congregations to be so free of their Purse to the Irish Evidence, who are
known Papists, Priests and Friars? For the Conspiracy in Ireland (as they tell
Us,) was To bring in the French, and cut the Throats of all the Protestants in
that Kingdom What Reason then have the Fanatics of England to be so liberal
to the Discoverers of that PLOT, when the very Parties concerned, (the
Protestants of Ireland never gave them a Farthing? Is it possible the English
Fanatics, can be more concerned for the safety of the Irish Protestants, than
They Themselves? Or that the Pootestants of that Kingdom could be so stupid, as
not to consider these Discovere^^ that saved their Throats from a General
Massacre, if they believed there was a^^ such Design in Agitation? As for my
part, let the world believe what they plea^^ I am certain, the Brethren do not
part with their Money for nothing; and I a^ afraid there lies a Snake in the
Grass, as I hope will shortly be found out.

In the interim our great Patriot is sent to the Tower, and kept close Prisoner
(...) the foresaid Crimes; And it is said, that last Saturday morning, when the
Sergeant (...) Arms went to Apprehend him, and desired his Lordship to eat
something before (...) appeared before the King and Council, the Earl replied,
He had no stomach to e^^ unless he could get a roasted Irishman; which others
hearing, they answered, No^^ was fitter for his Lordships Table, than his own
Creature and Precursor Mr. Fit^ Harris; and had his Lordship come but the day
before, he might have overtake him at Tyburn. But if his Lordships Appetite
still continues, he may perhaps e're lon^ have his belly full of his dear Pupil
Mr. Hetherington.

LONDON: Printed for H. R. 1681.


