CHRIST And the COVENANT THE Work and Way of Meditation.

Gods Return to the Soul, or Nation; Together with his Preventing Mercy.

Delivered in Ten SERMONS, (VIZ.) 1. Christ's Personal Excellencies, the Object
of of our Love. 2. Christ crucified, the Object of our Faith. 3. The New
Covenant of Grace opened. 4. Christ the Mediator of the New Covenant. 5. The
Way and Spirit of the New Covenant, or New Testament. 6. The Blood of
Sprinkling. 7. The sweetness and profitableness of Divine Meditation. 8. The
Work and Way of this Meditation. 9. Gods Return to the Soul and Nation. 10.
Preventing Mercy.


By W. B.

LONDON, Printed for N. Ranew, and J. Robinson at the Angel in Jewen-street,
1667.

To the READER.
Courteous Reader,
THese Ten Sermons lately taken by an expert band, as they fell from the mouth
of the sweet Preacher of them, contain so great a variety of Heavenly matter,
so much of the very marrow and quintessence of the Gospel, that thou will no
sooner begin to read them, but wilt presently find, that the heart of the
Reverend Author of them, has lay'n long asoke in the blood of Jesus, and that
he has been no stranger to his very bosom Love. Buy them therefore with what
speed thou can, and read them over diligently, it will be a good bargain for
thy Soul, and one of the Richest Commodities that ever thou mettest with at so
cheap a Rate. It is put into so small a Letter and Bulk, purposely for thy
better accommodation, and that not only in the ease of thy Purse, but
principally that thou may make it, as well thy Pocket, as thy Hearts
Companion, where e're thou go.

Farewell.
The Reader is desired to Correct, or Pardon these few faults, or any other
literal mistakes that he meets with.
PAge 17. line 9. for love read heart. p. 20. l. 25. f. love r. good p. 21. in
the Title, f. faith r. love. p. 25. l. 4. f. think r. thing. p. 29. l. 23. f.
cleary r. clearly. p. 32. in the Title, f. Christ's r. Christ. p. 35. l. 15. f.
Elias r. Eli. p. 41. l. 25. f. gorw r. grow. p. 43. l. 9. for spirit r. sight.
p. 64. l. 1. f. for r. if. p. 100. l. 27. f. for. lo. p. 355. l. 22. f. when r.
where. p. 356. l. 25. f. Samaritans r. the Samaritans. p. 367. l. 24. f. dange
r. danger. p. 371 l. 9. f. with that, r. what is that? p. 378 l. 24. f. when r.
where. p. 384 l. 12. leave out your. p. 388 in the title, f. and r. of. p. 389
l. 15. leave out be. p. 397 l. 6. leave out a. p. 403. l. 12. leave out and. p.
409 l. 7. f. uno r. unto. p. 419 l. 28. f. a r. the, and line 29. leave out
therefore. p. 426 l. 23. f. so, r. see. p. 445 in the title, for wory r. work.
p. 451 l. 8. f work r. want. p. 455 l. 25. for aytance, r. assistance. p. 476
l. 12. for not gone, r. not so gone. l. 19. for not gone, r. not so gone. p.
487 l. 23. for ere, r. or.

Christ's Personal Excellencies the object of our Love. SERMON I.
John 14.28. ^f ye loved me, ye would rejoice, because I said, I go unto the
Father, for my Father is greater than I.


THese words are part of the last sweet Sermon, which our Savior Preached unto
his Disciples before his Death and departure from them: wherein he labors to
allay their sorrow and grief upon the ^ccasion of his departure: Therefore he
tells them (...) the second Verse, In my Fathers house are many man^s: and at
the third Verse, I go to prepare a place for (...).

Then he tells them at the 16, 17, 18, verses, that (...) would send them
another Comforter and, I will not leave (...) comfortless, I will come unto
you.

Then he labors to persuade them unto comfort, (...) their protestation of
their own Love unto him. (...) say you love me, says he, If ye loved me, yo
would re^e, because I said, I go unto the Father, for my Father is ^ter than I.

^f ye loved me, that is, If you loved me so much as you should. It Is usual
with Scripture to speak of things absolutely, when they are meant
c^mparatively. If you loved me so much as you pro^esse, and so much as you
should: for they did love him.

If ye loved me, ye would rejoice, because I go unto m^ Father.

Joy is the top of Comfort, as Comfort is the top o^ Peace. Joy is the cream of
Comfort. If ye loved me ye would be so far from being troubled at my going that
you would be very much comforted: for I g^ unto my Father, who is greater than
I: Than I am a^ Mediator, who upon my coming to him, will exa^ me, and
therefore if ye loved me, ye would rathe^ rejoice, because I go un^o my Father,
who is great^ than I: From whence then I take up this Doctrine.

Doct. That true love unto the Person of Christ, w^ make us rejoice in his
Personal Exaltment, thou it may be in some respects unto our debasement, or
pr^sent loss.

For the opening and prosecuting whereof,

1. We must enquire what there is in Christ's g^^ing to the Father, that is
matter of our Rejoicing.

2. I shall labor to show you, that it is our duty rejoice in the Personal
Exaltment of Christ, tho^ in some respects it may be to our own loss and
^basement.

3. That true love to the Person of Christ will (...) able us to do this.

4. That it is possible, that Christ's own, and (...) Disciples, may be wanting
in their Love to Chri^ Person.

5. What an excellent thing it is to love the P^son of Christ, rather than the
benefits of Christ: To have our hearts drawn out in Love to his Person, more
excellent than to have a love to him upon the account of benefits. And

6. What we should do, that our hearts may be drawn out in love to the very
Person of Christ, so as we may be able to rejoice in his exaltment, though to
our own debasement.

First, If you ask what there is in Christ's going to the Father, that is
matter of our Rejoicing, of a Disciples rejoicing.

I answer, much every way; -- much in reference to our own concernments, --
much in reference to the concernments of Christ, -- much in reference to the
concernments of God the Father.

As for our own concernments,

First, If Christ had not gone unto the Father, his ^atisfaction for our sins
had not been accepted, nor ^ur Redemption perfected, Heb. 9.12. Neither by the
blood of Goats and Calves, but by his own blood, he entered in once into the
holy place, having obtained eternal Redemp^ion for us. It does relate and
allude unto the manner of the Old Testament: when the blood of Goats and Calves
was poured out, the Priest took the blood and carried it into the holy of
holiest, and sprinkled the mer^ Seat: But though the blood of Bulls or Calves
had ^een poured out, yet if the Priest had not carried it ^to the holy of
holiest, the typical satisfaction and re^emption had not been obtained: And so
here, though ^e blood of Jesus had been shed, and poured out upon the Cross,
if he had not gone unto the Father, and ^rried his blood into heaven, into the
holy of holiest, his ^tisfaction for our sin had not been accepted, and ou^
^edemption had not been perfected.

Secondly, If Christ had not gone unto the Father, he had not made the
application of his Death, and Blood, and Merits unto our Souls. He came into
the world, that we should have Repentance and Remission: both were purchased by
his Death: But now if he had not gone unto the Father, there had not been an
application. Both were purchased by his Death on earth, -- But was the
business so left at a loose? no, but by his going to the Father, what he
purchased by his Death he does apply. In Acts 5. it is said, Him has God
exalte^ with his Right hand, to be a Prince and Savior, for to giv^ Repentance
unto Israel, and forgiveness of sins. So that ha^ he not gone unto the Father,
there had not been a^ application of his Blood, and Death, and Merit unt^ our
souls.

Thirdly, If Christ had not gone unto the Father the Holy Ghost, the Comforter,
had not come. If go not away, the Comforter will not come. -- But wh^ might not
the Comforter, or the Holy Ghost, come though Christ had been here on earth, if
he had n^ gone unto the Father?

I answer, The gifts, graces, and comforts of the Holy Ghost, were the Dona
Regia, which were give^ out upon the Coronation of Christ: for by this goin^ to
the Father he was crowned with glory and honor, (...) in Heb. 2. -- When the
Holy Ghost comes, he do bear witness to our spirits, that we are the children
of God, and God reconciled to us. But how shou^ God give such a testimony of
his Reconciliation un^ us, if Christ had not first gone into heaven, and give
up his accounts of what he had done here on earth. (...) is said expressly in
John 7. This spoke he of the spir^ which they that believe on him should
receive, for the H^ Gh st was not yet given, because that Jesus was not yet
glo^fied. And if Jesus Christ had not gone unto the F^ther, and so sent the
Spirit, how should we ha^ known that he had so much care for us, and love to
us, when he was in heaven, as by the sending of the Holy Ghost. We are never
more fit for the Holy Ghost, than when we are weaned from the carnal presence
of Christ: And therefore if Christ had not gone unto the Father, the Spirit,
the Holy Ghost had not come.

Fourthly, If our Lord and Savior Christ had not gone unto the Father, we
should have had no Advocate in heaven to plead our Cause in heaven upon all
occasions. It Is a great matter (we say) to have a Friend at Court, an Agent
there that may plead for us. What a mercy is it to have an Agent in heaven to
negotiate our business there? why now says the Apostle; If any man sin, we
have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous. If Christ had not
gone unto the Father, we had not had this Advocate in heaven to plead for us
upon all occasions. And

Fifthly, If Christ had not gone unto the Father, we should have no entrance
into heaven; heaven was locked up, the Gates of Paradise were shut, and kept by
an Angel with a a flaming sword: This Paradise was opened upon the Cross, This
day shall thou be with me in Paradise; and we enter into it by Christ's going
into heaven, by his going into the holy of holi^est, I go to prepare a place
for you; not as sent before to take up your Lodgings, but as one Friend goes
before another, to make a great entertainment for his Friends. But I say, if
Christ had not gone unto the Father, we had had no entrance into heaven. Why
now, is it not a matter of Joy, and of great Comfort, that we have entrance
into heaven? -- That the Comforter is come, -- That we have always one in
heaven to plead our Cause upon all occasions: These and many other things we
obtain by Christ's going to the Father. This for our own concernment. And

Secondly, As for the concernment of Christ: By his going to the Father, he was
exalted, and glorified, (as Mediator I speak.)

And if you ask what was the Glory and greatness that was put upon Christ, as
Mediator, by his going to the Father. -- It consists in two things. -- The
Royalty of his entertainment, when he came unto his Father, -- And the
greatness of his advancement.

And if yo^ ask yet, what was the Entertainment that he had when he came unto
the Father.

Why, it was an Entertainment suitable to such a Father, -- and to such a Son.
When that great Sinner, the Prodigal, returned unto his Father, his Father
fell upon his neck, and kissed him. Bring out the Robes, kill the Fatted Calf,,
bring out the Ring: And if such an entertainment for a Prodigal Son, what
entertainment then for the Natural Son of God, the obedient Son of God, that
had been upon his Father's great concernment in the world? Great was this
Entertainment surely, beyond all my expression. But now more particularly.

1. No sooner did he come into heaven unto his Father, but he was Justified in
all that which he did and suffered for us, as you have it in the 1 Timothy 3.16.
God was manifest in the flesh, Justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels,
preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into glory.

2. No sooner did he come unto the Father, but he was mightily declared to be
the Son of God, as you have it in Romans 1. Thou art my Son, this day, (that is,
upon the Resurrection) this day have I begotten thee. The Apostle explains it
concerning the Resurrection in Acts 13.

3. No sooner did he come unto the Father, but he was anointed with a new and
fresh Anointing, with the oil of gladness above all his fellows: For as
David (the Type) had a double Anointing, one by the hand of Samuel, after
which he was thrust out into the Wilderness, and another at the day of his
Coronation, so Christ Typified had a double Anointing, one upon his
Incarnation, in which respects he says, The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, and
he has anointed me to preach, -- and another upon his Coronation, when he was
crowned with Glory and honor. And therefore in Heb. 1. he is anointed twith
the oil of gladness above his fellows, comes in upon his exaltation. And

4. No sooner did he come into the presence of his Father, but his Father said
unto him, Sit thou down at my Right hand; the most honorable place in heaven,
sit thou at my Right hand, my Son. -- Why now is it not a matter of great
rejoicing to us, that Christ going to heaven with our names upon his shoulder,
and heart, should have such an entertainment as this, such a welcome as this
unto God the Father?

But 2ly. What advancement had he upon his going to the Father?

Why, great was his advancement as Mediator.

For 1. No sooner did he come unto the Father, but he was Invested with all
that glory that he had with God the Father from all Eternity, which he had laid
by and veiled, when he took our nature upon him: and therefore in Joh. 17.
says he, And now, oh Father, glorify thou me with thy self, with the glory
which I had with thee before the world was. No sooner did he come into heaven
unto his Father, but he was invested with that glory again, that he had veiled
to take our nature upon him.

2. No sooner did he come into the presence of his Father, into heaven, but God
commanded all the Angels to worship him: Worship him all ye Angels.

3. No sooner did he come into the presence o^ his Father, to heaven, but he
was made Executor and Administrator to his own Will, to see that performed. We
die, and leave Legacies, but cannot Administer our selves, nor be the Executors
of our own Wills: but Christ lives for ever. I was dead, but am alive; and when
he came into heaven, God the Father made him Executor to his own Will, and
therefore says he; Ask the Father in my Name, and whatever ye ask, that will I
give you. Him has God the Father Exalted to give remission and repentance,
Executor of his own Will and Testament.

4. No sooner did he come into heaven, into the presence of his Father, but he
was made the great Governor of all the world, and Head of the Church. In Acts
5. Him has God exalted with his right hand, to be a Prince and Savior: Lord
over all the world, and Savior of the Church. Agreeable to that in Ephesians. 1.20.
which he wrought in Christ, when he raise^ him from the Dead, and set him at
his own right hand in the heavenly places, Far above all principalitie^ and
powers, and might and d^minion, and every name tha^ is named, not only in this
world, but also in that which is t^ come. And has put all things under his
feet, and gav^ him to be head over all things to the Church, which is his body.
Prince and Savior, Lord over all the world, and Savior and Head unto the
Church.

5. And to say no more in it: No sooner did he come into the presence of God
his Father, (that is greater than he, as Mediator) but God the Father did take
him into fellowship in the matter of divine worship. Whether I or no, Christ
qua Mediator, or quia Mediator, be to be adored with divine worship, I will
not now debate; but whatsoever worship was due to God the Father, was given to
Christ. Confounded ^he all they that worship graven Images, worship him all ye
gods. All divine worship due to God the Father, is given to him. Here Is an
advancement. Now is it not a matter of great rejoicing, that Christ our Head
should be thus advanced? Says the Emperor's Wife, If thou be Caius, I am
Caia; -- and, If Christ be King, the Church is Queen, Psalm. 45. Is it not, I
say, a matter of great rejoicing, that Christ our Head should be thus advanced?
Now thus he is advanced by his going to God the Father. Thus for the Son's
concernment. But

Thirdly, What matter is there of rejoicing by Christ's going to the Father, in
reference to the Father's concernment?

Much; says Christ in John 14.13. Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that
will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son. That will I do; I am
now going from you, and if ye ask the Father in my name, that will I do, --
why? not that the Son may be glorified only, but that the Father may be
glorified.

Look when the great Promise of the Father is fulfilled, then is the Father
glorified. What Is the great Promise of the Father? Acts 1. The coming of the
Holy Ghost. By Christ's going to the Father comes the Holy Ghost: Therein was
the Father glorified then.

And look, when Every tongue shall confess that Jesus is the Lord, to the
glory of the Father, then is the Father glorified. Now by Christ's going to the
Father, being exalted, every tongue does confess, that Jesus is the Lord, to
the glory of the Father, as in Philip. 2.

And to say no more in it but this: Look, when the great d^sign of God upon the
world is accomplished, and Christ the Son glorified, then is the Father
glorified. Now by Christ's going to the Father the great design of God is
accomplished, and the So^ glorified. Thus we have cause of rejoicing in
reference to the concernment of God the Father: Loo^ where you will, -- will
you look upon your ow^ concernment, -- will you look upon the concernment of
Christ, -- will you look upon the concernment of God the Father, there is
matter of our rejoicing in Christ's going to the Father. And so have done with
the first thing. But then

Secondly, How may it appear, that it is our wor^ and duty, to rejoice in the
Personal Exaltment o^ Christ, though in some respect it should be to ou^ own
debasement, or present loss?

Why you see what our Savior says here, If ye loved me, ye would rejoice,
because I go unto the Father, wh^ is greater than I. You lose by my going you
think; and indeed in some respects you do. But however it is your duty to
rejoice, because it is for my Personal Exaltment: And you know what Paul says
in another case. Some Preach Christ out of envy, and out of contention, and to
add affliction to my bonds; but however, says he, Christ is preached, Christ
is exalted, and therein I will rejoice: I will rejoice, though I be debased, so
Christ may be exalted, I rejoice.

If that we are to Praise God for the Exaltment of Christ, then we are to
rejoice therein; for Praise and Rejoicing go together in Scripture. Now, though
I cannot praise God, and be thankful that God loves me, I may praise God for
this, that the Father loves Christ, and be thankful for his love and his
goodness to Christ. Christ praised God for our glory and happiness, though to
his own debasement, why should not we praise God for his Exaltment, though it
be to our debasement?

If I am to mourn for sin, because it is a dishonor to God, though the sin be
to my own profit, then I am to praise God and Christ for his Glory, though it
may be in some respects to my prejudice.

B^t besides this, the more Communicative any good is, the more we may, and
should rejoice therein. There is abundance of light in the Sun, but if the Sun
be not up, and ascended, it cannot give light unto all the world: So now,
though there be light in Christ, able to enlighten all the world, yet if this
Sun be not up, he cannot give light to all the world: but being now Ascended,
he is able to give forth his beams of light unto all the world.

But you will say; How may it appear, that Christ will be as gracious and
communicative in his love unto us now in heaven, as he would have been had he
been here on earth.

You know what he said when he was here on earth, And let him that is athirst
come. John 7.37. In the last day, the great day of the Feast, Jesus stood and
cried, saying; If any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink. -- Now he is
in heaven, look into the Book of the Revelation, which he speaks from heaven,
he speaks more than that, And let him that is athirst come, there is that, And
whosoever will, let him take of the water of life freely, here is more now he is
in heaven.

And I pray, when did our Lord and Savior Christ, wash his Disciples feet?
Give the glorious testimony of his condescending love unto his D^sciples, (...)
when he was going to the Father? Jesus knowing (...) that the Father had given
all things into his hands, and that he was come from God, and went to God: he
arose from Supper, and laid aside his Garments, and took a Towel and girded
himself. Knowing that all power was given into his hand, he gives that reason:
He did thus condescend in this way of love, knowing that all power was given
into his hand.

Now that he is in heaven, all power is given into his hand, and therefore now
certainly he will be as gracious, and communicative in his love and goodness,
as if he had been here on earth; and rather over and above. Surely therefore it
is our work and our duty, to rejoice in this Exaltment of Christ, though in
some respects it may be to our debasement, or present loss. But then

Thirdly, How shall we do this?

Why, true love to the Person of Christ will enable us to do this: It will
enable us to rejoice in the Personal Exaltment of Christ, though it may be to
our own present loss and abasement. -- It is a sweet thing to the Lover, to
suffer for the Person loved: that is, where love fixed upon the Person, and not
upon the benefits, If love be fixed upon the benefit, it is not so, but if upon
the person, it is so: So if our love be fixed upon the Person of Christ, this
love will enable us to rejoice in the Exaltment of Christ, though it be in our
own debasement: Christ rejoiced in our Exaltment, though it was to his own
debasement, -- why? because he loved our persons, who loved us, and gave
himself for us, So that true love unto the Person of Christ, will make us
rejoice in his Exaltment, though it may be to our own present debasement,

You will say then, How few are there, that do love Christ indeed: Christ is
hard^y loved for Christ: Christ himself is hardly l^ved f^r himself: To love
the Person of Christ, how few are there that do that. And so I come unto the
fourth thing.

Fourthly, It Is possible that Christ's own Disciples may be wanting in their
love to Christ's Person. It Is somewhat strange this: If a Prince or Nobleman
should take a poor woman, a Beggar off the Dunghill, and marry her, it would be
somewhat strange, that she should not love his Person. If he should not love
her, you would not think it so strange: If Boaz should not love Ruth, you would
not have thought it so strange, but that Ruth should not love the Person of
Boaz, this may seem strange: So now, such beggars were we, when the Lord came
and took us off the Dunghill, and said, Now is a time of love. If the Lord
Jesus should not love our persons, it would not seem so strange; but that we
should be wanting in our love to the Person of Christ, this is strange: -- yea
Friends, it is possible that Christ's own Disciples may be wanting in their love
to the Person of Christ.

They may be wanting in the manner of their love to Christ's Person.

They may be wanting in the measure of their love to Christ's Person.

If ye loved me, says he, and yet they left all to follow him: possibly then,
the best Disciples of Christ, the best men may be wanting in their love to the
Person of Christ. To make this out a little to you.

1. First of all, The more we love the Person of Christ, the more diligent and
observant we shall be in keeping Christ's Commandments, that are properly his.
If ye love me, keep my Commandments. Why now, how many are there of God's own
people, that are too negligent in keeping Christ's Commandments; the
Commandment of Love, -- the Institutions of Christ: and why so, but because
they are wanting in their love to the Person of Christ, If ye love me, keep my
Commandments.

2. If a good man may be wanting in his zeal for for Christ, possibly he may be
wanting in his Love t^ Christ's Person: what is zeal, but fired love, inflam^
love, angered love? Now possibly a man that love Christ in truth, may be
wanting in his zeal. Old E^ loved God, without all doubt, and yet he was
wanting in his love to God. Peter loved Christ, Thou know that I love thee,
and yet wanting in his love by denying of Christ. Good men may be wanting in
their zeal for Christ; why? but because they are wanting in their love to the
Person of Christ.

3. The more a man loves the Person of Christ, the more he does love the
Servants, the people of Christ It was a good speech of Jerome, when there was
(...) difference between Austin and him: I love Christ dwelling in Austin: even
at that very time when there was a difference between them. And certainly if we
love the Person of Christ, we shall love Christ dwelling in the Saints. But now
don't we find by woeful experience, that even in good people, their love to the
Saints is wanting? why? but because their love to the Person of Christ is
wanting.

4. The more a man does love the Person of Christ, the more he will be speaking
and thinking of him: Love is busied and exercised in thoughtfulness about the
person loved; and in speech. If a man love a Person or Thing, he will be
thinking much on it, and speaking much on it. But now by our experience, cannot
we go a whole day together, and have no thought of Christ? Don't we sit down at
our meals frequently, and not one word of Christ? Good Conference, where art
thou? Good and holy Conference, where art? Come to Professors Tables, one Dish
after another, one Cup of Wine after another, but nothing of Christ. It Is gone,
it is gone: what is the reason, but because we are wanting in our love to the
Person of Christ? Certainly, if we were not wanting in our love to the Person
of Christ, we would be thinking more of him, and speaking more of him.

5. The more we love the Person of Christ, the more we shall desire to be
dissolved, that we may be with him in the enjoyments of himself, and those
heavenly embracements. I desire to be dissolved, (says S. Paul) why? and to be
with Christ, to have the Person of Christ: But how many good people are there
that cannot desire to be dissolved; -- why? because there is a want in their
love to the Person of Christ-Possibly then you see, by all these things, it is
possible that a good man, Christ's own and best Disciples, may be wanting in
their love to the Person of Christ. But

Fifthly, You will say, Suppose that my heart be not drawn out in love to the
Person of Christ, but my love is rather fixed upon Christ's benefits, spiritual
benefits: Is not that good? is it not good that I should have love for Christ
in reference unto the benefits that I have from him.

Good? yes. I sat down under his shadow with great delight, says the Spouse,
and his fruit was sweet unto my taste: Fruit; that is the Fruit of
Justification, the Fruit of Sanctification, of Consolation, and his fruit was
sweet unto my taste. It Is good, without all doubt, that our hearts should be
drawn out to Christ, by occcasion even of his benefits.

But I pray don't mistake me: I grant therefore,

1. It is good, and a lawful thing to love Christ in reference to his
benefits. But

2. It Is our duty to love Christ's Person, to have our hearts drawn out with
love to the very Person of Christ. But

3. The excellency of Christ's Person is not the object of my Faith, but Christ
crucified. But

4. Though Christ crucified be the object of my Faith, yet the Personal
Excellencies of Christ are the object of my Love. Yea, it is a more excellent
thing yet to love the Person of Christ, than the benefits of Christ. A more
excellent thing, to have my heart drawn out in love to the Person of Christ,
than to have my heart drawn out in love to him for his benefits.

But you will say, Wherein does our love to the very Person of Christ exceed,
or excel our love upon the account of benefits, though spiritual? Many ways.

First of all, If your hearts de drawn out in love to the very Person of
Christ, by your loving him you make him your own. It Is not so in other loves:
By my loving Gold, I don't make it my own; by my loving Silver, I don't make it
my own; but by loving his Person, I make him my own. It Is not so in regard of
benefits: By my loving the benefits of Christ, the comforts from Christ, I
don't make Christ my own, but by my love unto the Person of Christ, I make
Christ my own.

2. The less of Self in your love to Christ, the more pure and clean it is,
and so the better. Now if your heart be drawn out in love to the benefits of
Christ, your love is more selfish, you love him in reference unto your selves;
because you have such enjoyments, and such benefits. But if your hearts be
drawn out in love to the Person of Christ, your love is less selfish; so the
more pure, the more holy and clean.

3. If your heart be drawn out unto Christ himself, and the Person of Christ,
you will more readily accept of any thing from Christ, though it be never so
small; yea, though it be afflictive. If that your love be placed and founded
upon the benefits of Christ, then you will not so easily and readily accept of
any thing from Christ, especially if afflictive. True love interprets all
things in the best sense; that is, love to the ^erson, but love to the benefit
don't. Love the Person of Christ, and you will interpret every dispensation ^n
a good sense, for you love his Person, but Love to the benefit will not do so.

4. If your love be drawn out in love to the very Person of Christ, then you
will sympathize with Christ in all his Concernments of the Gospel, whether
matter of joy, or matter of grief. If your love be ^ounded upon Christ's
benefits, you will not sympa^hize with him so, but love his Person, and you
will ^ympathize with him in all his Concernments.

5. If your hearts be drawn out in Love to the very Person of Christ, then you
will abound therein: The ^nely measure of love, is to know no measure, that is,
^here the Person is loved: But if love be placed upon ^he benefit, it knows
stints, and limits, and measures. ^ut if your heart be drawn out in love to the
very Person of Christ, you will be abundant therein, and ^ou will never think
you can love enough.

6. If your heart be drawn out in love to the very Person of Christ, then you
will long after the presence of Christ, and you will be afflicted for his
absence. Love Christ upon the account of benefits, and it will not be so; but
love Christ upon the account of his Person, and then it will be so. You will
long after his presence, and you will be afflicted for his absence.

7. The more your heart is drawn out in love to Christ, and the Person of
Christ, the more you will love the Seed of Christ, the Posterity of Christ, ^he
Children, and the People of Christ. David loved ^onathan's seed, why? for he
loved his Person, not his benefits: so, love but the Person of Christ, an^ then
you will show kindness to the Seed of Christ, an^ be more loving to the Seed
of Christ.

8. The more your heart is drawn out to the ver^ Person of Christ, the more
will your love continue That Is perpetual that has a perpetuating Cause: The
Personal Excellency of Christ is a perpetual Caus^ of love, but the benefit
that does come from Christ (...) not so. Let the benefit be never so great, if
your lov^ be founded upon the benefit that does come from Christ, as the
benefit dies, your love will die; but your love be founded upon the very Person
of Christ and drawn out to the Person of Christ, then will yo^ love continue
and never die.

9. Lastly, as to this: If your heart be drawn o^ in love to the very Person of
Christ, to Christ himself, then you have gained the heart of God the Father f^
ever. Look into John 16. says Christ at the 27. ve^ For the Father himself
loves you, because ye have lov^ me. Not because ye have loved my benefits, but
because ye have loved me; ye have gotten the heart my Father, says he.
Therefore does my Father lo^ you, because ye have loved me, because ye love
(...) Person. Now is it not a blessed thing, Friends, (...) have the heart of
God the Father? Why, if your heart (...) drawn out in love to the very Person
of Christ, y^ have gained the heart of the Father for ever. (...) and the
Father loves you, and the Son loves you, a^ they will come and make their abode
with you. Oh wha^ blessed thing is it then, for to have ones heart dra^ out in
love to the very Person of Christ! Certai^ it is infinitely better to have ones
heart drawn out love to the Person of Christ, than to have a love Christ upon
the account of benefits, although the b^nefits be spiritual benefits.

And if these things be so, why should we not all labor for this love to the
Person of Christ? to love Christ, not upon the account of benefits, but for
himself. Oh that I could persuade people to fix upon the Person of Christ in
their love: Oh that this day I could persuade you to this divine fixation of
your love upon the Person of Christ. I fear our love is not rightly placed: I
fear we have love for Christ beneath Christ himself. It Is the great work of a
Minister, to woo for Christ: A Ministers work is to come a wooing for Christ.
Can a soul be wooed over unto Christ, and won over unto Christ, and not love
the Person of Christ? Now then, as ever you do desire that you may be espoused
to Jesus Christ, that you may be married to Jesus Christ, set not your
affections upon benefits, set not your affections upon your own concernments in
your love to Christ; be more raised Christians: Oh that your love were rightly
placed, fixed upon Christ himself, not on the bene^its, but on the Person of
Christ himself. But

Sixthly, You will say, What shall we do? we have ^eard what an excellent thing
it is, to have love to ^he Person of Christ, beyond all love to his benefits,
though they be spiritual benefits, what shall we do that our hearts may be
drawn out to the Person of Christ, that so we may be able to rejoice in the
Personal Exaltment of Christ, though to our own debasement.

What shall we do? It is a great, and a good Que^tion. What shall we do, that
our hearts may be ^rawn out in love to the very Person of Christ?

1. Be sure that you be really, conjugally united unto christ: There is a
double union, -- There is a union ^y way of juxta-position, laying one thing to
another: (...) a man's Arm is united unto Bread, when the Bread is bound to his
Arm. -- There is a union by way o^ Intus-susception, by taking in; and so a man
is united to his Bread, and his Bread to him, when he eats it, they are made
one.

So there is a double union (as I may so speak) to Christ; one whereby men are
united to Christ by the external Ligaments of the Gospel, concerning whom our
Savior may speak in John 15. Every branch in m^ that bears not fruit, shall
be cast out: -- And then ther^ is another union with Christ, which is that he
speak^ of, He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, shall live, that is
another kind of union, a closer union (...) Now if you be really, conjugally
united to Christ you will love not only his benefits, but you will lov^ his
Person: Rest not therefore, I pray you, in this external union with Christ by
the Ligaments of the Gospel, but labor more and more to be conjugall united to
Jesus Christ. But

2. If you would have your heart drawn out in lov^ to Christ himself, and the
Person of Christ, then stud^ much the Personal Excellency and Goodness that
(...) in Christ's Person. Good is the object of love: The more excellent the
good is, the more suitable the goo^ is, and universal and obtainable, the more
lovely an^ commanding is that love. Christ is good, an excellen^ good,
goodness it self: a suitable good, suitable unt^ all our wants. If you be
poor, he is rich; if you b^ foolish, he is wise; if you be out of the way, I am
t^^ way, says he; if you want a director in the way, I a^ the truth; if you be
in the dark, I am the light: A sut^ble good, and an universal good he is. As
all the sweetnesses that are in the flowers of the field, and the garden, are
brought in by the Be into the Hive; a^^ a l the sweetnesses of the flowers are
there imbodied on ^ive; ^ll ^he Attributes of God, and the swee^nesse of them
all are hived in Christ, in whom all the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily.
-- And he is an obtainable good; called the Rose of Sharon, the Rose of the
Field; not of the Garden, but of the Field, that every one may come at; called
the desire of all Nations. Do you then desire, that your hearts may be drawn
out in love to the Person of Christ, study much the Personal Goodness and
Excellency of Christ.

3. If you do desire that your hearts may be drawn out in love to Christ
himself, to the very Person of Christ, why should you not now stand still a
little with me, and behold how Christ has loved you, and your Persons? Shall
Christ love you, and your persons, and will not you love him, and his Person?
Consider a little with me,

1. The more impediments that any love does break through, the more it calls
for love again. What impediments has not Christ's love broke through to come to
us? -- Broke through all our unworthiness, -- broke through the Law, -- broke
through the Justice of God, -- broke through the Wrath of God, -- broke through
the Grave, -- broke through Hell, -- broke through all our unbelief.

2. And the more free any love is, the more it call's for love again. Three
things there are that call for love, Likeness, -- Benefit, -- Love: And where
none of these are, the love is most free.

Now Christ has loved you, but you were not like unto him when he loved you.

You could do him no kindesse, you had no benefits to bestow upon him.

And you had no love for him: In the day when he said, Now is the time of love,
there was no love in your ^e^ts for him; and therefore his love must needs be
most free. But

3. The more patient that love is, the more i^ calls for love again, the more
taking it is: Now o^^ Savior Christ stands knocking at your door: give m^
leave to say to you, Had Christ come riding Post through your City, and knocked
only at your door, and sai^ hasten after me, or you are damned for ever, it
ha^ been much; but to stand at your door and knock, day aft^ day, and year
after year, with the unwearied hand o^ his love. Oh unspeakable patience!
unexpressible love yet thus has Christ done for you, and thus has Chri^ loved
you, and loved your person; and shall Chri^ love you, and love your persons,
and shall your lov^ rest any where but in the Person of Christ: Do b^ consider
how he has loved you, and your person^ and then your heart will be drawn out
to love t^^ Person of Christ. And that is a third. But.

4. If you do desire that your hearts may be draw^ out in love unto Christ, if
you do desire, I say, the your hearts should be drawn out in love to Christ,
the Person of Christ, then use Christ much. In any goo^ thing you have, the
more you use it, the more yo^ prize it; and the more you prize it, the more yo^
love it. If you have a good Friend, the more you u^^ him, the more you prize
him; and the more yo^ prize him, the more you love him. If you have good Horse,
the more you use him, the more yo^ prize him; and the more you prize him, the
mo^^ you love him. If you have but a good Knife, the mo^ you use it, the more
you will prize it; and the mo^ you prize it, the more you will love it. Would
yo^ love Christ, use him much, and then the more yo^ will prize him, and the
more you will love him. Indeed we don't use Christ enough; and what is the
reason we don't love him? but because we don't u^^ him. -- Either your sins be
great, or else they be smal^ ^f your sins be great, you are afraid to use
Christ for them: If your sins be small, you think you need not ^se Christ for
them. Either your wants be great, or else they be small: If they be great, you
dare not ^se Christ for them; and if your wants be small, you will not, you
think it not worth your time to use Christ for them. Indeed we don't use Christ
enough: Use Christ much, and then you will prize him much; and if you prize him
much, you will love him much.

5. If you would have your hearts drawn out in love to the very Person of
Christ, go then to God, and beseech the Lord to circumcise your hearts for to
love him. Mark how the promise runs; The Lord has promised to unite our hearts
to fear him, and he has promised to circumcise our hearts to love him: why
then, would you fear the Lord, go to God to unite your hearts unto him, to fear
him; -- would you love him, go to God, and beseech him to circumcise your
hearts to love the Lord, and to love himself. And oh that the Love that now I
have been speaking of, unto the very Person of Christ, might this day be
begotten in any one heart, or increased where it is wanting. I fear we are
wanting in our love to Christ's Person: wherefore think on these things, and the
Lord bless them to you.

Christ Crucified the object of our Faith. SERMON II.
1 Cor. 2.2. For I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus
Christ, and him crucified.


HAving spoken of the Personal Excellencies of Christ, the object of your
Love, there is a necessity upon me, of speaking something concerning Christ
crucified, the object of your Faith, that your Love and Faith may go together;
and therefore have made choice of these words, only for this time.

Wherein the Apostle Paul does give an account of the reason of the plainness
of his Preaching: And I, Brethren, when I came to you, came not with excellency
of speech, or of wisdom: for, says he, I am to Preach Christ crucified. A
gallant eloquent speech, excellency of words, and pleated sentences, don't
become a crucified Christ. If I should speak at that rate, my speech would not
be suited unto the subject that I have in hand: for I Preach Christ crucified,
says he, For I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ,
and him crucified. Some Books read it, I desire not to know any thing among
you; but rather, I judge it, I decreed, I determined not to know any thing
among you.

Not to know any thing among you.] Not to make any think known unto you: I
would Preach, as if I knew nothing else but Christ, and him crucified. Christ,
and him crucified, is the great thing I desire to make known, and that ye
should know. So that plainly then the Observation is this.

Obs. The knowledge of Christ crucified, is the most desirable thing in the
world. The knowledge of Christ crucified, is the most desirable knowledge, and
the most desirable thing in the world.

That which the Apostles taught, and the Churches learned, must needs be the
most desirable. Now this is that the Apostles taught, and this is that the
Churches learned, and therefore this knowledge of Christ crucified is the most
desirable. But for the opening and prosecuting hereof,

1. We must a little enquire, what it is to know Christ crucified, and when a
man may be said to know Christ crucified.

2. That it is our great work and business in the world, to know Christ
crucified.

3. What there is in Christ crucified, that is so desirable to be known.

4 Whether a man may live under the Gospel, and not know Christ crucified.

5. What are the benefits that we do get, or gain by the knowledge of Christ
crucified. And then

6. What we should do, that we may know Christ crucified in a right manner. And

7. In case we do know him, what is our duty that flows from hence.

First of all, If you ask what it is to know Christ crucified, or when a man
may be said to know Christ crucified.

I answer shortly. A man is said to know a thing nakedly and barely, -- or else
effectually and truly. Barely and nakedly a man knows God and Christ, when he
does understand that there is a God, and Christ a Savior of the world: so the
Devil said, I know the^ whom thou art, the holy one of Israel.

But truly and effectually a man is said to know Christ crucified, when he does
know the mind and will of God the Father in Christ crucified, having a
disposition and affections suitable thereunto. Words of knowledge note an
affection; and words of affection in Scripture note an effect: accordingly
therefore in Scripture phrase, a man is said to know, when he does go round
about a business, does consider of it, and look well into it; and so Christ
says, Behold me, behold me: and says the Apostle, Consider the High Priest of
your profession.

This knowledge of Christ crucified, is not a bare knowledge of Christ
crucified in the history; but it is a serious looking into the mystery thereof.
In Scripture phrase a man is said to know, when he does approve; approbation is
put for knowledge: so at the last Christ shall say, Depart from me, for I never
knew you, that is, I never approved of you; knowledge being put for
approbation. And so a man is said to know Christ crucified, when he does
understand and know the mind and will of God the Father, in that great mystery,
and does approve thereof.

In Scripture phrase again, a man is said to know God, or know Christ, when he
does believe, or repose in Christ: so, This is life eternal, to know thee, and
him whom thou have sent, that is, to believe, knowing being put for believing.

And in Scripture phrase a man is said to know, and to know Christ, when the
power, and the efficacy of the Death of Christ is shed abroad into his heart,
and upon his life; and so Paul speaking to the Philippians says, I account all
things dross for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ, that I may be
conformed to his sufferings. So that I say, look when a man does not only
understand, but does seriously look into, and consider this great mystery of
Christ crucified, approve thereof, rest and repose upon this crucified Christ,
having the power and efficacy of his Death shed abroad into his heart and life,
then he is said for to know Christ crucified truly and effectually. B^t then

2. How may it appear, that it is our work, our great work, to know Christ
crucified.

Why if it be the work, and great work of Preachers of the Gospel, to Preach
Christ crucified; then it is our work, our great work, to know Christ
crucified. Now says the Apostle, in 1 Cor. 1. We preach Christ crucified,
(that is our work says he) the power of God, and the wisdom of God. When our
Savior Christ wrought any miracle, he said unto them, Go and see thou tellest
no man; -- but when he died and rose again, Go preach the Gospel, says he. And
what does the Gospel hold forth but Christ crucified? what is the Gospel but a
dead Christ? and what is Christ but a living Gospel? Now I say, that if it be
the work of the Preachers, their great work, to Preach Christ crucified, then
it is our work, and our great work, to know Christ crucified.

2. Look what that is, that all the Ceremonies, Sacrifices, and Types of the
Old Testament, and all the Ordinances of the New Testament do hold forth, that
are we to know especially. Now what do all the Sacrifices, all the Types of the
Old Testament hold forth, but Christ crucified? and what do all the Ordinances
of the New? What does Baptism? what does Preaching? what does the Lords Supper
hold forth, but Christ crucified? Surely therefore this is our great work to
know. But

3. If Christ crucified be the great and proper, and next object of our Faith,
then certainly it must needs be our special work and duty for to know Christ,
and him crucified. Now Christ crucified is the proper object of our Faith, and
being opened and Preached, will both beget and increase our Faith. It is the
object of our Faith, and therefore, says the Apostle, R^m. 3.25. Whom God has
set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood: The Blood, and
Death, and S^fferings of Christ, is the next and immediate object of our Faith.
Four things there are that do bid for our Faith, which men do ordinarily think
we are to trust unto: the power of God, the promise of God, the personal
excellencies and fullness of Christ, and their own graces. But though we do
rest upon the power and all sufficiency of God, yet if you look into Scripture,
you shall find, that the immediate object of our Faith is Christ crucified: God
is the u^timate, Christ the immediate object, Ye believe in God, believe also
in me, Joh. 14.1. in me nextly and immediately, and in God ultimately: and
though we may and do rest on the promise or word of God, yet we do so far rest
on it, as we do close with Christ therein: The promises are ^ut the veins of
Christ, whereby his blood is carried into all his body: it is with the promises
as it is with the ^eals, or Sacraments; for what are the Sacraments, but so
many real promises made to the eye? now you do not rest on the Sacrament it
self, but you rest on Christ which the Sacrament does exhibit: so for the
promise, though it stay up your heart, as it is the word of God; and though it
be objectum quo, the object by which you do it, yet Christ, and a crucified
Christ is the objectum quod, the object which you do rest upon. And as for the
personal excellencies, and fullness of Christ, though those excellencies do
draw out your love unto Christ, yet it is a crucified Christ that does draw out
your Faith: The personal excellency of Christ makes him a fit subject for you
to rest on, but it is Christ crucified that you build and lay the weight of
your soul upon. The brazen Serpent did not cure the Israelites by virtue of
it is excellent metal, but as lift up; so, says Christ, shall the Son of man
be lift up on the Cross, and as lift up on the Cross he is the object of our
Faith: and though our graces are, and may be a good help to confirm our faith
of assurance, yet they are not the object of our faith of reliance: for God
does therefore sometimes put the sentence of death upon our graces, that we may
not trust to, or rest on them: Christ and Christ alone, and that as dying and
crucified, is the object of our faith. And it is not with this object as it is
with other objects: take another object, and though it be never so cleary
spread before the organ or faculty, yet it cannot cause, or beget the Act.
Suppose the most excellent color be laid before the eye, will that cause the
blind eye to see? no: Or suppose the most excellent sound, or noise of Music
be laid before the ear, can that cause the deaf ear to hear? no; yet sound is
the object of the ear hearing; and color the object of the eye seeing; but if
the true object of faith, Christ crucified, be opened and laid before an
unbelieving heart, it will cause it to believe: yea, and it will increase
faith; and therefore if you look into the Book of the Hebrews, you shall find,
that the great design of that Book, is to raise and increase faith, as appears
by the Therefore that are in that Book, Wherefore let us draw near wit^ full
assurance of faith, etc. But how does the Apost^^ labor to raise and increase
our faith? He does i^ by opening the Priesthood and sufferings of Christ; an^
without doubt there is no such way to raise, beget and increase our faith, as
to open and spread Christ crucified before the soul. Now it is the great wor^
of a Minister, to be serviceable to the faith of God^ people; surely therefore
it is his work, and great work, to make known Christ crucified: and accordingly
Paul says here, I determined to know nothing among you, but Christ, and him
crucified.

Obj. But the Apostle says, Henceforth know we n^ man after the flesh, no not
Christ himself: and though w^ have known him after the flesh, yet henceforth
know we hi^ no more, 2 Cor. 5.16. and if we are not to know Christ after the
flesh, how is this true, that it is our great work to know, and make known
Christ crucified?

Answ. Yes very well; for the Apostle does not there speak of the knowledge of
Christ crucified, neither does he say, that we should not know the body and
flesh of Christ still: there have been indeed a generation of men, (and still
are) who thought, that when Christ died, rose, and ascended, his body was
swallowed up of his Deity, and that he has now no body, but is all spirit: but
the Apostle speaks the contrary; for, says he to the Philippians, Who shall
change our vile body, that it shall be like to his glorious body: Christ then,
though in heaven, has a body still, and this we are still to know. And in this
Verse he says, Henceforth know we no man after the flesh, are we therefore to
think, that men have no bodies of flesh here on earth? the same is said of
Christ, that therefore cannot be the meaning of these words: but we are not to
know Christ after the flesh, that is (say some) upon any fleshly or carnal
account, or in any fleshly or carnal manner; but I rather think, that the
Apostle here speaks in reference to the Jews: times were, when we thought,
that the Messiah, and salvation by him, did belong to the Jews only; but now
(says he) we know, that God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself,
not the Jews only, but the Gentiles also, ver. 19. and that Christ did not die
only for the Jews, but for the Gentiles; and he died for all, that they which
live should not live unto themselves, but unto him that died for them, and rose
again; wherefore (see how it comes in) henceforth know we no man after the
flesh; though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we
him no more, therefore if any man be in Christ he is a new creature, whether he
be a Jew or a Gentile, it is all one to us whatsoever he be, if he be in Christ
he is a new creature, wherefore now know we no man after the flesh, no not
Christ himself, upon any such Jewish and restrained account, for he died for
all, one as well as another, wherefore henceforth know we no man after the
flesh, no not Christ himself. And thus this Scripture being opened, the one
place is not contrary, but a light to the other. And so much in answer to that
objection, and for the second thing, namely, that it is our great work and
business, to know Christ crucified.

3. The third thing is, what is there in Christ crucified, that is so desirable
to be known?

I answer, There is the Conjunction of all the Attributes of God: The Power,
the Wisdom, the Justice, the Mercy, and Righteousness of God. In the day that
you know Christ crucified, that day does all the Attributes of God pass before
you, which is the Glory of God.

2. There also, in Christ crucified, you may se^ the wealth and riches, not
only of the Saints, bu^ of the World: Christ's Sepulcher is our Treasury (...)
And have made his Grave with the Rich, Isa. 53. Glassi^ reads it, He has
placed Riches in his Grave: For the wealth and riches of the Saints lie in the
grave an^ sufferings of Christ.

2. There, in Christ crucified, you see the condescending love of God in the
height thereof; the greatest condescension of divine love. There are two
Travells of Christ that we read of: Christ once traveling in the greatness of
his strength, in the 63. o^ Isaiah, and that is for the destruction of his
Enemies, and the deliverance of the Churches. Another travel which you read of
in the 53. of Isaiah, He shall see the travel of his soul and be satisfied,
and that is, Christ traveling in the greatness of his affections, in the day
of his sufferings: so that when you know Christ crucified, then you see him,
and know the greatest condescension of Divine love that ever was.

4. There also you may see the greatness, and the vileness, and the misery of
sin: for which Christ, the Lord of Life and Glory died.

5. There you may see the greatest Sacrifice for sin, that ever the world did
see. Four things, says A^stin, concur to a Sacrifice, -- The thing
sacrificed, -- the Sacrificer, -- the person sacrificed unto, -- and those that
he sacrifices for; -- I will add a fifth, the Altar: And all these meet in one
in Christ upon the Cross. -- He himself the Sacrifice, -- the Sacrificer, --
the Person sacrificed to, as God; and as Man, the Person for whom was the
Sacrifice, and the Altar: so that here is the greatest Sacrifice that ever the
world saw.

6. There you may see our great High Priest in all his Robes and Garments rol'd
in blood.

7. Therein Christ Crucified, you may behold and see the Covenant sealed, and
all the Promises confirmed, all the Promises being Yea and Amen in Christ.

8. There you may see your Reconciliation with God begun, and the daybreak of
your eternal happiness: This is eternal Life to know thee, and him whom thou
have sent.

9. There you may see your Right and Title unto all your Privileges, and the
root of all your Enjoyments. As the man being shown a Table full of Silver,
still had his eye under the Table to see the root of it; and being led to
another Table of Gold, still he looked under the Table to see the root of it: So
here, see but Christ crucified, and you see your Title to all the Ordinances,
and the ^oot of all your Enjoyments.

10. There you may see all your Afflictions san^ified, all your Curses turned
into Blessings upon he Cross of Christ.

11. There you may see the gates of Paradise ^pened afresh: This day shall thou
be with me in ^aradise, said Christ upon the Cross.

12. There you may see the Ladder that the An^els ascend and descend upon for
your ministry, as ^n the first of John and the last.

13. There you may see your desire upon all your ^piritual Enemies, Law, Sin,
and Satan. It is not ^ely a promise, that you shall have your desire ^on your
Enemies, but you shall see your desire ^on your Enemies; look upon Christ
crucified, ^d you see your desire upon all these Enemies.

14. There you may see the foundation of you^ Union and Communion with God the
Father.

15. There you may see again, the accomplishment of that great contrivance
between God the Father and Christ, in reference to our Salvation.

What shall I say, there in Christ crucified yo^ may see a full answer to all
your wants, to all you fears, to all your doubts. -- What do you wan^ but you
may see it in Christ crucified? Do yo^ complain of your own unworthiness? Oh!
I a^ a poor unworthy Creature; Do but look on Chr^^ crucified, you see him
suffering without the Gat^ Why, says Austin, did he suffer without t^^ Gates?
not only to fulfill the Scripture, He w^ numbered among transgressors: But he
suffered wit^out the Gates, not in the Holy City, because (...) suffered for
the Gentiles as well as the Jews; (...) suffered for the ungodly, for the
unworthy. No^ look upon Christ crucified, and there you see h^ suffering
without the Gates for the most unworthy*

Or will you instance in your own sin and gui^ why, do but look upon Christ
crucified, and y^ see that sacrifice for sin, that the world never s^ the like,
and that before your sin was committed*

Will you instance in the dominion of sin, a^ your bondage under it? look but
upon Christ c^cified, and there you see your Ransom: Who g^ himself a ransom
for many, in whom we have ^^demption through his blood.

Will you instance still in your own misery a^ ruins? Oh we lie like the
ruins of London at (...) day, in regard of our state by Nature: Yet do (...)
look upon Christ crucified, and there you shall the repairer of the breaches,
and the restorer of paths to dwell in. Oh what a blessed thing is it then, to
have the knowledge of this Christ crucified? Who would not know Christ
crucified?

4. But you will say in the next place, Whether may a man live under the
Gospel, and not know Christ crucified? We all know Christ crucified we hope,
for, Is it possible that a man should live under the Gospel, and not know
Christ crucified?

Surely it is possible a man may live under the Gospel, and not know Christ
crucified as he ought to know; for as in the times of the Law, Some that were
in the highest forms did not know God. It is said of the Sons of Elias, they
were Children of Belial, that knew not God, yet Priests, men of the highest
form, and yet they knew not God: So now in the times of the Gospel, men may sit
upon the highest form of profession, and yet not know Christ crucified aright
as they ought to know. You know how ignorant Nichodemus was, Art thou a Doctor
in Israel, and know not these things? How unacquainted was he with Christ
crucified? yea, Christ's own Disciples before Christ's death, how ignorant were
they of a crucified Christ? when he said, Destroy this Temple, in the second of
John, they understood it not: So that possibly men may live under the Gospel,
and be in a very high form of Profession, and yet not know Christ crucified is
they ought to know.

And to clear it to you. If we did know Christ ^^ucified as we ought to know,
why are we not ^ore sensible of our ignorance of Christ crucified. (...) is
both recorded and reported of Bishop Usher, a learned and holy man, that in the
midst of all his Learning, still he would cry out of his ignorance of Christ.
And that we know by experience, Grace will make one sensible of the sin that is
contrary unto that Grace. Faith will make one sensible of ones Unbelief,
Humility will make one sensible of ones Pride, Sincerity will make one sensible
of ones Hypocrisy; the knowledge o^ Christ crucified, will make one sensible
of ones ignorance of Christ; yet how many are there tha^ never were sensible of
their ignorance of Christ crucified; why? but because they do not kno^ this
crucified Christ, as they ought to know.

2. If we did indeed know Christ crucified a^ we ought to know, why are we not
more cruc^fied to the World, and the things thereof? Ga^ 6. You know what Paul
says, God forbid that (...) should glory in any thing, save in the cross of
our S^viour Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucifi^^ unto me, and I unto
the world. Did we kno^ Christ crucified as we ought to know, certainly w^ would
be more crucified to the world, and t^^ things thereof; but how few, even among
Pr^fessors, are crucified to the fashions, ways and ma^ners of the world? and
why so? but because fe^ there be that do know Christ crucified in a ri^^ manner.

3. If we did know Christ crucified, as we oug^^ to know, then why do we prefer
other things before Christ, when they come in competition w^^ Christ? In the
general we do choose for Chr^^ but in time of competition, how often do m^
prefer other things before Christ, and the kno^ledge of other things before the
knowledge (...) Christ? Truly says Paul, I account all things but loss; I did
account, and I do account all things loss, and dross, and dung, for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ; not only loss and dross, but I account
them dung, unsavory. Time was, when I gloried in my parts, and in my
privileges, but now how unsavory are all these things unto me, in regard of
the knowledge of Christ! So Moses chose affliction with the people of God in
time of competition, -- Why? because he esteemed the reproach of Christ greater
riches, then all the Treasures of Egypt.

4. And if we did know Christ crucified as we ought to know, why do we boggle,
startle at, and go back so often from the Cross and Persecution for the Name of
Christ, and not rather glory in the excellencies of Christ when they lie under
the greatest reproach? The wise men worshipped Christ in a manger. -- The
Disciples and Children cried Hosannah to Christ riding upon an Ass. Many will
honor Christ in a Coach, but will not honor Christ upon an Ass: Many cry up
the Kingdom and the Government of Christ when he is upon the Throne, but not
when a Crown of thorns is upon his head. Friends, it is one thing to glory in
the Kingdom and Government of Christ when it is under Glory, and another thing
when it is under Reproach. Many there are that glory in the Kingdom and
Government of Christ when it lies under excellency and glory, few that do glory
in the government of Christ lying under reproach; and why? but because they do
not know this crucified Christ in a right manner.

5. If we did know Christ crucified as we ought to know, why are we not willing
to take and receive all our mercies and blessings in the way that this
crucified Christ has purchased and bought for us? -- What way is that? -- Why,
Christ has bought them for us in a way of contraries, Heaven by the way of
Hell, mercy by the way of misery, glory and honor by the way of reproach,
Victory over enemies, by being overcome by enemies; Christ overcame the world,
by being overcome by the world. This is the way that the crucified Christ went;
and if in truth, we were acquainted with Christ crucified, and did know Christ
crucified as we ought to know him, why should we not be contented to take our
mercies and blessings in the way that this crucified Christ has bought them
for us? Joy by grief, hope by fear, and mercy by misery, and overcoming by
being overcome: But oh how many are there that are unwilling to take these
things thus? why, because few there are that do know Christ crucified as they
ought to know. But O friends, shall we live thus long under the Gospel, and not
know Christ crucified as we ought to know?

5. You will say in the next place, Suppose yet that we do know Christ
crucified as we ought to know, what shall we gain, or what shall we get
thereby? what are the great benefits that we shall obtain or get by knowing
Christ crucified in a right manner? Those are many.

1. Thereby you shall know God, -- you shall know your selves, -- and you shall
know men.

You shall know God, God is best known in Christ: The Sun is not seen but by
the light of the Sun. Christ (as one speaks) came from Heaven with a Bible
under his arm, to make known the will of God the Father to the Children of Men;
and without Christ, there is no knowledge of God the Father, he does reveal the
Father, thereby you know the Father.

And thereby also you know your selves: for three things are required to the
knowledge of our selves. -- We must know our sins, -- our misery thereby, --
and our inability for to help our selves: know but Christ crucified, you know
your sins, -- you know your misery thereby, -- and you know your inability to
help your selves.

And thereby you shall know men; for the more I know the worth of a man, the
more I know him; and the more I know the difference between man and man, the
more I know men: know but Christ crucified, and you know the worth of a man;
and you never know the worth of a soul, or of a man, but by knowing Christ
crucified; thereby you know (I say) God, -- and you know your selves, -- and
you know men.

2. Thereby you shall have your hearts drawn out and engaged to Jesus Christ:
When I am lift up, I will draw all men after me. One would think that the
scandal of the Cross should drive men from Christ; but there is wisdom and
power in Christ crucified, which draws men unto Christ: -- Wisdom draws; it
drew the Queen of Sheba to behold Solomon: a greater then Solomon is here. --
Love draws, it drew Rebecca unto Isaac; here is love indeed in Christ
crucified, Christ crucified is the most drawing thing in the world, where Love,
and Wisdom, and Power, and Strength, and all meet; thereby I say, your hearts
shall be drawn out and engaged to Jesus Christ.

3. Thereby also your lusts and temptations shall be fully mortified and
subdued. There are three sorts of lusts, -- the lusts of the eye, -- the lusts
of the flesh, -- and the pride of life, that John speaks of: the Devil tempted
Adam and Eve by all these, -- by the lust of the eye, They saw the Apple that
it was fair to look on: -- by the lus^ of the flesh, that the Apple was good to
eat, -- and by the pride of life, The Devil told them, that i^ they eat, they
should be like unto God, and he prevailed with Adam and with Eve. And
accordingly he sets upon the second Adam, and thought to have carried him too,
he tempted him by all these. -- He tempted him by the lusts of the flesh, Tur^
these stones into bread; -- By the lusts of the^ eye He showed him all the
Glory of the World; -- He tempted him by the pride of life, All this will I
giv^ thee, if thou will fall down and worship me: but here he missd his prize,
and so shall he do when he come^ and tempts you, if you do but keep close to a
crucified Christ in the time of your temptations, for by faith we quench all
the fiery darts of the Devil, and where are they quenched, but in the blood o^
Jesus? You blow out a candle, and it is easily ligh^ again; but if you quench
it in blood, it is not so easily light again: if you blow out a temptation, or
a sin by a Resolution, it is easily lighted again, but quench i^ in the blood
of Jesus, and it is not so easily light again.

4. Thereby also you shall dye unto all your own righteousness. There is no
such way in the world to dye unto our own righteousness, as by the knowledge of
a crucified Christ, as in that place of the Philippians, I account all things
loss, etc.

5. Thereby also you shall be able to deny your selves in all things, in one
thing as well as another. Possibly a man may deny himself in one thing, that he
may seek himself in another: I may deny my self in meats and drinks, that I may
have the more money; deny my self in prodigality, that I may seek my self in
covetousness: It is possible that a man may deny himself in one thing, that he
may seek himself in another; a man may deny his pride in one thing, that he may
be proud in another: But now the sight of a crucified Christ will teach us to
deny our selves in every thing. And therefore the Apostle Paul pressing the
Philippians unto humility and self-denial, he opens before them the sufferings
of Christ.

6. By your knowledge of Christ crucified, you shall grow in Grace, in one Grace
as well as in another; grow in Assurance, and yet in Repentance; grow in
Repentance, and yet in Assurance. The sight of Christ crucified is a friend
unto your Repentance, and a friend unto your Assurance. Says the Apostle, Grow
in grace, not in this or that Grace, but Grace in the general: Grow in Grace,
and in the knowledge of Christ: so that the knowledge of Christ crucified, is
that whereby you shall grow in one grace as well as in another.

7. Thereby also your hearts shall be established in opposition to all
sufferings and afflictions. It will encourage you to suffer, and it will enable
you to suffer. Nichodemus came by Night when he first came to Christ; but after
he had seen Christ upon the Cross, and seen the sufferings of Christ, how
boldly did he own Christ then! The sight of a suffering Christ, will both
encourage to suffer, and enable to suffer. All our sufferings are either
outward or inward: -- If my sufferings and afflictions be outward, the sight of
a suffering Christ will make me suffer: -- If my afflictions be inward and
spiritual, what is there that will quiet the Conscience of a poor trembling
soul, but Christ crucified? Thereby (I say) you shall be established in
opposition unto all your sufferings and afflictions, inward and outward.

8. Thereby also you shall have boldness in all your addresses unto God the
Father: Wherefore, says the Apostle, Let us come with boldness to the Throne
of Grace, -- Why? For we have an High Priest: An High Priest, there is the
sufferings of Christ; Thereby you have boldness in all your addresses to God
the Father.

9. Thereby, even by the knowledge of Christ crucified, you shall be possessed of
Christ. You know many things, and yet you do not possess them by your knowledge
of them: But know Christ crucified, and you are possessed of Christ. Says the
Apostle, My little Children, of whom I travel in birth again, until Christ be
formed in you. Christ formed in you, -- that is, till the knowledge of Christ
be formed in you. The knowledge of Christ brings one into the possession of
Christ.

10. Yea thereby you shall be furnished and prepared for every good word and
work. -- For, what is the death and suffering of Christ but Officina virtutum,
the Shop of Virtues? -- Do you want Faith? Christ crucified is the Object of
your Faith, and the Cause of it, as you have heard. -- Are you full of fears?
Are you afraid because of the Law, and the avenger of blood that is following
you at the heels? Do but look upon Christ crucified, and there you see the City
of refuge. So many wounds in Christ, so many Cities of refuge. -- Are you
impatient and froward? why, the sight of a patient Christ will make you
patient. -- Are you proud? The spirit of an humble Christ, a crucified Christ,
will make you humble. If I have gallant and brave clothes on, and go abroad and
swagger with them, and a man comes and tells me, Sir, you owe for these
clothes, its enough to take down my Plumes. So now, Though a man be proud of
this or that good thing, yet if he do but see Christ crucified, he shall there
be told, that Christ has paid for all; and this will take down his pride. --
Do you complain of a hard heart? The sight of a broken Christ will break your
heart, or nothing will. So that the knowledge of Christ crucified is that that
will furnish you, and prepare you to every good word and work. And therefore, O
friends, who would not labor to know Christ crucified? Let me speak a little
more.

11. This is the knowledge that is the soul-humbling knowledge: Other knowledge
puffs up; but if you know Christ crucified, you may glory in your knowledge
without pride: Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor the strong man in
his strength, nor the learned man glory in his learning. If I glory in my
wisdom, I am proud; if I glory in my strength, I am proud; but if I glory in
that, that I know Christ crucified, the more I glory in Christ crucified, the
more humble I am; That is a soul-humbling knowledge.

12. This is that knowledge which is the highest experimental knowledge in the
World. A man may have the experience of his own sins, yet be a wicked man: Oh,
I have such a proud heart, such a vain heart, may he say; why? for his sins are
within him, and he may easily (though a wicked man) have experience of what is
within him by nature: But to have experience of a crucified Christ is not by
nature. This is the highest experience in the World, Christ in me the hope of
glory; this is the most true experimental knowledge.

13. This is that knowledge that will make a man wise indeed: Other knowledge
may make a man wise quoad hoc, to this or that thing, but the knowledge of
Christ crucified does make a man wise at large.

And therefore I say, O what a blessed thing is it to know Christ crucified!
and who would not labor to know Christ crucified in a right manner?

6. You will say then in the sixth place, What shall we do to know Christ
crucified in a right manner: For we have heard, men may live under the Gospel,
sit upon the highest form of profession, and yet not know Christ crucified in a
right manner: What shall we do then that we may know Christ crucified in a
right manner? -- Something I shall speak to the manner, and something to the
means.

As to the manner: If you would know Christ crucified in a right manner, you
must look upon him as the Great institution and appointment of the Father. When
God does deal with us in a way of Institutions, he has not respect unto the
strength of the Means, or the worth of the Persons. When God deals with us in a
way of nature, there is respect had to the strength of the Means, or the worth
of the Person: As in Physic, God deals in a way of nature, there respect is
had to the strength of the Means. But when God deals with us in a way of
institution, there he has neither respect to the strength of means, nor to the
worth of persons. Now Jesus Christ is the great Institution of God the Father,
and so if we would know him rightly, we must look upon him: For though the
stung Israelite was cured by the brazen Serpent, yet he was not cured by the
brazen Serpent in regard of the mettle of the Serpent, but as it was an
appointment, and as an institution: So if a man would know Christ to purpose,
he must know him, and look upon him as the great institution and appointment of
the Father, Him has God the Father sealed. And what is the reason that many go
to and get no good by a crucified Christ, but because they never did to this
day look upon Christ crucified as the great Institution of the Father.

2. If you would know Christ crucified in a right manner, you must then look
upon him as sent, you must look upon this crucified Christ under the mission of
the Father. There are three great Missions that you read of in the New
Testament. -- There is the mission of Ministers; they are sent out to preach.
-- There is the mission of the Holy Ghost, I will send the Comforter. -- There
is the mission of the Son sent from the Father. Now the mission of Christ from
the Father, is the original of all the ^ther missions; and you cannot know the
other missions rightly, if you do not know this original mission. If you would
know Christ crucified in a righ^ manner, you must know him as sent. In the 17.
(...) John says Christ in his prayer to the Father, But have known thee, and
these have known that tho^ have sent me. So that if you would know Christ
crucified in a right manner, you must know him^ and look upon him as under a
mission from the Father.

3. If you would know Christ crucified in a righ^ manner, you must look well
unto the design, drif^ and scope of the Father in the sufferings of Christ Then
you know Christ when you know the Father, and you know the Father when you
know^ the Fathers Design. What is the great Design of t^^ Father in sending
Christ to die, but -- To magnif^^ his love, -- To save poor sinners, -- To
justify th^^ ungodly. Would you know Christ crucified arigh^ be sure you have
an eye to the design of the Father i^ the matter of a crucified Christ.

4. Be sure of this, That you look as well upon the Testamentalness of Christ's
sufferings, as the greatness of his sufferings. Some look much at the greatness
of the sufferings of Christ, as the Frya^ and Monks, and never look at the
Testamentalnes^ of Christ's sufferings. -- Oh, say they, Christ death was a
painful, reproachful, and a lingrin^ death, and thus they aggravate (as truly
the^ may) the sufferings of Christ; but not one wor^ of the Testamentalness of
his sufferings. But Christ death was to seal the Covenant; Therefore if yo^
would know Christ crucified rightly, you must a^ well look upon the
Testamentalness of his sufferings as the greatness of his sufferings. Thus in
regar^ of the manner, if you would know Christ rightly.

And 2. for the Means, I shall speak two or three things.

If you would know Christ crucified in a right manner, for Means, Then go unto
God the Father to create this knowledge of Christ crucified in you. All Light
was at the first by a word of Creation, Let there be Light. And as in the old
Creation, the Creation of the World, so in the new Creation, Let there be
Light, Let there be Knowledge: God that commanded the Light to shine out of
darkness, has shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the
glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ. This light comes into the soul in a
way of creation; go then to God to create this light.

And be sure that you set open all your Windows that the Light may come in.
There are some sickly and weak, who would fain have the Light to come into
their Chambers, but they are afraid of the cold Air, and so dare not open their
windows. So here, some would fain have more light and knowledge of Christ, but
they are afraid of the cold, and so dare not open their windows to receive the
light. But pray Friends, why should we be afraid of new lights? for why should
there not be new Lights found out in the Firmament of the Scripture, as well as
the Astrologers find out new Stars in Heaven? Be not afraid to set open your
Windows for any light that God shall make known unto you.

2. If you would know Christ crucified in a right way and manner, Then study
much, think much upon this crucified Christ; meditate much, insist and dwell
much upon Christ crucified. It is not slight and superficial thinking of Christ
crucified that will bring in this knowledge. If I would know a man, I must be
conversant with him: So if you would know Christ crucified, you must be
conversant with him, you must sit down, and consider, and dwell upon Christ
crucified in your thoughts and meditations. Now there are four times, wherein
it will be good for you especially to think of Christ crucified much. Four
cases. -- First, In case of some Revelation or Vision that you may be under.
When Christ was transfigured, and Peter said, I^ is good to be here, Christ
turns him off, and reads a Lecture to him about his sufferings; why, but to
show that in such times of Raptures and Revelations, is a fit season to think
of Christ crucified. -- 2. Another time or season is, The time and case of
spiritual pride. In case your heart be lifted up within you in reference unto
any Privilege, Gift, or performance, then is a fit time to think on a
crucified Christ. The Disciples were speaking who should be greatest, That one
might sit on Christ's right hand, and the other at his left hand; then said
Christ Are ye able to be baptized with the Baptism that I am baptized with,
and to drink of the Cup that I shall drink of? The Son of man must suffer,
says he: He turns them about from those thoughts to a crucified Christ; why,
but to show thus much, that when at any time our hearts are lift up upon any
account, then is a fit time and season to think on a Christ crucified. -- 3.
The time of dissension and difference among professors and Brethren, is a fit
time and season to think on a crucified Christ. When one Disciple desired to
sit at Christ's right hand, and the other at his left, the rest of the Disciples
took it ill, and all quarrelled one with another: Christ now tells them of his
sufferings; Is This a fit time for you to have differences among ^ou? think of
my sufferings. Never more seaso^able time to think of a crucified Christ, then
when ^rofessors are at variance. Times of dissension call or thoughts of a
crucified Christ. -- Again 4. In ^ase that a man be in any great affliction or
dan^er, or fear thereof, then is a good time to think ^f the sufferings of
Christ. Nichodemus comes by ^^ght unto Christ out of fear, and Christ first
^reaches to him the Doctrine of Regeneration, and when he had done so, says he
in Joh. 3. the 14. ^ers. As Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilder^^ss, even
so must the Son of man be lifted up. Ni^odemus was afraid to suffer for Christ;
now Christ ^^rns him over to his sufferings. The Son of man ^ust be lifted up;
-- why? but to show thus ^uch, that when we are afraid of sufferings, when ^e
meet with afflictions and troubles, and are in ^ar thereof, then is a fit time
for us to think of ^hrists sufferings. It is a good thing to think of christ
crucified at all times; but when you have ^evelations and Visions, -- when your
hearts are ^^ted up, -- when you are in any dissension, -- ^hen you are under
any affliction, trouble, or in ^ar thereof, then is a good time, especially
when ^ou are under spiritual temptations. And thus ^ow you see the second
thing; if you would know christ crucified in a right manner, study and medi^te
much on him, and insist much thereon: But ^^en

3. If you would know Christ crucified in a right ^anner, make it your work and
your business to ^^ow Christ crucified. Solomon gives you a pro^se in the 2 of
the Proverbs and the 3. If thou cryest after knowledge, and liftest up thy
voice for u^derstanding; if thou seek her as silver, and search for her as
for hid treasure; Then shall thou und^^stand the fear of the Lord, and find the
knowledge God, Prove. 2.5. How do men seek for hidden tr^^sures? how do men seek
for gold and silver? the digg into the bowels of the earth, and spare for
pains: So says the Lord, if you digg and search (...) it, you shall have this
knowledge. And you kn^^ how it is with those that do digg for gold and ^^ver;
though they do not meet with a Mine p^sently, possibly they may meet with
several spri^ of water that may stand them in more stead t^^ the Mine: So
digging in the Scripture, thoug^ man do not presently reach the Mine, yet he
(...) meet with such springs of comfort in the way, may be a refreshment to him
all his days. N^^ therefore friends, do you desire to know Chr^^^ and him
crucified? then remember these the things, -- Go unto God the Father to create
t^ light in you; -- Dwell and insist much upon Christ crucified in your
thoughts, and at some ti^^ especially, -- And then make it your work a business
to know Christ crucified: Digg in (...) Mines for this Knowledge.

But suppose I do know Christ crucified, wha^ my duty then?

Why then, if you do know Christ crucified, ^^tainly it does not become you to
conform unto (...) world, and to be uncrucified in your affections the world?

It does not become you to be the servants (...) men, especially in the worship
of God: Ye are boug^ with a price, be ye not the servants of men.

Certainly it does not become you to walk proud^y: What, shall Christ humble
himself, and shall we be ^roud? certainly it does not become you to walk
proudly.

But what shall I do then?

First go and resign, and give up your selves to Christ; shall Christ give down
himself unto us, and ^^all not we give up our selves unto him? Resign and give
up your selves unto him.

2. And then if indeed you do know Christ cru^^fied, take heed that you do not
doubt of your ^^terest in God, or salvation by Christ; what, know christ
crucified, and yet doubt? Why says the A^ostle, If when we were enemies we
were reconciled (...) the death of his Son, much more being reconciled we (...)
all be saved by his life, Romans 5. and chap. 8.32. He ^at spared not his own
Son, but delivered him up for (...) all, how, shall he not with him also freely
give us all ^^ings? If God the Father, did give his Son to ^ath for you, will
he deny you other things?

Go away and look no more sorrowful, let it ap^are that you know Christ, and
that you know christ crucified.

3. In case at any time, any temptation does a^ise upon you, Presently turn and
look wishly upon christ crucified, and there fix. If a man be in a ^^eat
temptation, possibly the temptation may be ^t by, by way of divertisement,
turning to another ^^ject; but if that other object be engaging, ^^en he is
helped thereby, not only by way of di^rtancie, but by way of assistance. Now if
a tem^ation do arise at any time upon any of you, pre^^ntly turn your eye, fix
it upon Christ crucified, ^ere stand, and there look, and thus shall you be
helped, not only in a way of divertancie, but in way of assistance.

4. If you do indeed know Christ crucified, the why should you not hold forth
the virtues of the Christ, the death of Christ, in your dying unto (...) things
below, and say with Paul upon all occa^^ons, Henceforth let no man trouble me,
I bear abo^^ in my body, the marks of the Lord Jesus. You co^^ to tempt me to
such a sin, do not trouble me, know Christ crucified; henceforth let no man
tro^ble me, I know Christ crucified; answer all yo^ temptations thus, and be
peremptory and resolu^^ let no man trouble me, do not trouble me, I kno^ Christ
crucified.

5. Go away and communicate that knowled^ of a crucified Christ unto others;
your knowled^ is nothing unless you make others to know w^^ you know. -- There
is a twofold revelation (...) Christ, -- Christ revealed to men, and Christ
(...) vealed in men, as Paul speaks, When it pleased (...) Lord to reveal
Christ IN me. When a man ha^^ revelation of Christ within him, he will
com^nicate that knowledge. Ye see how it is with (...) Sun shining upon the
wall, and with a Candle (...) Lanthorn; the Sun shines upon the wall, and (...)
wall enlightens no body, why? because the Su^ not in it: but there is a Candle
in a Lanthorn, a^ that enlightens others; why? because the Cand^^ within it: So
when a man has a revelation Christ upon him, it falls dead, as upon a mud w^
and he communicates not that light unto others but if Christ be in me the hope
of Glory, then c^^tainly I shall communicate this knowledge of Ch^^ unto others
also.

6. And to end all, if you do know Christ and him crucified, then go and place
your selves before the Lord, as David did, when the Lord had made known his
mind unto him; Then went King David in, and sat before the Lord, and he said,
who am I, O Lord God, and what is my house that thou have brought me hitherto!
etc. And what can David say more unto thee, for thou Lord God know thy
Servant; for thy Word sake, and according to thine own heart have thou done all
these great things, to make thy Servant know them. So I say, go you and place
your selves before the Lord, and say, What am I Lord, O what am I, poor
ignorant creature as well as others, that Christ crucified should be made known
to me! O the riches and the greatness of the Grace of God: According to thine
own heart Lord have thou done this, to make these things known unto thy poor
Servant: Wherefore Glory and Honor unto God the Father, and unto the Lamb that
sits upon the Throne for ever.

And thus now I have spoken something concerning a crucified Christ, as the
Object of your Faith; the former time concerning the Excellencies of Christ to
draw out your Love: Now then let your Faith and Love meet together; and may
your Love be quickened, and your Faith strengthened, I have enough.

The New Covenant of Grace opened. SERMON III.
Heb. 12. 24. And to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covena^^ and to the blood of
sprinkling, that speaks bett^^ things then that of Abel.


IN this Scripture you have the difference b^tween the Law and the Gospel: The
exce^lency of the state of the Church under t^^ New Testament, above the state
of the Chu^^ under the Old Testament; for says the Apostle (...) the 18. verse.
Ye are not come unto the Mount the might be touched, and that burned with fire,
nor un^ blackness and darkness, and tempest, and the sound of trumpet, and the
voice of words: But ye are come unto Mount Sion, verse. 22. and unto the City of
the li^ing God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innum^rable company of
Angels, etc.

So that first, look how much Mount Sion dot^ excel Mount Sinai, -- The City
of the living Go^^ does excel the Wilderness, -- and the heavenl^ Jerusalem
does excel the Mountain that might b^ touched, from whence the Law was given;
(...) much does our state now exceed and excel that of the Jews.

And says he, Ye are also come unto an innumerable company of Angels. The Law
was given at Mount Sinai by the ministration of Angels: Look therefore how much
our communion now with an innumerable company of Angels, does exceed that
ministration, which was by the ministration of Angels then, so much does our
Gospel state now exceed theirs.

And ye are also come to the general assembly, and Church of the first born.
Look how much the Catholic Church, drawn out of all Nations, does exceed the
Jewish Synagogue, so much does our Gospel Church state now exceed theirs.

And ye are come unto God the Judge of all. Look therefore how much the
manifestation of God, as the Judge of all the world, does exceed the
manifestation of God as a Lawgiver upon Mount Sinai unto the Nation of the
Jews only, so much does our Gospel state and Church exceed theirs.

And ye are come to the spirits of just men made perfect: -- It is true in
regard of the Saints in heaven, for we are fellow Citizens with the Saints
there. -- Or if you understand it of the spirits of just men made perfect with
Gospel perfection, by the imputation of the righteousness of Christ, it is
true: So that look as the state of Heaven does exceed the state of Earth, and
as Gospel perfection does exceed the imperfect state of the Law, so does the
state of the Church and Gospel now exceed that of the Jews.

And ye are come to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, and to the blood of
sprinkling, that speaks better things then that of Abel. Look therefo^^ as
Jesus Christ the Mediator of the New Covena^^ exceeds Moses the Mediator of the
Old; -- A^^ as the blood of Christ, the blood of sprinkling, do^^ excel and
exceed the blood of all sacrifices in t^^ time of the Old Testament, so does
our Gosp^ Church state now exceed that of theirs.

I shall not run through all these differences, privileges, only fall in with
this 24 verse.

And to Jesus, that is, ye are come to Jesus t^ Mediator of the New Covenant,
and to the blo^ of sprinkling, that is, ye are come to the blood sprinkling,
that speaks better things then that Abel. From which two Privileges with the
connection, I take up these Observations.

Observe. 1. That there is a New Covenant strick^ with the children of men.

2. That Jesus is the Mediator of this New C^venant.

3. That now in these Gospel times, we are (...) come to Moses the Mediator of
the Old, but un^^ Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant: And

4. That thus coming unto Jesus the Mediat^ of the New Covenant, we are also
come unto t^^ blood of sprinkling, that speaks better thing then that of Abel.

Doct. I shall begin with the first; There is new Covenant stricken with the
children of me^

It was always Gods way to deal with man i^ the way of a Covenant; that is the
most suitabl^ to man, the most honorable for man, and the mo^ amicable and
friendly: from the beginning therefore so it was; no sooner was man made, but
Go^ entered into Covenant with him, In the day th^^ thou eatest thereof, thou
shall dye the death; -- And then a Covenant he made with the World by Noah; --
And then a Covenant he made with Abraham; -- And then a Covenant he made with
the Jews at Mount Sinai. It has always been Gods way to deal with man in the
way of a Covenant, but now in these latter days he has stricken a New
Covenant with the children of men: A New Covenant will I make with the house of
Israel says the Lord, by way of promise, Jer. 31. -- A New Covenant has the
Lord made with the house of Israel, by way of fullfilment and accomplishment,
Heb. 8. So that there is a New Covenant stricken with the children of men.

For the opening of which Argument:

1. We must enquire what this Covenant is.

2. Why, and upon what account it is called a New Covenant: And

3. What are the ways and properties of this New Covenant.

4. Who are the Subjects of this Covenant, and persons that God does strike
this Covenant with.

5. We will a little inquire into the benefits thereof.

6. Labor to show you, what a man should do to get into Covenant with God; --
and in case he be in Covenant with God, how he should walk as becomes one that
is in Covenant with the great God. Here is matter enough to discourse on many
exercises; but, though with difficulty, I shall dispatch all in this one.

1. And first of all, if you ask me what this Covenant is, take this
description of the Covenant that now we are in.

It is that mutual agreement between God and Man, whereby God the Father does
engage himself to show mercy, love and kindness, to Christ an^ to his Seed;
Christ engaging both for himself an^ for his Seed, to be obedient unto God the
Father.

First, I say, it is a mutual agreement, and herein a Covenant differs from a
Law. A Law properly is a commandment with penalty. No sooner wa^ man made, but
he was under a Law, to be obedient unto God his Maker; and in case he broke it,
God by the Law of Nature might punish him But then when God said unto him, In
the day tha^ thou eatest thereof, thou shall dye the death, then God entered
into Covenant, man accepting thereof. The Child is obliged by the Law of Nature
to obey hi^ Parents; yet this is no Covenant, but a law of Nature, for here is
no agreement. But the Wife is obliged to obey her Husband, and this is a
Covenant why? -- because it is by mutual agreement; So that I say, this
Covenant, First, is a mutual agreement between God and Man: But

2. It is that agreement whereby God the Father does engage himself to show
kindness, grace and mercy, to Christ and to his Seed.

Unto Christ himself he does engage, Isa. 42. (...) the Lord have called thee
in Righteousness, and will bold thine hand, and will keep thee, and give thee
for a Covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles. If thou will
undertake the work of the Mediator, I do engage and promise to thee (I the Lord
have called thee in Righteousness, and) I will hold thine hand, and I will keep
thee.

And the Father does engage unto Christ, and his Seed too; for says he unto
Christ, If thy children forsake my Law, and walk not in my Judgments; If they
break my Statutes, and keep not my Commandments, then will I visit their
transgression with the Rod, and their iniquity with stripes; nevertheless, my
loving kindness will I not utterly take away: which is plainly spoken unto
Christ, as you read in the 89 Psalm, from the 26. v. unto the 30. So that I
say, it is that agreement whereby God the Father does engage himself to show
kindness, grace and mercy, unto Christ and his Seed.

On the other side, Christ ingages both for himself and for his Seed, to be
obedient unto God the Father.

Christ ingages for himself, and therefore says he in the 40. Psalm, verse 6.
Sacrifice and Offering thou did not desire, etc. Then said I, Lo I come, in
the Volume of the Book it is written of me, I delight to do thy will, O my God,
yea, thy Law is within my heart. They are the words of Christ; Then said I,
that is, then promised I. Paulus Fagius observes, that the Hebrew has no one
proper word for Promise; but where God is said to Promise, the word in the
Hebrew is only so, God said, God spoke; And indeed if any man will take the
pains to consult the Hebrew, and our English Translation together, he shall
find it true. I Will give you some instances, and so pass over, Deuteronomy. 1.11. The
Lord God of your Fathers make you a thousand times so many more as ye are, and
bless you, as he has promised you, Heb. as he has said. -- So in the 1 Kings
8.56. Blessed be the Lord that has given rest unto his people Israel,
according to all that he promised, Heb. according to all that he has said. --
So in the 2 Chronicles. 6.10. The Lord therefore has performed his word, that he
has spoken, for I am risen up in the room of David my Father, an^ am set on
the Throne of Israel, as the Lord hat^ promised, Heb. as the Lord has said. --
So a^ the 16. verse, Now therefore O Lord God of Israel, keep with thy Servant
David my Father, tha^ which thou have promised him, Hebr. that which thou have
said to him. So here in the 40. Psalm Then said I, that is, then promised I,
then ingage^ I unto God the Father, saying, Lo I come, in the the Volume of the
Book it is written of me; her^ Christ ingages for himself.

And he engaged also for his Seed; therefore Ps^ 16. O my Soul, thou have said
unto the Lord, sai^ by way of promise, O my Lord, my goodness is no^ for thee,
but for the Saints that are in the earth, an^ the excellent in whom is all my
delight. And so ou^ Savior Christ promises to the Father in the 17. o^ John;
Therefore do I sanctify my self, That the^ also may be sanctified. And if you
look into the Hebrews, you shall find that Christ is called the Surety of the
Covenant; Why? -- because he does engage for God the Father to perform to us,
and he does engage for us, that we shall perform to God. So that do you ask
what the Covenant is, plainly then it is, That mutual agreement between God an^
man, whereby God the Father does engage himself to show kindness, love and
mercy, to Christ and his Seed, Christ engaging both for himself, and for his
Seed to be obedient unto God the Father.

2. But then secondly, why is this Covenant called a New Covenant?

Not only because it is an excellent Covenant, as in Scripture phrase,
excellent things are called New; a New Song, etc.

Nor only because it brings a new heart, which is promised in the Covenant.

Nor only because it is always fresh and green, and new, upon which account
Austin thinks, that the commandment of Love is called a New Commandment.

Nor is it called New only because there is no other Covenant to succeed and
follow, which is the reason in the 8th. of Heb.

But it is called a New Covenant, in opposition to the Covenant that was made
with Adam, and with us in the state of innocence; -- and in opposition to the
Covenant which was made with the Jews in the time of the Old Testament.

First, New in opposition to the Covenant that was made with Adam in the state
of innocence; for then, though God out of free love and grace, was pleased to
condescend to enter into Covenant with man, yet then God did deal with us in a
way of Supremacy and of Righteousness; and therefore there is mention made
only of the Threatening, In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall dye
the death: But now God deals with us in this Covenant in a way of grace, and of
great compassion; and therefore in this Covenant there is mention made only of
the Promise.

Again, 2. Though God did enter into Covenant with Adam, and so with us, and
promised eternal life in Heaven; not eternal life in this World only, as some
would: For Hell was threatened in these words, In the day thou eatest thereof
thou shall dye the death, and therefore Heaven and Salvation was promised on
the contrary; yet I say (although God, when he entered into Covenant with us
then, did promise Heaven and Salvation) it was upon condition of our personal
and perfect obedience, and therefore called a Covenant of works; But now our
Covenant runs upon no such terms.

3. Then in that Covenant, acceptance began in the Work, and so to the Person,
and therefore says the Lord to Cain, If thou do well, shall thou not be
accepted? speaking to him as belonging to the Covenant of works: -- But in the
Covenant now made, the acceptance begins in the Person, and so to the Work,
and therefore says the Lord concerning Abel, the Lord accepted Abel (his
Person) and then his Sacrifice.

4. Then also the Lord gave Adam, and us, an^ ability to stand, but he did not
give a promise of perseverance in standing: But now the Lord does, I will put
my fear into your hearts, that you shall not depart from me, says the Lord.

5. Then in that Covenant, there was no room for repentance, no room for
remission: But as in a Court of mere Justice, the Question is not, whether a
man does repent of his Fact or no, but whether, I or No, has such a Fact been
done? So by the Covenant of works, the first Covenant, there is no Question
whether a man does repent or no, But whether the work were done, whether the
sin were done: But now in this Covenant, there is room both for repentance, and
for remission, (as by and by you shall hear.) And then

6. Though when God made that Covenant with Adam and with us, the tree of Life
might be some shadow of Christ, yet then there was no Mediator, for there was
no need, God and Man was not at variance, and so no need of a Mediator: But in
this Covenant that is now stricken, there is a Mediator, a Mediator of the New
Covenant. So that thus you see this Covenant is New, in opposition to the
Covenant that was made with Adam and us in the state of innocence.

And Secondly, As it is New in opposition to the Covenant that was made with
Adam, the Covenant of works; so it is new also in opposition to the Covenant
that was made with the Jews in the time of the Old Testament. For the clearing
of this,

First of all we must inquire whether there be any difference between the
Covenant made with the Jews in the day of the Old Testament, and the Covenant
made with us now: -- and in case there be, what is the difference, and wherein
it lies.

And first, If you ask whether there be any difference.

If I should answer with Divines ordinarily (wherein they speak the truth) I
must say, that the Covenant which God made with the Jews, was for substance the
same, though different in administration; but give me leave to express my own
sense in my own terms, thus,

1. It is plain and clear, that the Jews that were saved in the time of the Old
Testament, were saved by the same Covenant, that we now are saved by; for they
were saved by the Covenant that God made with Abraham, so are we, Luke 11. Romans
4. Gal. 3. Circumcision then was the Seal of the Covenant; and what was
Circumcision, but a seal of the Righteousness of Faith? The Ceremonies, Types
and Sacrifices, did not belong to the Covenant of works, they were Types of
Christ, and therefore it must needs be the same Covenant, for it was a Covenant
of works that was made with the Jews, God should have brought them from better
to worse for the Covenant of Grace was made with Abraham; but though the Law
was added after the Promise, it could not disanul the Promise, says the
Apostle in the 3. of Gal. So that its plain and clea^ the Jews that were then
saved, were saved by the same Covenant that we now are: But

2. Though those Jews that were saved, were saved by the same Covenant that we
now are saved by, yet notwithstanding the Covenant o^ works was declared, and
promulged among the Jews; Wherefore then was the Law added, says the Apostle?
Added then it was. As Sarah and Hagar made types of the two Testaments by the
Apostle Were at once in Abraham's house; So the Old Covenant of Works, and the
New Covenant of Grace, were at once in the Jewish Church: But

3. Though both these Covenants were at onc^ in the Jewish Church, the one
declared, and the other made with them; though Hagar was in the same house, yet
it was in subserviency unto Sarah; and though the Covenant of works was
declared, and was there at the same time, yet it was in subserviency unto the
Covenant of Grace; it was added, wherefore? says the Apostle, because of
transgression, to be a School Master to bring to Christ. It was there in
subserviency, and upon a Gospel design: But then

4. Though both these Covenants were thus joined together, the Covenant of
Works, and the Covenant of Grace both joined together in one state, yet both
together did not make a third and distinct Covenant; I am no ways of Camero's
^ind, that there were three Covenants, but of the Apostles mind clearly, in the
4. of the Galathians, where he speaks expressly, that there are two Te^aments,
and no more; so that though both were upon the ground together (one declared
then to ^ake them sensible of their sins, and to bring them ^o the other
Covenant) yet both did not make up a ^hird and distinct Covenant: But

5. Because the Commandment lay uppermost, the ^hole dispensation was called
Law, although the Pro^ise and the Gospel lay at the bottom; As now, be^use the
Promise lies uppermost, the whole of the ^ovenant is called the Promise, though
the Com^andment lies at the bottom.

Well then, if these things be so, wherein lies ^he difference between that of
the Jews and Ours?

Thus, first, although the Jews that were saved, ^ere saved by the same
Covenant that we now are ^^ved by; Yet then the Covenant had a special eye un^^
the Commandment, and therefore it is called the ^aw: Now the Covenant has a
special eye to the Pro^ise, and therefore it is called the Promise.

2. Then though the Covenant of Grace was ^ade with the Jews that were saved,
yet it was ^ven more darkly and obscurely; there was a vail ^^on Moses, that he
could not see to the end of ^ings: But now we all with open face behold as in
glass the Glory of the Lord, says the Apostle, as ^eaking of the difference
between the one and the ^her, Cor. 2.3.

3. Then also the ministration of that Covenant as very burdensome, now more
easy; Take my ^ke upon you, says Christ: it is spoken in opposition to Moses
too, for my yoke is easy, and my burden is light, Mat. 11.

4. Then also the Covenant was made with the Nation of the Jews only, but now
it takes in a^ the World, Jew and Gentile. That Scripture, Is^ 56. is spoken in
regard of Gospel times, Let not t^^ Eunuch say, etc. nor the son of a stranger,
that I (...) separated from the Lord, only let him take hold of (...)
Covenant. The stranger now may do it, it belon^ to the Gentile as well as the
Jew: And

5. Then the dispensation was more terrible, a^^ brought forth fear and
bondage; but now we a^ not come unto Mount Sinai, where was fear a^ trembling,
but we are come unto Mount Sion, whi^ brings forth Love, and Faith, and
Sweetness, a^ Thankfulness.

6. Then also the Covenant was confirmed (...) Promise, and by the blood of
Bulls and Goa^ now it is confirmed by Oath, and by the blood of ^^sus.

7. Then also the Mediator was Moses, that sto^ between God and them; now Jesus
the Mediat^

8. Then the Law was a Schoolmaster to bri^ to Christ, the Covenant of Works
was upon (...) ground, and the Law was a School Master; it is (...) so now.

9. Then Christ was in the hand of Moses, (...) Moses is in the hand of Christ:
Now the bond-w^man is cast out of doors; there was a time wh^ the bondwoman
and Sarah was in the house t^gether, but now the bondwoman is gone.

10. Then the Commandments were m^ carnal, as the Apostle speaks, and the
Promi^ worser, but now the Commandment is spiritual, a^ the Covenant founded
upon better Promises, says the Apostle, Heb. 7.

11. And (to say no more) look what difference there is between the Letter and
the Spirit, in regard of efficacy, (for that is the meaning of it) such a
difference there is between that and this. We are not Ministers of the Letter,
as in the days of Moses, but we are Ministers of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. So that
thus you see why this Covenant is called a New Covenant. -- N^w in opposition
to the Covenant that was made with man in the state of innocence, and new in
opposition to the Covenant that was made with the Jews in the times of the Old
Testament.

3. But then thirdly, What kind of Covenant is this? -- And what are the
properties of it?

Answ. To name but three,

First, It is a Covenant of Grace, in opposition to works, or to all our own
worth, or worthiness.

A Covenant of Grace, for it is made with sinners. The Covenant that was made
with Adam in the ^tate of innocence, was made with a Saint, having ^he Image of
God upon him, therefore a Covenant of Friendship: The Covenant that God makes
now, ^he makes with Sinners, and it is a Covenant of Reconciliation, and
therefore a Covenant of Grace. Then by that Covenant that God made with Adam,
there was no room for repentance, or for remission, now room for both.

For Repentance, I will take away the heart of stone, and I will give an heart
of flesh, says God.

For Remission, I will remember your sins no more, ^aith the Covenant; yea, the
Covenant of Grace ^oth so deeply engage for Remission of sins; That whereas the
Covenant of works would own no such things, the Covenant of Grace does so
deeply engage for remission of sins, that it is made the chief, and the reason
of all the other, I will write my Law in your hearts, and ye shall all know me;
Why? For I will remember your sins no more, Heb. 8. By that Covenant, if we had
sinned, we should have provoked God thereby to damn us, and to destroy us: By
this Covenant, when a man that is in Covenant sins, he does thereby provoke God
to pity him and to have compassion on him. In the Covenant o^ works the Lord
gave a man strength to stand, an^ left him to himself; but now the Lord has
promised in this Covenant, to cause us to walk in h^^ ways. When the
Israelites had to do with the Egyptians, the Egyptians enjoined them their
ta^ of brick, and gave them no straw: Now we ha^ to deal with so good a Lord in
this Covenant, the our tale of brick is lessened; we have straw, a^^ strength,
and not only strength, but God himself Co-worker with us. Yea, what Grace is
there the you want, or do complain for the want of, b^ it is promised in this
Covenant?

Do you complain that you are not converted I will write my Law in your hearts,
says God no^

Do you complain that you are ignorant? The shall all know me, from the least
unto the greatest (...) them, says the Covenant.

Do you complain that your heart is hard? I w^ (says God) take away the heart
of stone, and give y^ an heart of flesh. Grace, Grace, this Covenant the is a
Covenant of Grace, it is a gracious Cov^nant.

2. As it is a gracious Covenant, so it is a fr^ and inconditionate Covenant:
-- Free in oppositi^^ to all conditions to be performed by us; Pray do not
mistake me, I do not say there is no condition in the New Covenant; but the
Condition is performed by Christ our second Adam.

Nor do I say, that Faith, Obedience and Repentance are not required, but I
say, Faith, Obedience and Repentance are required in the New Covenant as
Duties, but not as Conditions.

This I say then, it is a free Covenant, in opposition to all conditions to be
performed by us; for when the Covenant of Grace is mentioned in Scripture,
where do you find any condition annexed to any thing that is there promised? --
says the Lord, I will remember your sins no more: -- Upon what condition? --
none mentioned; -- I will write my Law in your hearts; -- Upon what condition?
-- none mentioned; -- You shall all know me from the greatest to the least,
etc. -- Upon what condition? none mentioned. Where do you ever find the
Covenant mentioned with a condition?

And plainly thus; if there were a Condition, the Condition must be a distinct
thing from the thing promised. If I promise to go a journey with a man upon
Condition he shall bear my charges; his bearing my charges, and my going the
journey are distinct things. -- Now what Condition then can there be? What
Faith, Repentance or Obedience? Why? these are all promised in the Covenant,
therefore they cannot be the Condition; for the thing promised in the Covenant,
and the Condition that we are to perform, must be distinct. I say, if there be
a Condition, it must be distinct from the thing promised; but there is nothing
that we can perform, but is promised in the Covenant; therefore there can be no
Condition. The Prophet Isaiah tells us, that this Covenant is after the nature
of that Covenant that God made with Noah, That the World should be drowned no
more; and that i^ absolute, and upon no Condition. Junius thinks, that upon
this account, this Covenant of Grace i^ called a Testament, for says he, a
Testament is without Condition. A man makes his last Will and Testament; and
though now and then a man may hang a Condition upon a Rebellious Child, yet
ordinarily, a man then gives, and he gives freely, without all Conditions; and
so this Covenant is called a Testament: Why? because no Condition is to be
performed by us. That is the second thing, it is a free Covenant in opposition
to all Conditions to be performed by our selves.

3. As it is a free Covenant, in opposition to al^ Conditions to be performed
by us, so it is an everlasting Covenant, a Covenant of Salt that cannon be
broken, which my Covenant they brake, says God, speaking of the former
Covenant; and says he, in that place of Zech. I took my staff of Beauty, the
Covenant, and brake it. God brake it, that is the former Covenant. But now this
Covenant of Grace is an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and sure,
an everlasting Covenant that cannot be broken. And thus you see what kind of
Covenant it is; It is a Covenant of Grace, in opposition to all works and worth
in us; -- a Free Covenant in opposition to all Conditions to be performed by
us: -- and an everlasting Covenant: Lo, this is the Covenant that is stricken
with the Children of Men.

4. But then fourthly, Who are the Subjects of this Covenant, and who are the
persons that God does strike or make this Covenant with?

First, This Covenant of Grace is not made or stricken with all the particular
men in the world; A New Covenant will I make with the house of Israel, not with
all the particular men in the world. If this New Covenant of Grace were made
with all the particular men in the world, then all the particular men in the
world should have the Law of God written in their hearts, and should all know
God, and all have their sins pardoned, for so says the Covenant, by an
absolute promise which must be fulfilled.

And upon this account it follows, that Christ did not dye for every particular
man in the world, for Christ is the Mediator of the New Covenant; therefore if
the New Covenant be not made with every particular man, Christ did not dye for
every particular man; but the New Covenant is not made with all the particular
men in the world, as you have heard.

2. As this New Covenant is not made with all the particular men in the world,
so neither is it made with all that live under the Gospel. Though Ishmael lived
in Abraham's house, and so the skirt of the Covenant might be thrown over him,
yet in Isaac shall thy Seed be called, says God. A man may be in a Church, yet
not of the Church; as a man may be in a house, and yet not of the house. This
Covenant is not made with all particular men that live under the Gospel.

But who is it stricken with?

Plainly thus; If the Law of the Gospel be written in your hearts, so that it
is natural for you to do the work of the Gospel; as it is natural to an heathen
to do the work of nature, because the Law of nature is written in his heart;
then is this Covenant made with you: for thus runs the Covenant, I will write
my Law in your hearts.

2. If that you are taught of God, having an holy instinct unto what is good.
As the Be being taught of God, finds the way home to the Hive by an instinct;
and the Lamb being taught of God, find out his Dam amongst a thousand Sheep. So
I say, If you be taught of God, having an holy instinct unto what is good, then
are you in Covenant wit^ God; for thus runs the Covenant, You shall a^ know me,
and every one shall be taught of God.

3. If an heart of stone be taken away, and a yielding heart be given unto you,
whereby you yield t^ Gods Impressions, to Gods Instructions, and to God
Corrections, then are you in Covenant with God for thus runs the Covenant, I
will take away the heart of stone, and give an heart of flesh; a heart o^
flesh, is a yielding heart.

4. If you are begotten again to God by the promise, especially the absolute
promise, then a^^ you in Covenant with God. There were two Son of Abraham, the
Child of the Bondwoman, an^ the Child of the Freewoman, says the Apostle,
these were Types, -- And wherein did they differ? -- Why, the Child of the
Bondwoman was born after the Flesh, but the Child of the Freewoman was born
by the Promise, only by the Promise, an absolute Promise, and therefore I say,
if you be born again by the Promise, the absolute Promise, then are you in
Covenant with God.

And to say no more in it but this, If you be the Seed of Christ, then is this
Covenant made with you, for it is made with Christ and his Seed; and if you be
Abraham's Seed, then are you the Seed of Christ; for you may see how they go
together in the third Chapter of the Galathians; Now to Abraham and his Seed
were the Promises made: he says not, unto Seeds, as of many, but as of one,
and to thy Seed, which is Christ. And if you do believe as Abraham did, then
are you Abraham's Seed. So that thus briefly you see, who this Covenant is
stricken with, and who are the subjects of it.

5. But then fifthly, suppose I be in Covenant with the Lord, or suppose I be
not; if I be not, is there any great hurt? suppose I be, is there any great
good?

Much every way; give me leave to give you a little taste of it.

First, If you be not in Covenant with God, how can you expect any blessing,
mercy, or deliverance from God? for do but look into the Scripture, and you
shall find, that all blessings, mercies and deliverances come to the people of
God by virtue of the Covenant, and according to the Covenant: -- Will you
instance in outward deliveranc^s, the World is not drowned again? Why? -- but
because of the Covenant. -- Will you instance in spiritual deliverances? says
the Psalmist, He commands redemption, he remembers the Covenant; He makes
Redemption effectual by remembering the Covenant. -- Or will you instance in
both together? see what is said in the 9th of Zech. 11. As for thee also, by
the blood of thy Covenant, I have sent forth thy prisoners out of the pit,
wherein is no water: It includes both outward and spiritual deliverances: So
that now, if you be not in Covenant with God, what deliverance can you expect,
or what mercy, seeing they all come by virtue of the Covenant, and according to
the Covenant?

But on the other side, if you be in Covenant with the Lord, then are you
exalted and honored, yea, greatly honored. For if it be an honor to be in
League and Covenant with a great Prince, What an honor is it to be in Covenant
with the great God? When God did speak to Abraham of striking a Covenant with
him, he falls down upon his face; as if he should say, Who am I, that the great
God should be in Covenant with me?

Again, If God be in Covenant with you, look whatever excellency there is in
God, that is made over to you for your use. And as that King said to him that
was in League with him, My Horse is thine, and my Men are thine, and my Money
is thine; so when God enters into Covenant with a poor Soul, -- he says, My
Wisdom is thine, and my Power is thine, and my Love and Mercy is thine:
Whatever excellency there is in God, is made over to you, being in Covenant
with him.

And if that you be in Covenant with the Lord, then all his Retinue, his
Creatures, and his Servants, also are in Covenant with you, in the 2d. of Hos.
21. It shall come to pass in that day, I will hear, says the Lord, I will hear
the Heavens, and they shall hear the Earth, and the Earth shall hear the Corn,
and the Wine, and the Oil, and they shall hear Jezreel. -- Why? -- verse. 19. I
will betroth thee unto me for ever; yea, I will betroth thee unto me in
Righteousness, and in Judgment, and in loving Kindness, and in Mercies: And
then it shall come to pass, that I will hear the Heavens, and they shall hear
the Earth, etc. So that if you be in Covenant with God, then all his Retinue,
all his Creatures, and all his Servants are in Covenant with you too.

And if you be in Covenant with the Lord, then he is in Covenant with you, and
your Soul, and your Body both; not only with your Body, but with your Soul,
and not only with your Soul, but with your Body, with your whole man; and
therefore if you dye, the Covenant is not dissolved between God and you. The
Covenant may be dissolved between a Man and his Wife at Death, but this
Covenant can never be dissolved; and though you sin, and break with God, God
will not break with you, I hate putting away, says he.

And then, you may go to God as upon a Throne of Grace, and look upon God as
sitting in a Rainbow. Oh what a mercy, what a blessing is it to be in Covenant
with the Lord?

But in case I be not in Covenant with God, what shall I do to get into
Covenant with him? -- And in case I be in Covenant with God, how shall I walk
so as becomes one that is in Covenant with the great God? Here are two
Questions, I shall speak briefly to them and conclude.

First, Do you ask what you shall do to get into Covenant? Are you afraid any
of you, that you are not yet in Covenant with the Lord, and would you be in
Covenant with the Lord?

Why then be sure of this, that upon a right and good understanding of the
nature of this Covenant, you go to God, and make your choice of this Covenant
of Grace, to stand and fall by. The word Berith in the Hebrew, for Covenant,
some think comes from a root that signifies to choose; a man is in the Covenant
that he chooses, and every man is indeed as his choice is.

But then go and renounce the other Covenant of Works, etc. As the way to have
a part in Christ's Righteousness is to renounce all your own Righteousness; so
the way to have a share in this Covenant of Grace, is to renounce the Covenant
o^ Works.

Then go to Christ as the Mediator of the Covenant, and desire him to put you
into this Covenant; He struck the Covenant with God the Father at the first,
and he must put you into this Covenant, for he is the Mediator of the Covenant;
go then to him, as to the Mediator of the Covenant, to put you into Covenant.

Then leave the weight and stress of your Guilty Soul upon this Covenant of
Grace, bear upon this stream of Grace, here lay the weight of all, for the
Promise is made ours by resting on it; And what is this Covenant, but an
absolute Promise? there then rest, and leave the weight of your Souls.

And to say no more but this; Then go unto the Lord, and give your hand unto
God, and your self up to God, as one willing to be led by him into all the
things that the Covenant shall require. In the times of the Old Testament, when
they made a Covenant, they struck hands together; In Ezra 10.19. it is said,
they gave their hands to put away their Wives; and in the former verse, they
made a Covenant to do it, They rose, and made a Covenant to put away their
Wives: And we find in the 1 of Chronicles, that when David was dead, that all
the people came together, Chap. 24.24. And all the Princes, and the Mighty Men,
and all the Sons likewise of King David, submitted themselves unto Solomon the
King; the word in the Hebrew is, they gave the hand under King Solomon; they
gave their hand by way of Covenant, and they gave their hand under King
Solomon, in a a way of submission. So when we enter into Covenant with the
Lord, we give our hand under God; and therefore if you desire to get into
Covenant do these things.

Quest. Well, but suppose I be in Covenant with God, as I hope I am, What
should I do that I may walk as becomes one that is in Covenant with the great
God?

Answ. First of all, If you be in Covenant indeed with the Lord, then God has
honored you, he has exalted you, and honored you greatly; and if God have
honored you, why should not you honor God?

Now first, the more you fall down at the feet of the fullness of Christ, in the
sense of your own unworthiness, inability, and insufficiency, the more you
honor God: There is one, says John, who is mightier then I, whose shoe
latchet I am not worthy to unloose.

2. The more you cry up those Ordinances and ways of God, that are decryed by
the World, the more you honor God.

3. The more you keep close to God in declining times, the more you honor God.

4. The more you trust God at a dead lift, when all means fails, and when a
sentence of death is upon all the means, the more you honor God.

5. The more you serve God, contrary to your own disposition, and rea^h the
services of God over the head of your own dispositions, the more you honor God.

6. And the more that you do prefer the things of God in time of competition
above other things, the more you honor God.

7. And the more you part with your much for Gods lesser, the more you honor
God. What is Honor? Honor is a testimony of another Excellency; Now when I
can part with my much for Gods little, his little truths and things, I do
testify an excellency in God; I say, the more you can part with your much for
Gods little, the more you honor God.

8. And the more you do keep close to the Name and Faith of God and Christ,
even where Satan's Throne is, the more you honor God: Now then has the Lord
honored you, and taken you into Covenant with himself; then surely it is your
duty for to honor God, and by these several particulars you may honor God.

2. If the Lord have made and stricken a Covenant with you, then Friends give
me leave to say to you, Why should you be solicitous for your own things? If
you be in Covenant with the Lord, and God in Covenant with you, God will take
care of your things; therefore why should you be solicitous about your own
things? God is in Covenant with you, he will take care of yours.

And upon this account, in case there be any loss upon the things of God, why
should you not be as much affected for that loss, as for your own losses? For
if you be in Covenant with God, and God with you; Gods things are yours, and
your things are Gods: Gods things are yours, Why then should you not be as much
touched with the loss of any thing that concerns God, as with any thing that
concerns your selves?

Yea, Why should not God have the use of all yours? God is in Covenant with
you, and you have the use of Gods things, his Wisdom, his Power, his Mercy;
Why? -- Because he is in Covenant with you, and you are in Covenant with him.
Why then should not God have the use of your thing also, your Name, and your
Estate, and your Body, and your Time? If you be in Covenant with God, and God
be in Covenant with you, yours are Gods, and Gods are yours; why should not God
have the use of yours, as you think to have the use of Gods?

3. If God be in Covenant with you, and you be in Covenant with God, then why
should you not live at an higher rate then the best of the Jews did? You are in
a better Covenant then the Jews were; though for substance the same (as you
heard) yet you are in a better Covenant, and shall not your lives be better?

You have a better Mediator, and shall not your lives be better?

You have better Promises, and shall not your lives be better?

Your state now is called Grace to That: The Law was given by Moses, but Grace
and Truth comes by Christ, John 1. Chap. Look therefore upon the Jews, look
into the Old Testament, and look upon the best of them, and think with your
selves, am I in a better Covenant? Oh then how am I engaged to live better? Oh
that our lives were more exalted upon this account. Why should not our lives be
better, and we live at a higher Rate?

4. If you be in Covenant with the Lord, and the Lord in Covenant with you,
then be sure of this, That you be true to God; be true to God in the matter of
his Worship: the Covenant stricken between God and you, is a Conjugal Covenant.
A Woman, though she will admit another man into the house with her Husband, yet
she will not admit him into the bed, that is a breach of Covenant. Now the
Worship of God is the bed wherein Christ does bed with a Soul; and therefore if
you look into the Old Testament, you shall find that Idolatry is accounted
Adultry, and Harlotry: -- Why? Because they took Idols, and men into the bed
with God. Would you walk then as those that are in Covenant with the Lord, away
with every thing of man's out of Christ's bed, Remember it is a conjugal
Covenant? Whatsoever is of man's coming into the Worship of the Lord, which is
the Lords bed, is against your Covenant. When God speaks of a Covenant, he
says, Thou shall be for me, and I will be for thee, Hos. 3. Chap.

5. And to conclude all, if you be in Covenant with the Lord, and the Lord with
you indeed, go away, and walk humbly, and be very thankful. When the Lord made
a Covenant with Abraham, Abraham, says he, go thoughout the Land, and behold
it in the breadth thereof, and in the length thereof; so say I, has the Lord
entered into Covenant with you, go into the Land of the Covenant, behold the
length thereof, and the breadth thereof, and what God has promised in that
Covenant: behold it in the length thereof, and the breadth thereof, and thus
will your heart be affected and raised to thankfulness. Thus David's heart was
raised, for says he, Lord, though thou make not my house to grow, this is my
salvation, I am in Covenant with thee; And so you may say, Lord, thou make
not my Family to grow, I have never a Child, this is my salvation, I am in
Covenant with thee; though thou make not my house to grow, but I am poor, and
my house is pulled down, or burnt down, this is my salvation, the Lord be
praised, the Lord is in Covenant with me; thus do, and you shall be thankful.

And this is the last thing, if you be in Covenant with the Lord, go away, walk
humbly, and be thankful, that God should ever enter into this great Covenant,
this Covenant of Grace with you, even with you.

And so now I have done with the first argument, that there is a Covenant
stricken with the Children of men: The second follows, Jesus is the Mediator of
this Covenant.

Christ the Mediator of the New Covenant. SERMON IV.
Heb. 11.24. And to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant and to the blood of
sprinkling, that speaks better things then that of Abel.


I Shall now come unto the second Observation raised from the words, namely,

Observe. 2. That Jesus is the Mediator of the New Covenant.

For the opening and prosecuting whereof,

1. We must enquire what is the proper work o^ a Mediator, that is, a Mediator
between God and us.

2. I shall labor to show you, that Jesus was, and is, the fittest person in
the World to mediate between God and us.

3. That Jesus has undertaken this work of Mediation, and will certainly carry
it on unto du^ perfection.

4. How and in what respects Jesus is said to b^ the Mediator of the New
Covenant.

5. What are the benefits that we do gain by Jesus his being Mediator of the
New Covenant.

6. Give you some doctrinal Corrolaries, and practical Duties that do flow from
hence.

1. And First, If you ask, what is the proper work of a Mediator, that is, a
Mediator between God and us,

I answer, It is to make peace and reconciliation between God and us. At the
first, in the state of innocence, there was peace and friendship between God
and Man, there was no enmity in Gods heart toward his creature, nor no enmity
in Man's heart toward his Creator; but upon the Fall, a breach and separation
was made between God and us, insomuch as we are all by Nature the children of
wrath, God is angry; -- And an enmity is in us toward God: The wisdom of the
flesh is enmity against God, says the Apostle. Now therefore, the work of a
Mediator is to reconcile God to us, and to reconcile us unto God, both which
you have in 2 Cor. 5. All things are of God, who has reconciled us to himself
by Jesus Christ, and has given to us the Ministry of reconciliation, to wit,
That God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself: There is
reconciliation on Gods part, for it is said, He was in Christ reconciling the
world unto himself: Not imputing their trespasses unto them. -- Then at the 20.
verse you have reconciliation on our part, Now then, we are Ambassadors for
Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead be ^e
reconciled unto God. Here is both reconciliations.

Only you must know, That we do not find in express terms in Scripture, that
God is said to be reconciled to us, but we are said to be reconciled to him,
because we are the parties offending, and God the Party offended: Now the
Scripture always speaks so, that the Party offending, is to reconcile himself,
or to be reconciled, as in the 5. of Math. If thy brother has ought against
thee, leave thy gift, and first be reconciled to thy brother. Thou that have
offended, go and be reconciled to thy brother: and so we say in ordinary
speech, if a man have justly provoked another, Go and reconcile your self unto
him, that is, do that whereby he may be pacified and satisfied. And so God is
reconciled unto us, when we do that whereby his anger may be turned away, and
he pacified, which is the work of a Mediator.

Quest. But what need a Mediator for this work (say the Socinians) for God was
always willing to be reconciled to us, God so loved the World, that he gave
his Son: He loved them first, before Christ; what need a Mediator then, say
they.

And say the Arminians, to invalidate and inervate Election, If we be elected,
and so loved from all eternity, what need a Mediator to bring about actual
reconciliation in time.

To all which I answer,

Answ. Yes, very much: For,

First, You must know that affections are give^ to God in Scripture, according
to effects and dispensations sometimes.

Sometimes God is said to love or hate in reference to his eternal Decree, so
Romans 9. Jacob ha^ I loved, and Esau have I hated, before they had do^ good or
evil.

Some times God is said to love, or to be angr^ or to hate, in reference to his
dispensations; and so the Elect, that are loved from all Eternity, are born the
children of wrath, in regard of legal dispensation. Elect we are, and so loved,
in regard of Gods eternal good will, and yet under wrath when we are born, in
regard of legal dispensation.

2. You must know that this reconciliation with God, or God being reconciled to
us, does not make a real change in the inward affection of God, but in the
outward dispensation of God.

3. You must know this; That God may be willing to be reconciled unto us, in
regard of his eternal good will, and yet not be actually reconciled in regard
of his dispensations. As David was willing to be reconciled to Absalom, but he
was not actually reconciled, and therefore Joab comes as a Mediator between
them, to bring about the actual reconciliation. And if you look into the last
of Job, you will find, as Macovius does well observe to the purpose in hand,
That when God was very angry with Eliphaz and his friends (insomuch as the Lord
said to Eliphaz at the 7th verse, My wrath is kindled against thee and against
thy two friends) that yet notwithstanding, then God puts them upon a means of
taking away his displeasure: Therefore take unto you now seven Bullocks, and
seven Rams, and go to my servant Job, and offer up for your selves a burnt
offering, and my servant Job shall pray for you, and mediate for you. So that
God was angry, and his wrath kindled, yet he was willing to be reconciled, and
finds out a Mediator to bring about this actual reconciliation. And so here,
although God be angry with his own Elect, in regard of the dispensation, yet
notwithstanding he may be willing to be reconciled, in regard of his eternal
good will: But

4. You must know this also, that God may, and does, Will this for that
sometimes, and yet not for this will that, as Aquinas speaks.

For Example, God does will Rain for Corn, and Rain is the cause of Corn
willed: He does will Rain for Corn, yet Corn is not the cause of his will
willing the Corn. So here, God does will Christ's Mediation for Reconciliation,
and the Mediation of Christ is the cause of Reconciliation, but yet
notwithstanding, the Mediation of Christ, is not the cause of Gods Will,
willing Reconciliation. So that thus now you see, what the proper work of a
Mediator is, that is, to mediate between God and us, it is to reconcile God to
us, and to reconcile us unto God; That Is the first.

2. Jesus was, and is the fittest person in the World to mediate between God
and us. There was no creature fit to Umpire the business between God and us;
and therefore Job says well, at the 9th. Chap. 33. verse, Neither is there any
dayes-man betwixt us, that might lay his hand upon us both -- Man was not fit
to mediate, because man is the person offending; -- Angels not fit to mediate,
for the shoulder of an Angel could not bear the weight of Mediation-Work,
neither could an Angel satisfy. -- God the Father, not fit for this work, the
first person in the Trinity, for he was the person offended. -- The Holy Ghost
not fit for this work, for it is his work to apply the blood of this mediation;
so then, there is none other fit, but Christ fit, Jesus fit, The fittest person.

For first of all, he is the person appointed by the Father. If a man will
undertake to mediate between two, and be not chosen thereunto, he is not fit
for it, but if chosen, then he is fit. Why Jesus is the person chosen, mine
elect Servant, says the Father, Whom I have chosen, I have given him for a
Covenant unto the People, Isa. 42.

2. He was and is the fittest person to mediate between God and us, for he is a
middle person, partaking of Gods nature, and of man's. Extremes are joined
together by a middle: who more fit to mediate between two, then he that is a
middle between them?

3. He is the fittest person, for he is the fittest to make reconciliation
between God and us, to reconcile God to us, and us unto God.

First, He is the fittest to reconcile God to us; for that God might be
reconciled, he must be satisfied, his Justice satisfied, and his Anger
satisfied: Now Jesus Christ was God and Man; as Man, he ought to satisfy, but
could not; as God, he could satisfy, but he ought not: but as God-man, he both
could and ought, and so the fittest. And again,

2. Who more fit to reconcile God unto us, then he that was the most fit to
intercede, that had credit and favor, and love with the Father? Now Jesus lay
in the bosom of his Father; This is my beloved Son: and I was the Fathers
delight, says he in the 8th of Prove. Therefore the most fit to intercede, and
so to reconcile God unto us.

3. Who more fit to reconcile God to us, then he that was fit to be a surety,
to undertake for us. If a man come to mediate with a person offended, for
another: Says the person offended, but will you undertake he shall do so no
more? -- Yes, -- Why then I am willing. Now Jesus is called our surety, in the
8th. Heb. He undertakes that though we have broken with God already, we shall
break no more; and therefore the fittest person to reconcile God to us.

But secondly, the fittest person also to reconcile us to God.

1. Who more fit to reconcile us to God, then he that can change our natures?
Now Jesus is able to change our nature: I find, says Paul, a Law in my
Members, rebelling against the Law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity
unto the Law of sin which is in my members: O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from the body of this death? then, I thank God through Jesus Christ.
And Romans 8.2. The Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has made me free
from the Law of Sin and Death. And

2. Who more fit to reconcile us to God, then he that can beget good thoughts
in us concerning God? So long as a man has hard thoughts of God, he will never
be reconciled to God. Now Jesus Christ lay in the bosom of his Father, and can
tell the Soul what volumes of Love there were and are in the bosom of the
Father, for it, from all eternity, and so can beget love in the Soul toward
God, and so able to reconcile the Soul to God. You have it clearly in John
1.18. he lay in the bosom of the Father, etc.

3. And then to say no more but this, Who more fit to reconcile us to God, then
he that can give the Holy Ghost into our Souls? For as God is reconciled to us
by the blood of Christ, so we are reconciled to God by the Spirit of Christ:
Now Jesus gives the Spirit, I will send the Comforter, says Christ; so that
he, he is the fittest person in all the world to reconcile God to us, and to
reconcile us to God, and so the fittest person in all the world to mediate
between God and us. And so you have the second thing.

3. But then thirdly, As Jesus is the fittest person to mediate between God and
us, so he has undertaken this work of Mediation, and he will certainly carry
it on unto due perfection.

First (I say) he has undertaken it, and therefore he is called the Mediator,
1 Timothy 2.5. For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and Man, the man
Christ Jesus, and he alone is the Mediator. I confess indeed the word (...), is
given to Moses, and Moses in the 3d. of Gal. is called a a Mediator. The Law
was ordained by Angels in the hand of a Mediator, verse. 19. that is not Christ.
But the Law was ordained by Angels, in the hand, that is, by the Ministry of a
Mediator: -- Christ was not the Minister of Angels, Moses was; and therefore
Moses is to be understood here. The same word that is used concerning Christ,
is used here.

But now, although Moses was a Mediator, a Typical Mediator, and did stand
between God and the people, as in the 5th. of Deuteronomy. to deliver out the Law unto
them, verse. 5. I stood between the Lord and you at that time, to show you the
word of the Lord. Though (I say) Moses is called a Mediator, because he stood
between God and the people, to give and deliver out the Law to them, yet you
never find that Moses is called a Mediator in a way of Redemption, or
satisfaction, or paying of any ransom; so Jesus only is: In the 1 Timothy 2.
There is one God, and one Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus,
who gave himself a ransom for all. And so in the 9th Heb. For this cause he is
the Mediator of the New Testament: -- For what cause? -- Why? verse. 14. How
much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal spirit offered up
himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead works to serve the
living God; and for this cause is he the Mediator. It is never said so of
Moses; -- No, but Christ the Mediator, and he only the Mediator in a way of
satisfaction, and redemption, and paying of a price. Well, thus he has
undertaken the work.

And certainly, he will carry on his work of Mediation, unto due perfection;
for says the Apostle, he is faithful in all his house, as Moses was: Moses a
Servant, he as a Son. Moses the Mediator was faithful in all the house of God,
to a pin: Surely Jesus the Son will be faithful in this work of Mediation, and
carry it on to the uttermost.

But then you will say, what assurance have we, that Jesus will carry on this
work of Mediation unto the uttermost, unto due perfection.

First of all, you have the assurance of the first great promise that was made,
The Seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents head, Genesis 3. Says the Lord to
the Serpent, I will put enmity between thee and the Woman, and between thy Seed
and her Seed. If there be enmity between Satan and us, there will be peace
between God and us; where God says he will put enmity between the Devil and
us, he does there promise, that there shall be peace and reconciliation between
God and us; -- now this here he says, -- And how shall this be done? -- It
shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel. It shall be done by him
whose heel in his sufferings is bruised by Satan and his Instruments; It shall
be done by Christ.

2. As you have the assurance of the first promise, so you have the assurance
of what Christ has done already; he will not loose what he has done, he will
not loose his work. If Jesus Christ did not boggle nor startle at, nor fly back
from the hardest piece of Mediation, which was to satisfy for our sins, surely
he will not give in, and start back from the easier part, which is, to
intercede in Heaven, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for us.

3. As you have the assurance of what he has done, so you have the assurance
also of his delight in this work of mediation. If a man undertake a work, be
able to carry it through, and take delight therein, he will certainly carry it
on. Now our Lord Jesus Christ has undertaken this work: -- he is able, God and
Man, -- and he has a delight in this work, I delight to do thy will, says he,
in the 8th Prove. I was by him, as one brought up with him, and I was daily his
delight, rejoicing always before him, rejoicing in the habitable part of his
earth, and my delights were with the sons of men. Christ's heart was much in
this work of Mediation, insomuch, as if you look into the 3d of Mal. you shall
find he sits by it, and he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver, and
he shall purify the Sons of Levi: -- Why? -- That they may offer unto the Lord
an offering in Righteousness: then shall the offerings of Judah and Jerusalem
be pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of old, and as in former years. --
Who is this that sits thus at it? -- Why, in the former verse it is said, Even
the Messenger of the Covenant, that is, Christ Jesus. Behold I will send my
Messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me; there is John the Baptist. And
the Lord whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his Temple, even the Messenger of
the Covenant, -- (here is Christ) whom ye delight in: -- Behold he shall come;
and what shall he do? -- Why, he shall sit at this work, his heart is much in
this work, his delight is in it; and therefore you have the assurance of his
delight, that he will carry it on.

4. As you have the assurance of his Delight, so you have the assurance of his
Name and Title, JESUS, Jesus the Mediator of the Covenant. -- why Jesus? why
not Christ? why not Jesus Christ, as in other Scriptures?

Look into the Book of the Hebrews, and you shall find frequently that Christ
is called Jesus, -- Why? because this Title was more suitable to the Priestly
Office of Christ, which the Apostle is opening in the Book of the Hebrews. --
It notes also the Deity of Christ: Jesus signifies Savior; they go here
together, Jesus the Mediator, -- Why? because as he is a Mediator in order to
our salvation, so he is a Savior in the way of Mediation; Therefore they go
here together. And therefore as Jesus is able to save to the uttermost, so as
Mediator he will perform this work of Mediation to the uttermost. And thus now
I have done with the third thing, namely, That Jesus has undertaken this work,
To mediate between God and us, and he will certainly carry it on unto due
perfection.

4. But then Fourthly, How, and in what respects is Jesus said to be the
Mediator of the New Covenant?

Upon a threefold account.

Upon the account of stipulation, -- Upon the account of Confirmation, -- Upon
the account of Suretiship.

First, He is the Mediator of the New Covenant upon the account of stipulation,
for he it was that did strike the Covenant for us with God the Father. See what
is said in 2 Timothy 1. Who has saved us, says the Apostle, and called us with
an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his own purpose
and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus before the World began. So that
there was a Treatment between God the Father and Christ concerning us; and
Christ received grace for us before the World began. -- And as the first Adam
did strike the Covenant of works with God the Father for his Seed, so Jesus did
strike the Covenant of grace for his Seed with God the Father, and so called
the second Adam. A Mediator therefore of the New Covenant he is, in regard of
stipulation, he it was that struck up the Covenant first with the Father.

2. As he is a Mediator of the New Covenant upon the account of stipulation, so
upon the account of Confirmation; for he has confirmed the Covenant. -- He
confirmed the Covenant by his active obedience while he lived, and by his
passive obedience when he died.

By his active obedience while he lived, Dan. 9.27. He shall confirm the
Covenant with many for one Week. Larabbim, you read it with many, but rather he
shall confirm the Covenant for many; not for all, but he shall confirm the
Covenant for many for one Week.

And he did confirm the Covenant also by his passive obedience, in his Death,
Hebrews 9. For this cause he is the Mediator of the New Testament, That by
means of death for the Redemption of the transgressions that were under the
first Testament, they which are called might receive the Promise. For (the
Apostle explains it by a Similitude) Where a Testament is, there must also of
necessity be the death of the Testator. For a Testament is of force after men
are dead; otherwise it is of no strength at all, whilst the Testator lives. So
that plainly then, The Lord Jesus Christ did confirm the Covenant by his Death.

Only the Question is, how Christ did confirm the Covenant by his death?

The Socinians would make the World believe, that Christ did confirm the
Covenant by his death, in a way of Testimony and witnesse-bearing only; for
say they, Christ preached the Gospel while he lived, and when he dyed, he did
by his death seal it, and confirm the truth thereof: thus they say, that
Christ did confirm the Covenant by his death, only in a way of
witnesse-bearing, in a way of Testimony.

But surely this cannot be it, for if Christ did confirm the Covenant by his
death; he confirmed not the Covenant only by witnesse-bearing to the truth,
for so the Apostles might be said to confirm the Covenant, for in the 2 Heb.
3. How shall we escape, if we neglect so great Salvation, which at the first
began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard
him.

And if our Lord and Savior should only confirm the Covenant by his death,
in a way of witnesse-bearing, then the Martyrs that dyed for the Truth, should
confirm the Covenant by their Death too, for they by their death did seal to
the Truth, and did bear witness to the Truth, and so they should be said to
confirm the Covenant; but far be it from us to think any such thing.

But Jesus Christ did confirm the Covenant by his death thus, By performing
the condition of the Covenant, and by laying down his blood a price for the
mercies and blessings promised in the Covenant.

He did confirm the Covenant by his death, (I say) by performing the condition
of the Covenant. If a man be in captivity, and he that has him in captivity
promises, upon the payment of so much money that he shall be delivered, when
the money is paid down, the Condition is performed; Why, now Jesus when he
dyed, he gave himself a ransom for many, (...), yea, (...), and upon this
account, he is called a Mediator, 1 Timothy 2.5. There is one God, and one
Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a Ransom,
(...), a Ransom in the room, a Ransom for, or in the room of us.

As the first Adam should have confirmed the Covenant and did not, so the
second Adam did confirm the Covenant. -- How should the first Adam have
confirmed the Covenant? -- Why, the first Adam should have confirmed the
Covenant by performing the condition thereof. So now our Lord and Savior
Christ, being the second Adam, did confirm the Covenant, -- How? -- by
performing the condition of the Covenant: Thus he is the Mediator of the New
Covenant, upon the account of Confirmation.

3. He is the Mediator of the New Covenant upon the account of Suretyship, by
being bound unto God the Father that we shall perform to him, by being bound
to us that God the Father shall perform to us. In the 7th of the Hebrews, you
shall find he is called our Surety, verse. 22. By so much was Jesus made a
Surety of a better Testament: -- And why so? but to show, that where he is
Mediator, he is Surety. You know what a Surety is, he is bound for the Debtor
to perform. Says Judah unto his Father Jacob, Genesis 43.9. when he would have
Benjamin down with him to Egypt, I Will be surety for him, of my hand shall thou
require him; So Christ says unto the Father, I will be Surety for these men,
and of my hand shall thou require their performance; -- and says he to them
again, I will be Surety for God the Father, and of my hand shall you require
his mercies. So that thus now he is a Mediator of the New Covenant, upon an
account of Suretiship, upon a threefold account; -- upon the account of
Stipulation, -- upon the account of Confirmation, -- upon the account of
Suretiship.

5. But what are the benefits that we do gain or get by Jesus being the
Mediator of the New Covenant?

Much every way.

First of all, Is it not a great matter that God the Father should be
reconciled unto us? ^f God be reconciled, you are brought near unto him, into
oneness with him. Union is ^he ground of Communion, and Communion is ^he
ground of Communication; surely therefore it is no small matter. Now I say, if
Jesus be the Mediator of the New Covenant, God is reconciled to us.

2. If Jesus be the Mediator of the New Covenant, then you may go with
boldness, and look the Justice of God in the face; with boldness, for your
debt is satisfied: So long as a man is in debt, he steals by the Prison door in
the dark; but if his Surety have paid the debt, he dares come (as you say) and
whet his knife at the Counter door. Now Christ being your Mediator, the
Mediator of the New Covenant, he is your Surety, the debt is paid, and you may
go with boldness and look Justice in the face, and the Devil, and all those
Sergeants of Hell.

But thirdly, Is it not a great matter for Christ to be your King, Priest and
Prophet? consider it a little: If you observe it, you shall find that all the
blessings that came to the Jews or Israelites in the time of the Old Testament,
came through these three offices, King, Priest, Prophet; why, but as a Type, to
show that all our spiritual mercies must come through the hand of these three
offices in Christ: Now if Christ be the Mediator of the New Covenant, then he
is your King, your Priest, your Prophet; for all these three offices of Christ,
grow upon the Mediation of Christ.

For if he be your Mediator, then he will be a Prophet, a Prophet to declare
the mind, and the love of the Father to you.

If he be your Mediator, he will be your Priest, to satisfy the Fathers anger
for you.

If he be your Mediator, he will be a King to subdue all your Enemies, for he
is a Priest after the Order of Melchesedeck, King of Salem. Now is it not a
great matter to have Christ our King, our Priest, our Prophet? surely it is: But

4. Is it not a great matter, that all the blessings and mercies of the New
Covenant should belong unto you? Friends, have you duly considered what are the
blessings of the New Covenant? I Will tell you briefly;

They are all those spiritual blessings which you want, and complain for the
want of. There are seven or eight spiritual blessings that a poor drooping soul
does complain for the want of.

Oh says he, I am afraid I am not the Child of God, -- or I fear my sin is not
pardoned, -- and I do not find an inward constant frame of Soul to what is
good, -- And I am a poor ignorant creature, -- And I have a hard heart, -- And
I want the Spirit of the Lord within me, -- And I cannot walk with God as I
ought to do, -- And I fear I shall fall away, and go to Hell at last. Why now
in the Covenant of Grace there is supply promised against all ^hese fears.

Do thou say, I am afraid I am not the Child ^f God? Why, says the Lord here
in the Co^enant, I will be a God unto you, and you shall ^e my People; There is
Adoption for you, Heb.

Do you say, I am afraid my sin is not pardoned? then says the Lord in the
Covenant, Your sin and iniquity will I remember no more, Heb. 8.

Do you say, O but I don't find that constant frame of heart unto what is good?
why, says the Lord in the Covenant, I will write my Law in your heart.

Do you say, O but I am a poor ignorant creature? why, says the Lord in the
Covenant, You shall all know me from the greatest to the least, and you shall
be taught of God.

Do you say, O but my heart is hard? why says the Lord in the Covenant, I will
take away the heart of stone, and give an heart of flesh.

Do you say, O but I want the Spirit of God within me? why, says the Lord, I
will put my spirit within you.

Do you say, I cannot walk with God as I ought? why, says the Lord in the
Covenant, I will cause you to walk in my ways.

Do you say, I fear I shall fall away, and go to hell at last? why, says the
Lord in the Covenant, I will put my fear into your hearts, and you shall not
depart from me. -- These, even these besides Heaven, and besides the blessings
of this Earth, so all these blessings are promised in the Covenant of Grace;
and if Christ be the Mediator of the New Covenant, then do these blessing^
belong to you, for he is Surety, as well as Mediator. But

5. Is it not a great matter to have the Lord Jesus to interpose between God
the Father an^ you, to take up all differences as they may arise? why, if Jesus
be the Mediator of the Covenant, so it is, If any man sin, we have an Advocate
with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous, who is the propitiation for our
sins.

6. Is it not a great matter for you to enter into the Holy of Holiest, and to
have all your duties carried in to God the Father by the hand of Jesus? If he
be your Mediator, so it is, Rev. 8.

7. Is it not a great matter, in case that you have to deal with enemies,
either for Soul or Body, to have one by, that can and will interpose and rebuke
them? Why, if Jesus be the Mediator of the Covenant, thus shall it be. He
interposed between Laban and Jacob; when Laban followed Jacob, he rebuked
Laban. He interposed in the case of Joshua, when Satan stood at his right hand:
the Lord rebuke thee, as in the 3d Chapter of Zechary. The same word in the
Hebrew, that Job uses for Dayes-man, comes from a root that signifies to
rebuke.

8. And then to say no more in it but this, Is it not a great matter for one
that is in trouble, or affliction of spirit, to have Christ to interpose
between God the Father and him, when he lies under the sense of Gods wrath and
displeasure? Why, if Christ be the Mediator of the New Covenant, then thus it
is; Look into the 33. Chapter of Job, and see what a scheme and mold of
Conversion-work there is, verse. 14. God speaks once, yea twice, yet man
perceives it not: -- Here is man in his natural state and condition, going on
in the way of his sin, living under the means; and God speaking once and twice,
and he perceives it not. Well then at the 15th verse. In a dream, in a vision of
the night, when deep sleep falls upon men, in slumbrings upon the bed, then
he opens the ears of men, and seals their instruction. Here comes a work of
Conviction and Conversion, suddenly, unexpectedly, -- and what then? then
trouble of Conscience, at the 19th verse. He is chastened also with pain upon
his bed, and the multitude of his bones with strong pain, so that his life
abhors bread, and his soul dainty meat; his flesh is consumed away that it
cannot be seen, and his bones that were not seen stick out; his soul draws
nigh unto the Grave, and his life to the Destroyers: -- What then? why then at
the 23. verse. If there be a Messenger; Christ is the Messenger of the Covenant:
If there be a Messenger with him, an Interpreter, an Advocate; if there be a
Messenger with him, or an Advocate by him, one of a thousand, as Christ is, To
show unto man his Righteousness, where his Righteousness lies, -- What then?
why then he is gracious unto him, and says, Deliver him from going down to the
pit, I have found a Ransom. And then, his flesh shall be fresher then a
child's, he shall return to the days of his Youth, he shall pray unto God, and
he will be favorable unto him, and he shall see his face with joy, for he will
render unto man his Righteousness. Thus now shall it be, if Jesus be the
Mediator of the New Covenant. Oh what a confortable thing therefore is it, for
Jesus to be this Mediator of the Covenant! And thus you see in the 5th place
what those benefits are that we do gain thereby.

6. But then sixthly, what are those doctrinal Corrolaries, or practical
duties, that do flow from hence?

1. If Jesus be the Mediator of the New Covenant, what an evil thing is it, and
unreasonable, for men to think, or speak, or do any thing that may reflect upon
this Mediator of the New Covenant, or to sin against this New Covenant? There
are some Opinions that do reflect and cast a black reflection upon Jesus the
Mediator of the Covenant.

The Socinian tells us, that Jesus is a Mediator, such a one as Moses was, to
declare the mind of God unto us; but not a Mediator in way of satisfaction, to
satisfy Gods wrath.

They say he is a Mediator, but not a Surety, to merit for us, or to pay our
debt for us.

They say he is a Mediator, but deny the Deity of Christ, and so root up the
very mediation of Christ; they cast a very black reflection upon this Mediator.

The Papists they say, that Christ is a Mediator, and our only Mediator in a
way of Redemption, but we have many Mediators in a way of Intercession, Saints
and Angels.

They say that Christ is Mediator, but according to his humane nature only,
whereas the Apostle says expressly, that he offered up himself through the
Eternal Spirit: Thus they reflect upon this Mediator.

And for practice, Is it not a great reflection upon this Mediator for us to
think, that we our selves by our own Tears, and Fastings, and Humiliations, can
reconcile God unto us, or pacify Gods Anger, or make an Atonement for a
Nation.

Is it not a very great reflection upon this Mediator to say, O my sins are
greater then can be forgiven? Is not this a very blameable reflection upon this
Mediator of the New Covenant?

But there are four or five ways especially wherein we do sin against the
Covenant.

First, by not looking into it, not studying it, not being acquainted with it.
Shall the Lord Jesus be such a Mediator of such a Covenant, and shall we not
look into the Covenant, and be acquainted with it? Yet Lord, how many poor
souls are there that are ignorant of this Covenant? What unthankfulness is
this, what a sin against the Covenant is this, that Jesus should be the
Mediator of the Covenant, and men should not look into it, not study it, not be
acquainted with it?

2. Sometimes we sin against the Covenant, by altering the mold and the frame
of the Covenant, by hanging our conditions upon Gods Covenant, our pad-lock
upon Gods door.

3. Sometimes we sin against the Covenant, by slighting that Great Ordinance of
the Lords Supper, concerning which Christ has said, This Cup is the New
Testament in my blood: To slight it, saying, these are low things, we are above
Ordinances, and these are carnal things, now thus to slight it, is to sin
directly against the Covenant.

4. Sometimes we sin against the Covenant, by our unbelief and doubting. But

5. Sometimes we sin against the Covenant, by turning the Grace of this
Covenant into wantonness. Is this true? that the Lord has promised mercy upon
no condition to be performed by us, then why may we not live as we list, say
men? Thus turning this Grace of God in the Covenant into wantonness. But is
this true, that Jesus is the Mediator of the New Covenant? Why then should we
think, speak, or do any thing that may reflect against this Mediator, or sin
against this Covenant? That is the first thing.

2. If Jesus be the Mediator of the New Covenant, why then, why should you not
trust in the Lord for ever, build upon him, and be secure as to the mercies and
blessings promised in the Covenant? If you come to a Chamber to lodge in, and
you see that it is laid upon weak, or lathy props, that the foundation be not
sure, you say, I will not venture to lodge here; but if you come to a Chamber
that is laid upon a good foundation, you say then, I durst venture to lodge
here: Why this New Covenant is founded upon the blood of Christ, The blood of
Christ is the foundation of the New Covenant; And therefore why should you not
rest, and be secure, confident, as concerning the mercies and blessings
promised in the Covenant?

Object. O but you will say, I cannot be persuaded that Christ is my Mediator;
I know that Christ is a Mediator of the New Covenant, but I cannot think that
he does mediate for me. If indeed I were persuaded that Jesus were my Mediator,
or that he did mediate for me in particular, Ah then I should trust in the Lord
indeed for the blessings of the Covenant: But I cannot be persuaded that Christ
is my Mediator; I grant he is the Mediator of the New Covenant, but I cannot
say that he is my Mediator, or that he does mediate for me, and therefore I
cannot be satisfied.

Answ. No! What, the Father satisfied, who is the person offended, and you not
satisfied, who are the person offending!

No! Why if the Jew had sinned, and the High Priest had offered an Offering, or
a Sacrifice for him, the sinning Jew would not say, this was not for me, and
therefore I am not satisfied, for the sacrifice was not for me; He would not
say so, but he would say that he was satisfied: And shall Jesus be our great
High Priest, and shall He make an offering of himself for us, and will you
say, it is not for me?

But to come a little nearer to your Objection, that I may bring this great
doctrine home unto our hearts.

The Apostle has said, If any man sin we have an Advocate with the Father,
Jesus Christ the Righteous; what think you, are you not within the compass of
those words, if any man sin, will not those words reach you?

But if God be reconciled unto you, then Christ has mediated for you; now God
the Father is reconciled to you, for if you be reconciled to God, and the
things of God, then God is reconciled to you. Pray tell me, were you not an
Enemy once to the good ways of God, and the things of God? Yes; -- And are you
not reconciled now to the things of God? -- Yes, I confess I am: Well, if you
be reconciled to the things of God, God is reconciled to you; and if God be
reconciled to you, I am sure Christ has mediated for you. Luther was wont to
say, The only way to make God our Friend, is to cast our selves into his arms
when he seems to be our Enemy. Thus have you done, (poor soul?) when God has
seemed to be your Enemy, then have you cast your selves into the arms of God?
surely then God is reconciled unto you, and Christ is your Mediator.

Again, If you be the Seed of Christ, then Christ is your Mediator, and Christ
has, and does mediate for you; for he is a Mediator for his Seed. Now mark it,
there are but two Seeds, the Seed of the Woman, and the Seed of the Serpent; I
will put Enmity between thy Seed and the Seed of the Woman. There are but two
Seeds: how think you, are you the Seed of the Serpent? Either you are Christ's
Seed, or the Seed of the Serpent, and that is an hissing Seed, an opposing Seed:
Do you think you are the Seed of the Serpent? No, I hope I am not the Seed of
the Serpent; why, then you are the Seed of Christ, and Christ does mediate for
you: Now then humble your selves for all your unbelief, and lay the weight of
your guilty Soul upon this sweet Covenant of Grace, for Jesus is the Mediator
of it.

3. Lastly, This Doctrine methinks looks very wishly upon all sorts; -- It
looks wishly upon those that are good, and upon those that are bad; It looks
wishly upon those that are Godly, and upon those that are Ungodly; upon those
that are Converted, and upon those that are not Converted.

Upon those that are Bad, Wicked, Ungodly, Unconverted, and to them it says,
why should not you, even you come unto God for the Grace of this New Covenant,
which is confirmed by Christ the Mediator? Why should not you, you that are
unconverted, go unto God the Father, and press him to give out the Grace of
this Covenant to you? Has not the Lord said, Let not the Eunuch say, I am a
dry tree; only let him take hold of my Covenant. Neither let the Son of the
Stranger, that has joined himself to the Lord, speak, saying, The Lord has
utterly separated me from his people; Only let him take hold of my Covenant,
and do the things that please me.

This New Covenant confirmed by Christ Jesus the Mediator, either it is
confirmed for Saints only, or for Sinners also, that are Sinners for the
present.

If for Saints only, why does the Lord say, I will write my Law in your
hearts? Surely therefore it is for some, in whose heart Gods Law is not yet
written. And if this Covenant does extend to such, who as yet have not the Law
written, the Law of Grace written in their hearts, Oh what encouragement is
here for a poor sinner to go to God, and say, Lord thou have made this
Covenant, and Christ has confirmed it, and he is the Mediator of it; now this
Law is not yet written in my heart; O make good thy Covenant, and write thy Law
in my heart.

And for you that are Saints, this Doctrine looks upon you, and it says thus;
If Christ be the Mediator of the New Covenant, and your Mediator, that God has
provided for you, then go away, and be ashamed of your sins, and of all your
doings, the pardon whereof requires such a Mediator, and the blood of the
Mediator; Then shall ye be ashamed, says the Lord, When I am pacified toward
you: If Christ be your Mediator, and God be pacified, Oh then be you ashamed.

2. And to you it speaks thus. If the Lord Jesus Christ be the Mediator of this
New Covenant, your Mediator, and mediates for you, then why should not you
appear for Christ on Earth upon all occasions? Shall Christ interpose with the
Father, and appear for you, and mediate for you in Heaven upon all occasions,
and will not you appear for Christ on Earth? What, Christ appear for you in
Heaven, and mediate for you in Heaven, and will not you appear for Christ on
Earth? Yea, unto you it says, Why should not you all go away with your hearts
full of Love and Thankfulness, both to God the Father, and to Jesus Christ? If
you were going to the Prison for a Debt, and a man should meet you, and
undertake to be your Surety, and pay your Debt, you would love him as long as
you lived: Here is the case, we were all going to Prison, Christ comes,
undertakes to be our Surety, pays our Debt; then will you not love Christ the
Mediator of the New Covenant? Will you not love him, and be thankful to him,
and to God the Father? For though the performance of this Mediation be Christ's,
the Contrivance is God the Fathers. God the Father did contrive this Covenant,
and God the Father did send Christ this Mediator; [I] have given thee for a
Covenant, says the Father; and says Christ, Lo, I come to do Thy Will.
Friends, it was the will of God the Father, that Jesus should be the Mediator
of this New Covenant. Oh the freeness of the Grace of God the Father! He was
the person offended; and yet, that He himself should find out such a Mediator,
of such a Covenant, what Grace is here! Now therefore blessed be God the Father
for this Mediator, let us all say; and blessed be this Mediator JESUS, who has
mediated us into this New Covenant.

Go away (I say) you that are Saints with your hearts full of Love, both unto
God the Father, who has contrived this Mediation, and unto JESUS, who has
performed this Mediation; And now let your hearts be confirmed, -- let your
Hope be confirmed, -- let your Love be confirmed, -- let your Joy be confirmed,
-- let your Thankfulness be confirmed, -- let your Graces be confirmed. A
confirmed Covenant, calls for confirmed Christians.

I have done, I cannot say whom we should love most, and be thankful most unto,
the Father or the Son; but this I say, love the Father with all your heart, and
be thankful to him, in reference to his Contrivance; -- love the Son with all
your heart, and be thankful to him in reference to his Performance, for JESUS
is the Mediator of the New Covenant.

And thus I have done with the second Doctrine, namely, that Jesus is the
Mediator of the New Covenant: The third follows, and that is, That now in these
Gospel times, we are not come to Moses the Mediator of the Old, but unto Jesus
the Mediator of the New Testament.

The Way and Spirit of the New Covenant, or New Testament. SERMON. V.
Hebr. 12.24. And to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, etc.


Doctr. 3. THe Third Observation follows, which is this:

That in these Gospel Times, we are not come to Moses, the Mediator of the Old;
but unto Jesus, the Mediator of the New Covenant, or the New Testament.

The latter part of the Doctrine you have in the words of the Text, and the
former part in the Con^ext; for, says the Apostle, Ye are not come unto the
Mount that might be touched, to Mount Sinai: But ye ^re come unto Mount Sion,
and ye are come unto Jesus ^he Mediator of the New Covenant. So that now in
^hese Gospel Times, we are not come to Moses, the ^ediator of the Old Covenant;
but to Jesus, the ^ediator of the New Testament.

For the opening and prosecuting whereof,

First, We must inquire, What is here meant by ^oming unto Jesus the Mediator
of the New Covenant, in opposition to Moses, the Mediator of the Old Covenant.

Secondly, Whether it be possible for a man tha^ does profess Christ, the
Mediator of the New Covenant, to have recourse unto Moses, the Mediator of the
Old Covenant, or the Old Testament? That is, Whether a Man may possibly be
Legal and Mosaical, in these Gospel Times?

Thirdly, When so.

Fourthly, The Danger of it; and,

Fifthly, What we should do that we may stand clea^ from Moses, the Mediator of
the Old Covenant; an^ come fully off unto Jesus, the Mediator of the New. That
we may walk wi^h a Gospel, not a Legal Spirit; and be found in a Gospel, not a
Legal Way, in these Gospel Times.

First of all, If you ask, What is here meant by coming unto Jesus, the
Mediator of the New Covenant, in opposition to Moses?

I answer in the general, It does signify and note out, that Evangelical and
Gospel-state that we are now brought unto, by Jesus, the Mediator of the New
Testament; in opposition to the Legal state tha^ they were in, in the days and
times of the Old Testament: -- But because this is general and common unto that
which goes before, therefore you must kno^ more particularly;

That a Man is said to come unto Jesus, the Mediator of the New Testament, in
opposition to Moses when now in these Gospel Times, upon all occasion^ he has
recourse unto Jesus, as, in the times of the Old Testament, upon all occasions,
they had recour^ unto Moses: As now for Example.

In the times of the Old Testament, they came (...) Moses for the Law (under
God,) and they receiv^ the Law from his mouth: What says Moses? was the saying
then. So now in these times of the Gospel, we are to have recourse unto Jesus,
and to receive the Law at his mouth, What says Jesus? And therefore says our
Savior, It has been said unto you, Thou shall not kill; and, Thou shall not
commit Adultery: But I say unto you, and I say unto you -- Why? -- What,
because (as the Socinians would) Christ made any addition to the Law? No: but
because now (as for other Reasons) we are to receive the Law from his mouth,
from the mouth of Jesus.

And, as in the times of the Old Testament, they had recourse to Moses for
their Church, and their Church State: He it was that did give the Tabernacle
(under God) and the way of the Tabernacle: So now in the times of the New
Testament, we are to have recourse to Jesus, What says Jesus to a Church Way;
Not, What says Moses, now: And therefore, says Christ, If thy Brother offend
thee, tell him of it; and if he hear not, call two or three; and if he mind
not, then tell it to the Church; and if he hear not the Church, let him be as a
Heathen or Publican to you; for when two or three are gathered together in my
Name, I am in the midst of them, Matthew. 18. We are to hear what Jesus says in
this matter, and not what Moses.

And, as then, in the times of the Old Testament, they had recourse to Moses
(under God) for their Ministry; and Moses did direct them unto Priests and
Levites for their Ministers: So now in the times of the New Testament, we are
to have recourse to Jesus for our Ministry; and therefore says the Apostle, He
has set in the Church Pastors and Teachers: And in Ephesians. 4. He has ascended
up on high, and he has given gifts unto Men, Pastors and Teachers, and the
like. We are to hear what Jesus says now, and not what Moses, for our Ministry.

And as in the times of the Old Testament, they had then recourse unto Moses
for the Ordinances, for their Sabbaths, for their Sacraments, and for their
Worship: So now in the times of the New Testament, we are to hear what Jesus
says, and to have recourse to him for these things. -- Go, says our Savior
Christ, and teach all Nations, baptizing them, and teaching them to observe and
do what I command you, Matthew. 28. -- And for the Lords Supper, What I received
of the Lord, that delivered we unto you, says the Apostle. -- And for the
Sabbath, The Son of Man is Lord of the Sabbath. Go to him for your Sabbath; not
to Moses, but unto him. -- And for Worship, says our Savior Christ unto the
Woman of Samaria, John 4.23. The hour comes, and now is, when the true
Worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit and truth; for the Father
seeks such to worship him. You that are Samaritans, you have worshipped God;
but you have not worshipped God according to his own appointment, you have not
worshipped him in Truth. The Jews, they have worshipped God according to Gods
appointment, but not with the Spirit: But now, the hour comes, when men shall
worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth. In Truth, in opposition to
Samaritans, that did not worship according to appointment. -- And in Spirit, in
opposition to the Jews, that worshipped God Legally, and without the Spirit. Thus
we must hear what Jesus says.

And as then in the times of the Old Testament, they had recourse to Moses
still; when they wanted Bread, he (under God) gave them Manna, and he gave them
water out of the Rock: So now, in the times of the New Testament, we are to
have recourse to Jesus for our Bread. In John 6. says Christ, Labor not for
the meat which perishes, but for the mea^ that indureth to everlasting life,
which the Son of man shall give unto you, for him has God the Father sealed.

And as in the times of the Old Testament, they had much recourse to Moses for
their Faith: If they could not believe, Moses wrought miracles before them, and
they believed. Insomuch as its said in the 14. of Exodus last, And Israel saw
that great work which the Lord did upon the Egyptians, and the people feared
the Lord, and believed the Lord, and his Servant Moses. But now what says
Jesus, Let not your heart be troubled, ye believe in God, believe also in me.
Not in God, and in Moses; but, ye believe in God, believe also in me.

And to say no more in it, but this: In the times of the Old Testament, they
had recourse to Moses for their Rest. M^ses was to lead them up to Canaan, and
the Land of Rest: And so now in the times of the New Testament, we are to have
recourse to Jesus for our Rest; for says he himself: Come unto me all ye that
are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest.

Thus, as in the times of the Old Testament, they were upon all occasions to
have recourse to Moses: So now in the times of the New Testament, upon all
occasions, we are to have recourse to Jesus, the Mediator of the New Testament;
for says the Lord by Moses, in the 18. of Deuteronomy. 18. v. I will raise them up a
Prophet from among their Brethren, like unto thee, (rather, as thee) that is,
as I raised up thee; and will put my words in his mouth, and he shall speak
unto them all that I shall command him. Which the Apostle applies unto Christ,
Acts 3.22. For Moses truly said unto the Fathers, a Prophet shall the Lord your
God raise up unto you of your Brethren, like unto me (rather, as me, (...) as
me) that is, as he raised up me, not like unto me, as the Socinians would argue
from hence; That Chri^ must be but Man like to Moses: For Moses truly sai^ unto
the Fathers, a Prophet shall the Lord your Go^ raise up unto you of your
Brethren, like unto me, rather as me: That is, as he raised up me; Him shall ye
hear in all things, whatsoever he shall say un^ you. So that thus, As they had
recourse to Mose^ upon all occasions, in the time of the Old Testament* so now
we are to have recourse unto Jesus: And thu^ we see what it is to come unto
Jesus the Mediator o^ the New Covenant, in opposition unto Moses the Mediator
of the Old Covenant.

2. But then secondly, Whether is it possible for a man that does profess to
come unto Jesus the Mediaator of the New Covenant, still to have recourse to
Moses; that is, Whether is it possible for a man to be Legal and Mosaical, in
these Gospel times?

Without all doubt it is: and I wish (if it were the will of the Lord) that too
many were not found upon Legal ground among Pr^f^ssors. What think you of the
Galatians? Did not they live in Gospel Times? Did not they profess to come unto
Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant? Yet, see how the Apostle treats them,
and reproves them again and again, for their being too Legal, too Mosaical: Ye
are fallen from Grace, says he: My little children of whom I trav^^ in birth
again, till Christ be formed in you. Ye are so much for Moses, and the Law,
that I travel in birth again, till Christ be formed in you.

As there was a mixture of the Gospel in the time of the Law; so there may be
too great a mixture of the Law in the times of the Gospel.

And I pray what think you, Are there not very many that live under the Gospel,
in whom sin reigns? Yes, many live under the Gospel in whom sin reigns: And
says the Apostle, Let not sin reign in your mortal bodies, for ye are not
under the Law, but under Grace. If you be under the Law, then sin will reign in
you: And what is the reason that sin reigns in many that live under the Gospel,
but because they are under the Law. As there were two in A^rahams house, the
Bondwoman, and the Freewoman, Hagar and Sarah. So in these Gospel Times,
there will be some that shall be freely for the Grace of God, and the Covenant
of Grace; some again, that will turn in to the Covenant of works, and be Legal
and Mosaical.

And, If that we be Legal and Mosaical in these Gospel times, we shall be more
L^gal, and more Mosaical than before. As when a Servant was bound, and the year
of freedom came, and he might go free, and would not, then his ear was bored,
and he was to be a servant for ever: So now; for what is our Gospel time, but a
time of Spiritual freedom: And if men will be servants still, and under the Law
still, their ears are bored, and they are more Mosaical and more Legal than
before.

But friends, This ought not to be: for you know what the Lord says from
Heaven concerning Christ, Hear ye him. Once, in the 3d. of Matthew. ye have those
words from Heaven over Christ, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well
pleased. And a second time ye have those words at the Transfiguration, in the
17 of Matthew. 5. This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him.
-- Why are those words (hear ye him) added here? In the 3d. of Matthew. these
words are not added, but only thus; This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased. There it is not said, hear ye him, but in the 17 of Matthew. it is said,
This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him. -- Why is hear
ye him added here? -- Why, if you look into the former verse, ye find, Peter
answered and said unto Jesus, Lord, it is good for us to be here; if thou will,
let us make here three Tabernacles, one for Thee, and one for Moses, and one
for Elias. Moses gave out the Law, -- and Elias restored the Law: now they
being present; now comes the voice, hear ye him: That is, not Moses, not Elias,
but now hear ye him, in opposition to Moses, in opposition unto Elias, hear ye
him.

And if you look into the 7th. of the Romans you shall find that now in these
Gospel times, we are to be dead unto the Law; which the Apostle clears by a
very great similitude: Says he, Know ye not Brethren, how that the Law has
dominion over a man as long as he lives: For the woman which has an husband,
is bound by the Law to her Husband, so long as he lives; but if the Husband be
dead, she is loosed from the law of her Husband: So then, if while her husband
lives, she be married to another man, she shall be called an Adulteress; but
if her husband be dead, she is free from that Law; so that she is no
Adulteress, though she be married to another man: Wherefore, my Brethren, ye
also are become dead to the Luw, by the body of Christ, that ye should be
married to another, even to him who is raised from the dead, that we should
bring forth fruit unto God.

Ye are married to another, therefore ye are dead to the Law -- dead, how dead?
-- why, ye are freed from the Law; he expresses it so elsewhere, freed from the
Law -- How so? What are we freed from the Commandment of the Law? From the
precept of the Law? -- No, says the Apostle: The Commandment is h^ly, and
just, and good -- How then are we freed from the Law?

Why, you are free from the Vail of the Law, 2 Cor. 3. And you are free from
the Dominion of the Law: Ye are not under the Law, but under Grace, Romans 6.

And ye are free from the Pedagogy of the Law, the Law is not your
Schoolmaster to bring to Christ, Gal. 3.

And ye are free from the Covenant of the Law, as a Covenant. And thus are ye
in these Gospel times, dead to the Law, and free: But now though we are thus
dead, and be thus free, yet possibly a man may be too Legal in these Gospel
times, That Is the Second.

3. But then thirdly, When may a man be said to be Legal, or Mosaical, in
opposition to this Mediator, Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant? And when
may a man be said to be Evangelical in opposition to Moses, the Mediator of the
Old Covenant? Or, in short, What is the Way and Spirit of the Old, and of the
New Testament, and wherein do they differ?

First of all, An Old Testament legal Spirit, is a servile spirit, that serves
God upon the account of wages, or reward; mostly, chiefly, or only. An
Evangelical Gospel spirit, is a Filial spirit. Moses therefore the Head of that
Covenant, is called a Servant; and Jesus the Head of this Covenant, is called a
Son: Moses as a Servant, Christ as a Son, Heb. 3. And if you look into Romans 8.
you shall find its said there by way of difference: For ye have not received
the Spirit of Bondage again unto fear: So you read it, but the words are (...),
ye have not received the spirit of Servitude again, or a servile Spirit, or the
spirit of Servants: But ye have received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we
cry, Abba Father. -- Compare this with Gal. 4. and you shall see the opposition
does not lie between the Spirit of Adoption, and Bondage, but Servitude, v. 6.
Because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your
hearts, crying A^ba F^ther; wherefore thou art no more a Servant, but a Son. In
the 1. verse, Now I say, that the heir, as long as he is a Child, differs
nothing from a Servant, though he be Lord of all; but is under Tutors and
Governors, until the time appointed of the Father. But when the fullness of the
time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a Women, made under the Law, to
redeem them that were under the Law, that we might receive the Adoption of
Sons: And because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into
your hear^s, crying, Abba Father; wherefore thou art n^ m^re a Serve nt. So that
it is a servile spirit, and the spirit of a servant, that is here opposed to
this Adoption: And would you know the difference between the spirit of a
Servant, and the spirit of a Son?

Why, a Servant serves for wages, and a Son serves out of love and duty: And
are there not many in these times of the Gospel, that do serve God only, or
m^stly, upon the account of wages and reward. Ye know what men ordinarily say,
What need ye be so strict in your life, you may go to Heaven with less ado. So
then it seems, it is Heaven that is their measure of obedience -- Why -- because
men are legal, and serve God upon the account of wages: It Is Heaven, and
Reward, and Wages, that is the business. Why, because men are legal.

I grant, It is lawful to have an eye to the recompense of Reward, Christ
himself had. All love of reward is not Mercenary: But for a man to serve God,
mostly, chiefly, only, upon the account of wages, and for reward, this is
plainly Legal. A man of a Gospel spirit, knows that he lives upon a better
Purse, than all his own earnings can amount unto. But,

2. A legal Spirit, also is a fearing Spirit, put on rather by the Threatening,
than by the Promise; a Gospel spirit rather by the promise than the threatening.
In the times of the Old Testament, the Threatening reigned: And, if you look
into Deuteronomy, you shall find that when Moses the Mediator of the Old
Covenant, preached and declared the mind of God unto the people, he begins with
Curses, and Threatenings, Deuteronomy. 27. They were upon two Hills. and v. 14. The
Levites shall speak, and say unto all the men of Israel, with a loud voice;
Cursed be the man that makes any Graven or Molten Image, an abomination unto
the Lord. Cursed be he that sets ^eight by his Father, or his Mother: And,
Cursed be he that removes his Neighbors Landmark, and so he goes on with
Curses. In the 28. Chap. then comes the blessings: It shall come to pass if
thou shall hearken diligently unto the voice ^f the Lord thy God, to observe
and do to all his Commandments, which I command thee this day; That the Lord
thy God will set thee on High, above all Nations of the Earth; and all these
blessings shall come on thee, and overtake thee. Blessed shall thou be in the
City, and blessed shall thou be in the Field; blessed shall be the fruit of thy
body, and the fruit of thy ground, and the fruit of thy Cattle, the increase of
thy Kine, and the flocks of thy Sheep. Mark how the Blessing comes after. First
comes the Curse, when Moses the Mediator of the Old Covenant preached. -- But
now look into the 5th. of Matthew. and ye find that when Jesus the Mediator of
the New Covenant comes to preach, that he begins with Blessing. Blessed are the
poor in spirit, and bl^ssed are the meek, and blessed are those that hunger and
thirst after Righteousness, and blessed, and blessed. First comes the blessing,
and then afterward in the following part of the Chapter comes the Law, and the
curse. And if you look into this Scripture, you find the difference also: for
says the Apostle here, We are not come unto the Mount that might be touched,
that burned with fire, nor unto blackness, and darkness, and tempest, and the
sound of a Trumpet, and the voice of words which they could not endure, so
terrible was the sight thereof: But ye are come to mount Sion. Would you know
the difference between the dispensations? the one is terrible, the other
comfortable. -- The one is fearing, and the other comforting: Look in the 10th.
of Romans The Apostle there also makes the difference between the Spirit of the
Law and the Gospel. Moses (says he, v. 5.) describes the Righteousness which
is of the Law, that the man which does those things, shall live by them. Do,
and live: but at the 6. verse, The Righteousness which is of Faith, speaks on
this wise, Say not in thine heart, who shall ascend into Heaven; that is, to
bring Christ down from above, or who shall descend into the deep. But what
says it, The Word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart. The
Righteousness which is of Faith speaks on this wise; say not in thine heart
who shall ascend into Heaven: It don't hold the soul in suspense and anxiety,
and fear, and trouble. Christ has ascended, and Christ has descended.

Quest. But you will say, May not a man that is of a Gospel spirit, and that is
come to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, be full of fears? May not a
good and gracious soul be full of fears about his condition?

Answ. I answer, He may; but his fears do arise from the weakness of his
Adherence and Faith. The other's fears do rather arise from the weakness of the
ground he stands upon. As for example: Two men are afraid of drowning; one
stands upon a Rock, and he is afraid of being drowned; the other stands upon a
Quick-sand, and he is afraid of being drowned; both are afraid: He that stands
upon a Rock, is afraid of drowning, why, because he is afraid he shall be
washed off: His fear arises from the weakness of his Adherence: But the other's
fear arises from the unsoundness of the ground he stands upon, for it is upon a
Quick-sand. So here, are two fears: a gracious Gospel-heart fears, and a
Legalist fears. One fears from the weakness of his Adherence; I am upon the
Rock, but I am afraid I shall be washed off: But the other's fears arise from
the weakness of the ground he stands upon; he stands upon the Quick-sand, upon
his own duties, and his own works; so that a legal Spirit is a fearing Spirit:
He is put on rather by the Threatenings, than the Promise: The other by the
Promise, rather than the Threatening. The one is kept from evil by his delight
in good, and the other is put on to good by his fear of evil: That Is the second.

3. In the times of the Old Testament, they did very much measure the love of
God by outward things: For the Promises (as you know) then were mostly
concerning Temporal things; and so they measured the love of God much by those
outward things. But now in the times of the New Testament, our Promises are
mostly spiritual, and therefore a New Testament spirit, measures the love of
God most by Spiritual things, and not by these outward things.

4. A legal Old Testament spirit, trades much, or most, or altogether, with
conditional Promises; for the Old Covenant Promises were most conditional, and
ran conditionally: But now when God promises the New Covenant, he gives out an
absolute Promise; and therefore a New Testament spirit trades much with
absolute promises. For he knows (and you may know) that though a promise be
conditional, the Lord has promised the very condition in another Scripture,
and that without a condition. And he knows (and you may know) that when God
gives a promise with an Oath, though the promise do run conditionally, it shall
be fulfilled absolutely.

5. In the time of the Old Testament, they came unto Christ by the promise, for
Christ was not yet come, but promised: But now in the times of the New
Testament, we come first to Christ, and so unto the Promise; for all the
Promises are Yea, and Amen in Christ.

6. In the time of the Old Testament, they came unto Christ by the Law, and,
without the Law they might not come to Christ: For the Law was a Schoolmaster
for to bring to Christ. But now in the time of the New Testament, The Law is
not our Schoolmaster for to bring to Christ. And though seldom any go to
Heaven, but come by the gates of Hell; And seldom men do come to Christ now,
but they have some workings of the Law first: Yet notwithstanding, if I will
lay a necessity upon such a precedence of a legal work, before I do come to
Christ, then I am too legal.

7. In the times of the Old Testament, men did then upon any great discovery of
God, fly from God; as when God gave out the Law, they fled from God: And when
Christ did a great work before Peter, Lord (says he) depart from me, for I am
a sinful man: But now in the Gospel, the greater the discovery is, the more a
Gospel Spirit does draw near to God: Oh, it is good for me to be here! says he.

8. The time of the Old Testament, was a time of the Letter: And therefore if a
man of a legal spirit, can but perform his duty according to the Letter of the
Commandment, he is satisfied. But the times of the New Testament, are the times
of the Spirit: We are not Ministers of the Letter, but of the Spirit: And
therefore a Gospel spirit, though he can perform his duty according to the
Letter of the Command; yet if he don't attain the spirit in it, he is
unsatisfied.

9. To say no more in it but this: In the times of the Old Testament God spoke
by Visions, and Dreams, and Signs: But now in these latter days, he has spoken
by his Son; and we have a more sure word of Prophecy, whereunto we do well
that we take heed. So that thus you see that there is a difference, and what
the difference is between the way of the Old, and New Testament, between an Old
Testament, and a New Testament spirit.

F^urthly, But then 4ly. Suppose now that I have recourse too much to M^ses in
these Gospel times, and not enough unto Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant;
Suppose I be legal in these Gospel times, is there any great danger in it?

Much, very much: And I pray consider it, that we may be all found upon Gospel
ground, in this Gospel day. Danger, I say, much. For,

I. The more legal you are in Gospel times, the more sinful you will be, and
the less able for to live unto God.

1. The more sinful you will be: For says the Apostle, Let not sin reign in
your mortal body, for ye are not under the Law, but under Grace.

And the less able you will be to live unto God: For says the Apostle, Gal.
2.19. I through the Law, am dead to the Law, that I might live unto God. Till
ye be dead unto the Law, you will never live unto God; and in the Romans 7. Ye
are become dead to the Law, by the body of Christ, that ye should be married to
another, even to him, who is raised from the dead, that we should bring forth
fruit untr God. Dead unto the Law, That ye may bring forth fruit unto God:
Never think of bringing forth fruit unto God, while you are upon a legal
ground, and come not off fully to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant. --
It Is observed, that the Law was given out twice in Tables of Stone. And the
first time that they were given out, God did cut out the Tables of Stone, and
he himself did write the Law with his own Finger in those Tables. The second
time Moses cut out the Tables of Stone, and Moses wrote the words of the
Commandment upon those Tables. In the 34. of Exodus Hew thee two Tables of
Stone, like unto the first, says God: Well, so he did: at the 28. v. And he
wrote upon the Tables, the words of the Covenant, the Ten Commandments. The
first Tables were of Gods own making, and the writing was of Gods own Finger:
The second Tables were of Moses framing, and Moses writing, and yet the first
were broken, the second kept. -- What should be the Reason? One would think
that the first Tables should have been kept as a holy thing, rather then the
second; but the first were broken, and the second kept -- why -- For a good
reason, says Austine, because when the Commandment was given in the first
Tables, then God appeared in a dreadful way, with Thundering and Lightning: When
God gave out the Commandments again; the Lord appeared in a way of Grace: The
Lord proclaimed unto Moses, Exodus 34. The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and
gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for
thousands. Thus God proclaims himself as a gracious and merciful God, and when
the Law comes out now, it is kept. No such way to keep the Commandments of the
Law, as from the consideration of the free grace and mercy of God. When the Law
comes out with a Gospel hand, I then it is kept, and the Commandment not broken.
So that I say, the more Legal you are, the more sinful you will be, and the
less able you will be for to live unto God.

2. The more Legal you are, the more opposite you are to your own assurance; to
a full settled assurance of your interest in God and Christ: We have not
received the Spirit of bondage (you read it,) again to fear; but the Spirit of
Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father. Assurance is a work of the Comforter;
but the Spirit of servitude, it is opposite to the Spirit of Adoption, whereby
we cry, Abba, Father; it is a great Enemy unto true assurance. Now is it not a
miserable thing for a man or woman to be always fluctuating, and never to have
assurance settled: The more Legal you are, the more opposite to your own
assurance: But,

3. Though you do serve and worship the true God, yet if you worship him in a
Legal way, your worship will be Antichristian -- For what is Antichrist, and who
is Antichrist? -- The Apostle John tells you in the 1 Epist. 4.3. Every Spirit
that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God; and
this is that Spirit of Antichrist, whereof you have heard that it should come.

But shall Antichrist deny Christ to be come in the flesh in so many terms? No,

He shall not deny the Incarnation of Christ; for, he shall sit in the Temple
of God.

How then shall Antichrist deny Christ to be come ^n the flesh?

He shall set up such a Worship as was before Christ came in the flesh.

As in the time of the Old Testament before Christ came in the flesh, there was
an outward, glorious, and a pompous Worship; so shall Antichrist have.

As in the time of the Old Testament before Christ came in the flesh, there was
a Temple, and a great Cathedral; so shall Antichrist have.

As in the time of the Old Testament before Christ came in the flesh, there was
a High Priest, and Priests, and Levites; so shall Antichrist have.

As in the time of the Old Testament before Christ came in the flesh, there
were Copes, and Ephods, and Linen Coats; so shall Antichrist have.

As in the time of the Old Testament before Christ came in the flesh, there
were Candles, and Tapers, and Music in the Temple; so shall Antichr^st have.

As in the times of the Old Testament befo e Christ came in the flesh, there
were Altars; so shall Antichrist have.

And as in the time of the Old Testament before Christ came in the flesh, here
were Sacrifices; so shall Antichrist have his unbloody Sacrifices.

As then, they turned into a Covenant of Works, so shall Antichrist also do.
Thus, the more Legal, and of an Old Testament stamp, your Worship is, the more
Antichristian it is. Now is it not a dangerous thing to have our Worship
Antich^istian Worship in these Gospel-dayes?

4. But again, The Apostle Paul tells us, That the Inheritance is not to the
Bondwoman: there were two Women in A^rahams house, Hagar the Bondwoman, and
Sarah the Freewoman; and these were Types of the Law and the Gospel, says the
Apostle* The Inheritance is not to the Bondwoman, cast he out; but the
Inheritance is to the Freewoman, an^ to her Children: So then, the Inheritance
is not (...) the Legalist; no, the Inheritance is to the Freewoman.

5. Yea Friends, what is this, but a plain Apostasy, or that which tends to
Apostasy; now after we profess we are come to Jesus, the Mediator of the New
Covenant; to have recourse to Moses, the Mediator of the Old Covenant? All
flesh is grass, and withers; but the Word of the Lord endures for ever -- and
with that -- The Gospel that I preached unto you, that will hold (says he.)
Whose house ye are, says the Apostle, if ye hold fast the confidence of your
rejoicing stedf^st unto the end. -- Where lies our confidence but in Jesus, the
Mediator of the New Covenant? yea, says the Apostle to the Legal Galatians, Ye
are fallen from grace; because they we^e returned to Moses, and had recourse to
Moses. O what a dangerous thing then is it for a man to be Legal in these
Gospel Times?

Object. But yet, May not possibly a godly, truly gracious Soul, be too Legal,
even in these Gospel Times?

Answ. Possibly he may; for as there is no Duty which a good man does perform,
but a wicked man may perform the same for one Act; so there is no sin that a
wicked man does commit, but a godly man may commit the same for one Act; and
therefore this of Legality he may fall into as well as others.

Yet let me tell you this, Though a good and gracious Soul may be overgrown
with Legality too much, yet he is very sensible of his own Legality; a mere
Legalist is not, he thinks it strange that we speak of a Legal Spirit in a
Gospel-time.

And though a good man may be too much overgrown, be too Legal, and too
Mosaical; yet notwithstanding he does not, he cannot, wish that there were no
Law, because the Law is written in his heart; another that is under the power
of the Law, could wish with all his Soul, that there were no Law, because he is
under the power of it.

Again, Though a good man may be too much overgrown with Legality, yet he does
most savor the things of the Gospel, spiritual things: For every man is
according to what he savours. Three men come to a Sermon -- One's an
Affectionate man -- Another an Expressionate man, a man of parts -- Another a
Spiritual man; and the Preacher has (it may be) all three. He has Affection,
he has Expression, he has Spiritual matter: The Affectionate man is most
taken with the Affectionate part: The Expressionist, and the man of parts, is
most taken with the Expressions of the Sermon; and there he hangs, such and
such rare Expressions there were -- But the Spiritual man is most taken with
the Spiritual matter of the Sermon; for every man is according to the things
that he savours. Now, I say, a good man, though he may be overgrown with
Legality, yet he savours spiritual and Gospel-things most.

And then again, Though a good man may be too Legal, yet notwithstanding, he
don't, he cannot, oppose those that are Spiritual, and Evangelical, and of a
Gospel Spirit. Though a spark of fire be not so great as the flame, it will not
oppose the flame; and though a good man be too Legal, he will not oppose and
persecute them that are Evangelical, a Legalist will; says the Apostle, But
the Son of the Bondwoman, persecuted the S^n of the Freewoman. And truly, the
more Legal we are, the more we are apt for to persecute. So that thus then we
see what a dangerous thing it is to be Legal and Mosaical in these Gospel times.

But Fifthly, What shall we then do, that we may stand clear from Moses, and
come off clearly unto Jesus, the Mediator of the New Covenant?

This I must speak unto: only by the way, give me leave to say three or four
things unto you.

First, If we are not come to Moses, the Mediator of the Old Covenant, but unto
Jesus, the Mediator of the New; What a blessed, and happy condition are all the
Saints in now in these Gospel Times? It was a comfortable thing for the Jews to
have Moses with them, that Mediator, that upon all occasions he might interpose
between God and them. But alas, what was that Moses, to this Jesus, this
Mediator of ours. Though Moses was the Mediator of the Old Testament, and did
stand between God and the People: Yet

1. He was but a Typical Mediator; and therefore look how much the thing
Typified goes beyond the type, the substance goes beyond the shadow: so much
does our Mediator go beyond theirs.

2. Again, Though Moses was a Mediator between God and them, yet he was but
mere man; but J sus the Mediator of the New Covenant, is God and man; very God,
and very man. In Romans 9.5. Whose are the Fathers, and of whom, as concerning
the flesh, Christ came, there is his Manhood. Who is over all, God blessed for
ever, Amen. God, truly, not nuncupatively; truly God, and truly man.

3. Again, Though Moses was a Mediator, and did stand between God and them in
the time of the Old Testament, yet notwithstanding he was unwilling to
undertake the work: Send by whom thou will, says he: But now this our Jesus
says, Lo, I come, I delight to do thy Will.

4. Again, Though Moses was a Mediator then between God and them, and stood
between God and them; yet he was not able to do that work of mediation
perfectly: I am not Eloquent, says he; and I am not able to bear all this
people, says he: But now says Jesus, He has given me the Tongue of the
Learned, that I may administer a word in due season, to them that are weary: He
has born us, and he has born our griefs.

5. Again, Though Moses stood between God and them, and was a Mediator between
God and them, and did sometimes make an Atonement, as in the ca^e of the
Golden Calf, when they had sinned; yet notw^thstanding, he destroyed th^ee
thousand of them: Peradven^ure, says he, (after he had done it) I shall m^ke
an Atonement for your sin, Exodus 32.^0. And he steps in to God for them: And
the Lord said unto Moses, whosoever has sinned against me, him will I blot ou^
of my Book: and, I have heard thee, says he; neverthe^ess, in the day when I
visit, I will visit their sin upon them. Now Jesus, he makes an Atonement,
slays none, neither does God the Father make any reserve with him, he freely
forgives those that he makes Atonement for, all at once without any reserves,
or after reckonings.

6. Again, Though Moses was a mediator of the Old Covenant, stood between God
and the people, yet notw^thstanding he is dead; he did Intercede, but he is
dead, and Intercedes no more: But Jesus the Med^ator of the New Covenant, he
ever lives to make Intercession.

7. And though Moses was a mediator between God and them stood between God and
them; Yet they were not able to behold his face, after he had been in the
Mount, but a Vail was put upon it: But now as for Jesus, We saw his glory, as
the glory of the only begotten of the Father. And, We all with open face
behold as in a glass, the glory of the Lord. What a glorious Mediator have we
now? What a blessed condition has God brought his people to now? Friends, will
you not be thankful for this Mediator, will ye return to Moses now; what,
having such a Mediator, will ye now return to Moses, and be legal now? Consider
what a blessed state ye are now brought unto.

2. But secondly, If we are now come unto Jesus the Mediator of the New
Covenant, and not unto Moses: Why then should we go to men for the Worship of
God, and for the Ordinances of God? What, may we not have recourse to Moses,
and shall we have recourse to men? Moses spoke from God, and spoke the words of
God unto the people; and, may we not have recourse now to Moses for the
Ordinances, and Worship, and shall we have recourse to men for our Worship, and
Ordinances? As Gersom out of Austine observes: One commandment from a
fellow servants, is more burdensome then a hundred from the Master; and Moses
spoke the words of God: If Moses Tool does defile our Christian Altar, how much
more does the Tool of man defile our Altar? That Is the second.

3. If we be now come unto Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, why then
should we despair of any, and not go to God for the worst of men, for we are
come to Jesus, the Mediator of the New Covenant. Mark, how i'ts brought in, 1 Timothy 2.5. There is one God, and one Mediator between God and man, the man
Christ Jesus. -- What then? I exhort therefore that Supplications, Prayers, and
Intercessions, be made for all men: For Kings. Even for Nero, a persecutor. --
Why? For there is one God and one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ
Jesus: And therefore you may go to God for the worst of men, For there is one
Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus. Three sorts there are that
do greedily snatch at this Scripture. -- The Socinian, -- and the Arminian, --
and the Papist.

The Socinian thinks that here is something for him against the Deity of
Christ, because it is said, the man Christ Jesus. Whereas in the 3d. verse, it
is said, this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior.

The Arminian thinks there is some ground here for his Universal Redemption: For
it is said, There is one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus, who
gave himself a ransom for ALL: Whereas the Apostle here does explain himself,
what he means by this All; that is, all, both Jews, and Gentiles: For says he
in the next verse, Whereunto I am ordained a Preacher, and an Apostle, a
Teacher of the Gentiles, in Faith and Verity: Explaining his word All, to be
meant both Jews and Gentiles.

The Papists also think they have something here for their Opinion, who hold
that Christ is our Mediator only according to his humane Nature: For it is
said, the man Christ Jesus. But if we observe how these words are brought in;
we find, it is an encouragement to pray for the worst of men. -- Why -- for
there is one God, and one Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus.
Be not discouraged, go to God for the worst of men, for there is one Mediator
between God and men, the man Christ Jesus.

4. But then fourthly, If we are come unto Jesus the Mediator of the New
Covenant, why then, why should you not come to Jesus? If you be come, why
should you not come? That is, if you be come in regard of your state, why
should you not come in regard of act, in a way of believing. You are come unto
him in regard of your state; why should you not come unto him in regard of your
faith, come unto him in a way of believing. Some think, oh it is presumption to
come to Christ, and to believe and lay hold on Christ: But friends, It Is no
presumption for any man to do that act, that is suitable to his state; it is no
presumption to act according to my state that God has brought me to: Now this
is our state; in regard of state, we are come to Jesus, and therefore why
should we not come to Jesus also in a way of believing. Especially seeing he
has said, Those that come unto me, I will in no wise cast out.

5. If we be come unto Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, and not unto
Moses: Why then should we not all stand clear from Moses, and come fully off to
Jesus, the Mediator of the New Covenant?

But you will say, What should we do that we may be found upon Gospel grounds,
with a Gospel Spirit. I confess I have been too legal; legal in my
performances, legal in my obedience, legal in the matter of my comfort; what
should I do now that I may stand clear from Moses, and come fully off to Jesus
this Mediator of the New Covenant.

1. Improve all your former legal workings and fears, unto your dying to them;
improve them so as by them, to die to them. Many it may be of you here, have
been under legal workings, and terrors: Either you have, or you have not; if
you have not been under any legal workings or terror, thou art one of a hundred.

If you have, why should you not improve those legal workings, so as by them,
to die unto them: says Paul, I through the Law, am dead unto the Law. --
What Is that? -- I through the Law, am dead unto the Law, that I might live
unto God. I through affliction, am dead unto my affliction. -- I through the
disappointment of Friends, am dead unto my Friends. -- I through sin, am dead
unto my sin. -- I through the Law, and the terrors of the Law, am dead unto the
Law. Now then, Improve your former terrors, so as by them to die unto them. You
have been under them: I, but have you improved them, have you so improved them,
as thereby for to die unto them?

2. Observe what those things are that are commanded by Moses, in the
Old Testament, and go unto Jesus the Mediator of the New Testament, for grace
to perform them. There is nothing commanded in the Old Testament, but it is
promised in the New. There is nothing commanded by Moses in the Old Testament,
but Christ the Mediator of the New Testament, is engaged to perform it for you,
and to give you grace to do it: The Law commands, and Grace helps: The Law was
given by Moses, but Grace and Truth, comes by Jesus Christ. Observe therefore,
what that is that is commanded by Moses in the Old, and go to Jesus the
Mediator of the New, for Grace and Strength to do the same.

3. Then be sure that you stand when the Spirit breathes: Now the Spirit
brea^hes -- in the pure and clean preaching of the Gospel: Received ye the
Spirit by the works of the Law, or by the hearing of Faith? Would you be
brought off from Moses, and stand clear from Moses; choose to stand under such
a Preaching, where the Spirit breathes, and that is a Gospel Preaching.

4. Then put your selves upon the stream of the free Grace of God, without
having any foot on your own bottom: Some men will learn to swim, and they are
loath to lean themselves upon the stream of the water, but keep a foot at the
bottom; and they never learn to swim, till they take up the foot: Some would
fain be Evangelical, but they cannot lean themselves upon the stream of Grace,
but keep a foot at the bottom still, upon some thing of their own.

Some there are that do, and work, and when they can work no further, then they
eke it out with Christ's Mediation. So indeed they make the Mediation of Christ
but an Eekment to their own working: But away with these Eekments: Oh, let
Christ be all, let Christ be all! And therefore,

5. Study much the body of Jesus, and the allsufficiencie of the Mediation of
this Jesus the Mediator of the Covenant: The sight of Gods Alsufficiencie, will
draw one off from the Creature: And the sight of the Alsufficiencie of the
Mediation of Christ, will draw one off from Moses. Put thy self often unto this
Disjunction: Come O my soul, either there is enough in the Mediation of Jesus,
or not: If not enough, why do I go unto Christ at all; if there be enough, why
should I not stand clear from Moses, and upon pure Gospel ground? Thus
therefore do.

Quest. But, Suppose I have come to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant,
what should I do that I may walk up unto this condition? What should I do, and
how should I so walk, as one that is indeed come unto Jesus, the Mediator of
the Covenant; that yet I may stand upon Gospel ground, and not touch at all
upon Moses?

Answ. First, If you be indeed come unto Jesus, this Mediator of the New
Covenant, and would walk sutably thereunto: Why then, should you not still
throng and press after the Appointments, Institutions, and Ordinances of Jesus?
The Law and the Prophets were until John, but from John the Baptist, the
Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence; that was suitable to the Gospel. -- And what
was the suffering violence, but peoples pressing after the Gospel: So now, to
press after the Kingdom of Heaven, suites with a Gospel state; to press after
the Ordinances, and Appointments of Jesus, suites with a Gospel sta^e.

But secondly, Labor more and more for to know your Christian ^iberty, in
Conjunction with strictness of life. Some there are that are very strict in
their lives, but they don't know their Christian l^berty; some again know their
Christian liberty, yet abate in their strictness of life: But blessed is that
knowledge of our Christian liberty, that is in conjunction with more strictness
of life. Oh blessed! blessed is that knowledge of our Christian liberty, where
strictness of life, and holiness, grow up together with it. Therefore I say,
labor more and more to know your Christian liberty in conjunction with
strictness, and holiness of life, this suites a Gospel state; then shall you do
as those that are come unto Jesus. But then,

Thirdly, In regard of your Faith: Be sure that you close with Christ himself,
the absolute Promise; and live in continual dependence upon Christ, this Jesus,
this Mediator. For as living upon an old Stock, and a Stock received, suited
with a covenant of works: So living in continual dependence upon Jesus for
fresh Grace, suites with this covenant of Grace whereof he is Mediator.

Fourthly, In regard of your repentance and sorrow for sin, the more your
hearts do melt, and thaw under sense of love, that you have sinned against God:
For the Law rends and tears; but the Gospel melts and thaws. -- The more that
you grieve for sin, and rejoice in God together. -- The more you grieve for sin
that is pardoned, and because it is pardoned: For a legal Spirit grieves for
sin, only that it may be pardoned; but a Gospel spirit because it is pardoned.
-- And the more you grieve for sins that are secret, the sins of your spirits,
especially unbelief: For says Christ, I say unto you, he that locketh upon a
woman, etc. The more I say you are found doing these things in reference to
your Repentance, the more your Repentance suits with the Gospel, and with a
Gospel state. And then,

Fifthly, As to the matter of your Obedience.

1. The more gracious you are upon the account of Grace, the more Evangelical.
And,

2. The more free you are in your actings toward God, the more Evagelical;
those that Jesus makes free, are free indeed. -- Free -- Not from duty, but
free in duty; free from sin, but not free to sin: A legal Spirit is restrained
from evil, and constrained to good. Labor to be free in all your actings
toward God. And,

3. Then again, The more you are conformed unto God the Father who has given
you this Mediator, and to Jesus this Mediator; the more Evangelical you are,
and the more you suite with this Gospel state unto which you are come. -- Now a
man is conformed unto God the Father, when he does good to men for evil; Bless
them that curse you, so shall ye be the children of your Father. -- Then a man
is conformed to Jesus this Mediator, when his life is inammeled with Meekness,
and Humility; Learn of me, says Christ, for I am meek and lowly. Friends, the
Law frets, and the Gospel sweetens.

4. And then, In case that you have to deal with the things of the w^rld: The
more you are estranged from the world by Faith, and can forsake the things
thereof for Christ, and his Ways, and Truth, bearing witness to his Truth and
ways; the more you comply and comport with a Gospel state: If thou will be
perfect, says Christ to that Legalist, go and sell all that thou have, and
come and follow me, and thou shall have treasure in Heaven. And,

In case that you meet with sufferings, look upon all your sufferings as part
of Christ's purchase for you: Your sufferings are your servants; for all things
are yours; for you are Christ's, who is the Head of the Covenant.

And in case that you are under any spiritual desertion, Then praise God for
his love to Jesus, when you cannot praise God for his love to you: A true
Gospel spirit, will praise God the Father for his love to Christ his Son, when
he cannot praise God for his love to himself, because he wants assurance.

Again, if you would yet walk up unto this condition of the Gospel (whereunto
now we are come) then whatsoever you do, be sure that you do it upon Gospel
Principles: Principles of Love, principles of Thankfulness, principles of
Ingenuity: Principles are the springs of Actions: If your principles be
Evangelical, your actions will be Evangelical; if your principles be legal,
your actions will be legal: Stock therefore, and store your selves with Gospel
principles, principles of Love, principles of Thankfulness, and principles of
Ingenuity; doing all in the Name of Jesus, this Mediator of the Covenant.

And when you have wrought, and done all, Rest upon Jesus this Mediator, as if
you had done nothing: Yet repent, work and do, as if you had no such Mediator:
I say, Work, and pray, and read, and meditate, and confer, and repent, as if
you had no Mediator for to rest upon, but only your works; and yet rest upon
this your Mediator, as if you had done no work at all: Thus do, and thus shall
you comply and comport with your Gospel state.

Which that you may do, consider, This is that you are now called unto; you are
now come to Jesus, not to Moses; you are now come to Jesus the Mediator of the
New Covenant: Why then; As in the time of the Old Testament, they had recourse
unto Moses, so now in the times of the New Testament, ye are in all things to
have recourse unto Jesus: What says Jesus to this business? Here Is Worship,
What says Jesus to it? Here Is an Ordinance, What says Jesus to it? Here Is
an Officer of the Church, What says Jesus to it? This is suitable unto the
state that now you are come unto.

And thus shall all your Convictions, Graces, and your duties, be refined; you
shall have much in a little room: A legal work may be great for the bulk, yet
be but little; a Gospel work though but little, has a great deal in it, for
it is refined.

And thus also shall you have the wedding Garment on: For pray, What is the
wedding Garment, but a Gospel disposition, suitable to a Gospel dispensation;
this is the wedding Garment. Not Faith, nor Repentance, nor this, nor that
particular Grace, But a Gospel disposition, suitable to a Gospel dispensation,
is the wedding Garment; and thus shall you be clothed with it.

Thus also your Only shall stand in its proper place: For mark where the
Apostle places your only; Only, says he, let your Conversation be as it
becomes the Gospel; there stand a Christians only, upon a conversation
becoming the Gospel.

Thus also shall you please the Father: The more that you come to Jesus the
Mediator, whom the Father has appointed: And the more your Conversation suites
thereunto, the more you please the Father: You can never please the Father
more, than in coming to the Son.

Now therefore, as ever you do desire that you may please the Father;

As you do desire, that your only may be found in the right and proper place;

As you do desire, that you may be found having the wedding Garment on:

As you do desire, that all your Convictions, Graces, Duties, may be more
refined, and so preserved and kept:

As you do desire, to be found doing according to the state whereunto you are
called; so let it be your work, your and business, to stand clear from Moses,
and to stand upon clear Gospel ground, and to come off fully unto Jesus the
Mediator of the New Covenant: For, says this Doctrine, In these Gospel times,
we are not come unto Moses, the Mediator of the Old Testament, or of the Old
Covenant, but unto Jesus, the Mediator of the New Covenant: And so I have done
with this third Observation. There is a fourth thing yet behind, which concerns
the Blood of Sprinkling, that speaks better things than the blood of Abel.

The Blood of Sprinkling. SERMON. VI.
Hebr. 12.24. And to the Blood of Sprinkling, that speaks better things, than
that of Abel.


When I made entrance into these Words, I took up four Observations from them:
And having gone through three of them, I now come unto the fourth; which more
largely runs thus.

Observe. 4. That it is a very great privilege which in these Gospel times we
are partakers of, To come unto the Blood of Sprinkling, that speaks better
things, than that of Abel. -- For the clearing and prosecuting whereof,

First, I shall show you what this Blood of Sprinkling is, what are the grounds
and use of this Sprinkling.

2. That this Blood of Sprinkling, is a speaking-Blood, and speaks better
things than that of Abel.

3. That we are now come unto this blood of Sprinkling.

4. What are the privileges of coming to this Blood of sprinkling, and of
being sprinkled with this Blood of Sprinkling. And then,

5. What we must do that we may get our hearts sprinkled with this Blood of
Sprinkling.

First, If you ask, what this Blood of Sprinkling is.

I answer, That it is no other than the blood of Jesus, the Mediator of the New
Covenant -- called the Blood of Sprinkling; Because it was, and is, the thing
specified by all the Sprinkings of Water and Blood, in the Old Testament. In
the days of the Old Testament, it was their way and manner then, to mix water
and blood together, and to sprinkle it upon Persons and Things: which was a
Pattern and Type of this Blood of Jesus; as you read from the 13. verse, unto
the 24. of the 9. of the Heb. -- When our Lord and Savior Christ died upon the
Cross, there came water and blood out of his side, says John. And if you look
into the 1 of John, c. 5. you shall see that John, his beloved Disciple,
insists much upon it, at the 6. v. This is he that came by Water and Blood,
even Jesus Christ; not by Water only, but by Water and Blood. Again, This is
he, even Jesus Christ, that came by water and blood: which blood of Sprinkling,
is the blood of Jesus, says Peter expressly, in his 1 Epist. 1.2. Elect
according to the foreknowledge ^f God the Father, through sanctification of the
Spirit unto obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ: So that
plainly then, and briefly, this B^ood of Sprinkling, is the blood of Jesus.
Called the Bl^od of Sprinkling, in reference unto those Types and Ceremonies of
sprinkling blood, in the time of the Old Testament.

For our better understanding whereof, I shall labor to show you briefly, what
were the grounds and reasons of their sprinkling blood, in the times of the Old
Testament, and how that is appliable to the blood of Jesus.

If you look therefore into the Old Testament, you shall find that they
sprinkled blood upon a fourfold account.

To confirm and ratify the Covenant between God and them.

To make an Atonement for their sin.

For the sanctification, and purification of their Persons and things.

And for the preservation of their Persons.

Accordingly therefore, says the Apostle, Heb. 9.19. the Book was sprinkled:
so in the 24. of Exodus the meaning of it is given, v. 7. And he took the Book
of the Covenant, and read in the audience of the people, and they said, all
that the Lord has said, we will do, and be obedient; and Moses took the blood,
and sprinkled it on the people, and said, behold the blood of the Covenant: and
the 9th of the Heb. tells us, That he sprinkled the Book it self; -- And why
so? -- But to show thus much, That it is the Blood of Jesus that does ratify
and confirm the Covenant now made, between God and us; as at large in that 9th
of the Hebrews.

2. Then also in those times of the Old Testament, they sprinkled blood, to
make an Atonement for the sins of the people; as you have it in the 4th of
Levit. 6, and the 20. verses. And the Priest shall dip his finger in the blood,
and sprinkle of the blood seven times before the Lord, before the Vail of the
Sanctuary. The Mercy Seat, and the Altar, were sprinkled; -- the reason is
given at the 20 v. And he shall do with the Bullock, as he did with the Bullock
for a fin offering, so shall he do with this: And, The Priest shall make an
Atonement for them; and it shall be forgiven them. And why so? But to show
that it is the blood of Jesus, whereby we have Atonement, as in Romans 5.11.

3. Again, In the times of the Old Testament, they did sprinkle blood for the
purification of men's Persons, and of Things. As you have it in Levit. 14. v. 7.
And he shall sprinkle upon him that is to be cleansed from the Leprosy seven
times, and shall pronounce him clean. And why so? But to show that it is the
blood of Jesus that does cleanse us from all Iniquity, as in the first Epist.
of John, Chap. 1.

4. Then in those times, they did sprinkle men's persons, for preservation from
the destroying Angel: when the destroying Angel came to destroy the Egyptians,
the posts of the Israelites were sprinkled, that they might be preserved. --
And why? But to show that it is by the blood of Jesus, that we are preserved
from the destroyer. In the 1. v. of the 1. of Jude, its said, Jude the servant
of Jesus Christ, and Brother of James, to them that are sanctified by God the
Father, and preserved in Jesus Christ; or preserved by Jesus Christ: and Christ
our passover is sacrificed for us, says the Apostle to the Corinthians. So
that thus now you see briefly, what were the grounds and reasons of their
sprinkling blood, in the times of the Old Testament, and how all this is
applicable to the Blood of Jesus.

And if you look wishly into the Scripture, and compare things with things, you
shall find that Moses in the times of the Old Testament, did divide the blood
of the Covenant, part whereof was sprinkled upon the Altar, poured down at the
foot of the Altar, to oblige God to the Covenant. -- And part of it was
sprinkled upon the people, to confirm their souls in the certainty of the
Covenant, and to oblige them to observe and keep Covenant with God. So, with
the blood of Christ. And therefore when our Lord and Savior Christ speaks at
the Lords Supper, he says, This Cup is the New Testament in my blood, shed for
many, for the Remission of sins. The first part part of the words: This Cup is
the New Testament in my blood, has regard to us, showing that our souls are to
be confirmed in this, that we are in covenant with God. -- The second part of
the words, shed for many, for the remission of sins, relates unto God, showing
the use of Christ's blood, to satisfy God for our sins, and to obtain our
Remission.

And if you would know, What is the use of this Sprinkling; I say, Sprinkling
of the Blood; notes Application: What are we the better for the Blood of
Christ, if it be not applied to us, and sprinkled on us. There are two great
Attributes of God, that we have to deal withal, in the great matter of our
Redemption. -- The Justice of God -- and the Mercy of God. That the Justice of
God might be be satisfied; Christ was made a sacrifice on the Cross, and his
blood shed on Earth, that the favor of God might be obtained: Christ carries
(as our great High Priest) his Blood, (the virtue of it) into Heaven, and
sprinkles the Mercy-seat seven times.

And that we might be sanctified, and reconciled to God, this Blood is
sprinkled upon us too. As it is sprinkled upon the Altar, and the Mercy-seat,
that God might be reconciled to us; so it is sprinkled upon us, that we might be
sanctified and reconciled to God: And that thereby we might be assured that God
is in covenant with us. As when the Jews were sprinkled with blood, the Priest
saying, This is the Blood of the covenant, they were assured thereby, that they
were in covenant with God: So when we are sprinkled with the blood of Jesus, we
are, or may be, assured that we are in the covenant of Grace with God. And thus
now you see, what this Blood of Sprinkling is, -- upon what account it is
sprinkled, -- and what is the use of the sprinkling thereof. And so I have done
with the first General.

Secondly, This Blood of Sprinkling (which is the blood of Jesus) is a speaking
Blood, and speaks better things than that of A^el, or than Abel.

It speaks, in regard of its continual, and perpetual Virtue, and Operation:
But here are two things,

First, What this Blood of Sprinkling speaks.

2. How, and in what sense, it speaks better things than that of Abel.

First, What this Blood of Sprinkling speaks.

1. It speaks a necessity of satisfaction, for, Without blood there is no
Remission.

2. It speaks the Righteousness of God: If God have burnt down such a City as
this, to declare his Righteousness; how much more does the shedding of the
blood of Jesus, declare the Righteousness of God: To declare, I say, his
Righteousness, says the Apostle, in Romans 3.

3. It speaks the highest Obedience, that ever the Sun saw. That the Son of
God should be obedient unto death, laying down his blood, is the highest
Obedience. As the disobedience of the first Adam, was in the matter of the
Tree; so the obedience of the second Adam, was in the matter of the Tree: Who
his own self bare our sins in his own body, on the Tree, says the Apostle. --
As the disobedience of the first Adam, was in the transgressing a positive
commandment, which was the symbol of obedience to the whole Moral Law: So the
obedience of the second Adam, does consist in being obedient unto a positive
commandment, which was the symbol of his obedience to the whole Law of God:
This c^mmandment received I of my Father, says he. -- And as Moses the Head of
that Covenant, was faithful in all his house; in so much as its said of him, As
the Lord Commanded, so did he: so Jesus the head of this second Covenant was
faithful in all his trust, and as the Lord Commanded so did he, As the Father
gave me commandment, says he, even so I do, John. 14. last. So that the blood
of sprinkling, speaks the highest obedience in the World,

4. It speaks also the worth of souls, If a Physician have a Patient ready to
die, and nothing will work his cure but the heart-blood of the Physician, and
the Physician should vouchsafe thereto, and let him have his heart-blood to
drink; Would it not argue that the Physician thinks this man's life is of great
concernment and of great worth, so it is here. And what does this argue but that
Jesus did look upon the souls of men, as of Infinite worth and Concernment.

5. This blood of Jesus, and the blood of sprinkling speaks the evil of sin:
The hainousness, the sinfulness, the evil, of sin. There are many things that
do speak the evil of sin, but of all things methinks the blood of sprinkling,
the blood of Jesus, speaks the evil of sin loudest; Give me leave to name
some, that so you may compare them and this together.

First, The separation from God, and union with Satan, speaks the evil of
sin. As by Grace we are united unto God, made One with God, and separated from
the Devil: so by sin we are separated from God, and united unto Satan, and made
one with him.

2. The Condemnation of the whole World by the sin of Adam, speaks the evil of
sin: If the eating of the Apple, committing that one sin, brought Condemnation
upon all the World, how g eat must the evil of sin be!

3. The fire of Hell speaks the evil of sin, for what is the fuel that the
fire of hell feeds upon, but sin; take sin away, and the fire of Hell will die,
it will be quenched.

4. The spoil of Duties speaks it: One sinful thought, is enough to spoil a
prayer, to spoil a Duty, to spoil a Sermon: And if one drop of Ink shall black
a whole Glass of milk, how black is that Ink!

5. The horror of Conscience speaks it; for, If but one sin set on upon the
soul by God, does put a man into such horror of Conscience, how great is the
evil of sin!

6. The troublesomness of the relics of sin in the Saints speaks it: Sins in
the Saints are but wasps without their sting, And if the wasps without their
sting be so troublesome, how troublesome are the wasps that have their stings in
them; how troublesome is sin in it self!

But seventhly, and above all, The Blood of sprinkling speaks the evil of sin.
For if the guilt of sin be so great that nothing can satisfy for it, but the
Blood of Jesus, and the Filth of sin be so great that nothing can fetch out the
stain thereof, but the blood of Jesus, How great, How heinous, How sinful must
the evil of sin be? The Blood of sprinkling speaks the evil of sin: And then

6ly As the Blood of sprinkling speaks the evil of sin, so it speaks the
riches and the freeness of the Love of God. 'Twas love in Jonathan to part with
his Garment for David, What love is it in Christ, to part with his Blood for
us? It was love that made Christ weep over Lazarus, They said, Behold how he
loved him! And if his Tears speak his love, what does his Blood? It Is love to
give a cup of cold water to a Disciple, what is it then to give ones warm Blood
unto Enemies,

Three things there are that do make a gift greatly free. 1. The greatness of
the gift given,

-- 2. The unworthiness of the Person given unto

3. And the greatness of the person that gives.

1. As for the gift it self, What greater than the Blood of Jesus?

2. As for the Persons given unto, who more unworthy then sinful men?

3. As for the Person that does give, who greater then God in the three
Persons? The Father gives Christ to die: The Son dies and gives his Blood: And
the Holy Ghost comes and sprinkles it; for it is the work of the Holy Ghost to
sprinkle: this is another thing that the Blood of Jesus speaks; It speaks the
Riches and the freeness of the love of God: these are the things that this
blood of sprinkling speaks.

And now if you ask, How, and in what respects it speaks better things than
Abel, or then that of Abel: (For it may be translated both ways according to
the several copies, But take it according to our translation: better than that
of Abel, or then the blood of Abel.) How and in what respects does the blood of
Jesus speak better things than the blood of Abel?

Why it speaks better things than the Personal blood of Abel -- And it speaks
better things than the Sacrificed blood of Abel.

It speaks better then the Personal blood of Abel: for the blood of Abel cried
for vengeance against his own Brother, But the blood of Jesus cries for mercy
and for remission for his Enemies: Father forgive them they know not what they
do, said Christ when their hands were imbrewed in his blood:

But others think rather that these words are to be understood of the
sacrificed blood of Abel. And because Abel is the first that stands upon record
in Scripture for offering a sacrifice with blood, It is as if the Apostle
should say, The sacrifice of Jesus on the Cross, and the blood of Jesus,
speaks better things than the sacrifice of Abel, or of all the sacrifices in
the Old Testament. And Indeed, This is more suitable to the scope of the Apostle
here; For the design of the Apostle here, is, to show the excellency of
New Testament sacrifice, and of the way of the New Testament, above the Old.
And if you look into the Scripture you find, that though in the Fourth of
Genesis, it ^s said, Abels blood cried, yet notwithstanding i^ is not said that
Abel or his blood speaks: bu^ ^n the Eleventh of the Hebrews it is said that,
in point of sacrifice, By faith, Abel speaks: By faith Abel offered unto God
a more excellen^ sacrifice then Cain, and by it he, being dead, yet spe^keth.
In point of sacrifice by faith, he yet speaks.

And would you know how the blood of Jesus speaks better things than the
sacrificed blood of Abel, or than all the sacrifices of the old Testament. Thus.

1. The blood of Jesus, and the sacrifice of Christ on the Cross, does give
efficacy unto all those sacrifices: What a^e all the Types and Ceremonies, but
dead things without the thing Typified?

2. And though Abel offered an excellent sacrifice, he did not offer his own
Blood: But Jesus did; he offered up himself by the Eternal Spirit, as in the
9th of the Heb.

3. And though Abel, and the Fathers of the Old Testament offered excellent
sacrifices, yet they offered often, and so those sacrifices could not make the
Comers thereunto perfect, says the Apostle, But Christ offered himself once
for all. And so he has for ever perfected them that are sanctified. Heb. 10.

4. Though Abel and the Fathers in the Old Testament did offer excellent
sacrifices, yet their sacrifice was after their sin committed; when they had
committed a sin, then they were to get a sacrifice, and possibly they might have
died before the sacrifice; was offered: but the sacrifice of Christ is, before
our sin is committed; we cannot die between the sin and the sacrifice.

5. And though Abel and the Fathers of the Old Testament offered excellent
sacrifices, the blood whereof was sprinkled on the people, yet that was but to
the purifying of the flesh, for says the Apostle at the 13th v. of the 9th
Chap. If the Blood of Bulls and of Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer sprinkling
the unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh etc. But the sprinkling
of the blood of Jesus, purges our Consciences from dead works. How much more
shall the blood of Christ, who through the Eternal Spirit offered himself
without spot to God, purge your Conscience from dead works, to serve the living
God. Upon which words says Capellus, you have here the excellency of this
offering above all other offerings in the World: above the offerings of the
Heathen, above the offerings of the Jews, above the offerings of the
Christians. Above the offerings of the Heathens; for they sacrificed to
Devils, but he offered himself without spot to God. -- Above the sacrifice of
the Jews; for their blood of sprinkling sanctified to the purifying of the
Flesh, but this to the purging of your Conscience from dead works. -- Above the
offering of the Christians; for though Christians offer up spiritual sacrifices
to God, as prayers, and thanksgivings, yet not without spot; but he offered
himself through the Eternal spirit without spot to God.

6. And then, Though A^el offered an excellent sacrifice, and so the Fathers of
the Old Testament; yet notwithstanding those were for themselves, and for those
times. Abel offered for himself, and the Jews for themselves, for that time
only; but Christ offered a sacrifice for all the World, He is the Lamb of God
that takes away the sin of the World, and a Lamb slain from the beginning of
the W^rld.

7. Again though Abel offered an excellent sacrifice, and the Fathers of the
Old Testament offe^ed excellent sacrifices, and the blood thereof was
sprinkled; yet it was not sprinkled upon all things, but in the 9th Heb: it is
said, Moreover he sprinkled with blood both the Tabernacle, and all the Vessels
of the Ministry, and almost all things are by the Law purged with blood; It was
but almost, but now by the blood of Jesus all things are purged and cleansed,
not almost, but all things are purged and cleansed. Thus now you see what this
blood of sprinkling speaks, and how it speaks better things then the blood
of Abel; better than his Personal blood, and better than his sacrificed blood,
and that is the second General.

3. Now 3, unto this blood of sprinkling are we come in these Gospel-t^mes. We
are not come unto the blood of Bulls and Goats, and heifers, but we are come
unto the blood of Jesus the blood of sprinkling.

For what is the dispensation that we are now under, but the dispensation of a
cruc^fied Christ? There are two Comings of Christ mentioned in the Scripture A
coming in a way of meanness, riding upon an Ass: his first coming is in a way
of humiliat^on, riding upon an Ass, and accordingly his Kingdom is a Kingdom of
Patience. And there is a coming second Coming of Christ, when he comes riding
upon the Clouds in power and Great Glory, and accordingly his Kingdom then
shall be a Kingdom of power and Glory. When Christ comes the second time we
shall be under Glorious dispensations, but now we are under the first Coming of
Christ, and therefore what is the Dispensation that now we are under, but the
dispensation of a crucified Christ? -- What does a Preaching signify and hold
forth, but Christ crucified? We Preach Christ crucified, says, the Apostle --
What do the Sacraments hold forth, why: This Cup is the New Testament in my
Blood, says he. So that now we are under the Dispensation of a crucified
Christ. In the times of the Old Covenant, they did believe in God, and God
himself was the first object of their Faith, and so they came to Christ: now,
in these times of the New Testament, the first and immediate object of our
Faith, is the blood of Christ, Faith in the Blood of Christ, Rom: 3. So that (I
say) It is the blood of Jesus that now we are come unto.

Well but though in these Gospel Times we are now come to the blood of Jesus,
the blood of sprinkling; yet, it may be, this blood of sprinkling may not be
sprinkled upon my soul. When may the blood of sprinkling be said to be
sprinkled upon a man's soul? How shall I know, whether this blood of sprinkling
be sprinkled upon my soul in particular; that is a Question of great
Concernment: Thus therefore,

1. If it be your great work in all your Temptations, and upon all Occasions to
apply your selves unto the blood of Jesus, then is the blood of Jesus applied
to you, and so sprinkled on you: The blood of Jesus is sprinkled on us by the
Spirit of God, and when it is sprinkled by the Spirit of God, it is applied. If
you do make applications of your selves to Christ, certainly Christ has made
applications of Himself to you: for all our grace is but a reflection of his
Grace; we love him, because he loved us first, and we choose him because he
chose us first, and we apply our selves to him, because he has applied himself
unto us first. If therefore in all Temptations, and upon all occasions, it be
your great work to make an application of your selves unto the blood of Jesus,
then has the blood of Jesus been applied to you, and sprinkled upon you.

2. If you ever have had such a sight of the blood of Christ, as that thereby
you are purged from an evil Conscience, Then has this blood been applied to,
and sprinkled on you; They go together. In the 10th Heb. 22, its said, Let us
draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of Faith, having our hearts
sprinkled from an evil Conscience, or purged: (the 9th of the Hebrews, calls it
purged;) having our hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience. What is that? why
an evil Conscience is an evil Conscience two ways -- either because it is a
sluggish Conscience, and don't stir us up unto our duty, and accuse for sin;
-- or else because it is a clamorous and despondent Conscience. Now if you have
had such a sight of the blood of Jesus as has quickened your Conscience, and
wakened your Conscience, and yet pacified your Conscience at the same time,
Then have you been sprinkled with this blood of Jesus. You see how they go
together, in the 10th Chap. 1.2, 3. v. But,

3. If you have a continual sight and remembrance of the blood of Jesus in all
your goings out, and your comings in, Then has the blood of Jesus, been
sprinkled upon you: When the destroying Angel passed over the houses of the
Israelites, the Posts were sprinkled with the blood of the Lamb: The Posts; And
why their Posts? But that in all their goings out, and their comings in, they
might have an eye thereunto: So now, how is it with me? Do I, not only find
the virtue of the Lord Christ within me? But that in all my goings out, and
comings in, I have an eye unto his blood; then is his blood sprinkled upon my
posts, and applied unto me.

4. If that you do walk in the Light, as God is in the Light; then the blood of
Jesus has been, and is, sprinkled upon you, and applied to you: 1 John 1.7.
But if we walk in the Light, as he is in the Light, we have fellowship one with
another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin. -- If
we walk in the Light, as he is in the Light? -- What Is that? -- How is God and
Christ in the Light; -- why he is in the Light certainly, in regard of Grace
and Holiness. So he is in the Light, and to that purpose the Apostle speaks
here: So then, Although you cannot walk in the Light of Comfort, but as a child
of Light walking in darkness; yet if you do walk in the Light of Holiness, walk
in the Light, as God is in the Light; then certainly, the blood of Jesus Christ
has cleansed you, and so has been sprinkled upon you.

5. If you are indeed separated and set apart for God, and for the Work and
Service of God, then is the blood of Jesus sprinkled upon you: He that is dipped
in this blood of sprinkling, is separated. You shall observe, that when the
Priests were Consecrated, the tip of the right Ear was sprinkled with blood,
and the Thumb of the right hand, and the Toe of the right Foot: -- And not
only the Priests, when they were consecrated were so sprinkled: But when a man
was cleansed from his Leprosy, he was so sprinkled also. You have them both in
Levi^. concerning Aaron, Levit. 8.23. He slew the Ram, and Moses took of the
blood of it, and put it upon the tip of Aarons right ear, and upon the thumb of
his right hand, and upon the great Toe of his right foot: This in regard of
Aaron. -- In regard of the Leprosy, you have it in the 14 of Levit. And of the
rest of the Oil that is in his hand, shall the Priest put upon the tip of the
right Ear of him that is to be cleansed, and upon the Thumb of his right hand,
and upon the great Toe of his right Foot, upon the blood of the
Trepass Offering: And so in regard of Blood, as well as of Oil -- what is the
meaning of this, that the tip of the right ear was to be touched with blood, and
the thumb of the right hand was to be touched with blood; and the toe of the
right foot with blood, both when the Priest was consecrated, and when the
Leprosy was cleansed? But to show thus much, That the whole man is to be set a
part for God. -- The Ear of his understanding and knowing part, is to be set
aside for God. -- The Thumb of his hand, the believing part, (by Faith we lay
hold) is to be set apart for God. -- And the great Toe of the right foot, the
Practical part of life and conversation: The whole man is to be set apart for
God, where this sprinkling comes: So that look therefore, when a man is set
apart for the Worship and Service of God, Ear, and Hand, and Foot, set a part
for the Worship and Service of God; then he is said to be sprinkled with this
blood of Sprinkling.

6. Once more, If that you have had such a prospect of Christ crucified, and
have seen what great and wonderful things Christ has done and suffered,
insomuch as your hearts have been astonished therewithal; then have your souls
been sprinkled with this blood: See how they go together, Isa. 52.13, 14, 15.
Behold, My Servant shall deal prudently, he shall be exalted and extolled, and
be very high, (speaking of Christ). As many were astonished at him, (his Visage
was so marred, more than any man's, and his Form, more than the Sons of men) so
shall he sprinkle many Nations; the Kings shall shut their mouths at him, for
that which had not been to^d them, shall they see, and that which they had not
heard, shall they consider. Where this blood is sprinkled, there comes
Astonishment at the Mirror, and Wisdom and Mystery of a crucified Christ. So
that thus now you see, that we are come unto this blood of Sprinkling; and how
a man shall know whether his own soul be sprinkled with this blood of
sprinkling in particular. And is this a small matter?

4. The fourth thing tells us, It is a privilege, and a very great privilege
to come unto the blood of sprinkling; it is a very great privilege, to be
sprinkled with this blood of Sprinkling.

It was a very great privilege for the Jews, to have a sacrifice by them at
hand, when they had committed sin, to have the blood of sprinkling by them. --
But alas, what is that to this, what was that sacrifice to this of Christ, and
what was that blood to this of Christ; and what was that sprinkling unto this
sprinkling of the blood of Jesus? Look what difference is between the Type, and
the thing Typified. -- Look what difference there is between the blood of Bulls
and Goats, and the blood of Jesus. -- Look what difference between Carnal, and
Spiritual things; so great a difference is there between the coming to the
blood of Bulls and Goats, and the coming to, and being sprinkled with the blood
of Jesus.

Let me open this a little to you, if you be indeed come unto this blood of
sprinkling, and be sprinkled with the blood of Jesus;

Then look whatsoever benefits do flow from the blood of Jesus, all those do
belong to you: And do you well consider what are the benefits that do flow from
the blood of Jesus? Let me name some to you.

1. Thereby (in the General) we have redemption: In whom we have Redemption
through his Blood. says Paul, Ephesians. 1.

2. Thereby the Covenant of Grace, is ratified and confirmed, Heb. 9. at large.

3. Thereby the Church of God is purchased, Acts 20. purchased by his blood; By
the blood of God.

4. Thereby the Wall of Partition, made between Jew and Gentile, God and us, is
broken down, Ephesians. 2.13.

5. Thereby all things in Heaven and Earth, are reconciled, Col. 1.20.

6. Thereby are your souls justified, and your sins pardoned; In whom we have
Redemption through his blood, The forgiveness of our sins, Ephesians. 1.

7. Thereby are you washed, and cleansed, and sanctified; The blood of Jesus
cleanses from all iniquity, 1 John 1.

8. Thereby is your great adversary Satan routed, and overcome, and spoiled;
Rev. 12. They overcame him by the blood of the Lamb.

9. Thereby Christ is made welcome by his Father, when he comes into Heaven in
your name, to intercede for you. In the times of the Old Testament, the high
Priest went into the Holy of holiest, and carried blood, and sprinkled the
Mercy-Seat seven times: But the high Priest did not sit down. Now in the 10. of
Heb. 11. it is said: And every high Priest stands daily ministering, and
offering often times the same sacrifices, which can never take away sins: But
this man, after he had offered one sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down at the
right Hand of God the Father. The high Priest did not then sit down, but now
when Christ comes into Heaven with your names upon his Heart, to sprinkle the
Mercy-Seat with his blood; Come my Son, says the Father, sit down and welcome,
upon this account.

10. And thereby also have you entrance into the Holy of holiest, as in the
10th. of the Heb.

11. And if indeed you be sprinkled with this blood of sprinkling, then are you
at one with the Mercy-Seat: It Is the same blood that is sprinkled upon the
Mercy-Seat in Heaven, and that is sprinkled upon your souls here on Earth: The
same blood in the time of the Old Testament, that was sprinkled upon the
people, was sprinkled upon the Altar, and the Mercy-seat; so the same blood
that is now in Heaven, sprinkled upon the Mercy-seat, is sprinkled upon your
hearts.

12. If you are sprinkled with this blood of sprinkling, then all the Promises
are yours; for all the Promises are, Yea, and Amen in Christ: And if Christ's
blood be sprinkled on you, and applied to you, then may you apply the Promises
to your selves.

13. And if indeed, you be sprinkled with this blood of sprinkling, then are
all things clean unto you; for as the blood of sprinkling, is sprinkled upon
your souls, so are all your Enjoyments be sprinkled with it.

14. And if you be indeed sprinkled with the blood of Jesus, then may you go
away, and say; Now are all the blessings of the Covenant mine: The day that you
are sprinkled with the blood of Jesus, you may say; now know I, that my sins
are pardoned: Mercy is mine, and Pardon is mine, and Adoption is mine. As, when
the Psalmist had a sight of God, he cried out, and said: Gilead is mine, and
Manasseh is mine; So the day that you have this sight of God, in being
sprinkled with the blood of Jesus, you may cry out and say: Not, Gilead is
mine, and Manasseh is mine; But, Pardon is mine, and Adoption is mine, and
Heaven is mine, and God is mine for ever: Oh! Who would not labor to get his
soul sprinkled now with the blood of sprinkling?

5. You will say (in the fifth and last place) It Is a great privilege to be
sprinkled with the blood of sprinkling: We grant it. But what shall we do, that
even we may get our souls sprinkled with the blood of Jesus, the blood of
sprinkling?

First of all you must know, That there is a twofold sprinkling, with the
blood of Sprinkling. -- There is an Initial sprinkling, -- and a Renewed
sprinkling: As there is an Initial Repentance, and a Renewed Repentance; so
there is an Initial Sprinkling, and a Renewed Sprinkling.

An Initial sprinkling, and that is a man's first Conversion, when he is
justified, according to that in the 1 Cor. 6.11. Such were some of you, but you
are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, in the Name of the
Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. Here Is the Initial sprinkling.

The Renewed sprinkling, is upon a twofold account, -- 1. Upon the account of
some great sin committed, -- and 2. Upon the account of some special duty to be
performed.

A fresh sprinkling there must be upon some great sin committed: So in the 51
Psalm, says David, Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity: He had sinned a great
sin, but his sin was pardoned, Psalm. 51. Title, A Psal^ of David, when Nathan
the Prophet came unto him that was, after Nathan came to him. -- And what di^
Nathan say, he told him his sin was pardoned, yet says David, v. 7. Purge me
with Hysop, I must have a fresh sprinkling; after some great sin committed
there must be a fresh sprinkling with the blood of Jesus.

And upon duty to be performed, especially some great duty to be performed,
there must also be a fresh sprinkling. In the 10th Heb. 22. Paul says, Let us
draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of Faith, having our hearts
sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water: --
why our bodies washed with pure water? It relates to the washings in the Old
Testament: when the Priests were to come to offer a sacrifice, there was a
Laver, and they were then to wash themselves; so, says the Apostle, let us
draw near to God, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our
bodies washed with pure water; because upon a new address to God, a fresh
sprinkling with the blood of Jesus is to be had. It Is not enough to have an old
sprinkling with the blood of Jesus, but upon all our approaches to God,
especially after some great sin committed, or some special duty to be
performed, we must come and get a fresh sprinkling with the blood of Jesus.

2. You must know also, that though you have bin very great sinners, yet you
are not incapable of this sprinkling with the blood of Jesus. The Apostle says
in that place of the Corinthians: Such were some of you; -- what such? v. 9.
Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Be not
deceived, neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate,
nor Abusers of themselves with mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor
Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God.
And such were some of you; but ye are washed, -- how? -- why ye are justified
in the name of our Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God, which sprinkles,
which applies the blood of Christ: So then, though ye have bin great sinners,
yet you are not incapable of being sprinkled with this blood of sprinkling.

3. You must know this also, that there is nothing on this side the blood of
Jesus, this blood of sprinkling, that can cleanse you: If any thing should bid
for our cleansing, methinks it should be our sufferings and persecutions for
the name of God; but look into the 7th Rev. 14th it is said, These are they
which came out of great Tribulations, and have washed their Robes, and made
them white in the Blood of the Lamb. -- They have washed their Robes, -- how?
what, with their great Tribulations? -- No, They came out of great
Tribulations, but their Tribulations don't wash them: these are they that came
out of great Tribulation, and have washed their robes and made them white in
the blood of the Lamb. Nothing on this side Christ, and this blood of
sprinkling, can cleanse your souls. But,

4. Though there be nothing on this side Christ that can cleanse your souls,
but the blood of Jesus, yet it is the Spirit of Christ that must sprinkle it.
The blood of Jesus is then sprinkled, when it is applied: now this is the work
of the Holy Ghost, I will sprinkle you with clean water, I le wash you with
water? As it is a derogation to the blood of Christ to go to any else for
cleansing; So it is a derogation to the Spirit of Christ to go to any else for
sprinkling, or to go to any else for that application of the Blood of Christ.
It Is only the Spirit of Christ that must sprinkle this blood upon your and my
soul.

5. Though this sprinkling must be done only by the Spirit; Yet notwithstanding
this blood of Jesus is sprinkled by the ordinance in the hand of the Spirit; by
the preaching of the Gospel. He preaches not that sprinkles not the blood of
Christ in preaching; and especially by that great ordinance of the Lords
Supper. You may observe therefore, that the same words that were used in the
Old Testament when they sprinkled the blood, This is the blood of the Covenant,
as in the 9th of the Hebrews, are used by our Savior Christ at the Lords
Supper: This Cup is the New Testament in my blood, etc. Why so? but to show
thus much, that this ordinance of the Lords Supper, is the Hysop in the hand of
the Spirit, whereby the souls of believers are sprinkled with a fresh
sprinkling: Oh therefore who would not come to this ordinance of the Lords
supper in a right way and manner.

6. But then again, you must kn^w ^lso that you must come for sprinkling with
the great'st sense of unworthines that may be. I^ you look into the 19th of
Numb. you shall find that he that sprink^^d the blood, was to be unclean until
the evening, v. 7. Then the Priest shall wash his clothes, and he sh^l b^ the
his flesh in W^ter, and afterward he shall come into the Camp, And the Priest
shall be unclean until the evening. At v. 6. The Priest shall take Cedar-wood,
and Hysop, and Scarlet, and cast it into the midst of the burning or the
Heifer; and then the Priest shall wash his clothes, and come into the Camp, and
shall be unclean until the evening. And at the 8th v. He that burns her shall
wash his clothes in Water, and bathe his flesh in Water, and shall be unclean
until the evening. And a man that is clean shall gather up the Ashes of the
Heifer, and lay them up without the Camp in a clean place, and it shall be kept
for the Congregation of the children of Israel for a Water of separation: It is
a purification for sin, and he that gathers the Ashes of the Heifer, shall
wash his clothes, and be unclean until the evening. -- What Is all this, but to
show thus much; That they might not come to this sacred Expiation, but with the
greatest sense of their unworthiness; Plainly showing thus much, That there is
no meddling with this blood of sprinkling, but with the greatest sense of our
unworthiness of the blood of Jesus. Now therefore, do you desire that you may
be sprinkled with this blood of sprinkling? then, whenever you go to the
blood of Jesus, and look upon it, go with the greatest sense of your
unworthiness of this blood; then go to the Spirit of God (whose work alone it
is) to apply and sprinkle, and then stand and wait where the Spirit stands with
his Hysop to sprinkle the souls of men: and so shall you be made partakers of
this great privilege.

But suppose that I be sprinkled with the blood of Jesus, and that this blood
of sprinkling has indeed fallen upon my soul, what is my duty then?

1. Then, Go away and doubt no more. When the sinning Jew was sprinkled, do you
think he doubted whether he were pardoned or no? No surely, he did believe that
he was pardoned, and that he was in Covenant with God. For those words were
used, This is the Blood of the Covenant. And shall you be sprinkled with the
blood of Jesus, and will you doubt whether you be in Covenant with the Lord by
Grace or no? etc.

This blood of sprinkling speaks, and you have heard what it speaks; -- now
then I pray take heed that you don't refuse him that speaks from Heaven; mark
how it follows, in the very next words to the Text, We are come to the Blood of
sprinkling that speaks better things then that of Abel. See that ye refuse
not him that speaks, for if they escaped not who refused him that spoke on
Earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn away from him that speaks
from Heaven. Why man or woman! it is Jesus that speaks to thee, Jesus the
Mediator of the Covenant that speaks un^o you to believe: What, are you
sprinkled? go away then and doubt no more: but take heed that ye refuse not him
that speaks from Heaven.

And secondly; Then also conclude and say; Now know I that I shall be preserved
from the destroyer. When the Isralites posts were sprinkled with the blood of
the Lamb, They could say; Now know I that I shall not be destroyed by this
destroying Angel? Art thou sprinkled with the blood of Jesus, say then: Now
know I that I shall not be destroyed, but that the Angel shall pass over me in
the destroying day.

3. Then also go away and be Contented with your Condition what ever it be: And
well you may, if you be sprinkled with the blood of Jesus you are made
partakers of the greatest priveledg that can be, and will you not then be
contented with your Condition? Go away and be contented with your Conditions,
saying I have now received the greatest privelege, for I am sprinkled with the
blood of Jesus. therefore will I be contented with my Condition? What ever it
be.

4. And then go away and praise God, and be very thankful; Be very thankful to
God the Father, and to the Lamb with whose blood you are sprinkled. Look into
the 5th Rev. and you shall find, there are 3 quires of Praisers, and all
praising upon the account of this blood: And when he had opened the book, v. 9.
the 24. Elders fell down before the Lamb, and they sung a new song: The four
and twenty Elders (these are men) saying, Thou art worthy to take the Book, and
to open the Seals thereof, for thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God by
thy blood: By thy blood, here is the foot of the Song.

Then comes in the Angels, another Quire, praising God, v. 11. And I beheld,
and I heard the Voice of many Angels round about the Throne, and the Beasts,
and the Elders, and the number of them was ten thousand times ten thousand, and
thousands of thousands, saying with a loud voices; Worthy is the Lamb that was
slain; see the foot of the song still, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain. Men
praise upon this account, Angels praise upon this account also.

There Is a third Quire, and those are other Creatures, verse. 13. And every
Creature which is in Heaven, and on the Earth, and under the Earth, and such as
are in the Sea, and all that are in them, heard I, saying; Blessing, Honor,
Glory, and Power, be unto him that sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb:
The word slain is not there, but to the Lamb, that is all one: Now shall there
be such praising God upon that account, for the Lambs being slain. And are you
indeed most concerned, and sprinkled with this blood of Jesus, this Lamb, and
will not you praise God? O! Go away, and be for ever thankful!

5. Go away and sin no more: Be not defiled with sin, for you see it cost dear
to cleanse you. The blood of Sprinkling, the blood of Jesus.

6. And go away and honor God, yet more in believing. It may be there are some
here, that never honored God to this day, with a believing smile: Man, Woman,
art thou sprinkled, indeed sprinkled with the blood of Jesus? Go away then, and
honor the Lord, with one smile of Faith this day.

7. And to conclude all, Art thou indeed sprinkled with the blood of Jesus;
then go away, and be sure that you never sell your Birthright, for a mess of
Pottage: Mark, how this Text comes in. In this 12 of the Heb. the Apostle
speaking of profane Esau: Take heed, says he, lest there be any Fornicator,
or Profane person, as Esau, who for one morsel of meat, sold his Birthright:
For ye know how that afterward, when he would have inherited the blessing, he
was rejected, for he found no place of Repentance, though he sought it
carefully with tears; for ye are not come to Mount Sinai, but ye are come to
Mount Sion, and ye are come to Jesus, the Mediator of the Covenant, and to the
blood of Sprinkling. What then? O! Take heed you do not sell your Birthright,
for a mess of Pottage! -- What is your Birthright? The Gospel is your
Birthright, you are born there-to (through Grace:) And, What is your little
estate, but a mess of Pottage; and what is your great estate, but a great boul
of Pottage. O! Do not sell your birthright for a mess of Pottage. You are
sprinkled, and the blood of sprinkling is upon you. Then hold fast, keep your
birth right, and never sell it for a mess of Pottage; for ye are come unto
Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, and to the Blood of Sprinkling: That
speaks better things, than the blood of Abel. And thus now I have done with
the fourth Argument, and with this Text.

Think on these things, and the Lord bless them to you.

The Sweetness and Profitableness of Divine Meditation. SERMON. VII.
Psalm. 164.34. My Meditation of him shall be sweet.


THe Psalm, is a Psalm of Thanskiving; wherein the Psalmist does call upon, and
provoke himself to praise the Lord, upon the account of his Greatness, verse. ^.
Bless the Lord, O my soul; O Lord my God, thou art very great, thou art clothed
with Honor and Majesty.

Which greatness of God is Illustrated, by the work of Creation, and
Preservation.

By the work of Creation, from the 2. verse. unto the 25.

By the work of Preservation; from the 25. unto the 33,

Having called upon himself thus to praise the Lord, he resolves to do it; I
will sing unto the Lord as long as I live, I will sing praise unto my God,
while I have my being.

And says he, My Meditations of him shall be sweet, I will be glad in the Lord.

My Meditation of him shall be sweet.

Take the words as they lie in themselves, and you have this Doctrine presently.

Doct. That it is a sweet thing for a gracious soul to meditate on God:
Meditation work, is sweet work. A gracious soul does find sweetness, in
meditating on God: David was a gracious man, and he found sweetness in this
work of Meditation on God. It Is the property then of a gracious soul, to find
sweetness in meditating on God.

For the opening and prosecuting of which Argument;

First, We will inquire what this Meditation is, what is the true Nature and
Notion of Meditation.

2. How, and in what respects, a man may be said to meditate on God.

3. How it may appear, that it is a sweet thing to meditate on God, and the
things of God.

4. I shall answer unto some Objections.

And then show how the work of Meditation, is to be carried on with sweetness:
Which is my design in the choice of these words.

I. As for the first, What the work of Meditation is, what is the true Notion of
it: It Is several ways expressed in Scripture.

Sometimes it is called, a Remembering of God, in the 63 Psalm, When I remember
thee upon my Bed, which is explained by that which follows, And meditate on
thee, in the night watches.

Some times it is called, a Thinking on God; so in Psalm, 48.9. We have thought
of thy loving kindness, O God.

And sometimes it is called, a Musing on God: and so in the 143 Psalm, I
remember the days of old, I meditate on all thy works, I muse on the work of
thy hands. Thus it is severally expressed in Scripture

Great Authors, do describe it several ways.

It is a vehement application of the soul, unto a thing, for the Investigation
and Experimental knowledge thereof. So Gerson, and others.

It is a studious action of the mind, whereby a man labors to find out some
hidden truth; so Austine.

It is the exercise of a man's soul, whereby calling to Remembrance what he does
know already; he does further think on it, and debate on it within himself, for
his own profit and benefit; so Mr. Greenham.

But plainly and briefly thus:

It is the vehement, or intense application of the soul, unto some thing,
whereby a man's mind does ponder, dwell, and fix upon it, for his own profit and
benefit.

First, There must be the application of the soul, to some thing; and therefore
sometimes it is expressed by laying of a thing to heart: The Righteous are
taken away, and no man lays it to heart; no man considers on it: If ye will not
lay these things to heart, Mal. 2.2. etc.

And as there must be an Application, so there must be a vehement and intense
Application of the soul, unto a thing. For every Consideration don't make
Meditation: Consideration heightened, makes Meditation.

Meditation is the work of the whole soul: The Mind acts, and the Memory acts,
and the Affections act; Let the Words of my mouth, and the Meditations of my
heart: It is an intense and a vehement application of the soul unto truth.

But thirdly, There must be also a Fixation of the soul upon the thing: It is
not every slight and transient thought, that makes Meditation; My meditation
shall be of thee, all the d^y, Psalm. 119. It Is, Actio cunctabunda, says
Alvares. A man may think on God every day, and meditate on God no day: There
must be a fixation of the soul upon some truth; a dwelling and fixing of the
soul, upon some thing.

But then, This must be in reference to ones own profit and benefit. Though I
do think, and think much of sin, if I do not think thereof to leave it, it is
not Meditation. -- Though I think on the life and the death of Christ, if it be
not to conform unto him, these thoughts will not amount to Meditation. --
Though I think on the love and goodness of God, yet if it be not to get my
heart inflamed with love thereby, it will not amount to Meditation.

Plainly then, Meditation for the true Nature, and the Notion often, is a
vehement, an intense application of the soul, unto a thing; whereby a man's mind
does dwell, and insist, and abide upon it, for his profit, and benefit: that is
the first.

2. But then Secondly, How and in what respects may a man be said to meditate
on God?

Why look when a man does meditate on the Name, Nature, Titles, and Attributes
of God, then he is said to meditate on God.

On the Nature of God: so in Psalm. 63. When I remember Thee upon my Bed, and
meditate on Thee in the night watches.

And look when a man does meditate on Christ the Son of God, then he is said
for to meditate on God: For Christ is God: and therefore says the Apostle;
Consider the high Priest of your Profession, looking unto Jesus.

And look when a man does meditate on the Word of God, the Law and Statutes of
God, then he is said to meditate on God, Psalm. 1. He delights in the Law of
the Lord, and therein does he meditate.

And look when a man does meditate on the works and Concernments of God, then
in Scripture Phrase he is said to Meditate on God; And so in the 77. Psalm. I
will Remember the works of the Lord; I will Remember thy wonderes, and I will
meditate also of all thy works: So that briefly; Then a man is said to meditate
on God; Not only when he does meditate on the nature of God; but when he does
meditate on the Son of God, meditates on the Word of God, meditates on the
Works and Concernments of God. And that is the second.

3. But how may it appear that it is a sweet thing to meditate on God? That
meditation-work is sweet work, and that it is a sweet thing to a gracious soul
to meditate on God?

Something first in the General, and then more particularly in reference to a
gracious soul. In General:

It is a sweet to meditate on God. Will you instance in the Nature, Name, and
Attributes of God?

First is it not a sweet thing to Enjoy God? Enjoyment of God is the life of
our lives. And how do we Enjoy God? God does come down to us, and we do Ascend
and go up to him: Sometimes God does come down into our souls? Sometimes
there is an ascent of the soul unto God. And what is the Ladder whereby we
ascend unto God, and take our turns in Heaven with God, but believing
Meditation?

The more perfect any thing is, the more sweet it is to lay out ones thought
there on. Now God is all perfection; There is nothing not perfect in God: If
you have a nose-gay made up of flowers, and but one weed, the sweetness of the
nose-gay is spoiled; There are perfections in God, and no weeds among them. If
there be a Musical Instrument and one string out of order, all jarr's. There is
no string out of order among Gods perfections: perfection and nothing not
perfect in God. You account it a sweet thing to see your Lands, and your estate
lie together, a sweet thing to see all your Children together: Do but look and
meditate on God, and you see all your wealth lie together.

And if the Names, Titles, Attributes of God be your relief in all Conditions;
Then it must needs be a sweet thing to meditate on God in this respect. Why
now; The name of the Lord is a strong Tower, the righteous fly thereunto and
are safe. A sweet thing it is therefore to meditate on God in this respect.

2. Will you Instance in the meditating on Christ the Son of God? You know what
is said by the Spouse in the Canticles. I sat down under his shadow: Sat
down, how? It Is meditation sets the soul down under the shadow of Christ --
And then his fruit, whether Justification be the fruit, or sanctification, or
Consolation; Then his fruit was sweet unto my taste.

And If Jesus Christ be our standing relief against all Temptations, and
Desertions; Then it must needs be a sweet thing to meditate and think much on
him. Now he is our Brazen Serpent, our standing relief against all our
Temptation, and our Desertions.

But 3ly. will you Instance in meditating on the Word of God? It Is a sweet
thing to behold the light; and the word is a light, and Lanthorn unto our feet.
Is it not a sweet thing to taste honey? David says The word of the Lord was as
honey and the Honeycomb. And the more it is meditated on, the more fully tasted.

And if the Consideration, and the meditation of the word of God be our great
relief against all the scorns and reproaches, and oppositions of the World,
then certainly it is a sweet thing to meditate on the word of God. Now do but
look into the 119th Psalm. and you shall find David speaking thus; Remove from
me reproach and contempt; Princes did sit and speak against me -- what relief
had he? -- But thy servant did meditate in thy Statutes. Here Is his relief,
Princes, Great-men; They sat and spoke against me, and they reproached me, and
they opposed me, but here was my relief, I did meditate in thy word.

But Fourthly, will you Instance in the works of the Lord? There are Three
sorts of Gods works.

There Is the work of Creation.

And the work of Providence.

And the work of Redemption.

As for the work of Creation: If it be a sweet thing to behold and to consider
the workmanship of the Finger of human wisdom: What a pleasure and sweetness
is it to behold the workmanship of the Finger of Infinite wisdom?

And as for the works of Providence: If the meditation and the Consideration of
the Providence of God be our great help against the pain of unbelieving
thoughts; Then it must needs be a sweet thing to meditate on God in this
respect. Friends, ye tha^ know God, have experience how painful unbelieving
thoughts are; Great is the pain of unbeli^ving thoughts -- well, but what help
against this pain? -- The Consideration of the Providence of God: Sait^ our
Savior in the 10th Matthew, The very hairs o^ your Head are all numbered, fear
ye not therefore, ye ar^ of more value than many Sparrows, -- what then -- take
no thought, here lies your relief; The Consideration, and the meditation of the
special providenc^ of God, is your help against painful unbelief,

And as for the work of Redemption, There all the Attributes of God do meet:
There is Wisdom, there is Power, there is Mercy, there is Righteousness, there
is Faithfulness: And, If it be a sweet thing to behold the Beams of the Sun,
what a sweet thing is it to behold all the Beams of Gods glorious Attributes,
meeting in one work; which work the very Angels desire to look into, where the
Glory of God is: Certainly, It is a sweet thing then to meditate on God, in
regard of his works; These things more generally.

But now more particularly, as to our case.

How may it appear, that it is a sweet thing for a gracious soul, to meditate
on God: It will appear to you by diverse Arguments.

First, It is a sweet thing for a good and gracious man, to meditate on God,
and the things of God, because it is natural to him. Natural works are pleasant
works: It is a tedious and an irksome thing to row against the stream of
Nature; but Natural works are pleasing works. Now as it is a natural thing for
a worldly man, to think and meditate on the world, and the things thereof; so
it is natural to a gracious man, to think and meditate on God, and the things
of God. I pray, What is the reason, that wicked men take so much delight in
thinking, and meditating, and musing, on their sins and sinful ways, but
because sin is natural unto them: Why, a good man being made partaker of a
Divine nature, it is natural to him therefore to think on God, and the ways and
things of God; and therefore pleasant, therefore sweet.

But secondly, As it is natural to a gracious man to think on God, and the
things of God, so it is suitable to him. As it is a natural work, so it is a
suitable work: suitable things are pleasant; the more suitable any thing is unto
us, the more it pleases us, all pleasure and delights, arises from the
conjunction of sutables: If you have never so great an estate, if it be not
suited to your heart, you have no delight in it. If you have never so small an
estate, if it be suitable to your heart, you are delighted and pleased in it.
Now, what in all the world, so suitable to a gracious soul as God? Is the
Object of a man's understanding Truth? God is truth. Is the Object of his Will
Good? God is good. Is the object of his Affections Love? God is love. Is the
soul of a man Immortal, Immaterial? God is so, an Immortal, and an Immaterial
Being. Is the Soul of a man Eternal, a part post? God is so, God is eternal
and unchangeable. Are our desires infinite? God is Infinite. What is there that
the soul of man can want, but it is answered in God? A suitable good he is
surely, therefore it must needs be a sweet thing to meditate on God, and the
things of God.

But Thirdly, and Especially, As it is a suitable thing for a gracious soul to
meditate on God, so it is profitable. Gain is sweet: Now it is a very gainful
thing, and very profitable for to meditate on God, and the things of God:
Meditation work, is gainful work.

For first of all, Meditation is a great help to Knowledge: The more you think,
and meditate on what you read and hear; the more you know, and though you read
never so much, and hear never so much, if you don't meditate on what you read,
or hear, it will amount to little, you will be never the wiser: If a man does
meditate, he proves the wiser. Mark what David says, Psalm. 119. I am wiser
then mine Enemies, v. 89. I am wiser then my Teachers, I am wiser then the
Ancients, v. 98. Through thy Commandments, thou have made me wiser then mine
enemies. -- It may be so, they might be fools. -- But says he, I have more
understanding, then all my Teachers, v. 99. I, but this Teacher may be some
young man, newly come from the University. -- I have more understanding then
all my Teachers: I but, says he, I und^rstand more then the Ancients. Pray
how? For thy Testimonies are my meditation. Through thy Commandments, thou have
made me wiser than my enemies; for they are ever with me. I have more
understanding than all my Teachers, for thy Testimonies are my Meditation.
Meditatio sapientiae Parens, Meditation is the P^rent of Wisdom. If you read
over a Book, and there be many Notions and good things in the Book, yet if the
Notions be not made your own, if you be not Master of the Notions you read, you
are never the better. If I read, and read, and find such and such Not^ons in a
Book, if I be not Master of those Notions, I am little the better for my
reading. It Is Meditation that makes you the Master of the Notions that you
read, or that you hear, otherwise, it is but the Book's Notion still. By
meditation after a Sermon, a man may look further into a truth, than the
Preacher ever intended: Meditation is a great help to Knowledge: that is the
first.

2. As Meditation is a great help to Knowledge, so it is a great friend to
Memory. Meditatio firmat memoriam: Meditation strengthens Memory, it fastens
the things that we hear or read, in the memory. Many complain they have bad
memories: Oh! their memories are very bad, they cannot remember: what is the
reason that we remember no more what we read, and what we hear, but because we
meditate no more upon what we have heard, or read: Meditation is a great help
to Memory.

3. As Meditation is a great help to memory, so it is an Heart-warming work, a
Friend to warmth of heart. If a thing be cold, you chafe it, if a man's body be
cold, you chafe it, and rub it; and by chafing and rubbing of a cold part, you
put life and warmth into it: Meditation chafes the soul, and rubs the soul with
a truth. And what is the reason that our hearts are no warmer by what we read,
or hear, or observe, but because we meditate no more on it. Meditation is a
heart-warming work.

4. As it is an heart-warming work, so it is that which will keep your hearts,
and souls, from sinful thoughts. When the Vessel is full, you can put in no
more: If the Vessel be full of puddle water, you cannot put in Wine; if the
Vessel be full of wine, you cannot put in puddle water. If the heart be full of
sinful thoughts, there is no room for holy and heavenly thoughts; if the heart
be filled with holy and heavenly thoughts by Meditation, there is no room for
evil and sinful thoughts. And what is the reason that men's hearts are so full of
sinful and evil thoughts, but because their hearts are no more full of God;
they think no more, they meditate no more of God: Thereby (I say) you will be
kept from sinful thoughts.

5. As it will keep you from sinful thoughts; so it will fit and tune your
hearts for every Duty: For Prayer, for Thanksgiving, for holy Conference and
Communication of good things to others.

For Prayer, it is Orationis Matter, etc.

As it is the Sister of Reading; so it is the Mother of Prayer. Though a man's
heart be much indisposed to prayer, yet, if he can but fall into a meditation
of God, and the things of God, his heart will soon come off to Prayer.
Meditation lies so near unto Prayer, that in the Hebrew, the word that
signifies to Pray, signifies to Meditate: And therefore you shall observe, that
whereas in some Books it is said, that Isaac went out to Pray, in other Books
it is said, that Isaac went out to Meditate. Meditation is a friend to Prayer.

And it is a Friend to Thanksgiving; and therefore says the Psalmist here in
the Text, I will sing praise unto my God, my meditation of him shall be sweet;
they go together.

And it is a great help unto holy Conference, (which I am afraid is too much
wanting among us) Private meditation on God and the things of God, is a great
help unto holy Conference. Psalm. 45.1. My heart is inditing a good matter --
What then? I speak of the things which I have made touching the King: my tongue
is the pen of a ready writer. -- When? -- When the heart has been at work in
Meditation, Psalm. 77.12. I will meditate also of all thy works. -- What then?
-- and talk of thy doings. See how Conference comes in. I will meditate also of
all thy works, and talk of all thy doings. So that thus then, Meditation will
fit and prepare you, and tune your hearts to Prayer, Thanksgiving, holy
Conference, and other Duties.

6. As Meditation is a great friend to Prayer, and to other Duties; so it is a
help unto growth in grace, and the Knowledge of Christ.

A help to grow: The more we meditate on what we read and hear, the more we
grow. And what is the reason, that men grow no more after all that they have
heard and read, but because they meditate no more. The best Scholar Reads and
Meditates, and Meditates and Reads. And the best Christian reads and meditates,
and hears and meditates. The growing Christian does. Suppose now you have a
load of Dung, or Marl, to lay upon the ground, you lay it upon the ground, to
make it fat and fruitful; but if it be laid upon the ground and not spread,
will it make the grass or the corn grow; no, it will hinder the growth of the
grass: The spreading of it makes the grass grow: So now, come and lay down a
load of Truth upon a poor Soul, and let it lie unspread, it rather hinders his
growth; but the Hand of Meditation spreads it. And, I say, What is the reason
that s men grow no more, but because it may be Sermon, or Truths, like loads,
are laid down upon the Soul, but no spreading by the Hand of Meditation.

7. As Meditation-work is a great friend to growth in grace; so thereby also
your hearts shall be kept savoury and spiritual in the midst of all your
outward and worldly Employments. Oh, says one, that my heart were but more
savory and spiritual in all my outward Employments, and in my Calling. Why,
Meditation carries a Still up and down in the soul, whereby it does extract and
distill the Virtue and the Juice of all the leaves of Providence, that it meets
with in the Calling. You see how it is with a Cow, or with a Sheep, though the
grass that the Cow or the Sheep eats be green; yet by Concoction, and digesting
of it, it turns white, and turns into milk: so now, though that which you read,
that which you meet withal in your callings be but ordinarily as the common
grass, yet if you can digest it, it will be milk unto you. And how are these
things digested, but by Meditation?

Friends, Thereby you steal out of your calling to get unto God.

Thereby your hearts are perfumed as you walk along in your calling and in your
place.

This is that, that will keep your hearts savoury and spiritual in all your
outward and worldly employments: that is a seventh thing.

8. Thereby also you shall fill up all the chinks and crevices of your lives
and spend your spare times for God. There is no man but has his spare times,
more or less: Some more, some less, but all have their spare times: That look
as it is with a Book, all Books have their margents, some Books have a greater
margent, some a lesser, and a narrower margent, but all Books have their
margents; so all men have their margents, their spare times: some have a
greater margent, and more time to spare than others, some have a lesser and a
narrower margent, and less spare-time than others. But all men have their
margents, and their spare times. Some men know not what to do with their spare
time, therefore they call in for Dice, and call in for Cards, and call in for
Vanity. Some, when they are out of Employment, they dare not be alone. Have but
the skill of Meditation, to meditate on God and the things of God, and you will
never be afraid to be alone: your margents will be all filled up, all the
chincks and crevices of your lives shall be all filled up with God: Therefore,
O what a profitable thing is this work of Meditation!

9. Thereby you shall be also able to draw good out of evil: here is the
Philosopher's stone: What a great ado has there been in the World about the
Philosopher's stone, to get that: Why? because of the profit of it; thereby
Lead is turned into Gold, and other metals turned into Gold: but here is the
Philos^pher's stone indeed; Meditation will turn all into Gold; turn evils into
good, bring good out of evil, grace out of sin: There is a deal of d^rt li^s at
your door, and there is no flowers grow out of it; bu^ bring the same dirt into
your Garden, and then fl^wers grow out of it. So now, if sin lie at your door,
there are no flowers grow thereon; but bring your sin, your dirt into your
Garden of Meditation, and you shall have flowers grow out of your dirt.

10. Lastly, Thereby you shall converse with God, and enjoy God. The happiness
of our life lies in our enjoyment of God, and in our converse with God. There
is a converse with God in this life, a (...), our Conversation is in heaven,
our Trade is in heaven: and how do we come to trade in heaven, why, we go up to
God in Meditation, and there we take our walks with the Almighty: thus we trade
with God, thus we converse with God: Surely therefore, this work of Meditation
is sweet, for it is profitable, as you have heard in these ten particulars.

4. Again, As the work of Meditation is very profitable, natural, suitable; so
it is very contentful, and satisfying to a gracious Soul. What person in Love,
is not satisfied in thinking, and meditating on the person loved? What gracious
loving Child, is not satisfied in thinking on his Father, that is absent in an
other Country? So what David says, in the 63d. Psalm, My soul shall be
satisfied, as with marrow and fatness -- When? -- When I remember thee upon my
bed, and meditate on thee in the night watches. I shall not only be contented,
but my Soul shall be satisfied -- how? -- In a way of Meditation: It Is
Meditation-work that is soul-satisfying work.

5. And as it is soul-satisfying work, so this work of Meditation to a gracious
soul, is a most delightful work: What greater delight, than to think on that
God in whom he does most delight? Is it delightful to a wicked man to sit and
muse, and meditate on his sinful ways; and will it not be delightful to a
gracious soul, to sit and think, and muse, and meditate on the Lord? Certainly,
it is a work that is most delightful to a gracious soul.

Object. But how can it be so delightful? it is a hard work, Meditation work is
hard work, and therefore how can it be so delightful to a gracious soul?

Yes, very well, for though it be hard in regard of its practice, yet it may be
sweet and delightful in regard of its profit. Is it not a hard work to the
Husbandman to plow, to sow, to reap; and yet delightful in regard of its
profit? Is it not a hard wo^k for a man to be digging in the Mines, digging up
of Silver; and yet delightful in regard of the profit? Is it not a hard work
for a man to make such ventures at Sea, through all storms; and yet it is
delightful in regard of its profit; the profit of the Voyage makes it
delightful: Why, you have heard now the profitableness of the work of
Meditation -- It is an help to Knowledge, thereby your knowledge is raised --
Thereby your Memory is strengthened -- Thereby your Hearts are warmed --
Thereby you will be freed from sinful thoughts -- Thereby your hearts will be
tuned to every duty -- Thereby you will grow in grace -- Thereby you will fill
up all the chinks and crevices of your lives -- And know how to spend your
spare time, and imp^ove that for God -- Thereby you will draw good out of evil
-- And thereby you will converse with God, have communion with God, and enjoy
God: And I pray, is not here profit enough to sweeten the voyage of your
thoughts in Meditation?

But, Secondly, Hard work you say, and therefore how can it be delightful!

Friends, The harder the work is, the sweeter it is, being overcome: It Is a
sweet thing to overcome: It Is hard thing to fight, but it is a sweet thing to
overcome: The harder the Nutt is to crack, the sweeter is the meat when it is
cracked; the harder the Scripture is that is to be opened, the sweeter is the
kernel, the truth when it is opened. When God opened the Rock, the Waters that
flowed out were as sweet as honey. Now meditation makes a Conquest of the work.

3. Though it be a hard thing to meditate on God and the things of God, yet
notwithstanding do but consider why the wo^k is hard, and you will say that the
difficulty of the work is no Impeachment to the suavity, or the sweetness
thereof. There are two things that make meditation hard:

The one is, because men are not used thereunto, men are not exercised therein:

And another is, because they don't love God enough:

Every thing is hard at the first: Writing is hard at the First, Painting hard
at the first, and the getting Languages hard at the first. A Trade is hard at
the First. So certainly the work of meditation will be hard at the first: There
is nothing not hard to those that are unwilling, There is nothing hard to those
that Love. Love makes all things easy: Is it an hard thing for a Lover to
think or meditate on the Person loved? Is it a hard thing for a Child at a
distance from his Father to think or meditate on his Father, and his Father's
love and kindness, is this hard? Indeed to a Rebellious Child it is hard, to a
Child that is run away from his Father it is hard; but for a loving and an
obedient Child, it is not hard. And what is the reason that the work of
meditation is so hard to many of us, but because in truth we are not used
thereunto -- or because we are rebellious Children, and don't love the Lord as
we ought to do.

Quest. But you will say, May not a wicked man meditate on God, and find
sweetness in the Work?

Answ. I answer, that it is possible that a wicked man may separate, and
sequester himself unto this work of reading, studying, and thinking on the word
and Law of God: 1 Samuel 21.7. Now a certain man of the servants of Saul was
there that day, deteyned before the Lord, and his Name was Doeg. He was there,
separated, cloystered for the studying of the Law, and yet a Doeg, a great
persecuter. And who does not see it? Friars, and Monks separate and Cloister up
themselves at this very day, and spend much time in that which they call
Meditation.

Yea possible it is, that a wicked man may not only think and meditate on the
Law of God, but he may find some sweetness therein; for if wicked men do
delight in their approach unto God, as in the 58. of Isaiah, Why may they not
delight also and find a sweetness in their meditation concerning God.

But 3dly. Though a wicked man may meditate on God, and the things of God, and
find some sweetness in the work of meditation, yet with this difference. There
is a great deal of difference between the sweetness that a wicked man finds in
the work of meditation, and the sweetness that a good man finds in the work of
meditation. For though a wicked man may meditate, and find some sweetness in
the work; yet not withstanding the sweetness does rather arise from the
satisfaction of his natural Conscience, than from the Connaturalness and
suitableness that is between his heart and the work. Possibly a Doeg, a wicked
man may be Convinced that he ought to read the scriptures, and to meditate
the^ein, and having don so his Conscience is satisfied, and he finds sweetness
therein; But ^his sweetness does rather arise from the satisfying of his
n^tural Conscience, than from any Connaturalnesse and suitableness that there
is between his heart and the work.

2. It is one thing for a man to find a sweetness in this work of meditation in
reference to his own employment, Calling, or livelihood; another thing for to
find a sweetness in it in reference unto God, to his own practice, and holiness
of life and Conversation. Suppose I be a Preacher: It Is my duty to study the
Scriptures: And studying of the Scripture I meditate, and when things come off
well, I have a sweetness therein; Yet all this may be in reference to my
calling, to my employment, and to my livelihood. But now a gracious man he
meditates on God and the things of God in reference to God, to his holiness,
and practice; Mark what David says. 119th Psalm. I will delight my self in thy
Commandments; which I have loved. My hands also will I lift up unto thy
Commandments, which I have loved; and I will meditate in thy statutes. Lord,
says he, I love thy Commandments: And upon that account I meditate in thy
Commandments: And I don't only meditate, but my hands also will I lift up
unto thy commandments. For practice, I will not only lay my eye to reading, I
will not only lay my head to studying, but my hands also will I lift up unto
thy Commandments; to take hold on them, and to practice them. So that thus a
gracious soul, as he meditates on God and the things of God, and he finds a
sweetness; so it is in reference unto God, and to his own practice and holiness
in Conversation.

But 3dly. Though a wicked man may meditate on God and the things of God, and
find a sweetness in so doing; yet he does also find as great, if not a greater
sweetness in other things, and in meditating and musing upon his Sins, and in
the World, J^b. 20.12. Though wickedness be sweet in his mouth, though he hide
it under his tongue, though he spare it, and forsake it not, but keep it still
within his mouth, as a sweet pellet; here is his great delight. Though he may
meditate on God, and the things of God, and find some sweetness there, his
great delight is here, in his sin; And he finds rather more delight and
pleasure in musing on his sin, and sinful course, and meditating on the World
and the things thereof, than he finds in meditating on God and the things of
God. But now a Gracious man delights in the Law of the Lord, and therein does
he meditate: why, but does he not also stand in the Counsel of the ungodly? --
No, he walks not in the Counsel of the ungodly, but his delight is in the Law
of the Lord, and in his L^w does he meditate: -- he stands not in the way of
sinners: Possibly he may meet with sinners, and wicked men occasionally; but he
does not walk with them ordinarily, he does not stand with them, but his
delight is in the Law of the Lord, and therein does he meditate.

But to say no more. Take a wicked man, and though he may meditate on God, and
the things of God, and find some sweetness therein, he does not do this
ordinarily, meditate ordinarily, and continually, God is not in all his
thoughts, God may be in some of his thoughts, but God is not in all his
thoughts. But this meditation of God and the things of God, is the ordinary
work of a good man, he delights in the Law of the Lord, and therein does he
meditate day and night. Meditation on God and the things of God is his ordinary
work; So that thus now you see the difference, and thus you see the Doctrine
cleared: It Is a sweet thing to a gracious soul to meditate on God and the
things of God, meditation-work is sweet work to a gracious soul. -- Sweet for
it is Natural, -- Sweet, for it is suitable -- Sweet, for it is profitable. --
Sweet, for it is satisfying -- Sweet, for it is delightful: And, If these
things be so;

What shall we say of those that never spent any time yet alone in meditating
on God, and the things of G^d? Never spent a day, never spent half a day,
never spent an hour in private meditating on God and the things of God. Shall
we say, these are Godly? Why, in the time of the Old Testament the beasts were
unclean that did not chew the Cudd; in the New Testament it is made the property
of the Highway Ground, that the seed falls upon it, and it is not covered over
with meditation, and consideration.

What, Is it the property of a gracious soul to meditate on God, and does he
find so much sweetness in meditating on God and the things of God? and have I
lived Twenty years, have I lived Thirty years, have I lived Forty years, and
never spent an hour yet in private in meditation on God and the things of God,
how can I think I am Godly?

If this Doctrine be true, that a gracious holy man finds a sweetness in
meditating on God, and meditation work is sweet work to a gracious soul, then,
Friends, why should you not all labor to be found here, in this work of
meditation. I fear we are strangers hereunto: many come and hear Sermons, and
write Sermons one time after another, and afterward they stand up upon dusty
shelves, and are never meditated on: But is this true that a gracious man finds
so much sweetness in the work of meditation, and that it is so profitable a
work? why should we not all labor to be found herein?

You will say then unto me, Meditation is a sweet work we confess, and very
profitable; but what should I do that I may be able to carry on this work of
meditation with sweetness? I have found it hard some times, and after I have
begun it I threw it off. Sometimes I have thought that the work of meditation
is Incumbent only upon Preachers, but I see it is sweet, and profitable and
good for every one. What shall I do then that I may be able to carry on this
work of meditation with sweetness?

That I shall speak to, more largely: Only for the present give me leave to say
some thing to it by way of premises; I Will only speak to Four Cases, and so
conclude this Exercise.

Would you meditate on God and the things of God with sweetness? First, In case
that you would meditate on the Nature, and Attributes of God, be sure that you
divide your thoughts, for variety is most refreshing: All the Attributes of God
are worthy of our thoughts; do not therefore stand poring on one excellency,
or upon one Attribute; but when you are most fearful, put your thoughts upon
that in God which is most cheerful: When you are most cheerful, put your
thoughts upon that in God, which is most dread-ful: ever more divide your
thoughts, if you be to meditate on God, and the Name and Nature and Attributes
of God.

And Secondly, be sure of this, That you meditate, not in a way of Reason only,
when you come to meditate on God, but in a way of Faith. For, Who can give the
Reason of the Trinity in Unity, and the Unity in Trinity? How can men know and
understand this, that the Second Person should be begotten of the Father from
all Eternity, and yet be coequal with the Father: here Reason halts. Says one
truly, Dispute not with G^d, lest you ^e c^nfounded; Dispute not with Satan,
lest y^u be overcome. And I say, If you would not fail and miscarry in your
work of Meditation, be sure that when you are to meditate on God, the Nature,
the Names, the Attributes of God, that then your meditation be carried on in a
way of Faith, and not of Reason only.

3. And then be sure of this, that you never think of God out of Christ: I
thought upon God and was troubled, says the Psalmist, Why? he did not think of
Christ too. I thought upon God and was troubled. I, but think upon God in
Christ, and you will not be troubled: Never think of God but in Christ: It Is an
horrible thing, says Luther, to think of God out of Christ. This is the first
thing, in case that you would meditate on God, the Nature, the Names, and
Attributes of God; divide your thoughts, meditate in a way of Faith, and not in
a way of Reason -- and never think of God out of Christ.

2. In case that you would meditate on Christ the Son God, be sure of this,
That you think on Christ, and meditate on Christ, as your great example, as
well as your gift, And your gift, as well as your example; There is both in
Christ, when your hearts are most brisk, think on Christ, as your example; and
when your hearts are most low, think on Christ as your gift. But if that you
would meditate on Christ, carry on both; think on Christ as well for your
example as for your gift, and for your gift, as well as for your example.

And never think on Christ out of the Gospel: For as you may not think on God
out of Christ, so you may not meditate on Christ out of the Gospel: Christ is a
living Gospel, and the Gospel a dead Christ.

And in all your meditations on Christ, be sure that you observe, what that
Title of Christ is, that is most suitable to your condition, and then meditate
thereupon.

But thirdly, In case you would meditate on the Word of God;

First know, that there are four parts of the Word. -- There Is the
Commandment. -- The Promise. -- The Threatening. -- The Example. These four
divide the whole Word of God. Precept, Promise, Threatening, Example.

If you have to deal with a Commandment, or Precept, remember this, That there
is no Precept and Commandment, but is backed and surrounded with several
Promises; Promises of assistance, and Promises of reward.

In case you have to deal with a Promise, Know this: God is as punctual in
performing, as he is gracious in promising.

In case you have to deal with a Threatening, Then remember this: that God
threatens, that he may not fulfill, but he promises, that he may fulfill. As
God promises that he may fu^fill, So he threatens that he may not fulfill.

And in case you have to deal with an Example, Remember this, that there is no
Example, but has a Promise, or a Threatening, in the bowels or bosom of it.

But Secondly, If you would meditate on God in ^eference to his Word: Then look
upon all the Word of God, as your Fathers Letter, and your own ^vidence. If a
Child be beyond Sea, and a Letter ^ome from the Father, the Child reads it; he
reads (...), again and again, and thinks on it: Another, that (...) a stranger
to the Letter, though he see it, he don't ^ead it so often over, nor meditate
so often on it, ^ut the Son does. Why? it is my Fathers Letter, ^ith he, and so
I Will read it, and meditate on it, and ^ink on it. So some men do not look upon the
Scrip^res as their Fathers Letters sent from Heaven to them: But those that are
good, they look upon all the Chapters there as their Fathers Letters; and I
will read it over, for it is my Fathers Letter, and I will think on it much, for
it is my Fathers Letter. Thus then, Look upon the Word as your Fathers Letter.

And look upon the Scripture also as your own Evidence: A man has an Evidence
for Land, and, it may be, the parchment is a dusty thing, yet he takes a great
deal of pains in reading it over, and thinking on it; Why, (says one that
stands by) Why will you spend so much time in reading of a dusty Parchment?
But, O Friend, says he, Friend, it is my Evidence for my Inheritance. So now,
when men come to the Word, and do not look upon it as their Evidence for their
Land, they have no list to meditate on it, but when a man comes to the Word,
and can look upon it as his Evidence for a great Inheritance, then he loves to
meditate on it. Remember therefore these two things, -- That all that is in the
Word, is either Commandment, or Promise, -- Threatening, or Example: -- And look
upon the Word as your Fathers Letters and as your own Evidence. And then,

Fourthly, In case that you would Meditate on the works of God.

First, Be sure of this, that you look upon al^ the works of God as Enammelled
and Embroidered with so many Attributes of God: For the more you see the
Attributes of God shining forth upon his Works, the more sweetness you will
take in the meditating the^eof. But if you don't se^ the Attributes of God
shining forth upon his Works you will take no sweetness in meditating thereon.

Then be sure, that you don't take things apart, an^ separate from another, but
take all together: They are set one over against the other. If you part the
Works of God, you will find no beauty nor sweetness in the consideration of
them; but put all together, the design, and end of the Work, and the whollness
of the Work gives a beauty to it. Take heed therefore that you don't separate
between piece and piece, but carry all togethe^, and the end thereof.

Thirdly, If you would meditate on God, in reference to his Works, be sure of
this, that you never go to read Gods Work, but by Gods Candle: The Work of God
is a great Book; but the work of God cannot be read but by Gods word: God has
a Candle of his own to read his W^rk by: When you go to read his Work, be sure
you carry his Candle along with you, and so shall you be sure to read it the
better. I have done.

Be sure you look upon every work of God, as coming out of the hand of your
Father, that you may say, O this is my Fathers work, and this is my Fa^hers
work. London is destroyed, but this is my Fathers work: You have heard of that
honest good man of Chelmsford, when it thundered and lightened, insomuch, as all
the Town were afraid that Doomsday was come; how he got upon a Stall in the
Street, and said, This is my Fa^hers voice: And so when you look upon any work
of the Lord, look upon it as your Fathers work, and then you will take a
sweetness and contentment in the Meditation thereof.

And thus I have given you some taste: But how this work of Meditation is to be
carried on with sweetness, I reserve for the next Exercise; only for the
present, you have heard what a profitable thing it is, to meditate on the
things of God: What now remains, but to get up and be thinking and meditating
on God, and the things of God.

The Work and Way of Meditation. SERMON. VIII.
HAving showed how sweet and profitable the work of Meditation is, to meditate
on God, and the things of God; we came the last day to this Question, or
Objection:

But if the work of Meditation, be so sweet and profitable: What shall we do,
that this work of Meditaon, may be carried on with sweetness and profit?

I am a stranger to this work of Meditation; I have often read the Scriptures,
and not meditated on them. I have often heard the Word, and not meditated
thereon: I have sometimes begun to meditate, but finding it a hard work, I have
left it off again. And sometimes I have thought that this work is incumbent
only upon Students, and Preachers: But if it be our duty to meditate on God,
and the things of God, what shall we do that the work of holy Meditation, may
be carried on with profit, and with sweetness?

For answer hereunto, four or five things, I shall speak unto.

First, I shall labor to show you, that it is our duty to meditate on God, and
the things of God.

2. That this work of Meditation, is every Man's work, -- and every Days work:
-- And such a work as is Consistent wi^h ev^ry busi^^ss, and condition.

3. I shall lay down some means for the right performance of this work.

4. Give you some Rules and Directions, how this work of Meditation should be
carried on with sweetness and profit, in a right manner.

And then draw forth some Arguments, or Motives to press you all hereunto.

I. First, It is our work and duty, to meditate on God, and the things of God:
Will you instance according to our Explication at the first.

Will you instance in the Nature, Titles, and Attributes of God? Why, it is our
work and duty so to meditate on God: For wicked men are blamed, that God is not
in all their thoughts; If they be blamed for this, that God is not in all their
thoughts, then surely God is to be in all our thoughts.

Good and holy men are commended, and rewarded for this: They that feared the
Lord, spoke often one to another, and a book of Remembrance was written for
them that feared the Lord, and that Thought on his Name. They are commended, --
and they are rewarded. In the day when God makes up his Jewels, they shall be
found among them, Mal. 3.

And who does not know that it is our duty to praise the Lord: not only to be
thankful to God upon the account of benefits received, but to pra^se the Lord
upon the account of his own Excellencies; and how should the heart be tuned and
framed unto this praising of God, but by meditation on the Name and Nature, and
Titles of God? Psalm. 48. Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised, v ^. --
How does he tune his heart to this praise? We have th^ught of thy loving
kindness, O God.

The more that the heart of any man is laid in with meditation, the more
pregnant will his words be in the praises of God. So that thus then, it is our
duty for to meditate upon this account.

But Secondly, Will you instance in Christ the Son of God? As it is our work
and duty to meditate on the Nature, Titles, and Attributes of God, so to spend
and to lay out our thoughts upon Christ the Son of God. You may observe
therefore, that this word Behold, is oftener prefixed, and set before the
Mystery of Christ, than before any other Depth, or Mystery in Scripture. -- And
why so? But to show that this Depth, and this Mystery, is that especially that
calls forth our Consideration, and our Meditation. There are four things
concerning Christ, which do call for our meditation.

The Personal excellency of Christ. --

The Offices of Christ. -- The Life, and -- The Death of Christ.

As for the Personal excellencies of Christ, you read what the Apostle says,
in the 7. c. of the Heb. v. 4. Now consider how great this man was, Mechisedec,
the Type of Christ: And if the Type were so great, Christ is greater. -- And if
we are to consider the greatness of the Type, much more to consider and
meditate on the Greatness, and Personal excellencies of Christ typified.

And as for the Offices of Christ, you read what the Apostle says, in the 3.
chap. 1. v. Wherefore, holy Brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling,
consider the Apostle and High Priest of our Profession, Christ Jesus.

And as for the Life of Christ; you know what the Apostle says, in the 12.
chap. 2. v. Looking unto Jesus, the Author and Finisher of our Faith.

And for the Sufferings of Christ, you read what follows; Who for the joy that
was set before him, endured the Cross, despising the shame; for consider him
(v. 3.) that endured such contradiction of sinners against himself, etc. So
that thus then, we are to meditate on God upon this account; laying out, and
spending our thoughts and meditations upon Christ the Son of God.

But Thirdly, Will you instance in the Word of God? Why, as we are to meditate
on Christ, the Son of God, so we are to meditate on the Word of God: Psalm.
119.15. I will meditate on thy Precepts, v. 23. Thy Servant did meditate on thy
Statutes, v. 48. And I will meditate on thy Statutes, at the 93. v. O how I
love thy Law, it is my meditation all the day. The Word of God we are to
meditate on; to meditate on God, and the things of God upon this account. Now
here are four things, that will lead you out to meditation.

The exactness of the Commandment.

The faithfulness of the Promise.

The terror of the Threatening.

And the weightiness of the Examples, all which meet in the Scriptures, and in
the Word of God. And accordingly we are to meditate on the Word of God, upon
this account.

Fourthly, Will you instance in the Works of God? Why, as we are to meditate
on the Word, so we are also to meditate on the Works of God. The work of
Creation, the work of Providence, and the work of Redemption. The works of God
are sought out of all those that have pleasure in them, Psalm. 143. I remember
the days of old, I meditate on all thy Works, I muse on the work of thy hands.
Thus David did, and thus should we also do; so that thus then you see, that it
is our work, and our duty, to meditate on God, and the things of God, in
reference to his Nature, Name, and Attributes. -- In reference to his Son, --
In reference to his Word, -- and in reference to the works of God. And that is
the first General.

II. Now secondly, This work of Meditation, is every man's work. -- It is every
days work. -- And it is that work that is consistent with every business and
condition.

First, (I say) It Is every man's work; it is the work of the wicked; -- and it
is the work of the Godly.

It Is the wo^k of the wicked, for it is their first step unto Conversion: The
Prodigal bethought himself and returned unto his Fathers house. The Prophet
Haggai, calling upon the Jews to repent, says, Consider your ways. I
considered my ways, and turned my feet unto thy Testimonies, says David.
Consider your ways; or, as in the Hebrew, set your heart upon your ways. --
And when does a man set his heart upon his ways, but when he does seriously
ponder and meditate on his ways? Th^s work of Meditation therefore, I say, it
is the work of the wicked: It is their first step unto Coversion.

And it is the work of the godly; Meditation-work, is a godly man's work. -- For
either he is weak, or strong;

If he be weak, he has need of it that he may be strengthened.

If he be strong, he has need of it that he may be quickened. There is no man
but has need of Meditation.

If a man be a Beginner, he ought to meditate that he may proceed:

If he be a Proficient, he ought to meditate that he may be perfect:

If he be Perfect with Gospel-perfection, he ought to meditate that he may hold
on his perfection, Psalm. 1. It Is made the general description of a good man, He
delights in the Law of the Lord; and in that Law does he meditate.

And Secondly, As it is every man's work, so it is every days work. There are
some special times (as you will hear) which are more fit for meditation. But
this work of meditation is every days work: When I awake, says the Psalmist,
I am ever with thee. How? By prayer and meditation: I have set the Lord always
before me. -- How, but by meditation and prayer? What time is there that is not
fit for this work of Meditation?

Is the Sabbath day unfit for it? No: There is a Prayer for the Sabbath, Psalm.
92. to meditate on the works of God.

Is the weekday unfit for this work of Meditation? No, the Sabbath day is our
market day; and then after we have bought our ma^ket on the Sabbath, we should
Roast it by meditation on the week: We don't go to the Market on the market day
to buy meat into the house, only for the market day; but for all the time till
the market day comes about again: Indeed, Solomon says of the Sluggard, that
he is so sluggish and slothful, That he does not roast what he h^th taken in
hunting: The Sabbath day is the hunting day for souls, wherein the Venison is
taken: On the week day we are to roast it, and to live upon it by meditation,
and otherwise. -- And what is the reason that many don't live upon their
Venison, that they have taken on the Lords day; but because they don't roast it
by meditation on the week day, and so are in the number of Solomen's sluggards;
the sluggard roasteth not the Venison that he has taken in huntin^ I am sure
that David, in the 119. Psalm. says, that his meditation was at work, all the
day long; It is my meditation all the Day, not a piece on it, it is every days
work, it is all the days work. Yea in the first Psa^. he takes in the Night
too. He delights in the Law of the Lord, and therein does he meditate Day and
Night. So that that is the Second thing: Meditation work is every days work. As
it is every man's work, so it is every days work. And,

3. As it is every days work, so it is that work that is consistent with every
business, and with every condition. A Garment that will fit the back of every
condition. What dunghil-condition, but this flower of Meditation may grow
thereupon? In Judge. the 5th it is said there, v. 11. They that are delivered
from the noise of Archers in the places of drawing water; There shall they
rehearse the righteous acts of the Lord. -- There, where? why in the places of
drawing Water; When they are in the field, drawing waer: And if that be a fit
place be rehearse the righteous acts of the Lord, certainly then it is a place
fit for meditation: And if that the place of the Drawing Water, then the very
place of scraping Trenchers, and sweeping the kennel may be a place fit for
meditation? If that the place of drawing Water, be a place fit for rehearsing
the Acts of the Lord; what place, what condition, what business, but Meditation
may accompany it?

Possibly a man may be sick, and he may be kept from Books, or he may be kept
from hearing; but yet he may meditate on God, and the things of God.

Possibly he may be thrown into Prison, and he may be kept from Books and
Bible, yet he cannot be kept from Meditation. It Is said of Mr. Glover, that
Great Martyr in Queen Maryes time, that lying in Prison a Coventry, it was told
him, he should be remooved to a close Prison at Litchfield, and all Books taken
away from him; At that he was much troubled, but says he, I sat down and
considered, and meditated with my self, Is God the God of Coventry, and not of
Litchfield? Is not God the God of Litchfield, as well as of Coventry: And when
I had thought on this thing, and meditated thus, my heart was quiet within me.
Surely there is no condition so sower, but Sweet Meditation may grow thereon:
Now if this work of Meditation be a work that is Consistent with every
business, and every condition -- every days work, and every man's work, why
should we not be found in the practice of it?

3. But you will say 3dly, What help, or what means to this work of Meditation?
What shall I do, how and by what means should this work of Meditation be
performed?

First, If you would Meditate on God rightly and duly (to speak first by way of
means, and then for the rules of direction afterward) be very sensible of your
want, and of your neglect herein. A man is never more fit for a duty, then when
he is very sensible of his neglect therein sensibleness of neglect of former
duty, fitts one for future duty. If a man have very great possessions, and he
lose them, he is very sensible of the loss thereof, why now look into the 17th
Job, and you shall find there are Thought-possessions: says he, My days are
past, my purposes are broken off, even the thoughts of my heart. In the Heb.
even the possessi^ns of my heart. As if he should say thus; Time was that I had
very great Thought-possessions, I thought on God, I enjoyed God, I possessed
God; but now I have lost these my possessions of God, and the thoughts of my
heart, the possessions of my heart are broken off. Thus sensible J^be was of
the loss of his Thought-possessions. And the more rich our Thought-possessions
are, the greater is our loss And the more sensible we are of the loss of our
thought-p^ssessions, and of our Meditations, the more fit we shall be for this
work of Meditation. First therefore be very sensible of your want and neglect
of this work of Meditation thus long.

2. If you would meditate indeed on God and the things of God, labor more and
more for a Serious Spirit: A frothy, leight, and giggling disposition, is never
fit for Meditation: Labor therefore to be serious. And there are three or four
things that will poise and make your hearts serious.

The sight of the glorious Majesty of God.

The sense of your Eternal Condition, Eternity, Eternity.

Humiliation for Sin.

And converse with those that are serious. Be serious, and you will be more fit
for Meditation: That Is the Second.

3. If you would indeed meditate on God and the things of God, labor more and
more for a Fixed Spirit: Fixation of Spirit is a great friend to meditation. An
unsettled, an unfixed soul, cannot meditate: Fix therefore first. And there are
many things that may fix your Spirits.

The great and weighty Judgments of God that are upon us, may help to fix us,
and hang lead upon our heels.

In case you are to come to Meditation, or any other Work, come free, and don't
leave any business standing at the Door: for a hundred to one, but your hearts
will step out unto it, at the time of your Work, whether Meditation, or Prayer,
or any thing else. Therefore come free unto every Duty, if you would be fixed.

And labor for Intention of Affection. In Meditation, Prayer, or any other
Work, be Intense: We use to say, when the Candle burns, the Mouse does not
nibble, but when the Candle is out, then the Mouse nibbles: when our hearts are
warm and lively in Prayer and Meditation, we are free from distractions; the
Mouse nibbles not.

And in case you meet with any distraction in Meditation, or other duty, don't
stand to Correct your heart in the time of the duty, but go on with your work.
If a woman carries a Child abroad among friends, and the Child cries and makes
a disturbance, the mother don't then correct the Child there; but calls the
Child to an account when she comes at home: for says she, Else would my
correction be a further disturbance to the company: So here, when you meet with
distractions in duty, if you call your hearts to an account then, it will be a
further disturbance; but on with your present duty, correct afterward; and thus
shall your hearts be the more fixed, and fixation of heart is a great help to
Meditation.

4. If you would indeed meditate on God and the things of God, be sure that you
lay out such objects as may give entertainment to your thoughts. For if there
be no Corn in the Quern, what grinding will there be? Have therefore objects
laid out to exercise your thoughts withal, upon all occasions; And so when you
have any spare time, your Objects lying by, you will be presently upon the work
of Meditation: only let those Objects be such as are drawing, alluring,
thought-begetting Objects, and Thought-entertaining Objects: But then

5. If you would meditate on God and the things of God, strengthen your Love
and Delight; for Meditation grows upon the stalk of Love and Delight: And the
more a man does love God and the things of God, the more he meditates thereon:
Psalm. 119. O how I love thy Law? -- what then -- It is my Meditation all the
day: this was much; his meditation all the day, -- What Is the reason? -- Why,
his Love was beyond expression; O how I love thy Law! It is my meditation all
the day. Love loves to be thinking on the person loved. It carries the Picture
of the Person or thing loved up and down in its bosom; the more you love, the
more you meditate; and the more you delight, the more you meditate. Can a Woman
forget her Child? no, why? because she loves it. Can a Worldly man forget the
World, his Money and his House or Land, can he forget this? no, why? because he
loves them: What Is the reason we meditate no more, but because we love God no
more? Do but strengthen your love to God and the things of God, and your
delight in God and the things of God, and you will meditate more. This is the
fifth means unto the work of Meditation, Strengthen your love to, and your
delight in the Lord: And then

6. If you would meditate on God and the things of God, Then labor to get a
deep Impression of the things of God upon your heart and soul. It Is deep
impressions that calls for meditation. A man reads the word of God, and it may
be understands it, but he don't meditate -- Why? -- because the word made no
impression upon his heart as he went along. But if he read it, and understand
it, and has an impression made upon his soul as he reads it, then he thinks
on it afterward: As in hearing the Word of God, a man hears the Word of God in
Public or in Private, and he meditates not thereupon -- Why? -- Why, because
it has no impression upon him. Possibly a man may think of the free grace of
God, yet if it make no impression upon his soul, he don't go away and meditate
on it. If a man think on the Wrath of God, and it make an impression upon him,
he goes away, and is still in the thoughts thereof: What Is the reason, that
many poor souls, troubled in Conscience, are always thinking of Hell, and
Judgment, and Wrath, but because the Wrath of God has made a deep impression
upon their souls; and the more deep the impression is upon your soul, the more
full will your meditation be: You see how it was in former times, when they
went in procession, at the end of the Parish, they would take up a Boy and whip
him, -- Why? that he might remember the bounds of the Parish: for, Passion is
the best Doorkeeper of Memory. And as passion is the Doorkeeper of Memory; so
Impression is the Doorkeeper of Meditation.

7. If you would meditate on God and the things of God, Take heed that your
hearts and your hands, be not too full of the world, and the employments
thereof. The more full your hand is of worldly employments, the more you will
think thereon, and the more you think thereon, the less you will think of G^d
and the things of God. And what is the reason that many meditate and think so
little of God and the things of God, but because their hearts are so full of
the World, Where their treasure is, there will their hearts b^.

O says one, I would think on God, and I would meditate on God with all my
heart, but meditation-work is a work of time, it will cost time, and I have no
time; my hands are so full of business, and so full of employment, I have no
time for this work; Meditation is not a transient Thought, but it is a work of
time, and will ask time, and I have no time. Mark therefore what David says in
the 119. Psalm. Lord incline my heart unto thy testimonies, how so? Turn away
mine eyes from beholding vanity: The way to have ones heart inclined to the
Testimonies of God, is to turn away ones eyes from these outward vanities.
Would you therefore meditate on God, and the things of God, then take heed that
your hearts, and your hands, be not too full of the world, and the employments
thereof.

8. Lastly, If you would meditate on God, and the things of God, go then to God
for this skill of meditation. Friends, There is an Art, and divine Skill of
meditation, which none can teach but God alone: Would you have it, go then to
God, and beg of God these things.

First, Beg of God that he would change your nature: For if your soil be not
changed, nothing but weeds will grow still, not the Flowers of meditation, but
the weeds of vain thoughts; go first to God to change your Nature, to change
your Soil.

2. Go to God and beg of him that he would sanctify, and sequester your mind
unto himself, that your whole mind may be under God's sequestration* Every man
is as his mind is: A man's mind is a profus^ thing, and it is as full of
thoughts, as the Sun is full o^ Beams. If God don't take it in, and bring it
under his sequestration, it will be full of evil; go then t^ God, and desire
him to sanctify your devising, you^ thinking, and your projecting Faculty.

3. Go to God, and beg of him that he would la^ out drawing objects before you,
that may draw o^ your thoughts, and your meditations: It Is God the must present
such objects.

4. Go and beg of God your Thoughts also, an^ beg of God these
thought-possessions, that Go^ would give you thoughts. And then,

5. Beg of God a fixed heart: for fixation of hea^ is a great friend to
meditation. And then,

6. Beg of God the Spirit; for the Spirit is our Remembrancer, to bring all
things to our remembrance. Thus do, and you shall in some measure be able to
carry on this work of Meditation in a right way, with comfort and sweetness.
These things by way of means: By way of means; -- be sensible of your former
work of meditation; -- labor to be more serious; -- get a fixed heart and
spirit; -- lay out objects that may entertain your thoughts upon all occasions;
-- strengthen your love to, and delight in God; -- labor to get Impressions,
deep impressions made upon your souls, to the things of God; -- and take heed
that your hearts and hands be not too full of the world: -- And then go to God
for this skill of Meditation.

4. But then fourthly, What are those rules and directions that will help
therein? How and in what way and manner should this work of Meditation be
carried on, with sweetness and success?

First of all, In all your Retirements (for the work of Meditation, is a work
of Retirement) in all your meditations, be sure that you retire in to God
himself: Don't retire into your retirements, as the Monks and those do retire
into a monkish devotion: But in all your Retirements, be sure that you retire
in to God himself.

2. Take heed that you be not Legal in this work of Meditation. Legal work is
sour work; Meditation work is sweet work. A man is legal in this work of
Meditation, when he does make it a mere task, when he does in his meditation,
think on God out of Christ: I thought upon God, and was troubled; to think upon
God out of Christ, is sour work: I thought upon God and was not comforted, but
was troubled, says the Psalmist. So that, to make our meditation work a mere
task, is a legal work; to think upon God out of Christ, is a Legal work; and to
pass through God unto Christ, also is Legal. For, In the times of the Old
Testament, they come to Christ through God, but in the time of the New
Testament, we go to God through Christ. An Old Testament way is a Legal way,
would you therefore have this work of Meditation carried on with sweetness;
Take heed of a Legal spirit in this work of Meditation, which will sour all.

3. Be sure of this, That nothing fall within the compass of your meditation,
but what falls within the compass of the Scripture. It may be you may think of
God, and you may think what God was doing before the world was made, this you
have no Scripture for; therefore is no work for your meditation. -- It may be,
you think you are a Reprobate; for say you, I have the marks of a Reprobate
upon me: But where does the Scripture give any marks of a Reprobate? The
Scripture gives marks of a wick^d man, that possibly may be converted. But now,
If you would carry on the work of meditation in such a way as it may be done
with sweetness, be sure that it be bounded with the Scripture; and let nothing
fall within the compass of your meditation, but what falls within the compass
of the Scripture.

4. In all your settled meditation, Begin with Reading, or Hearing. -- Go on
with meditation, -- End in prayer. For as Mr. Greenham says well, Reading
without Meditation, is unfruitful; Medition without Reading, is hurtful; To
meditate and to read without prayer upon both, is without blessing.

If you do read and not meditate, then you will want good affections.

If you do meditate, and not read or hear, you will want good Judgment, and be
apt to fall into some ill Opinions.

If you do read, or hear, or meditate, and not pray, you will want the blessing
of the Lord upon both: Read, or hear first; then meditate; and then pray upon
both. I speak of settled meditation, and let one be proportioned unto another.
There must be a proportion between the one and the other, in a settled
meditation; and therefore if that you would meditate rightly, I say in all your
meditations, begin with reading, go on with meditation, and end with prayer.

5. If you would have this work of Meditation carried on with profit and
sweetness, join with your Meditation, the examination of your own souls, in
case you meditate on God and Christ, think with your selves by way of
examination, But have I an Interest in this? I have been now thinking and
meditating on the excellencies of Christ, but have I an Interest in him? Come
Oh my soul, thou have been meditating on God, and on the excellencies of
Christ, but have thou any share, have thou any Interest therein? Join
examination with your Meditation, then it will be profitable, then it will be
sweet; otherwise it is but Contemplation, or but a study; but join examination
with your Meditation, so it is sweet, and so it is profitable.

Sixthly, Observe what those times and seasons are that are most fit for
Meditation, and be sure you lay hold thereon. Though Meditation-work is every
days work, yet there are some times and seasons that are more fit for
Meditation. Shall I name Four or Five.

1. Look when the Lord has made any deep Impression upon your soul by word or
work, then is a time for your meditation; for Impression calls for meditation

2. The Morning is a fit time for Meditation before the World come in. What
more fit for God than the best of time; the Morning is the best of time,
therefore a fit time for Meditation on God.

3. The Sabbath Day is a fit time also for Meditation, therefore the 92th Psalm.
is appointed for the Sabbath, A Psalm for the Sabbath Day, says the Title to
the Psalm.

4. The time of Gods special dispensations is a fit time for it; Look when
there is a special dispensation of God abroad, either of Mercy or Judgment,
then is a fit time for Meditation. In the 9th Psalm. The Lord is known by the
Judgment which he executes, the wicked is snared in the work of his own
hands, Higgaion Selah. -- what is that? it comes from the Heb. Hagah, which
signifies to Meditate. When the wicked are snared in the work of their own
hands, here is wo^k for meditation. Look (I say) when there is a special
dispensation of God either in Mercy or Judgment, that is a fit time for
meditation.

5. Look what time that is that lies next, or near, or close to, any great work
or service, that is a fit time for meditation: As for example. Suppose we be to
receive the Lord's Supper: The time that lies next before it is a fit time for
meditation. Suppose a man be to be called out for some great service or
Employment: The time that goes close before it is a fit time for him to sit
down and meditate with himself upon the work: For the more a man does prepare
for a work, the more likely he is in reason to perform it well. Now, Meditation
is a good preparation: Look therefore what that time is that immediately
before, or close to the work of the Lord, that is a fit time for Meditation. --
Thus now you see what the special times are for the work of Meditation. -- The
time of Impressions -- The morning time -- The Sabbath day -- The time of
special dispensations, either of Mercy or Judgment -- And the time tha goes
Immediately or next, or close before the great work and service of the Lord.
And, If you would meditate rightly, observe what the fit times for Meditation
are, and be sure you lay hold thereon.

7. I Will name but one more. Though there is a great deal of profit and
sweetness to be found in this work of meditation, and it is every days work,
yet take heed that you don't so meditate on one of Gods excellencies, as to
neglect another; nor don't so spend your whole time in the work of meditation,
that this work of meditation should eat up other duties: God would have us rise
from this work of meditation, as from any other duty, with an hungry appetite.
Friends, God would have us rise hungry from every duty, and not glutted,
variety is refreshing, he has given many duties that we may not pore upon one.
In case therefore you have bin at the work of meditation, either God has come
in upon you with his special Influence, or not: if he has, praise the Lord
for his AYtance, it is mercy that you have had one good thought of God, but
Meditation is more than a thought, meditation is thought upon thought; praise
God, that is the way to have more, -- And In case that God has not come in upon
you in the work of meditation; then yet be not discouraged, for God would not
have you glutted, and God would lead you to some other work, and one duty, one
work, is not to eat up and devour another. I say with one; Let not your time be
the measure or rule of your Meditation, but your Meditation the rule of your
time; Yet take heed, that you don't spend so much time in musing and
considering, and meditating, as that this work of Meditation should eat up any
other Duty, but quicken thereunto. And thus you see some means, some helps, to
this work of Meditation; Some Rules and Directions for the right carrying it on
sweetly: What now remains, but that you up and be doing; turn your hand to it.
You have heard the duty proved: You have heard the sweetness and profitableness
thereof cleared: You have heard what Objects we are to lay our Thoughts out
upon: And you have heard some means, as helps unto the Work: And some Rules and
Directions for the carrying of it on: O then, you that never spent hour in
meditation all your days, if there be any such here; Now bethink your selves,
and now give up your Thoughts to God. -- You that have gone one year after
another, and one week after another, and never spent any time in meditating on
God or the things of God, O now bethink your selves: And that you may do so,
and be provoked hereunto, give me leave to lay down some Arguments and Motives
to press both your souls and mine, unto this great work of Meditation. The
Arguments are diverse: Thus

First, Friends, The more acquaintance you have with this work of Meditation,
the more time you will get, and the less you will lose. A man that has the
skill on it, need never lose an hour. Who knows the worth of time? This little
spot of time does our Eternity depend upon: Yet, Lord, how many are there that
lose their precious hours and time -- But what is the reason? -- They have no
hand at this work of Meditation: When their business is over, they might
otherwise turn their hand to this work, and lose no time. The more acquaintance
you have with this work of Meditation, the more time you will get, and the
less you will lose.

2. Hereby, even by this work of Meditation, you shall get into the Secrets of
divine things. There is a Secret and a Mystery in ever Trade: A man don't know
the Trade, till he knows the Secret and the Mystery of it: It Is said, The
secret of the Lord is with them that fear him. Knowledge brings us to the door
of Truth: But Meditation has us into the House, and into all the Rooms
thereof: Thereby (I say) you shall get into the Inwards, and the Secrets of the
things of God.

3. Thereby also you shall suck out the sweetness of all those divine and
precious things that you know. As a man by musing on his Sins, sucks out the
sweetness thereof; so by meditating on the things of God, you suck out the
sweetness of the things of God into your own souls.

4. By this work of Meditation, you shall have a Testimony in your own Souls,
that you are truly godly. Every man is what he is most in private. A good man's
work lies most underground, lies most out of sight. In the time of Moses, the
beasts were clean that chewed the Cud, and unclean that did not chew the Cud.
In the time of David, it is made the Description of a godly man, He delights
in the Law of the Lord, and therein does he meditate. Hereby then, you shall
have a testimony in your own hearts, that you are truly godly. But you shall
not only have a testimony that you are truly godly, but practice it, and
thereby you shall be very godly: for the more constant you are in godliness,
the more godly you are. By the work of Meditation, you will be constant in the
work of Godliness -- The more extensive your godliness is, the more godly you
are: Now by meditation, you can extend your thoughts, beyond your hands: As by
sinful musings, a man can extend his thoughts beyond his power to practice; so
by meditation on God and the things of God, a man may extend his thoughts
concerning godliness, beyond his power to act -- As in sin, a man by his
thoughts may be naught where he has not an outward power to be naught; so by
holy meditation, a man may be good where he has not a power in his hand to
practice. The Psalmist says, in the 45th. Psalm, The Kings Daughter is all
glorious within, her garment is of wrought gold, verse. 13. Her clothing is of
wrought gold, is not that glorious? clothing is outward, but says he, she is
all glorious within; It Is not the wrought gold without makes her glorious, but
she is all glorious within: Though the garment, and though her clothing be of
wrought gold, yet her glory lies within. Here lies the glory of a Christian, to
be glorious within: -- And how can we have this inward Holiness, Grace, and
goodness, and Glory, unless we be versed in this work of Meditation?

6. Thereby also, you shall offer up your selves unto divine Embraces; and upon
this ground of Meditation, will God give out his loves unto you: In Cant. 7.
says Christ, There will I give thee my Loves, v. 12. -- There -- where? Let us
get up early to the Vineyards, let us see if the Vine flourish, whither the
tender Grap appear, and the Pomgranates bud forth. Here Is the public Assembly.
-- What Is this to meditation? -- Yes, in the former v. Come my beloved, let us
go forth into the Field, let us lodge in the Villages, places of Retirement;
There will I give thee my Loves, upon the ground of Retirement. There will he
give forth his loves. O! What a great mercy is here, by this work of
Meditation, you do not only offer up your selves unto Divine embraces: But,
There upon Meditation-ground, will God give out his loves unto you.

7. Thereby also, your souls and hearts shall be subdued unto God: As in sin,
so here, Friends, It is not a sinful thought that does subdue my heart into
sin; it is not a sinful suggestion that subdues my heart into sin: But, A
Complacential dwelling of sinful thoughts in my heart, subdues my heart into
sin. So it is not a transient good thought that will subdue the soul, or the
heart unto God; but it is a Complacential dwelling of good thoughts in the
heart that does subdue the heart unto God, and that is done by Meditation.
Thereby therefore, I say, Your very hearts shall be subdued unto the Lord: Oh
what a mercy is this!

8. By this work of meditation on God, and the things of God; You shall live on
God: Possibly a man may come to the Court where the King is, and not live upon
the King, because he don't stay there; but those that stay at the Court, they
live upon the King, for they stay there. Now by a thought, I don't stay upon
God; but by a frequeut meditation on God, I shall live in God; for then I stay
by God, and I do stay on him.

9. Thereby also you shall have a constant relief against all your afflictions,
both inward and outward.

Inward, Psalm. 143. Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for says he, v. 4. My spirit
is overwhelmed within me, my heart within me is desolate: What then? -- I
remember the days of old, I meditate on all thy works: Here lies the relief
against spiritual fears, and overwhelmings of soul, even to meditate on God as
one ought to do, in a right manner: I am overwhelmed, but I Will meditate on all
thy works, and muse on the work of thy hands.

As for the Outward afflictions, Psalm. 119. the place cited before, v. 23.
Princes also did sit and speak against me, but thy Servant did meditate in thy
Statutes. Reproach from an ordinary man, is affliction enough; but for Kings
and Princes, to speak against one, this is a great matter. What relief then?
But thy servant did meditate on thy Statutes. So that by this, you have a
constant relief against both outward, and inward afflictions. And,

10. Thereby also you shall be freed from that unkindness, that God will take
at your hands, if you don't meditate on him, and the things of God. Friends, If
you don't meditate on God, and the things of God, God will take it very
unkindly at your hands: What man that is abroad beyond Sea, hearing that his
wife frolicks it at home, and never thinks on him, will not take it unkindly?
We are absent now from God, and to frolic and be vain, and go up and down, and
have no thoughts on God, no meditation on God; How unkindly must God take this
at our hands? It Is a slight, If a man speak unto you, and you don't think of
what he speaks, it is a slight to him: So to read what God says, or see what
God does, and not think on it, not to meditate on it; what is this but a slight
unto God?

Respect and Meditation, go together, Psalm. 119.15. I will meditate in thy
precepts, and have respect unto thy ways. So then, The want of meditation, and
thinking on what God says, and what God does, is a great sleighting of him,
it is a want of respect, and God will take it unkindly: -- And what then? -- Why
he will deal by you as you do by him; if you think not on him, he will not
think on you; and in the day of your extremity, when you call and cry to him,
because you thought not of him, he will not think of you. But to end all.

God knows, and your own souls know, how you have lain musing in the way of
sin; how some times you have lain devising mischief upon your beds: How often
you have chewed the Devils Cud; what swarms of unclean thoughts, of proud
thoughts, of unbelieving thoughts, have possessed your hearts? Oh friends!
Shall we lie musing upon our bed, in a way of sin, and shall we not think, and
muse, and meditate on God, and the things of God? What shall we not be the same
for God, that ever we have been for sin? O, we have had our sinful musing
times, therefore now why should we not have our holy musings also?

And to conclude all, Meditation, holy meditation, is a very great friend to
heavenly Conversation: Sweet meditation of God, is a very great friend to holy
Conversation: Private meditation, a great friend to an outward holy
Conversation. -- Now then, -- As ever you desire, that the holiness of your
Conversation may be advanced; That you may be as godly now in your thoughts, as
ever you have been ungodly. -- That God may take nothing unkindly from you. --
That you may have a constant relief against all afflictions, both inward and
outward. -- That you may live on God. -- That your hearts may be subdued into
God. -- That God may give out his Loves unto you. -- That you may be very godly
-- That you may have a Testimony in your own souls, that you are truly godly;
That you may suck out the sweetness of all the things you know; That you may be
let into the secret of Godliness, and not stand at the door of Knowledge only.
-- That you may never lose a precious hour, but redeem your time. Now to the
work of Meditation: And you that have neglected it so long, be not ashamed to
begin it at last.

Gods Return to the Soul or Nation. SERMON. IX.
Psalm. 90.13. Return (O Lord) how long, and let it repent thee Concerning thy
Servants.


This Psalm is a Psalm of Moses the man of God, Says the title.

Wherein he does strengthen his Faith, and the Israelites Faith in God. -- And
shows the misery and frailty of man's life -- petitions God for his mercy.

He sets down the misery and frailty of man's life, in the body of the Psalm --
But before, in the beginning of the Psalm, he does strengthen his own, and
others Faith in God.

A man is never fit to look upon the troubles of this World, and the miseries
thereof, till his heart be established in God by believing. This therefore he
does in the first place, by several Arguments of Comfort.

First drawn from their interest in God v. 1. Lord, thou have been our dwelling
place in all Generations: As if he should say, We are now in the Wilderness,
and so no abiding place, well: Thou have bin our dwelling place in all
Generations.

Faith finds that in God which we want here below, and that is the way to true
Comfort.

The Second is drawn from the eternity of Gods essence and being. v. 2. Before
the Mountains were brought forth, or ever thou had formed the earth and the
World, even from everlasting to everlasting, thou art God.

The Third is drawn from our Resurrection! Though now we die, and are
destroyed, yet at the 3. v. Thou turnest man to destruction, and say^st, Return
ye Children of men.

Our Resurrection is an easy work with God; it is but saying. Thou say,
Return ye Children of men.

The Fourth is drawn from the shortness of the time that lies between our Death
and the Resurrection! for it will be said, There Is a great deal of time between
our Death, and the Resurrection: But says he, you must account as God
accounts, for at the 4th. v. A Thousand years in thy sight are but as
yesterday, when it is past; And as a watch in the night. These things being
thus premised: Now you may read over the miseries and troubles of this World.
Which you have at large from the 5. v. unto the 12. v.

But what then, what is the work and Duty of the Psalmist then? -- Why, then he
Petitions God.

He petitions first for Wisdom: That by all the troubles and miseries of this
life, he may provide and lay in for eternity. So teach us to number our Days,
that we may apply our hearts unto Wisdom. v. 12.

And then he petitions for the return of Gods love, Return (O Lord) how long,
and let it repent thee concerning thy Servants. -- Where you have the matter of
the Petition -- The explication, -- And the reason thereof.

The Matter of the Petition, in those words, Return, O Lord.

The Explication thereof, And let it repent thee, concerning thy Servants.

And the Reason, How long? Thou have been long absent; O Lord, how long will thou be absent? how long will thou be angry? Return, O Lord, how long? And let
it repent thee concerning thy Servants.

God is said, To return, when after some Judgments for sin, he does show forth
some fresh tokens of his love and favor.

God is said To Repent, when he does change his dispensations of Anger into
Love. And this is that which the Psalmist does here most desire: From whence, I
take up this Doctrine or Observation.

Obs. When God is in any measure departed from his people, it is their great
desire, that God would return unto them, and repent him concerning his
Servants. -- For the clearing and prosecuting of which,

First, I shall labor to show you, that God does sometimes forsake, desert,
and depart from his own people for a time.

2. That they are very sensible of such departures, and think it long.

3. That then, in the time of those departures, their great desire is that God
would return, and

4. That when God does return unto his people, then he does repent him
concerning his Servants; and

5. What we should do in case God should be in any measure departed from us,
that he may return again unto us.

First, As for the first: God does sometimes desert, and forsake, and depart
from his people for a time. Not in regard of their Union, so he never departs;
But in regard of Communion, and manifestation, so sometimes he does: Though
nothing is hid from the heat of this Sun, yet our souls may be hid from the
light of this Sun: God does sometimes depart from his own people.

For first, He is the Sovereign Lord over all: And what if God will, to make
his power and sovereignty known among his own people, sometimes withdraw,
forsake, and depart from them. Two times you read in the Book of the Canticles,
that Christ withdraws from the Spouse: Once upon occasion of her sin, and
security; And then she meets with blows, Cant. 5. Once upon an account of his
mere pleasure, Cant. 3.

As whom God will he shows mercy to, and whom he will he hardens: So whom God
will he is present with, and whom he will he is absent from, He is the
Sovereign Lord over all. But

Secondly, What if God will that his people should have a taste of hell in this
life, that so they may be sensible of, and very thankful for their deliverance
from hell, and the wrath to come. There are three things in hell -- Torment of
Body, -- Horror of Conscience, -- Loss of God.

By our Pains and Torments, Gouts and Stone, we think of the Torments of Hell,
or may think.

By the horror of Conscience that we meet withal, we may think of the horror
of Conscience there.

And by Gods withdrawing, and Gods departing from us here, we may think of the
loss of God for ever there.

These things are not in perfection here: In heaven there is nothing but the
presence of God, and all the comforts there flow from that Fountain. -- In hell
there is nothing but the absence of God, and all the miseries there flow from
that Fountain. -- This life lies between both. And what if God will (that we
may be sensible of the great deliverance from the wrath to come) give us a
taste of hell, by his withdrawings and by his departings from us for a season.

Thirdly, I am sure, it is very fit that we should be conformed unto Jesus
Christ. As Christ was conformed unto us, in reference to our Temptations; so
it is fit we should be conformed to him, in reference to his Desertions. Christ
was deserted, Christ was forsaken, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
Surely, the Disciple is not above his Master. But

Fourthly, I am sure of this, That God loves to see the workings of all our
graces, our Faith, and Love especially: There are some graces that do not open
nor show themselves, but in the Sunshining day of Gods presence. When the Sun
shines, the Marigold opens. When the Sun shines, the Fish that lay at the
bottom of the water in a cloudy day, swim at the top of the water, and are
seen. In the Sunshining day of Gods presence, then our Thankfulness, our Joy,
our Assurance floats, and are to be seen upon the top of the water. But there
are other graces, that are best seen when God withdraws, and when God is
absent, -- Faith in God, -- And love to God especially.

Faith in God, For Faith works best, when it works all alone, without the
Auxiliaries of Comfort. It Is no great matter for a Wife to believe her
Husband's Love, when he is at home, and daily and hourly showing kindness: But
when he is abroad, and absent and she hears not from him, then to believe his
Love, is somewhat: So to believe the Love of God toward us, when he is
present, is no great matter, though it is good: But when God is gone, when God
is absent, then to believe his love, is Faith, worthy of God, as Parisiensis
speaks.

Thus also, our love unto God does and will appear: For when God is present
with us, and shines upon us, then we see Gods love to us; but when God is
absent from us, by our longings after him, then we see our love unto God. Now I
say, What if God will, to draw out all our graces, and that he may see the
workings of our graces, Faith, and Love especially; what if he will withdraw
and absent himself from his people for a time? But,

5. What if God will, for the good and benefit of others, withdraw and absent
himself, and depart from his own people? In the Book of the Cant. we find that
when Christ does withdraw from his Spouse, and she could not find him, Chap.
5.6. she searches after him, enquires for him, makes great complaint: Then the
Daughters of Israel say, Whither is thy beloved gone, O thou fairest among
women? whither is thy beloved turned aside, that we may seek him with thee? So
long as he was present, others were not drawn on for to seek him with her; but
now he is absent, and she looks after him, and complains for want of him, now
others are drawn to enquire after him.

And why so? But to teach us thus much, that God will so overruled the
desertions of his people, that his with-drawment from them, shall draw others
to him. And thus now you see, there is reason, and good reason, why God should
some times depart from, forsake, and be absent, even from his own people for a
time: And that is the first thing.

2. Secondly, The Saints and People of God, are very sensible of his
displeasure: How long Lord? They are most sensible of this, they look upon it
as a very tedious thing, and m^st afflictive, to lie under Gods departure: How
long Lord?

Words of Expostulation, note Affection, especially if they come with an
Ingemination: And so you have it in the 13 Psalm, How long will thou forget me,
O Lord, for ever; how long will thou hide thy face from me, how long shall I
take counsel in my soul. Four how longs: How long, how long, how long, how
long. It Is a very tedious thing, and most afflictive to the people of God, to
lie under Gods departures.

It was so with Christ: ye may measure the hearts of the Saints, by the heart
of Christ. The First in every kind, is the Rule of the rest. Christ was the
first of Saints. Now though our Savior Christ met with many afflictions and
troubles in his death, you shall find, he is most sensible of Gods departure:
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? He does not say, O my Disciples, why
have you left me, and why have you forsaken me; but, my God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? That is not the greatest affliction, that weak men account
the greatest: That is not the greatest burden, that a weak man accounts the
greatest, but that which a strong man accounts the greatest burden, is the
greatest burden. Why now, that the Rock of Ages, Christ himself should
complain under this of Gods forsaking; what does this argue? When Paul cries
out, Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death:
Will you not conclude thereby, that the body of Death was a great burden, that
the sin of our Nature was a great burden? So, when Christ himself shall cry
out, and complain of Gods forsaking, and departing, will you not conclude then,
surely this is a burden indeed! This is that the Saints and People of God, are
the most sensible of.

2. It is the property of a gracious soul, to be most affected with the inside,
and the spiritual part of mercies, and of deliverances: Though God give them
outward deliverances, they are not so much affected with the outward part, as
with the inside, and the spiritual part of the deliverance. And therefore in
Mich. 7.18. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons Iniquity, and passes
by the Transgression of the remnant of his heritage: he retains not his anger
for ever, because he delights in mercy. It was an outward deliverance that
God gave them, but the Church is most affected with the spiritual part on it.

And as they are most affected with the spiritual part of a Deliverance, so
they are always most affected with the inward, and the spiritual part of an
Affliction. -- What Is that? -- The Anger of God, the Displeasure of God, the
Desertion of God, the Departing of God. This is the thing that the Saints
therefore are the most affected with, and the most sensible of.

3. That is most afflictive to a gracious soul, which is most contrary to him,
and to his will; All that is affliction, which is contrary to ones will. It was
no great matter in it self, that Mordecai did not pull off his Hat, and bow his
Knee to Haman; it was no great affliction in it self, but it was contrary to
Haman's pride, and that is an affliction that is contrary to ones will. Now what
is the will, and what is the desire of the Saints, but the presence of God?
That they may ever be at their Fathers Knee, that they may ever be in his Arms,
and held in the Im^races of his Love, held in his Smiles; this is the thing
that they do most desire. And therefore in the very beginning of the Cant. Kiss
me with the kisses of thy Mouth: This therefore, being the thing that they do
most desire, the contrary must be the most afflictive.

4. That must needs be most afflictive, which hinders them in all their
Enjoyments: Without the presence of God, they have no enjoyment, their
enjoyments are as no enjoyments; the presence of God with them, is the top of
all their enjoyments. If the Sun be down, it is not all the Torches, and Candles
lighted up, that will give you a day; and if God be gone, it is not all your
Creature Comforts, will give you joy. Take away the word MY, and take away the
word GOD; you take away the comfort of the word GOD, if you take away the word
MY. And therefore, Whereas the Lord had used to call the Israelites his people,
and God had a little forsaken them; he says to Moses, Thy people, and the
people, but not my people. But then,

5. Thereby the Saints and people of God, are exposed to great temptations:
When God goes, the Devil comes. And so far as God does go, so much the Devil
comes; if God do forsake and depart from a man, as to final rejection, then the
Devil comes in a way of possession. If God departs from a man, in a way of
desertion, then the Devil comes in a way of temptation; as God goes, so the
Devil comes. Now, Is it not a grievous thing for the Saints, and People of God,
to be exposed to Temptations? Thus they are by the departure of God, and by the
absence of God, by the withdrawments of God. No wonder therefore that Gods
departure is the most afflictive to them. And that is the second.

3. But then thirdly, As the departings of God, are the most afflictive to a
gracious soul; so when the Lord is in any measure departed, it is the great
desire of the Saints and people of God, that God would return. Not that God
would take away his hand, the Psalmist does not say so; We are afflicted, Lord,
take away our affliction; no, but return, O Lord, how long. They do not say, We
are in this or that distress; Take away this distress and misery from us: No,
But return, O Lord. This is the great thing that they do most desire: When God
is gone in any measure, or departed from them, their great desire is, that God
would return unto them; and it must needs be so. For,

First, What is the presence of God, but the most desirable thing in the world:
When the days of refreshing shall come from his presence. It Is the presence of
Christ, that will make the Day of Judgment, a Day of refreshing. God's
presence, is the Saints pleasure: In it there is a filling up of our indigent
Nature: -- In it there is the obtainment of our last end, with the knowledge
thereof: -- In it there is an universal good. Gods presence is the most
desirable thing in all the world: No wonder then, that when God is departed in
any measure, the Saints should above all things in the world, desire that God
would return again. But,

Secondly, God never returns empty handed to his people. If a Husband be long
absent from his Wife, he will not return empty handed; I am sure, God will not
return empty handed unto his people: When he has stricken them, he will let
out more love unto them, then ever before. It was a sad and a sharp
dispensation, that the Basket of good Figgs should be carried away Captive,
with the Basket of bad Figgs; but see how God returns unto them, not empty
handed, Jer. 24. The word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Thus says the
Lord, the God of Israel, like these good Figgs, so will I acknowledge them that
are carried away Captive of Judah, whom I have sent out of this place, into the
land of the Chaldeans, for their good; for I will set mine eyes upon them for
good. and I will bring them again to this Land; and I will build them, and not
pull them down, and I will plant them, and not pluck them up; and I will give
them an heart to know me, that I am the Lord, and they shall be my people, and
I will be their God; For they shall return unto me with their whole heart. See
how God returns! when he returns, he does not return empty handed unto his
people: When God returns unto you, he will not only pay you the principal of
your Enjoyment; but will pay you all your forbearance-mony too. But,

Thirdly and especially: Take the Saints and people of God, and where do they
live, but in the love of Christ's Person, not of his benefits, not of his
Comforts, but they live in the love of his Person; Look into the Book of the
Cant. and you shall find, how the heart of Christ is drawn out in love to the
Person of the Spouse; Let me hear thy voice, says he, for thy voice is sweet,
and thy Countenance is comely: how fair is thy love, my Sister, my Spouse; thy
lips. Oh my Spouse, drop as the Honeycomb, and so he goes on insisting in his
love upon the Person.

So does the Spouse also toward him, my beloved is altogether lovely, and as
you read, my beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest among Ten Thousand. And
so she goes on. Thus love is drawn out toward the Person of Christ: Now, If
this be the spirit, and if this be the disposition of the Saints and the people
of God, that they live in love to the Person of Christ, then no wonder that
when Christ is withdrawn, they do above all things desire that he would
return again. This must needs be, for they live in the love of his Person, and
not of his benefits, not of his Comforts; Therefore above all things they say,
Return, O Lord, return.

Fourthly when the Lord does return unto his people, he does then Repent him
concerning his Servants. Return, O Lord, how long, and let it repent thee
concerning thy Servants, For the opening and clearing of this, four things
briefly.

First, What it is for God to Repent.

2. Whether God does at any time repent, or will at any time repent.

3. How it may appear that when God returns unto his people, that then he will
repent him concerning his Servants. And,

4. How should we know in the Day and time of Gods departure from us, that God
will again return unto us.

1. As for the first: If you ask what it is for God to repent.

I Answer. It is to change the dispensation of his anger. God don't repent by
the changing of his affection, but he repents by the changing of his
dispensation. As when a man is writing, and he blotts out what he has written,
he repents that he had wrote such a thing; So when God is writing hard things
against his people in a way of dispensation, and he shall blott out that
dispensation, then God is said to repent: So it repented the Lord that he had
made man, in the 6. of Genesis

2. Secondly, If you ask, Whether God does, or will at any time repent.

I Answer. yes; Expressly, in the 32 Exodus 14. And the Lord repented of the
evil which he thought to do unto his people. It Is a direct Answer of prayer to
the very words. At the 12. v. Moses prays; Turn from thy fierce wrath, and
repent of this evil against thy people. And at the 14. v. The Lord repented of
the ^v^l which he thought to do unto his people. God does and will some times
repent.

Only you must know; God will more easily repent of his Judgments, than of his
Mercies. And you must know that the gifts of God are of two sorts. -- Ordinary
and Common gifts, and so God repents of them, and he takes them away, It
repented the Lord that he had made man -- Of the gifts of God that concern
effectual vocation, so God repents not; For the gifts and callings of God are
without repentance. Those gifts that concern our effectual Vocation, those God
repents not of.

3. But then Thirdly, how may it appear that when the Lord does return unto his
people, that then he will repent him concerning his Servants.

Why that appears by the thing it self. If a man say he will go from such a
Town and never return again, and then do return, he does repent him concerning
the thing, by his return: And so concerning God. In the 18th Jer. At what
instant I shall speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to pluck
up, and to pull down, and to destroy it, If that Nation against whom I have
pronounced, turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil that I thought to
do unto them. Well,

4. But then 4thly. How shall we know in case God be absent, or God be
departed, how shall we be able in the time of Gods absence, or departure, to
know that God will return again. Suppose that God be withdrawn from my soul in
particular, I am this day under a spiritual desertion, how shall I know that
God will return again to me. Or suppose that God have forsaken, and departed
much from the Nation, how shall we know whether God will return again or no?

Indeed it is a very hard thing to bear the departures of God; But yet if I did
know that God would return again, I should be comforted; How therefore shall I
know, both in reference to my own soul in particular, and in reference to the
Nation, that God will return again?

Here are two cases, and I shall speak all along to both.

If your Question do relate unto your own particular case and soul. I Answer
thus;

You may know it by your Relations. If you be in Covenant with God; God will
return again to you though now he be absent; Though he afflict you with Rods,
his loving kindness will he not take away, nor suffer his faithfulness to fail.
Will a Father or Mother leave their Child? no; I am sure God will not. Joseph
was under a great displeasure with his Brethren, yet notwithstanding at the
last he could hold no longer, but he bursts out, and says, I am your Brother
Joseph: And so though you be under some great displeasure from Christ, yet
there is a time when Christ will break forth and say unto you, I am yous
Brother Jesus. And I say, if you be in Covenant with God, you may conclude it,
for so does the Psalmist, Psalm. 42. ult. I shall yet praise him. My soul, thou
art cast down and disquieted, but be quieted, for I shall yet praise him. --
Why, he is the health of my Countenance, and my God. You may know it then by
your Relations. But

2. Though God or Christ be gone, and in a great measure departed from your
souls, yet, If you cannot leave God, God cannot leave you. In our conversion,
God comes to us before we come to him. But in Apostasy we depart from God
before he departs from us. How is it therefore with you? Can you say truly, My
soul cannot leave God, then conclude and say, God will return again, and cannot
leave you. But

3. Though God be very much gone, and departed from you in a great measure; Yet
if in the time of his absence he does send you letters and tokens of love, you
may know for certain he will return again. Possibly God, or Christ may appoint
an affliction to bring you a token, or to bring you a message of love in the
time of his absence -- Possibly, he may appoint or order some providence to
bring you a Token, or some message of love. -- Possibly he may order and
appoint upholding mercy, to be a pledge to you of delivering mercy. And believe
it, upholding mercy is always a pledge of delivering mercy. How is it
therefore with you, are you deserted, is Christ gone; yet have you not had the
upholding presence of God all this while? then be of good Comfort, Christ is
not gone but he will return again.

4. If your case and condition be such, that although you cannot find Christ,
Christ is gone: though Christ be gone, and departed from you, and you cannot find
him, yet, If you can direct others to the finding of him when you cannot find
him, then certainly he is not gone, but he will return again unto you. The
Spouse in the Canticles seeks after Christ: says she, he has withdrawn
himself and I cannot find him. Chap. 5. The Daughters of Jerusalem say, whither
is thy beloved turned aside, that we may seek him with thee? -- my Beloved is
gone down into his Garden, to the beds of spices. Mark, she could not find him
her self, and yet she can direct others to the finding of him -- What does this
signify, but plainly teach us thus much, that though Christ be gone, and we
cannot find him, yet if we can direct others to the finding of him, he is not
quite gone, but he will return again. Now is it thus with you, when Christ is
gone cannot you direct others to the finding of him? If you can, then build upon
it, he is not so gone but he will return again.

But then, Secondly, suppose that the Lord be departed from this Nation much,
we are under a very great displeasure of the Lord this day: God is departed
from us, how shall we know now in the time of Gods departure, that he will
return again to this Nation.

First, you know how it is with a man that does leave his house: though he go
away, yet if his Children be there, and his goods be there, his Plate and his
Jewels there, he will either come again to them, or send for them to himself!
Believe it, Christians, God has a very great Cupbord of Plate in this Nation,
Christ has much plate in England, as much as in any Nation in the World, and
he will not lose his plate. There are three things very precious in the eyes of
God -- His truth -- His worship -- His Children: Such plate the Lord has much
of here, and he will not lose his plate, therefore he will return again. Though
he may afflict, and afflict sorely, yet he will return again.

2. God will never go, while prayer stays. If there be a praying spirit, and a
spirit of prayer be up in this Nation, conclude that God is not quite gone, but
he will return again.

3. You may know it by the Providential Pledges, that the Lord sends you. God
was very much displeased with Jonah; you know, he threw him overboard into the
Sea; but then he appointed a Whale to receive him, to give him entertainment:
To provide a Chamber of Preservation, even in the Belly of destruction. What
did this signify? It signified thus much, that God would deliver him
afterward; this Providence, was a Pledge for after-deliverance. So David was
hunted in the Wilderness by Sau^, but in the Wilderness, God gave Saul into his
hand? What did that signify? That present deliverance, did signify to David,
an after-deliverance. Now though God be gone, and greatly departed from us
here: Have you not many Providential Pledges of his Love? What think you of the
house, that should have been blown up with fire lately? What does it signify,
but thus much, That God does mind to restrain the remnant of their rage: How
many Pledges, Providential pledges, have we had of Gods return; therefore let
us say: Yet God will return again. But,

4ly. If your estate and condition be such, upon which the Lord will deliver
for his Names sake, and with a Notwithstanding; then why should you not
conclude that God will return again: Friends, There is a time when God will
deliver his people, for his Names sake; and with a notwithstanding all their
sins, and notwithstanding all his own displeasures: Nevertheless, he saved them
for his Names sake, Psalm. 106. -- And when is that, that God will deliver a
people for his Names-sake, and with a n^twithstanding? -- Look into the 44.
Psalm. and you shall see when. Look when a people do suffer for his Names-sake,
then God will deliver for his Name sake: Arise for our help, and redeem us for
thy Mercy sake. Why? at the 22. v. For thy sake we are killed all the day long,
and accounted as Sheep for the slaughter: Therefore, Lord, arise for thy Name
sake. For, for thy sake are we killed. When a people suffer for God's Names
sake, then God will deliver for his Names sake, then God will deliver with a
notwithstanding. -- How is it with you now? You are in a suffering day, but are
not all your sufferings for the Name of Christ? Be of good comfort then, though
God may be departed, and your City destroyed, yet he is not quite gone, but
will return again. But then,

5ly. What shall we do that God may return again? Answer, Still I will carry it
on in answer to both the Cases.

If this Question do relate unto your own particular souls: If you say, God is
now gone from me, what shall I do that God may return to my soul again?

I answer briefly, First, Be sure of this, that you keep your door open, the
door of your hearts open for Christ's return. When the Master is abroad, the
servant fits up to keep the door open for his coming in.

2. Be sure of this, that now in the time of Christ's absence, you neglect no
duty though very uns^voury to you. The more unsavory the duty now is unto you
through the absence of Christ, the more acceptable unto Christ.

3. Be sure that you go and stand there where Christ uses to be. And let me
tell you this, If you cannot find him where he uses to be, you shall find him
where he uses not to be, as you read in Cant. 3.

4. Then, be sure of this, that you be not foolish with other lovers in the
time of his absence; L^st he bear thereof and come home no more.

5. Be sure of this also, that you do gather in upon Christ by all those words,
and by all those things whereby he seems to put you away from him. As the Woman
of Canaan, true Lord, but the Dogs eat of the Crumbs -- which made Christ turn
in again, Oh Woman, great is thy Faith, be it unto thee even as thou will. But
then,

6. Be sure that you send unto him one way or other, and tell him that you are
sick of love unto his Person: Then he returns. And,

7. Now say, Lord, though thou killest me, yet will I trust in thee. Friends,
it was Faith that brought Christ and your souls together at the first; and it
must be Faith that must bring Christ and your souls together after a desertion.
Whatsoever therefore the displeasure of the Lord be upon you, say, Lord; Though
thou killest me, I will trust in thee; Though I cannot see thee, yet I will
trust in thee, and wait upon thee.

But then, Secondly, suppose it be the case of the Nation.

God is departed in a great measure, who does not see it? What shall we
therefore now do that God may return unto us again.

Friends, Truly it is not an easy thing to bring God back again, when he is in
a way of displeasure toward a people: The Lord was angry, and sorely
displeased with Jonah: The Mariners prayed, Jonah confessed his sin, and yet the
storm ceased not, yet God goes on. I say, it is not an easy thing to bring God
back to a Nation, when he is once in a way of displeasure against a people.

And some times the Lord will never return unto a people again: The case of the
Gaderens in the matter of their Hogs: The whole City came unto Christ, and
besought him to be gone. And away he went, and we don't read that ever he came
there again.

Sometimes he will return again, but with reserves of after-Judgments: In Exodus
32. Moses prayed, and the Lord repented of the evil which he thought to do unto
his people, v. 14. But, says he, v. 34. Nevertheless, in the day when I visit,
I will visit their sin upon them. Nevertheless: For all I thus repent me, and
for all I do thus return unto them; nevertheless in the day when I visit, I
will visit their sin upon them: Sometimes I say, he does return with reserves
of after-Judgments, yet if you look into the 3d. of Deuteronomy. the thing is expressed:
The Lord will judge his people, and repent himself for his Servants, when he
sees that their power is gone, and there is none shut up or left.

Well but then, what shall we do? It is too manifest, God is in a great measure
gone from us, and departed from us, what shall we do now that God may return
again unto this Nation?

First, Be sure that you make your peace with Christ. Christ is this day
offended, his Gospel and Institutions trampled upon. A Prophet will the Lord
your God raise up among you, hear ye him; if not, he will not pardon you; that
is, Christ. He that sins against the great Remedy, shall be judged without
remedy: Christ is the great Remedy; It is a dangerous thing to sin against
Christ. O, says Christ, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered you, and
you would not be gathered; your house is left unto you desolate. And in Matthew.
22. you read, That after that great invitation to the Supper, those that were
invited refused, They made light of it, went their ways: and the remnant took
his servants, and entreated them spitefully, and slew them: But when the King
heard thereof, he was wroth, and he sent forth his Armies, and destroyed those
Murderers, and burnt up their City. It is a Gospel quarrel: And therefore I
say, Is the Lord gone and departed from us? O make your peace with Christ, it
is Christ that is offended: O make your peace with Christ, else never look the
Father should return again. But then,

2. If you desire that God may return again unto you, Then let us all return
unto the Lord with all our hearts, Joel 2.12. Therefore also now, says the
Lord, turn ye even to me with all your heart, with fasting, and with weeping,
and with mourning: Who knows if he will return, and repent, and leave a
blessing behind him? Who knows, if you will turn unto him with all your heart,
but he will return to you, and leave a blessing behind him?

But look into Hosea 6. Come, and let us return unto the Lord; for he has
torn, and he will heal us; he has smitten, and he will bind us up; after two
days will he revive us, in the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live
in his sight. God will return.

Well, but what assurance have we of it? are we certain God will return? --
Yes, verse. 3. His going forth is prepared as the morning. As sure as a Morning
is after Night, so sure will God return: his going forth is prepared as the
Morning; as certain he will return as the Morning does.

I, but when will God return?

In due season: He shall come unto us as the Rain, as the latter and former
Rain unto the earth, that is, he will return in due season, his return of love
shall be as the Rain, as the former and the latter Rain in their season. Would
you now therefore, that God should return to you, O now do you return unto God.

And that you may do so, only thus.

First, Be sure of this, that you pray and believe, believe and pray. Some
pray, but do not believe; some say they believe, but they do not pray. That
which prayer cannot do, nothing can do; and That which faith will not do,
prayer cannot do. The prayer of faith shall heal the sick; and who knows but it
may heal a poor sick Nation also: And therefore I say, pray and believe, and
believe and pray.

2. Be sure of this, that in all your addresses unto God in prayer, you come to
the bottom in the matter of your Confession. If you have days of fasting, and
prayer, and humiliation, be sure that you come to the bottom in the matter of
your Confession, to confess the Original sin of all the displeasure that is
come upon us: Otherwise, though you fast, and pray, and confess, yet if you do
not confess and bewail that sin which is the original of all our miseries, you
do but cry Lapwing cry, farthest off from the Nest, and it will do us no good.

3. Be sure of this also, That you put away the evil of your doings, and do the
contrary good; put away the evil of your doings, especially your Ashtaroth.
Friends, though you fast and pray, and humble your selves; if you do not
reform, all your fasting and prayer will not bring God back again. All the
days of fasting and prayer that you keep, will do nothing, unless there be
reformation. Yet I confess still, God must have a latitude, and he will some
times save and deliver before we are prepared for it; but I say, ordinarily,
though you fast, and pray, and cry never so much, yet if you do not reform, all
your prayers will not do: And though you do reform, yet if you do not reform,
and put away your Ashtaroth, that sin that has brought this displeasure, your
Reformation will not do. And though you do thus also, yet if you do not do the
contrary good, it will not serve. Look to that therefore.

4. Be sure of this, That you go out of your selves, and lay down all your
worldly interests at the feet of the Lord, saying, Come Lord, Return O Lord:
not return, O my Trade return; not return, O our Ships return; not return, O
our Peace return; but return O Lord, return O Lord. Friends, the more you go
out of your selves, the more fit you are for God to return unto you.

5. And to conclude it, If you desire that God should return unto you, and that
you may return to God, go then to God, and pray, and say, Turn us O Lord, and
we shall be turned. And thus I have spoken to this case.

Yet there is one thing more. It is a tedious thing to lie under Gods
departure: There may be hopes that God may return again; But what shall we do
in the interim till God returns again?

I will briefly speak to it, and have done.

If your Question do relate unto your particular Souls, and you say, God is now
gone from my soul, what shall I do in the interim till God return again?

First, be sure that you carry it as the afflicted Spouse of Christ in the
absence of your husband; and for that you may read at large in the book of the
Canticles.

2. Be sure of this, That you maintain your interest, and let not the sense of
your interest in God and Christ be dissolved. Return O Lord, how long! and let
it repent thee concerning thy servants. Still they keep their interest, Thy
servants still. And so the Spouse, I am my Beloveds, and my Beloved is mine.

3. Be sure of this, That you never come to say, God will never return again;
though you say, Lord, how long! yet never say, God is gone, and will return no
more. Poor drooping, afflicted and deserted soul, be sure of this, that you
never say, God will never return; lo, he comes leaping over the Mountains,
over difficulties to you; Only be you willing to go leaping over the Mountains
of difficulties for to meet with him.

And 2. If your question do concern the public, or the Nation, What shall we
do till God do return again?

I answer, Then go and lament after God. Is God gone and is God departed in a
great measure from this Nation? now go and lament after God. Twenty years when
the Ark was taken, the children of Israel lamented after God in the Ark. How
long how long God may stay at a distance from us, God only knows; in the
interim let us all now go and lament after God. And

2. Be sure that you keep his Ambassadors with you. When he calls home his
Ambassadors, he proclaims War against a Nation; but so long as he has any
Agents among you, he is not quite gone. And

3. If ever God begins to return to us again, be thankful for the beginnings of
his return. He that is thankful for little, shall have much; and he that is
thankful for the beginnings of return, shall have a whole return. Thus do then,
and who knows but that the Lord may yet return, and leave a blessing behind
him? That he may do so, let us now pray, and say with the Psalmist, Return O
Lord, how long, and let it repent thee concerning thy Servants.

Preventing Mercy. SERMON X.
Psalm 21.3. For thou preventest him with the blessings of goodness.

Thou have given him his hearts desire, and have not withheld the request of
his lips, Selah. For thou preventest him with the blessings of goodness.


THis Psalm is a Psalm of Thanksgiving, wherein the Psalmist does profess, that
he will joy in the Lord, verse. 1. The King shall joy in thy strength O Lord,
and in thy salvation how greatly shall he rejoice! Why so? because that the
Lord had heard and granted his Petition, Thou have not withheld the request
of his lips, verse. 2. yea, more then so, Thou have given him his hearts desire,
verse. 2. yea more then so, thou have given him more then he asked, for he asked
life of thee, and thou gave it him, even length of days for ever and ever,
verse. 4. Yet more then so, thou have not only given him his hearts desire, an
answer to his Prayer, and more then he prayed for, but thou have prevented him
with the blessings of goodness. As if he should say, Lord, I never asked a
Kingdom, I never thought of a Kingdom, but thou have prevented me with the
blessings of thy goodness, and thou have set a Crown of pure Gold on my head;
blessings of goodness in the Hebrew is put for good blessings, wherewith the
Lord did anticipate the Psalmist; for thou preventest him with the blessings of
goodness; in the consideration of which preventing Love and Grace, his heart
was much warmed, and affected.

From whence then I take up this Note or Doctrine.

Doct. That it is a sweet thing, and worthy of all our thankful
acknowledgements to be prevented with the blessings of Gods goodness, or Gods
good blessings.

Preventing mercy is sweet mercy, soul-refreshing mercy, which a thankful
gracious heart does well observe, and in the observation thereof is much
refreshed therewithal.

For the opening and prosecution of which Argument, first I shall labor to
show that it is no new thing for God to walk in the way of preventing mercy
with the Children of Men. Secondly, How, and in what respects God will prevent
us with his mercies, or his blessings. Thirdly, What those choice blessings
are, wherewith God will prevent the Children of Men. Fourthly, Why God will
carry on the work of his mercy in a way of preventing Love. Fifthly, What there
is in this preventing Love, that should be so sweet and soul-refreshing to a
thankful gracious heart. And Sixthly, In case that God has prevented any of us
with his love or mercy, what is our duty that does flow from thence.

1. It is no new thing for God to walk in a way of preventing love and mercy
with the Children of Men: Thus he has always dealt, does deal, and will deal
so; thus he has always dealt, so with the World, so with the Nations of the
World, so with great Towns and Places, so with Families, and so with particular
Souls.

1. As for the World; Did not God first come with his mercy to the World,
before the World made after it? God so loved the World, that he gave his only
begotten Son: But how did he give this gift? Did we beg it first, did we seek
it first, or did he first prevent us with it? When Adam, and all the World in
Adam had sinned, fallen, did Adam and the World first go to God for Christ, or
for the promise of Christ; or did God first give out the promise of Christ,
before Adam or the World sought it? The Seed of the Woman shall break the
Serpents head; God first gave out this promise of Christ, before Adam or the
World sought it. Thus in regard of the World.

2. And as he has dealt thus with the World, in regard of preventing mercy, so
with the Nations of the World: with the Nation of the Jews; so in the 16 of
Ezekiel. When thou layedst in thy blood, and no eye pitied thee, I passed by
thee, and said unto thee, live. So when the Nation of the Jews shall yet be
converted again: He is found of those that seek him not: it is spoken of the
calling of the Jews. And as for the Nations of the Gentiles, says our Savior
Christ to his Disciples, go teach all Nations. Did the Nations of the Gentiles
come to Christ, and say, Lord, the Nation of the Jews have rejected thee, now
then let the Gospel come to us, and we will receive it? No, but says our
Savior Christ, Go, teach all Nations, whatever they be, Rich or Poor, High or
Low, whatever they be, Go teach all Nations, and I will be with you, for their
Conversion, for their Salvation, to the end of the World. Thus in regard of
Nations.

3. So also in regard of Towns, great Towns, Places, Corporations. What worse
Town then that of Capernaum, which afterward was exalted to Heaven? But did
Capernaum first come to Christ, or did Christ first go to Capernaum? Christ
first went to them, Mat. 4. Ye read of several Towns in the Acts of the
Apostles that did receive the Gospel by the hands of the Apostles, Iconium,
Derbe, Lystra; but did these Towns first seek to the Apostles, and say, Pray
come and Preach Christ to us, or did the Apostles first go to them? The
Apostles first went with Commission from God to them. Thus in regard of Towns.

4. And as God dealt thus with Towns, preventing Towns and Corporations with
the means of Grace, when they never thought on it, so in regard of Familes. Who
does not know how God by his mercy did prevent the Family of the Jailer,
converting that Family by his preventing Love? Who does not know how God dealt
by Zacheus and his Family: Zacheus got up the tree, may be, in curiosity among
the multitude to see Christ go by, but Christ seeing him, invites himself to
his house, Come down Zacheus, for to day I must abide at thy house. Did Zacheus
first invite Christ? or did Christ first invite himself? Christ first invited
himself. Thus in regard of Families.

5. And as for particular souls, you know how it was with Matthew the Publican
sitting at the receipt of Custom; Come and follow me, says Christ, preventing
of him. And you know how it was with Paul, I was a Blasphemer, and I was a
Persecutor, but I obtained Mercy: How so? Did he seek it first? No, says he, I
went breathing out threatenings against the people of God, and God met me, And
unhorsed me, God prevented me with his grace and mercy: Thus Paul. And pray
tell me, what do you think of that whole Chapter, Luke 15? There are three
parables; the parable of the lost Groat, of the lost Sheep, and of the lost
Son. The Woman lost her Groat, and swept to find it; but did the Groat make
first toward the woman, or the woman make after the Groat first? The Shepherd
lost his Sheep; but did the Sheep make first after the Shepherd, or the
Shepherd after the Sheep? Indeed it is said concerning the lost Son, that he
first takes up a resolution, I will return home to my Father; but when his
Father saw him afar off, he ran and met him, and embraced him, and welcomed him
home; Why? but to show that the work of Grace and Mercy shall be all along
carried on in a way of preventing love. Thus it was with the World from the
beginning, thus with the Nations of the Jews and Gentiles, thus with great
Towns and Corporations, thus with whole Families, and thus with particular
Souls: It is no new thing therefore for God to walk in a way of preventing love
toward the children of men. That is the first.

II. Well but then secondly, How, and in what respects will God prevent us with
his mercies, or with his good blessings?

He will prevent us with his Mercies,

1. First, In reference to our own deservings; when we deserve evil, we shall
receive good. Is it not a great prevention, when a man shall deserve evil, to
receive good? Thus will God deal with men sometimes: He has not dealt with us
after our sins, nor rewarded us according to our iniquities. Did not Moses
deserve a sharp chiding, and to be beaten out of his excuses, when God sent him
upon his work, and he stood excusing the matter so long? Exodus 4. he said, O
my Lord, send I pray thee by the hand of him whom thou will send: and the anger
of the Lord was handled against Moses: What was the issue of it? Instead of
blows, mercy, instead of chiding and threatening, a promise; And he said, is not
Aaron the Levite thy Brother, I know that he can speak well, and lo, behold he
comes forth to meet thee, and when he sees thee he will be glad in his heart;
and thou shall speak unto him, and put words in his mouth, and I will be with
thy mouth, and with his mouth, and will teach ye what ye shall do: Here is good
in the stead of evil. Thus God prevents us with his mercies, in reference to
our own deservings.

2. As God does prevent us, thus in reference to our own deservings, so he does
prevent us also in reference to his own proceedings of common providence. Look
when God does give in a mercy, that is beyond the reach of the second cause,
that is stronger or greater then the root of the second cause will bear, or
beyond common providence, then God is said to prevent us with his mercy: Now
thus God does many times give in a mercy, that the Root of the second cause
cannot bear. So he gave Elizabeth a Child, and Sarah a Child, when they were
old; With this staff came I over this brook (says Jacob) and lo, I am become
two bands. And thus Israel said, A Syrian ready to perish was my Father
(Deuteron. 26.5.) and he went down into Egypt, and sojourned there with a few,
and became there a Nation, Great, Mighty, and Populous. A Syrian ready to
perish was my Father: As if a man should say, I came here to London poor,
having but my Pen and Inkhorn by my side, and now I am risen up to a great
Estate, beyond all my own Parts, Wits, and Endeavors, for the Lord has
prevented me with the blessings of his goodness. Thus God does sometimes
prevent us with his mercy, in reference to his own proceedings of common
Providence, or the course of Nature.

3. And then again Thirdly, As the Lord does thus prevent us with his mercy in
reference to his own proceedings of common providence, so he does prevent us
with his mercy in reference to our own preparedness. Look when God does give in
a mercy that we are not prepared for, then God is said to prevent us with his
mercy. Now was it not a great and choice mercy for the Ark to be brought home
again to Israel? Yet notwithstanding you shall find they were not prepared for
it; before they were prepared, God gave them in the Mercy, the Ark came back, 1 Samuel 6. Chapter, but their preparation you read of in the 7 Chap. And Samuel
said to all the House of Israel, if you do return unto the Lord with all your
hearts, then put away the strange Gods, and Ashtaroth; and the Children of
Israel did put away Baalim and Ashtaroth, and served the Lord only. This was
after the Ark came home; so then the Ark returned before they were thus
prepared. And you know what is said in the 57 of Isa. For the iniquity of his
Covetousness I was wroth, and smote him, I hid me and was wroth, and he went on
frowardly in the way of his heart: What then? verse. 18. I have seen his ways
and will heal him, I will lead him also, and restore Comforts to him, and to
his Mourners; over, and beyond all preparations, for he went on frowardly in
the way of his heart, and he was not prepared but notwithstanding his want of
preparation, I have seen his ways and will heal him, and will restore comforts
to him, and to his Mourners. Thus God does sometimes prevent us with his mercy,
in reference to our own preparedness for his mercy.

4. As God does prevent us with his mercy, in reference to our preparedness for
his mercy, so he does prevent us with his mercy, in reference to all our
Prayers. Look when God gives in a mercy before we pray for it, then God is
truly said to prevent us with his mercy. It is ordinarily said, God will not
set in his mercy before our Oven be hot; but if God should never set in his
mercy till our Oven and Hearts be hot in Prayer, we had been an unredeemed
people to this day: though God will answer Prayer, yet he will be found also of
them that seek him not. Do ye say, why then should we pray? I answer, that you
are to pray, not only because it is your duty to pray, but, the more God works
in an extraordinary way, the more it is our duty to be found in the use of
ordinary means: And what if I say, that the same mercy may come as an answer of
prayer, and yet in a way of preventing love too? What say you to the case of
Hezekiah? When he was sick he prayed, and God heard his prayer, and health came
as an answer of prayer, and yet he was prevented, for fifteen years more God
gave in to him, which was beyond his prayer. You know how it was with
Zacharias; says the Lord, I have heard thy prayer, and gave him a Child, yet
he did not pray for a Child, for he could not believe that he should have a
Child; so that God gave him a Child in a way of preventing mercy, and yet it
was in answer of prayer too. So here in the Text, Thou have given him his
hearts desire, and have not withheld the request of his lips, for thou have
prevented him with the blessings of thy goodness; Why? why although the mercy
received may be an answer of prayer in regard of the body of it, yet it may
come in a way of preventing love, as to the moreness of it; so it was with
David, so with Hezekiah, and so with Zacharias. That Is a fourth thing, God does
sometimes prevent, as in reference to our prayer, giving in mercy beyond all
our prayers.

5. And then fifthly, As God does prevent us in reference to our prayers, so in
reference to our believing thoughts or expectances. When the Lord turned the
Captivity of Zion, we were like them that dreamed: why were we as them that
dreamed? Why, truly we never looked for it, nor expected it, we did not think
on it, it was beyond all our expectations. Thus God does prevent us sometimes
in reference to our expectances, to our faith, and to our thoughts.

6. As he thus prevents us with his mercy in reference to our thoughts, and
faith, and expectance, so in reference to his own promises, and the conditions
thereof; if I promise a man a kindness upon a condition, and do that kindness
for him when he has not performed the condition, then I prevent him with
kindness. Now the Lord has promised many a mercy upon a condition, and yet
given the mercy when we have not performed the condition; I said (says David)
I would confess my sin, and thou Lord forgavest my iniquity. Lord, thou have
made a promise of forgiveness, upon condition of our confession and
humiliation; I did not go so far, I did but say, I would confess my sin, and
thou prevented'st me with thy forgiving Love. Thus now you see, how, and in
what respects God does prevent us with his mercy; he does prevent us with his
mercy in reference to our deservings, in reference to his own proceedings of
Common Providence, in reference to all our Prayers, in reference to our Faith
and Expectance, in reference to our Preparedness, and in reference to his own
Promises, and the conditions thereof. That Is the Second.

III. Well but then thirdly, what are those choice blessings, wherewith God
will prevent his people?

What not? But the greater the blessing is, the more it is steeped in
Preventing Love. There are outward blessings, and there are inward blessings,
there are temporal blessings, and there are eternal blessings; Now though the
preventing love of God does shine forth in all, yet the greater the blessing or
the mercy is, the more it is irradiated with the beams of preventing Love.

Will ye instance?

1. First, Will ye instance in the great matter of our Redemption? What greater
mercy or blessing then our Redemption, in and by Jesus Christ? that is of Grace;
in whom we have Redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of our sins,
according to the riches of his Grace. And when Christ came into the World in
reference to our Redemption to take our Nature upon him, do but see what a pack
of wicked men were then extant upon the ground, in the Luke 3.1. Now in the
fifteenth year of the Reign of Tiberius Caesar, (there s one) Pontius Pilate
being Governor of Judea, (there is another) and Herod being Tetrarch of
Galilee, (there is another) and his Brother Philip Tetrarch of Iturea, Annas and
Caiphas being Highpriests, the Word of God came unto John the Son of Zacharias
in the Wilderness. And why was Christ born in such a time as this, and among
such Company, but all to show, that the work of our Redemption was to be
carried on in a way of Preventing Love.

2. Or will ye instance in the matter of our Conversion: What greater mercy or
blessing then our Conversion? yet look into the 33 of Job, and you shall see,
how that Mercy comes swimming down the stream of preventing Love. God speaks
once, yea twice, and yet man perceives it not; What then? In a dream, in a
vision of the night, when deep sleep falls upon men, in slumbrings upon the
bed; then he opens the ears of men, and seals their instruction.

3. Or will ye instance in the matter of our Justification: What greater mercy
or blessing then that of our Justification? Yet this also comes swimming down
the stream of preventing Love, for he justifies the ungodly. And in the 4th of
the Romans it is said of Abraham, that he was justified, not yet circumcised,
for we say, that faith was reckoned to him for righteousness, verse. 9. How was
it then reckoned, When he was in circumcision or in uncircumcision, not in
circumcision but in uncircumcision? Why, why not in circumcision, but in his
uncircumcision? but to show that this mercy of Justification must be carried on
in a way of preventing Love.

4. Or will ye instance in the matter of our Sanctification? What greater mercy
then to be truly sanctified? Yet this also comes swimming down the stream of
preventing Love; I will wash ye with clean water: Such and such were some of
you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified in the Name of the Lord. This
also in a way of preventing Love.

5. Will ye instance in the matter of Consolation? What greater mercy t^en for
a poor drooping soul to be truly comforted? This also comes in a way of
preventing Love; e're ever I was aware, before I was aware, says the Spouse,
My Soul was as the Charets of Aminadab; I was unwilling to receive the Promise,
my Soul refused to be comforted, but, e're ever I was aware, my Soul was as the
Charets of a willing people, of Aminadab, that is of a willing people. When
Christ was dead, how sad was Mary; Christ did but come unto her, and say, Mary,
and she was comforted.

6. Will ye instance in the Revelation of the truths of the times? What greater
blessing, then for a man to be well acquainted with the truth of the times, in
opposition to Antichrist? Now says John in the 1 of Revel. (when these truths
were given out) I heard a voice behind me; before I was aware God prevented me,
acquainting me with these truths of the Revelations.

7. Or will ye instance in outward blessings or mercies? then I Will appeal to
you; In the great turnings of your lives, has not God prevented you with his
blessings? It is true, we are to trade in a way of Prayer to gain outward
blessings, and mercies; but I say, when ever did you meet with any great turn
of your life, but it was cast by preventing Love before Prayer came in? So that
do ye ask what are those choice blessings wherewith God will prevent his
people? You see here what they are. So I have done with the third thing.

IV. Now Fourthly, Why will God carry on the work of his Mercy in a way of
Preventing Love?

1. First, Because the heart of God is full of love to the children of men.
Ordinary love will show kindness upon kindness; but where the heart is full of
love, it delights to prevent the person loved with kindness. Now the heart of
God is full of love for the children of men. That Is one thing.

2. God will so carry on the work of his Grace and mercy, that all his mercies
and blessings now may be conformed to the womb that bare them. The Child
follows the womb that bare it: The first in every Kind is the Rule of the rest.
Now Election is the womb of all our mercies; and does not preventing Love sway
there? I have loved Jacob, and hated Esau, before they had done either good or
evil; there is preventing love. Now I say, God will so carry on the work of his
mercy, that all his mercies and blessings may be conformed to their first
original Election, and there preventing mercy is very sweet.

3. But thirdly, God will so carry on the work of his mercy, as it may be most
taking and effective upon the souls of the children of men; and what is more
taking then preventing love? What more Operative, what more Powerful, what
more taking I say? You know the Parable; some were invited to the Supper, and
some not invited, some came, and some came not; who were those that came? who
were those that came not? those that came not, were such as were invited; those
that came, were such as were in the Lanes, Highways and Hedges, compelled to
come in. Ay, preventing love is the most taking; now God will so carry on the
work of his mercy, as it may be most taking, and most effective upon the souls
of the children of men.

4. Again, God will so carry on his mercy, as that it may be holding and sure.
The more any mercy is laid upon that which is in God himself, and the less laid
upon that which is in us, the more holding and sure it is: Now Mercy laid upon
Grace is sure, and therefore God will carry on the work of his Mercy in a way
of preventing love, that his mercy may be sure, that it may be holding.

5. Again, God will so carry on the work of his mercy, as that it may be most
engaging, and most obliging with the hearts of men. What is there in all the
world that is more engaging to an ingenious spirit then Grace? And what is
there more gracious then preventing love? Thereby a soul is engaged to God. Ah
says a poor soul, I was going on in the way of my sin, lay snorting in my sin,
and never thought on the good ways of God, unless it were to oppose them, and
speak against them; but then, before I was aware, I know not how, God did
reveal himself, and his ways to me; Oh now what shall I do for God! I will
spend, and be spent for God; any thing for Christ, who has thus overcome me
with his preventing love. Of all those that are called the Ancients, Austin did
most magnify the Grace of God; Bradwardin called him the Son of Grace; and of
all in those days, none that we read of tasted so much of the preventing mercy
of God as he: When he was young he prayed for the mortification of his sin, and
yet he confesses that he secretly desired that God would not grant his prayer,
yet God prevented his prayer. Another time being alone, he heard a voice
saying, toll lege, toll lege, take and read, take and read; and he opened the
Bible, and pitched upon some words in the first of John, that proved the
beginning of his Conversion. Another time going a Journey, he misses his way,
and missing his way, he escaped his Enemies that lay in the way for him;
several times God prevented him, insomuch that he brake out into this
expression, Lord, I did not first come to thee, but thou did first come and
stir me up to come unto thee. And who ever magnified the freeness of the riches
of the Grace of God like Paul? and why? Of all the men in the world, he lay
under the greatest preventions of Divine Love: no wonder therefore Paul of all
men magnified the free Grace of God, for he of all other lay under the
preventions of Divine Love.

6. Again further, God will so carry on the work of his Grace, and Mercy, that
no flesh may glory in it self, that we may not rest upon any thing that we do,
or have, or suffer. When we are to come to duty, we are unwilling to it; after
we have performed it, we are as apt to rest upon it, as before we were
unwilling to come unto it: what is the reason, but because men think that they
do come to God before God comes to them; but let a man be once fully convinced
of Gods preventing Love, and he rests no more upon what he does, but says he
then, if God has prevented me in reference to my prayer, why should I rest on
my prayer, if God has prevented me in reference to my duty, why should I rest
on my duty, says Paul to the Corinthians, He calls things that are not, that
no flesh may glory in his sight, And in Job 33, says Elihu there, In deep
sleep, in a dream, in a vision of the night, when deep sleep falls upon men,
in slumbrings upon the bed, then he opens the ears of men, and seals their
instruction; Why? That he may withdraw man from his purpose, and hide pride
from man. There is no such way in the World to take down the pride of man, to
keep him from resting upon duty, as to be well seen, well experienced, in the
preventing love of God: And therefore God carries on the work of his Grace and
Mercy in a way of preventing love, that no flesh may glory in it self.

7. God will so carry on the work of his mercy and goodness, and of his grace,
that men may be made most gracious, and in case they sin against him, they may
be reduced to true repentance. What is there in all the World will make one so
gracious as a sight of Grace? and what gives one a greater sight of Grace, then
preventing love? And what is there in all the world that will reduce a soul to
true repentance (having sinned) like preventing love? It is said of Peter, he
went out and wept bitterly; all his tears came out of the eyes of preventing
Grace; Christ looked upon him first, it was preventing love that brought forth
that repentance. I say, no such way to reduce a poor soul that has sinned to
true Repentance, as the consideration of Gods preventing love. Do you therefore
ask why God is pleased to carry on his mercy thus, in a way of preventing love;
for these six or seven reasons. And so you have the fourth thing.

V. Well but then in the fifth place, What is there in this preventing love
that is so sweet to a gracious soul, to a thankful heart?

1. The more immediately that any mercy does come out or Gods hand, and the
less it runs through ours, the more sweet it is. Water is sweetest out of the
Fountain. Now preventing mercy comes immediately out of the hands of God, and
runs not through our hand at all, nor through the hand of the second cause at
all, therefore must needs be very sweet.

But Secondly, The more costless, or less costly to us, any mercy is, the
sweeter it is. Possibly a kindness may cost more to keep it, then it is worth.
Suppose a man promise me or give me wood; the cutting down of the wood, and
bringing it home, may cost me more then the wood is worth: So a kindness may
cost one more care then the thing it self does amount unto. But now preventing
mercy cost me nothing, it is cut down to my hand, it is brought into my hand,
it is costless mercy, it cost me nothing, surely therefore it is very sweet.

3. But then again Thirdly, The more perfect, and complete, and entire any
mercy is, the sweeter it is. Half-mercies are not so sweet as whole. Preventing
mercy is complete and entire. In the 16 of Ezekiel. you may see what a complete
mercy is there given, I washed thee with water (verse. 9.) I thoroughly washed
away thy Blood, and I anointed thee with ointment, I clothed thee also with
broydered work, and shod thee with Badgers skin; and I girded thee about with
fine linen, and I covered thee with silk; I decked thee also with Ornaments,
and I put bracelets upon thine hands, and a Chain on thy neck, and I put a
Jewel on thy forehead, and earrings in thine ears; and a beautiful Crown
upon thine head; and so he goes on. What mercy was this? It was preventing
mercy, I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thy own blood, and said unto
thee when thou wast in thy blood, live, yea, I said unto thee when thou wast in
thy bloody, live. So then, preventing mercy is the most complete mercy; and it
must needs be so, for it comes immediately out of Gods hand, and not through
the hand of the second cause. That that comes immediately put of Gods hand, not
running through the hand of the second cause, is most complete. Upon this
account our Justification is more perfect and complete then our Sanctification,
because it comes immediately out of the hand of God, and not out of our own
hand. In Justification our guilt is removed, in Sanctification our filth is
removed; our guilt is offensive to our selves, our filth is offensive to God:
Now one would think, God should rather take away all our filth that is
offensive to himself, then all our guilt that is offensive to us; no, but our
Justification is perfect, our Sanctification not perfect; why? because our
Justification comes immediately out of the hand of God, and does not run
through our own hand; for though we be justified by our Faith, yet it is as
Faith is Gods Instrument, not as our act: Now the more immediately that any
mercy comes out of the hand of God, and the less out of our hand, the more
perfect and complete it is: So does preventing mercy do, and therefore must
needs be very sweet.

4. Again Fourthly, The more that any mercy does correct difficulty and sweeten
duty, the sweeter is that mercy. Now preventing love does correct difficulty,
and it does sweeten duty: See it in Zacheus; what an hard and great work was he
upon! Lord (says he) the half of my goods I give to the poor: Stay then,
suppose his Estate was a thousand pounds, he would have but five hundred pounds
left; and Lord, says he, If I have taken any thing from any man by false
accusation, I restore him fourfold. Suppose he had wronged men to the value of
a hundred pounds, there is four hundred pounds more gone, so there is but a
hundred pounds left of a thousand: What an hard work is this! yet mark how
easily he comes off to this hard work, Behold Lord: why he had drunk deep of
preventing love, Zacheus come down, says Christ, for to day I must abide at
thine house. Christ does not come and say, Zacheus, give half thy goods to the
poor, and if thou have wronged any man, restore him fourfold, and then I will
come to thy house; no, but Zacheus, Come down, for this day I must abide at thy
house, preventing him with his love, and then this hard work comes off easily.
There is nothing will correct difficulty and sweeten duty more then preventing
love, therefore preventing love must needs be sweet. And thus now you see what
there is in preventing love, that is so sweet to a gracious soul. That is the
Fifth.

VI. But now Sixthly and Lastly, You will say, Suppose I have tasted of
preventing love and mercy, suppose I have had experience of it, for I must
needs say, this is my case; for I was going on in the way of my sin, and God
prevented me many a time with his preventing Grace: I have been backward to,
and dull in duty, and God has many a time prevented me with assisting Grace: I
have been full of unbeleef, and said, I am cast off, and shall never see the
face of God again, but the Lord has prevented me with his comforting grace,
and with the shines of his face: I was galloping to Hell as fast as I could,
but God has prevented me with his saving Grace. And as for my outward Estate
in the World, I was low, and knew not what to do, and God prevented me with
such a Gift, such a House and Land; what has my life been but a Bundle of
preventing mercy; if any have drunk deep of this preventing grace, I may say, I
have much more. Now what is my Duty that does flow from hence?

1. If you have tasted of Gods preventing love and mercy, if God has indeed
prevented you with the blessings of his goodness, why then should not your
hearts be filled with the sense thereof? why should not your thoughts be much
thereupon? How God has prevented you at such a time, in such a thing. The more
sense you have of Gods preventing love and mercy, the more humbly you will walk
with God, and the more closely, especially considering that God will not
upbraid you. If a man takes a Beggar from the Dunghill, and makes her his Wife,
prevents her with his love and kindness, the sense of his preventing love, will
make her walk humbly all her days, unless the man upbraid her with it; if he
upbraids her with it, it will not make her walk humbly; but unless he upbraids
her with it, the sense of it will make her walk humbly all her days. Friends,
God does prevent us with his love, and will not upbraid us with his
preventions; and therefore why should we not walk humbly, and why should we not
think much thereon, and have our hearts filled with the sense thereof. The more
necessary and useful any mercy is, the more we are engaged to think thereon.
Some mercies are more necessary, and some less necessary. Those mercies and
blessings we put God upon the giving of with our own desires, we may suspect
are less necessary; but those that God gives us in a way of preventing love, we
may think them most necessary. This is the w^y of preventing love, surely
therefore we are engaged to think much thereon; thus ye become Gods Darlings by
his preventing love. The World has its Darlings: such a one lies long in bed,
takes little pains, yet the World flows in upon him, the World prevents him, he
is the Worlds Darling; another man is up early and late, takes a great deal of
pains, and yet is Poor; but here is a man, do what he will, yet he grows Rich,
for he is the Worlds Darling: So now you have blessing upon blessing, and in a
way of prevention, What does this argue, but that you are Gods Darlings? And
will you not think much of this? O think much thereon.

2. If you have tasted of this preventing love and mercy, go away and be very
thankful to God upon this account. Shall David be thankful to the Lord for
preventing him, taking him from the Sheepfold, and will not you be thankful
for preventing mercy? Shall Ruth be thankful to Boaz for preventing her with
his Kindness, spreading his skirt over her, and will not you be thankful to
the Lord for his preventing love to you? Why should ye not all say with David
here, He has prevented me with the blessings of his goodness. Indeed I was a
great sinner, but he has prevented me with his Justifying Mercy; and I was a
wandering creature, as a lost sheep, but he has prevented me with his Redeeming
Mercy; Gpd spoke once, and twice unto me, and I heard it not, but in the deep
sleep of my soul, then did he open mine ears, and seal instruction on me before
I was aware; therefore all that is within me bless the Lord. O you that are
thus prevented, bless the Lord for this his preventing mercy, his sweet mercy.

3. But thirdly, If you have tasted of Gods preventing mercy, and have indeed
been prevented with the blessings of his goodness, even your very prayers have
been prevented with the blessings of his goodness; Why then should ye not be
early up, and sooner at your prayers, that if it may be, you may prevent Gods
mercy with your prayers, as God has prevented your prayers with his mercy.
When a Master comes into the Chamber where his Servant lies, and finds him in
bed, what says the Servant, if he be ingenious? This my Masters coming into my
bedchamber before I was up, is a plain rebuke to my sloth, I will be up the
sooner hereafter. So says a gracious ingenious soul, Gods preventing my prayer
with his mercy, is a plain rebuke to my prayer; wherefore awake prayer, up
prayer, through the grace of God I will never be so tardy again with my Prayer,
and Duty; but as God has prevented my prayer with his mercy, so through grace,
I will prevent his mercy with my prayer for the time to come.

4. If you have tasted of Gods preventing mercy, and God has indeed prevented
you with the blessings of his goodness, why then should ye not all labor to be
like unto God in your dealings with men, preventing them with your loving
kindness. You think it a great matter to forgive a man that has injured you,
upon acknowledging of his fault; but God prevents us with his forgiveness,
before we acknowledge, and be humbled; therefore why should you not labor to
be like to God therein? If a man has done you a wrong, or injury, do not stand
upon it to have his acknowledgement, but say, I will be like to God, God
prevents me with his love before my acknowledgement, therefore through Grace I
will prevent this man with my kindness before his acknowledgement, I will
forgive him. Thus labor to be like unto God in all your dealings with men.

5. But Fifthly and Lastly, If you have tasted of this preventing love, and God
has indeed prevented you with the blessings of his goodness, why then, why
should ye not trust in the Lord for ever? Whatsoever your condition be, trust
in the Lord, and believe for ever now, for your souls, for your bodies. Some
there are that doubt of their Salvation, of the salvation of their Souls: Ah,
says one, I am afraid I shall not be saved, because my prayer cannot be
accepted; But will the Lord be found of those that seek him not, and will he
not be found of you that seek him? Though your prayers are poor prayers. Ah
says another, I am afraid the Lord will not receive me when I come to him, he
will not receive me, No, But if the Lord comes to us first, and makes a tender
and offer of his Grace to us, if he seeks us, will he not receive them (think
you) that seek him? Surely he will. Some there are that doubt in reference to
their outward condition, and say, they shall want Provision, shall want Estates
to maintain them; but has the Lord prevented you with his mercy in the great
turns of your life, why then should you not trust in the Lord though you see no
means at all how you should be supplied? Heretofore God has prevented you with
his mercies; and why should you not say, God has prevented me heretofore,
therefore now I Will trust in him, though I see no means of supply? Whatsoever
your condition be, trust in the Lord now upon this account, and believe,
believe. Let me say this to you, Would you believe? Do you desire to believe?
Yes, I desire to believe; do ye? Then let your eye be fixed upon Gods
preventing love. What is the reason that men do not believe, but because their
eyes are fixed no more stedily upon preventing love? The more you know God is
willing to help you, the more you will believe; I believe that, you will say.
Now I pray then tell me, Suppose a man comes to a Beggar, and before the Beggar
asks, the man gives him money; will not the Beggar conclude that this man was
willing to relieve him? Yes. Thus now it is, we beg and we beg, but it is as no
begging, then comes the Lord and prevents us with his mercy; will you not say,
the Lord is willing to show mercy? Surely he is: Now therefore, seeing God is
thus willing to show mercy, O then believe you that have gone doubting, and
fearing, and trembling all your days, for shame now believe. Have you tasted
of Gods preventing mercy time after time, in the matter of your Justification,
in the matter of your Sanctification, in the matter of your Consolation, and in
reference to your outward Concernments? O trust in the Lord for ever upon this
account, and magnify the freeness of his Grace. Now go away, and say, through
free Grace, I Will doubt no more: Upon all occasions trust in the Lord, O you
that have been made partakers of preventing mercy.

FINIS.

