A BREVIATE FOR THE Members of the Convention.
THE People of this Nation are by Birth a Free People, who are born to a
Liberty of Person and Propriety in their Goods and Lands, and therefore England
is rightly called a Free State.

To understand the Government, we must know that these two things are always to
be distinguished, the Constitution and the Administration.

The Constitution of a Government does lie in the Original Agreement of the
People, which they make between themselves, or with their Governor, or
Governors before the Government be set up, whether there be none before, or
the former at an end.

When the People are in such a State, while there is no Order of Superiority or
Inferiority introduced, it is called a Community: When a Ruler is chose, so
that there is a Ruling and Ruled Part, it is a Society, or called a
Commonwealth.

Let us suppose a Company of Families, that having no dependence on one
another, nor any one having Power over the other, yet living near each other,
do find it convenient to join together into a Society; for mutual Defense
against some foreign Enemy, or for the reaping several Advantages, which they
shall receive by it. The Heads or Representatives of these Families assemble,
to consider what is to be done in order to these Ends. Three things more
especially they must consult upon. What Government (as to the sort or kind) is
best for them? Who shall be Governor or Governors? And by what Laws or Rules
they shall Govern who are entrusted with the Supreme Power? And more
particularly, in relation to what measure of it, they will allow them, to have
over their Persons and Estates, to use them as they have occasion, for the
Public Good. For when they are yet Free in Both, the Governor can have power
so far, but no farther than they at first Consent. Whatsoever Reservations of
Liberty the People make in their Agreement, these are to be looked upon as
their Rights by the Laws of the Constitution, and Essential thereunto, and
consequently inviolable by any of these Governors whom they set up for the
Administration; the very Laws of the Administration being void, so far as they
interfere with any of those of the Constitution.

The Constitution and Laws thereof being agreed upon, and it being impossible
for humane Prudence to foresee all Accidents, which must be provided for
therefore as they arise, the Administration necessarily must lie in these two
things. The making farther Laws (subordinate still to those foreprized) as
occasion requires, and seeing them Executed, that is, in Legislation and
Judgment. The one is the Business of the Supreme Authority, the other of the
Inferior Magistrates, or Officers, and Executioners of the same, according to
that Fundamental Agreement made by the People.

Our Government now as Constituted in order to this Administration, is, we
know, a Mixed Government. A Government is known to be pure or mixed by the
placing the Supreme Authority. If the People place it singly in the King, or
singly in the Nobles, or singly in the People, then it is a pure Monarchy,
Aristocracy, or Democracy: But when it is placed in all Three, then it is a
Mixed Government, as Ours is, where there are no Laws in the Administration ever
made but by King, Lords, and Commons.

These things I pursue only so far as is necessary to the reaching my main
purpose; and the leading me to a right Discernment of the present Condition,
into which we are now brought, in regard to this said Government.

The Supreme Power of the Nation being placed in a Parliament, which is a
Corporation of King, Lords, and Commons, that is, The Supreme Authority
residing in King, Lords, and Commons, as one Corporation, there does appear, at
this Conjuncture, a Dissolution of the Government. This Appearance does arise
from the opening of the last Scene. For the King being now gone, gone from his
People, and departing from his Government, that one Corporation (we speak of)
is broke, so that there remains now no subject for that supreme Authority; It
being evident that a Parliament, wherein an Essential Point of our Constitution
does consist, cannot now be assembled: And the Providence of GOD it self has
extraordinarily determined our Case. If a King dies, he has a Successor, and
the Right devolves upon him; but whilst the King lives, he has no Successor,
and the Right remaining in him and no other, and he being divided from his
Lords and Commons, the Subject of the supreme Power, or this one Corporation
(whereof the King is a Chief, Essential, and Constituent Part) does perfectly
cease, and must necessarily cause a Dissolution.

I choose not to found this upon what does rather convince others, which comes
to this Account. The King by his frequent Malversation in the Government, and
rooted Design of subverting our Religious and Civil Rights, for the
Introduction of Arbitrary Power and Popery, which being aggravated by such an
Endeavor, as the destroying that share in the Government which every Commoner
has, that has Right to choose his Representative in Parliament, by his
Garbling Corporations, and so evacuating this Liberty in effect; and by such an
Endeavor also as the exterminating his Protestant Subjects, seeing that
Religion which he would have introduced, is such, as by the Principles of it,
if it comes into Domination, must do so to all Heretics, and thereupon may he
be looked on no longer as Rex, but Hostis, and Hostis Publicus: Besides, the
subjecting us to a Foreign Jurisdiction, and the very Changing the Government,
by that indefinite Dispensing Power over the Laws, as was carved to him by his
Judges, from Regal to Despotical: it is judged by them, that he is fallen
thereupon from his Royal Dignity, and that the Universality thereby have
Warrant, not only to defend themselves against him, but by Virtue of that
Sanction which is tacitly employed in the Laws of the Constitution, to proceed
on to take the Forfeiture he has made of his Government, and Depose him: For
it is a fond thing (think they) to imagine any Laws without a Sanction, and
impossible there should be any other Sanction in Treatys between Free Nations,
or between a Free People, and the Governors they set over themselves, than
Force, to be used by the Parties concerned, there being no Third Party on
earth, to appeal to, in such Cases.

However this be, it being taken for granted, that the Government is dissolved,
and I suppose upon that preceding Account, of the one Corporation (I say) being
broke, the supreme Authority that lay before in the Three as united in One,
does escheat, or fall to the Community; who must therefore choose a new Subject
for that Power, and it lies at their Discretion to place it in what Subject
they please; They may lodge it in the Lords and Commons alone without a King,
if they think that Government best, the matter lies altogether upon their
Agreement, and Consent. I suppose it most likely that they will agree to place
it again in a Monarch, Lords, and Commons (the Person only left at Choice, and
Care had to prevent all Danger of Law in the case) according to the Ancient
Constitution Though who (...) know the Mind of a Nation, when an^ come
together, if he knows his own Mind?

There is one thing we have now Opportunity to obtain, which we can never
recover again, if it be lost, and that is, what His Highness the Prince of
Orange has made one of his two Designs, The Delivery of the People from
Slavery, which can never be done effectually, and radically, but upon this
Advantage. The Delivering us from Popery, is contained in the Settling our
Religion, and that being a Work of great length, is the business more properly
of a Parliament; but this is a thing must be done by the Community, and
consequently by those that are the Representatives of it, a Convention, so
Called, (in regard to a Higher Capacity hereunto) and not a Parliament; for
that represents the People, not as in a Community, but as in a Commonwealth
where there is pars imperans as well as subdita, which now is not. A Parliament
makes Laws for the Administration, but the People, as in a Community, make Laws
for the Constitution.

I would therefore humbly offer it to the Consideration of those who shall meet
as Members of this Convention, that, in order to the effect premised, they do
but agree and pitch upon this one certain Point of good Polity, that
wheresoever they place the supreme Authority, they do lay also the Rights or
Propertyes of it, that is, the Jura Majestatis ( Majes^^^ being ma^^^a
Potestas) all together.

The Rights of Majesty, or of the supreme Power, are mainly these. The ^ir^^ is
Legislation, or making Laws, and this undoubtedly lies in a Parliament. The
next, is the Power of raising Arms, or Armies, or the Militia, the Power of
making Peace and War, or the Power of the Sword, which is necessary to maintain
those Laws. The Third, is a Power over our Estates, or the Purse, or raising
Money, which must maintain the Sword. A Fourth, is the Power of choosing
Magistrates, to rule us according to these Laws, such as Judges and Sheriffs,
to name no other. A Fifth, is the last Appeal. Now let but the Power of the
Militia, and choosing Magistrates, be laid where Legislation is, and we shall
be fundamentally delivered from all Slavery for ever in the Nation.

It we be Enslaved or oppressed by any Prince for the time to come, it must be
either by Force, or by Injustice. We cannot be oppressed by Force, because no
Forces then can be raised by him, but by a Parliament. He cannot rule by an
Army, or by Violence, for the Militia is in the Lords and Commons, as well as
in him, and they will not let him do so: We cannot be oppressed with Injustice,
for the Judges and Officers entrusted with the Execution of Justice, shall be
Chosen also by them, and they will look to that.

It is true, while no Parliament sits, the King by Virtue of the Executive
power lying in him, may raise Arms, and put in Officers and Magistrates as
there is need, but both these are to be done under the Control of the next
Parliament, which are therefore to sit often by ancient Statutes, there being
no War to be levied, nor Magistrates Confirmed without their Approbation.

Let us remember the State we are in, a State that puts the supreme power in
the hands of the People, to place it as they will, and therefore to bound and
limit it as they see fit, for the public Utility; and if they do it not now,
the Ages to come will have occasion to blame them for ever. When the supreme
Power is upon the disposing, if they do not take this Item, as part of their
proper Work, To bind the descent of it to a Protestant, I shall blame them: But
I shall do so much more, if after the danger we have been in of Arbitrary
Domination and Popery, by the King's raising Arms, and putting in and out of
Judges at his own pleasure, they do not take more care of the supreme Power, to
lay it and its Rights better together. Especially, seeing nothing can i^deed be
that in nature, which it is, without its Properties. This is uniform ((...)
must persist) to the nature of Government, that where the supreme Authority is,
there must be its Prerogatives, and where the chief or principal Rights of it
is, there should all the rest which depend upon, and belong to it, be placed
also; Where Legislation is lodged, there should the Militia, there should the
power of making Judges, to name nothing more than serves my turn, be lodged
also. It is this has been the great Declension, Fault, or Defect of our
English Commonwealth, that the People have suffered these Rights of
Sovereignty to come to be divided, arising, we must conceive, from the
Administration, that is Mal Administration, as appears, for Example, in the
Militia, which upon the fresh coming in of the late King, was indeed, in two or
three hot Acts declared to be, and ever to have been in the King; when both the
Assertion was gross Flattery, and such Acts void, as fundamentally repugnant
with the Constitution.

There is one difficulty to be thought on, and that is the Negative Voice of
the Prince in his Parliament. The Lords and Commons may agree upon some Law for
the Public Benefit, and the King alone may refuse to pass it. If he be
obstinate, this is a great evil, and might really make one think it would be
better therefore to place the supreme power in Lords and Commons only without a
Controuler, for the preventing this Inconvenience: Bren there will be no need
of Change upon that account, for the King sometimes may see more than both his
Houses: And forasmuch as this Prerogative of his has been disputed, and denied
by many Judicious Men, who have pleaded the Obligation of former Princes to
confirm those Laws, quas Vulgus elegerit, it is to be hoped that the Wisdom of
the Nation will be able to find out some Expedient or Salve for this
difficulty, and for more than that also: So long as they have the Golden
Opportunity, to bring a Crown in one hand, with their Terms or Conditions in
the other.

As for the several Grievances that need Redress, and many good things that are
wanting to complete the Happiness of our Kingdom, there may be some Foundations
laid happily, or Preparations made in order thereunto, by this Convention; but
as belonging to the Administration, and being Matters of long Debate, they are
the Work more properly of an Ensuing Parliament. Only let not the Members of
this present Great Assembly forget, that they having so unlimited a Power, and
the Nation such an Opportunity, which, as the Secular Games, they are never
like to see but once, they are more strictly therefore bound in Conscience and
in Duty to their Country, to neglect no kind of thing which they judge
absolutely necessary to the public Good. I care not if I commend three or four
such Particulars to Consultation, which shall be these. A Regulation of
Westminster Hall. A Register of Estates. A Freedom from Persecution, (by a Bill
for Comprehension and Indulgence) in the Business of Religion. A Redemption of
the Chimney-Money, which bringing in the King to be Lord of every man's House,
is against Property, and an Overbalance in the Revenue, is against the
Interest of the Nation.

FINIS.

