THE Brethrens Answer IN LONDON TO Mr. Ferguson's Letter.
Beloved in the Lord, --
WIth a great deal of grief, and fellow-feeling, we received your Lamentable
Epistle, and as you were pleased to make us partakers of the News of the
Persecution, and heavy affliction, wherewith you are afflicted; so we desire
you to sympathize with us, when you read the following lines. Truly our Case is
likewise very desperate, and our Condition, Deplorable (if it were possible)
with Tears of blood, we must needs to the shame, and Confusion of your face,
acknowledge, that you were the only mouth of the Cause -- and the greatest, and
chiefest Instrument in Carrying on the precious work of a further, and more
thorough-Reformation. Indeed you were the main Wheel, that moved in the late
mysterious Engine, and by your Indefatigable pains, and Industry in
Contriveing, and managing so great, and glorious a Design, that it was in a
manner brought, within sight of the promised Land; but woo, and alas to you
and us, we are neither of us permitted to Enter into it, it was all blasted in
the very minute, and we are all certainly informed that nothing but Woes and
Curses, and Judgments, fiery and Indignations are to be poured out upon us if
we go on, and persest, in such horrid, and Rebellious Practices: there is a
Notable, and thundering Text against us, Curse not the King, no not in thy
Bedchamber, for the birds of the Air shall Carry the thought, and that which
has Wings shall tell the matter; and therefore it is no wonder we are so
unhappily prevented, since the Little birds not only tell tales, but discover
the most secret thoughts and Intentions of the Heart. As for your Spirit of
Prophecy, that your write us, is entered into you, we do so far believe it,
that all our Plots and designs are in vain and to no purpose, unless to our own
destruction, and that the thoughts of our heats, and the works of our hands
shall Not meet their designed Ends, viz. to Establish the good old Covenant and
Association, the old high Court of Justice, and a Complying Parliament, that
would thoroughly mind their own, and the Interest of the Brethren; Indeed had
this took Effect, we had been richer in goods, than in Grace, and should have
replenished our selves with the Jewels and the Earings of those Egyptians that
so tyranously and persecutingly Lord it over us -- but on the contrary they Now
spoil us, and distrain our Goods, for the violation of the Laws -- but garnt,
-- that it had pleased our Infernal Master, (whose work we do, and whose wages
we shall assuredly receive) to have lengthened the thread of Seigniour
Potapskis life, yet he would never have continued to Suckle and Replenish us,
with the Tap of Sedition, and Rebellion, fot he has gone on too much in that
Work already; but We Say -- had he lived, yet the stroock of Justice would have
over taken him, and he would have received a fit recompense of his Reward, the
Axe and Scaffold.

And this put me in mind to Advertise you of the Resolution and Courage, with
which the four Martyrs, embraced their Destinys, but especially the Lord
Russel, who by the Assistance of the Reverend Doctor Board, Acted his last part
more like some Mutius Scaevolva, or Guido Faux -- than a sneaking Penitent
Traitor -- his Lordships Ghost (if reports be true) was lately seen near the
fatal Place, of his Execution, and had like to been killed over again, by a
midnight-Magistrate, for not Vanishing in due Season, but I suppose neither the
aforementioned Doctors hand, nor head was concerned in this, if it had, it
would never have wandered at so unseasonable a Minute, or have met with so
severe a Bastinado, Indeed the good Lord at his death approved himself in some
measure like Sampson in killing more at his death than in his life, for we are
really informed he made use of white Powder, which the Doctor furnished him
with, which does a world of Execution without the least Noise, his Speech was
as Murdering as Boraskies Blunderbuss, tho it made little or no report at all;
Indeed the Doctor is an Excellent Composer, and has done this misterious
Business to a Tittle, very ingeniously, and with a great deal of Caution, but
we know (to our Griefs) Murder will out, and such sort of Knavery cannot be
long concealed, tho the greatest care Imaginable be taken to secure it, I may
say of him as was said of the Men of Benjamen, that he slings a Stone to an
hairs Breadth, but he has the fate of Left-handed-men to be very Unfortunate,
but however the Intention was very good, and Pious, he did it no doubt for the
Promotion of the good Cause, and and the carrying on the Work of the Lord
successfully in the three Nations -- and therefore in our Opinion, he deserves
all possible Laud and Commendation, and a large Gratuity out of the stock of
the Brethren --

But as for your Dear, and Intimate friend Sr. Patience, we have nothing, but
expected to hear foam News from him e're now, but in this too, we are
disappointed, and know not what to do for three or four swindging Evidences
when therest of the Trials come on, it is true he did good Service, in his
Generation, and (as you say) ventured his Soul for his Friend, but dares not
venture his Neck for the good Old Cause. --

As for M, -- G --, and A -- I suppose they breath the same Air with you, and
we much wonder that you did not more in large on that Subject, if my Lady G --
be likewise in Terra in cognita, I hope M -- is not in so bad a Condition, as
you seem to represent him, for he has, no doubt, still the same Spiritual
stroakings, inward Comforts and Consolations that he had before, But, Woe be
unto G -- if he has not the constant Supply of a kind Sister to support him in
his Misery -- as for A -- he is no doubt like Hanibal in the Alps, will either
make or find a way if there be no Stews, or Brothels ready made, he is the best
Founder in the World, for the old Trade cannot be forgot; It Would be endless
to recount all our miserys, and the several Afflictions, the distressed Saints
are exercised with, but we shall hasten to a Conclusion, with some few words of
Use and Application.

1. Then since, the Holy Plot, is so unexpectedly disapointed, we may see what
Fools and Idiots these men are, that put any trust or Confidence in lying
Vanitys, or any work of their own hands, others were designed to be our
Sacrifices, but the Rod is fallen on our own Backs, and we must all hang in the
Air, between Heaven and Hell.

Erasmus the seventh and the eighth.

2 From the Constant and Resolute behavior of the Lord Russel, you and all of
us may learn this Profitable Lesson (viz,) to do likewise, since Death is
certain, what need you care when it comes, since your Fate is written in your
foreheads.

Count Tekely the seventh and the eigihth.

3. Let us advise you to have Patience, under your Sufferings, considering that
the Laws are above you, and that it will be very Vain and Foolish for an Infant
to strive against a Man of War, bear up like a Courageous Soldier in the
Cause, and your Lot be to Dye for it, Dye like a true Protestant Martyr with a
Lie in your Mouth.

Consider, and seriously Ponder, what we have now written unto you, and when
any thing of moment Intervenes, pray make us acquainted with it, who remain in
all brotherly Love and Affection, your despised, persecuted Fellow Sufferers.

London, the last year of Whiggisme, and the middle of the Month of Sorrow.
LONDON, Printed for H. Jones. M.DC.LXXXIII.


