A DISCOURSE Concerning IRELAND AND THE Different INTERESTS thereof, In Answer
to the Exon and Barnstaple Petitions; SHOWING, That if a Law were Enacted to
prevent the Exportation of Woollen-Manufactures from IRELAND to Foreign Parts,
what the Consequences thereof would be both to ENGLAND and IRELAND.

Pro Aris and Focis. L^NDON, Printed for Tho. Not at the Queen's-Arms (...)
the Pall Mall, and are to (...) by E. Whitlock (...) Stationers' Hall. 1697/8.

PREFACE.
HAving seen in the Votes of the Honorable House of Commons, the Contents of
two Petitions, one preferred by the Inhabitants of Exon, and the other by those
of Barnstaple, etc. which (in the Opinion of all such as I have conversed with,
who know the Affairs of Ireland) have a malign and fatal Aspect upon the
English Interest and the Established Church of that Nation; and being desired
by some well-wishers to both Countries, to publish my Thoughts upon this
Subject, I think my self bound by the Sacred Ties of Religion as well as the
Common Obligations of Nature, to gratify their Desires in this Particular: and
do hope to make appear in the following Tract, that the fore mentioned
Petitions are not only the most unreasonable, but the most unconscionable
Requests that could be made to that August Assembly; for if they mean (as it is
universally believed they do) that the High Court of Parliament, to gratify the
Petitioners Request, should enact a Law to prevent the Exportation of Woollen
Manufactures from Ireland to Foreign Parts, and consequently to Ruin the
English of Ireland. I know nothing more extravagant which they could have
desired, unless it were that a Law should be enacted against the Church of
England, or the City of London; the English of Ireland having been upon all
Occasions, since they were a People, the truest and stanchest Friends the
Monarchs and People of England ever had.

I had (I confess) some Thoughts relating to this Affair the last Session of
Parliament, but after the prorogation thereof, being persuaded by some I
conversed with, that the Parliament of England would not proceed further upon
that Matter, I forbore to make them public; but seeing the forementioned
Petitions, I am forced to put them together after the best manner I can, in
that small compass of time, I have for doing it, so that it cannot well be
expected the following Paper should appear so correct and accurate as it might,
if I had time either to consider further of it, or consult my Friends, but
Truth, I hope, will not be rejected, because She appears in a mean and humble
Habit; and I do affirm, that to the best of my Understanding, I shall deliver
nothing else in this Discourse. There may perhaps some small Mistakes be
occasioned through haste or inadvertency, but the main Scope of it is Fair and
Honest, and I shall not in any one particular endeavor to impose upon those to
whose Consideration it is submitted.

It may perhaps be objected that I might have written more politely, if I had
done it with that brevity which is now usual upon other Occasions; but indeed
the Subject is of so great Consequence, that I think I have not altogether done
right to it, having to avoid Prolixity, omitted several things I might have
said; and I would desire those who may think it tedious, or whose Occasions may
not suffer them to read the whole, to omit the first part which is Historical,
and begin at Page 37 where that which is most material begins to be treated of,
and which will not take up much time in the perusal.

The great Motive (I am told) which induced the Western People to prefer
Petitions against Ireland, is the Notion they have of our being grown Rich and
full of Money and Trade since the late War, which was undoubtedly occasioned,
partly indeed, because one particular People among us (of whom I shall speak at
large in the following Pages) have engrossed the greater part of what Riches
there are in Ireland, and make a greater figure than ever they did before; and
partly by the unwary Discourses of some of our own Country that travel into
England; who cannot bear the very beginnings of Prosperity, and are so
vainglorious, that they think they cannot sufficiently extol their own Riches
and Magnificence, (when God knows that) poor Ireland in her highest Prosperity
never was, nor is like to be guilty of so unpardonable a Sin, as being Rich to
that degree, that the English Nation should have cause to envy her, or be
jealous of her.

A DISCOURSE Concerning IRELAND, etc.
THE greatest and the wisest Nations under Heaven, being subject to human
Frailties, are apt sometimes to conceive wrong Notions of things; and I know no
Opinion more groundless, and withal, more universally received by the People of
England, than that which they entertain concerning that unhappy Kingdom of
Ireland; which of all the Territories that they have by their powerful and
victorious Arms subdued to the Obedience of this Crown, has been (as they
imagine, and would persuade others) the most dearly purchased; They generally
believe, that Aceldama to have cost England greater Numbers of Men, and vaster
Quantities of Treasure, computing the Expense of both, from the time that the
English had first footing there, till the Conclusion of the late War, than it
really did the Greeks to Conquer the World by the Prowess of Alexander the
Great; or the Romans to do the same under the Conduct of Julius Caesar. For we
are told by Historians, that the Armies commanded by those Generals, were
recruited by every fresh Victory they obtained, and the People that had one Day
the misfortune to be subdued by them, must the next Day assist in the
Destruction of their Neighbors.

The Spoils of conquered Nations in hand, and the Prospect of Empire at length,
were the great Encouragements those Conquerors had to undergo their Toils and
Labors. The Riches of the Foreign World were their principal Funds for the
payment of their Forces; and though it would be absurd to imagine, that they had
not frequently (and especially upon all urgent Occasions) Succors from their
own Countries; yet those great things which in their different Ages in the
World, are attributed to them, were principally achieved at the Expense both
of the Blood and Treasures of their vassal and tributary Provinces, which daily
increased as they went forward with their Conquests.

But a great many of the English Nation are fully persuaded, that the course of
their Victories in Ireland was not so swift and easy, but that the Methods by
which it has been brought under subjection have been very different, and the
Work much more difficult and tedious.

For that being a poor and moneyless Country, there were no very great
Encouragements for an Army to Conquer it, so that it was gained by piecemeal,
and England was at the whole Expense of subduing it; for from the Reign of King
Henry II. till the latter end of Queen Elizabeth's Days, being 432. Years, it
was not entirely conquered; in which time Seventeen Kings and Two Queens
governed successively in England: for which Reasons they conclude, that it must
of necessity have cost the English Nation vast Numbers of Men, and great Sums
of Money, to keep their Ground, which they gained there from time to time, and
at length to bring that whole Kingdom under subjection to the Crown of England.

And running away with this as an undoubted Maxim and Truth, they conclude,
That it had been much better for England, that God had left Ireland out of the
Book of the Creation, or placed it in some distant Corner of the World.

But this Conclusion will fail of course, when I show the mistake of the
foregoing Opinion, which will be the easiest thing imaginable to do, if they
will allow their own Chronicles and the Writings of their most Authentic
English Historians, to be the Rule of our Belief concerning the manner and
means of Ireland's being Conquered by England. For which end I here intended to
have inserted a brief Abstract of English History, so far as it relates to
Ireland, from the Reign of King Henry II. to the Conclusion of the late War;
but I find this in a great measure done to my hand by one Mr. W. H. in his Book
entitled, Remarks on the Affairs and Trade of England and Ireland; printed for
Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside near
Mercers-Chappel, 1691. to which I refer such as think it worth their while to
be satisfied more at large: And therefore I shall only desire those who think
Ireland to have cost England so dear, to consult the Histories which are
written concerning that Kingdom by their own Authors, and they will find that
the first Number of Men sent over by Strongbow Earl of Chepstow and Pembroke,
under the Command of Fitz-Stephens and Fitz-Gerrald, was but 400. which were
followed soon after by Legross with 130. and in three Months after by Strongbow
himself with 1200. more, being in August 1170. the whole three Numbers
amounting but to 1730. which was the Complement of the Army, that by the
Assistance of Mac Murragh King of Leinster and his Friends, did not only
recover that King's Dominions in Leinster, but very much enlarge them, and in
effect, made the Kings of England Lords of Ireland, and all this was done at
the private Expense of Strongbow, and his Friends; as the remaining Provinces
of that Kingdom were most, if not all of them, subjected to the Crown of
England at the Expense of particular Persons, who notwithstanding, were well
rewarded for their Services, by the grants of those vast Estates which were
given them by the Kings of England, and which many of their Successors enjoy to
this Day.

It Is true that King Henry III. in the Year 1172. landed there in Person, with
a Party which some say, consisted of 4500. but others only of 500 Knights; but
had no occasion to make use of them, for upon his arrival, the Natives of the
three Provinces of Leinster, Munster, and Connaught were so terrified, that
five of their Kings became tributary to him; by which means he did not only cut
off the Communication which France held with Ireland theretofore, from whence
they had considerable Succors whenever the English waged War against them; but
he had himself, in four Years after, a very considerable Subsidy out of that
Kingdom. His Successors also had frequently great Aids of Men, Money, and
Provisions from thence, which were great Assistances to the English in their
several Wars against the French, Scotch, and Welsh; all which is owned by the
most Authentic English Historians that have written upon this Subject. And it is
certain that they make it plainly appear that the People of England from their
first entrance into Ireland for 400 Years, which reached to the middle of Queen
Elizabeth's Reign, were considerable gainers by that Kingdom, and that there
were greater Numbers of Men, and more Money, and Provisions sent from thence
into England, France etc. in the several Kings Reigns that governed during
those Years, who were generally involved either in Civil Wars in the Heart of
England, or in Foreign Wars against the French, Scotch or Welsh, than were sent
out of England all that time toward the Reduction or Conquest of Ireland.

For though there were frequent Rebellions raised in Ireland before the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth, yet they were generally quashed by the English of that Country
and such of the Irish as adhe^ed to them, with very little Cost to England,
till that grand Rebellion which was raised by Tyrone and others, who were set
on and encouraged by the Pope (who by his public Bull excommunicated Queen
Elizabeth and the Kingdom of England) and were assisted with Men and Money by
the Spaniard.

For till the Pope's Supremacy was invaded, and Religion reformed, most of the
Irish except the Grandees of them, that lost their Estates, by Conquest at
first, or by Rebellion after they had submitted to the Crown of England, with
their particular Friends and Adherents, most of the rest, I say, were well
enough satisfied with the English Government, under which they lived much more
securely and happily, than they did under their own Petty Kings, who were daily
Killing and Robbing, and using all manner of Acts of Hostility toward each
other.

But the Pope being disobliged, the Quarrel ceased to be (as formerly) between
English and Irish, on account of Civil Interest, and was taken up between
Protestant and Papist, on account of Religion, for the English Papists joined
with the Irish, as did some Irish Protestants with the English on the other
hand, and the Papists of both kinds became Enemies to the Crown of England, by
the instigation of their Priests and Friars, as we must expect they will ever
remain while those Incendiaries are suffered to continue amongst them.

And the Truth of the Matter is, that the ancient Irish being a poor
dispirited, and cowardly People, that is, the generality of them, they would in
all probability run with as much dread from the English, as the Spartan Slaves
did from their Masters, to their several Employments, when they appeared with
no Arms, but Whips in their Hands; were they not assisted and managed by the
degenerate English Papists, who are the most desperate and troublesome Enemies
the Protestants have in that Nation.

For the Proof of which we need not look further back, than the late Rebellion,
for the Chief among the very first, that began about Christmas 1688. to drive
away the Protestants Cattle in the Counties of Mayo and Galway in the Province
of Connaught, where the Rappareeing Trade began, were of ancient degenerate
English Families, such as the Jordans, Stanfords, Joyces, Garvys, and several
others, whose Predecessors were anciently transplanted thither from England.

And as for the Army which was raised there for the late King James, it could
never have been brought to be any way considerable, had none joined in it but
the ancient Irish. We know that Tyrconnel and Sarsfield who were the Two
principal Commanders among them, were both of English Families. And it is
remarkable that most of those Families that were the chief Instruments in the
Conquest of Ireland, are this Day, or at least were in the late War, the most
dangerous and perverse Enemies the English met with in that Kingdom; and
particularly the Burks or de Burgo's, the Chief of which Name was so eminently
serviceable in the Conquest of the Irish, that the Estate which was granted him
in consideration of that Service, was thought sufficient to recommend an
Heiress of that Family Elizabeth de Burgo, to Lionel Duke of Clarence, third
Son to Edward III. King of England, the yearly Rent thereof, even in those
Days, being computed at 30000 Marks.

But in the late War, that Family has been so far from being serviceable to
England, that I knew my self four Lords of the Name who were Colonels of
Regiments; by which we may imagine what a Number of this Family was in all
other Posts in the Irish Army. The Principal of those Lords, Clanrickard, a
half-witted, hot headed Zealot, being (to satisfy his foolish Ambition of being
thought great) made a kind of a Sham-Governour of the Town of Galway, would
have in one Day (by the Advice of some of the malicious Inhabitants of that
place) sacrificed to his Rage and Folly, the Lives of Sir Thomas Southwel and
all his Party, being between Two and Three Hundred Protestant Gentlemen, which
he certainly had done, had he not been prevented by others who had the Sense to
consider that they might very probably be called in a little time, to a severe
Account, for so horrid and barbarous a Murder.

Another, by his Title Galmoy, was Colonel of Horse, and spared no Protestant
with whom he could find any manner of pretense to pick a Quarrel; he was the
first (that I heard of) who drew blood in the late War, having hanged up
Carleton and Dixy at a Sign Post in Belturbot, without any manner of Trial,
either by Martial or Common Law; after which the Rabble cut off their Heads,
and kicked them through the Street as Foot-balls. He also occasioned several
other Gentlemen in the Queens County, after they had made Terms for their
Lives, to be hanged and quartered at Maraburrough, for which Reasons he has
thought fit to Transport himself to France, where he still remains. The other
two Lords of that Family, were one of them taken Prisoner, and the other killed
at Aghrim.

Hugh Lacy was also one of those that in the Reign of Henry II. at his own
expense Conquered the Kingdom of Mead, which is a considerable part of
Ireland: And his Successors are most, if not all of them bigoted Papists, one
of them I knew in the Year 1687. to be principal of the Dominican Friars in the
City of Limerick; his Father had been a Colonel in the Rebellion of 1641. and
was one that bore a great Sway in that Country at that time; and though I do not
know what Employments the rest of that Family had, yet I do not doubt, but they
were, to the utmost of their power, active and vigorous in carring on the late
War.

And I may justly give the same Account of the Fitz-Stephens and a great many
of the Fitz-Gerralds, whose Ancestors Commanded the first Forces that Strongbow
sent into Ireland, though the chief of the latter be a Protestant and the first
Earl of Ireland. There are also several of the ancientest English Families who
continue Papists, and have undoubtedly been as deeply engaged in the War as
their Neighbors.

But besides these particular Families, there are, in one part of that Kingdom,
a whole Generation of People called the Natives, or the Birth of Galway (as
they style themselves) who were reckoned before the late War to have been worth
30000 l. per annum, in Lands in the Province of Connaught, beside their Trade
or Merchandise by which they purchased their Estates: They consist of 14
Families, which they call Tribes, such as Lynch, French, Blake, Kirwan, Dean,
Skerret, Bodkin, Morris, Athy, etc. the generality of which are so far from
owning themselves to be Irish men, that they care not for intermarrying, nor to
have any dealings with the ancient Irish, more than the purchasing their Lands,
or receiving their ready Money for Wines, and other Merchandise: They were at
first a Colony of Fishermen, and when they began to Trade to Sea, and grew
great and rich by that means, were frequently molested, and Plundered by the
old Irish, so that they were constrained to make their Application to King
Edward VI. from whom they obtained a Charter, with great Privileges and
Immunities, by which they were enabled yearly to choose their own Clergymen,
in opposition to the Irish Arch Bishop of Tuam, and were, in short, put thereby
in a posture of defending themselves contra gentem quandam feram and barbaram
Offlaherty, which are the words of their Charter. This Town in the Rebellion of
41. was one of the last in that Kingdom that surrendered to the Earl of Munrath,
upon very advantageous Articles, as it did this last War to General Gynckhel.
In the Year 1688. the Mayor of that Town, one Brown by name, had a Commission
for a Regiment sent him by Tyrconnel, which was accordingly raised there and in
the Neighborhood. There were also a great many of the Natives of that Town,
who were Field-Officers, Captains, and Subalterns in other Regiments in that
Kingdom.

Now there is no doubt to be made, but those Papist; of English Extraction, in
conjunction with the Old Irish, have been very injurious to the People of
England, and have put them to a vast Expense both of Men and Money, as well in
this late War, as in that of Tyrone in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and that
horrid Rebellion of Forty One, in which (according to the best Accounts we
have) above 200000 Protestants of all Sexes and Ages were barbarously murdered
in cold Blood; but this will not be sufficient to prove that the English have
been loosers by Ireland, and that it were better for them there were no such
Country in the World. For let us but consider the State of that Nation in the
Reign of King Charles II. and the yearly Benefit which it is apparent to the
World England made of it, and we shall find it demonstrable, that it is a mere
vulgar Error, either to think or say so.

For it is plain Matter of Fact, that in the latter end of that King's Reign,
and the two or three first Years of the late King James's, that they received
Forty Thousand Pounds per annum, which was or might have been transmitted to
them into England out of the Revenues of Ireland, and remained clear to them
over and above the Charge of the whole Establishment of that Kingdom, that is
both of the Military and Civil List, which amounted to 243663 l. Sterling. to this
we may add above 10000 l. a Year paid out of that Revenue in Pensions to
several Persons resident in England.

The Rents also of Lands in Ireland which belong to English Proprietors, or at
least which were constantly spent in England, amounted to 100000 l. yearly, and
it is affirmed by them that best understood the Trade of that Nation, that the
English by their Shipping employed in carrying Coals for Ireland, and in
Merchandising otherwise for the People of Ireland to several Parts of the
World, gained above 70000 l. clear, per annum.

If we consider likewise the several other Advantages tha England receives by
Ireland, for Students that come to the Universities and Inns of Courts,
Travelers thither, the Post Office, Interest of Money, etc. it will by a
modest Computation appear, that the King and People of England did in those
Reigns receive yearly above 200000 l. clear out of Ireland, besides the
forementioned Charge of the Establishment of that Kingdom, and the vast
Advantages they gained by the Trade thereof; from thence they were supplied
with many Commodities useful and necessary for the carrying on of their
Manufactures here, and received vast Sums of Money from thence; for their
superfluities both of English and Foreign Goods, the Computation of which I
shall leave to those that are concerned in that Trade at this Day, or were
before the War, who must consequently best understand it.

Let us now suppose (as we justly may) that Ireland considered in the
Circumstances in which it was in the Year, 1686. did yield to England one
Million of Pounds Sterling. in four Years: and let us compute as near as we can,
the Treasure which those three grand Rebellions that have been the most
chargable to England, has amounted to, the first of which broke out in the Year
1597. (till which time Ireland was never accounted a burden to England) and the
exact Charge of that War, it is said, came to 1191248 l. Sterling.

In the Rebellion of 1641. England being embroiled in a Civil War at home (
Scotland also being in Confusion) was able to afford Ireland but very little
Aids of Money, the Army that fought against the Rebels there, lived for the
most part on their Shifts, and in consideration of the Pay due to them, had
great part of the Lands of that Country set out as Debentures, which many of
them this Day enjoy. But let us suppose that England in that War in Ireland,
was at the Expense of one Million more.

And as for the last War in Ireland, I am informed, that cost England something
more than two Millions, so that it is plain, that Ireland considered in the
forementioned Circumstances, in the Year 1686. yielded England in twenty
Years, by a very modest Computation, more Money than ever it cost them to
Conquer and keep it, and has more than once paid for its own purchase; and I
may justly conclude this part of my Discourse with this Assertion, That Ireland
next to England its self, is the richest Jewel in the Crown, and that it has
already been very Advantageous to England, and may be much more for the future,
provided the English there be supported and encouraged, and the Natives kept in
due subjection: The Truth of which, the beforementioned Mr. W. H. has made out
at large in his Book, which might have saved me this trouble, had it not met
with the same Fate that this probably may, to be despised, and neglected,
because it relates to Ireland, which is sufficient to prejudice a great many
against it. But his having done this to my Hand, is not the only Reason of my
being so brief in speaking to it, but because it is not the main Point, which I
intend to insist upon. For lest I may meet in this skeptical Age, with some
Persons, that it may be as hard to induce to give Credit to this Paradox, of
Ireland's being useful and profitable to England, as it is to persuade others
to believe the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity, and will as much question and
object against the Truth of English History, as some do against the Authority
of the Holy Scriptures. I shall therefore desire to be allowed only this one
Postulatum or Principle to proceed upon, viz. That since Almighty God, when it
was at his pleasure, and he might have forborne the Creation either of England
or Ireland, thought fit to create them both in the Neighborhood of each other,
and allowing that Ireland has been always a vexatious and chargable Country to
England (for if the People of England will say, and are resolved that this is,
and shall be Truth, it is but Duty and good Manners in us of Ireland, to
subscribe to it) yet that it is not only expedient, but almost necessary, for
the common Security and well being of England at home, as well as for the
Advantage of their Commerce and Trade abroad, that the Possession of Ireland,
and the Government thereof, both in Church and State, should be always in
English Hands, and managed according to the English Laws there Established, and
the Interest of this Crown therein, be constantly and entirely preserved.

And this is, what is, and has been allowed, not only by the wise Men of the
present and former Ages, but by those who are most prejudiced against Ireland,
otherwise they would not have thought it worth their while to assert their
Title to it with so much Vigor, and Conquer it so often as they have done.

From this Concession (which I never heard to have been refused by any of the
English Nation) I may deduce this very natural and undeniable Consequence.

That our most Wise and Gracious King, and the Grand Council of this Nation,
the Two Houses of Parliament, would be so far from Enacting or Consenting to
any thing that may prove apparently prejudicial to the English Interest in that
Kingdom, which they have so lately, and at so dear a Price re-gain'd and re
established, and which being violated, must produce some evil Effects even to
this Kingdom, that they cannot look favorably upon any that would impose such
Advice upon them, but believe them either to be (at least) ignorant of the
Constitution of that Country, or to act out of a Principle which I don't think
convenient to mention.

It shall therefore be my Province, upon this Occasion, humbly to represent,
how Dangerous (I apprehend) the Consequences of such a Law as is mentioned in
my Title Page, will, in all probability, prove to the English Interest, and the
Established Church of that Nation, and only to offer to the Consideration of
the Wise Men of England, whether they may not in some time, severely affect
this Kingdom, though the Prejudice be immediately to Ireland.

And that I may with the greater perspicuity and plainness accomplish the same,
'twill be useful to take Notice, that that Nation consists principally of three
several kinds of People, whose Interests and Dependencies are very different
from each other.

I shall say something of them in particular, and endeavor to show how far
this Law if enacted, will affect each of them; and if I demonstrate that the
English Party are like to be the only sufferers thereby, I hope I shall gain my
Point, and that the Wisdom of England will not think convenient to do any thing
that may be ruinous or prejudicial to that Interest.

First, I shall begin with the Irish Papists, as they consist of Popish English
Families, as well as of the ancient Natives of that Kingdom, in which sense I
desire to be understood all along, when I mention the Irish.

I have already hinted how vexatious and troublesome they have been to England
ever since the Reformation of Religion, how vigorously they have at several
times, endeavored to cast off the English Yoke, and how Bloody their
Rebellions and Massacres have been. And it is certain, that all such of them as
have been dispossessed of their Estates, especially since the beginning of
Queen Elizabeth's Reign, were turned out of them, by reason of their constant
opposition to, and uneasiness under the English Government, with which ('it is
apparent) they have believed their Interest to be wholly inconsistent; or it
cannot be imagined they would have made so many violent Efforts to extricate
themselves from it: I need not therefore give my self, or those to whose hands
these Papers shall come, any further trouble, by producing Arguments to prove
the Dependence and Hopes of the Irish Papists to be very opposite to those of
the English of that Country, for if their Interests be so, this must of course
be allowed.

And this they have in the late War evidently demonstrated to the World: For
when the Emperor, the King of Spain, and most of the other Roman Catholic
Princes of Europe were in League with his Majesty of Great Britain, the Pope
himself being rather a Friend, than an Enemy; and such of those Princes as did
not assist us against France, were all Neuters, the Irish only, with some small
assistance from France, maintained a brisk and vigorous War against us, and did
indeed make a stronger opposition to the Arms of England, than we might imagine
it were possible for them to do, if we consider either the Condition in which
they are now, (being unhorsed, and disarmed of all manner of Weapons of War) or
the Circumstances in which they were in any time since the Restoration of King
Charles II. till the last part of his Reign, when by the great Encouragements
they had (by the D. of York's means) from the Court of England, they began to
seem formidable to the Protestants of Ireland. So that, I think I have made it
evident, that as they believe the Extirpation of the English out of that
Country would be their greatest Interest, and Advantage, so they have chiefly
depended upon the French, and by them expected the accomplishment of that great
Design.

Not that I will say that they have naturally a greater Affection for the
French than any other Nation, but because they have, for some Years, esteemed
the French King to be the most powerful and the most Ambitious Monarch of
Europe, of the Romish persuasion; and consequently the most likely to attempt
the Expulsion of the British out of that Country, and (as they fondly imagined)
to restore them to their pretended ancient Estates and Liberties; which is the
same reason that induced them to be so fond of the Spaniard in the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth.

And notwithstanding that there have been, all along the War, considerable
Numbers of those Irish Papists in the French service, many of which remain
there this very day, and the Ruins of Demolished Towns, and Fortresses in
Ireland, and the vast heaps of the Bones of Slaughtered Men, which are to be
seen in many parts of that Kingdom, are but too Fresh, and Sensible Monuments
of their Villainies, and cannot when we see them, but make us Reflect upon their
Behavior toward us, and remember how few years have passed since they were by
downright Dint of Sword beaten into good Manners; I say notwithstanding all
these things, I have been very well assured that long before the Conclusion of
the Peace, they have made application to the Emperor, K. of Spain and other
Roman Catholic Princes, that they might Intercede for them to the K. of
England, as being poor Persecuted Catholics; because they are not left in a
Posture of running into another Rebellion, and Cutting of Throats at pleasure.

And, to my certain knowledge, they had September last their Agents or
Plenipotentiaries (as some style them) in Flanders, and have the confidence to
tell us, that they were never so happy as under an English Government, and that
our present King has been gracious to them beyond expectation; and so far, they
are in the right, and speak Truth, whether they believe it or no; but they do
also endeavor to make us believe, that most of any Note among them having
taken the Oath of Fidelity, they are now true Friends to King William and the
English Interest of Ireland; and we know very well that Oaths have been ever
such Sacred Ties, as they could not break through, but have observed them, as
invfoiably, as a certain Friend of theirs, (who was always Famed for being
nicely just to his word) did perform his repeated Oaths and Promises of
Preserving the Church of England, and Governing these Kingdoms according to the
Laws then Established, etc.

But to lay any stress upon their asseverations to this purpose, is so grand a
contradiction to Common Sense and Experience, that reason can never admit it,
nor Mankind be so far Imposed upon, as that they should expect the performance
of any thing of this kind from them, it is altogether as reasonable to imagine,
that those Creatures which are called Tame Wolves, when let loofe, will abstain
from their Prey and not fall upon the Flocks and Herds, nor Foxes upon the
Poultry, it is as reasonable (I say) to believe this, as that Irish Men in power
will preserve; and not endeavor to extirpate the Protestant Race out of that
Country, and for my part, I shall scarce ever be convinced, but that the
Character is very applicable to them which Hippolitus gives his Hunts man of
the Spartan Dogs -- Spartanos
(Genus est audax avidumque serae)
Nodo cautus propiore liga.
which according to my Interpretation is as follows, That it is a Turbulent
ungovernable Generation, greedy of Blood, and never in good order, but when
tied up, or close coupled.

If these be the People which the Parliament of England propose to keep in low
circumstances, they are very much in the right, for that Generation never
becomes Rich or Powerful but they grow Troublesome and Uneasy, and are ready
to join with any Popish Prince, that will assist them against the English
Nation, who can never be too jealous, or careful to prevent their being in a
condition, to repeat those Villainies which they have so often and so lately
acted against the Protestants of that Kingdom, and consequently of putting
England to any further Charge or Trouble in the Reduction of them.

There may be several particular methods proposed for weakening that Interest,
and incapacitating them of being any further troublesome to England, such as
Banishing their Priests and Friars; taking care to have their Children, or the
greater part of them, educated in the Principles of the Protestant Religion, as
the French do, to have those of the Protestants in their Country, brought up to
Popery. The prohibiting of Papists by Law to purchase any Lands or Freeholds in
that Kingdom, and so forth.

But if the Government of England would think convenient to have Parliaments
more frequently called in Ireland than they usually have been, especially in
the Reign of King Charles II. who never called one from the time of the
Settlement of that Country, to the day of his Death, which without dispute,
gave the Irish Papists great opportunities of growing upon us, and being in a
Condition of giving England such vigorous Opposition, as they did in the late
War; whether his design in that omission, was to give that People those
opportunities or no, I shall not determine; but am confident, that if
Parliaments were frequently called there, and the management of Affairs were,
in some measure, left to their discretion, there would be such prudent and
effectual courses taken for suppressing the Natives of that Country, as would
for ever prevent their being mischievous or uneasy to England; and it is
certain that there is nothing which the considering and cunning Men among them,
do dread more: but have had in all former Reigns, the Interest in the English
Court, to prevent it.

By this means, of frequent Parliaments, and allowing the freedom of Trade, in
some measure, to the English of that Country, it would in a few Years appear,
that Ireland is of greater advantage to the English, than any thing they ever
added to their Dominions, of which the Kings of England would be very sensible
by the vast Revenues that would accrue to them; and this without prejudice to
the Trade of England, whose Commodities out-sell those of Ireland in all
Foreign Markets; and considering that the Traders of Ireland lie already under
such Restrictions, that it is impossible they should ever injure England, either
in relation to its Manufactures at home, or its Commerce abroad; though there are
some of that unsatiable Temper, that they think whatever the poor English of
Ireland do gain by their Industry and the blessing of God upon their
Endeavors, to be just so much lost out of their own Treasures.

Having said something of the Irish Natives in general, I come now to their
Commerce and manner of living, and how far such a Law if enacted, will affect
them.

Though it is not to be doubted, but that many more of the Ingenious sort of
them, are fallen into Trade, in imitation of the English, yet they are no
farther concerned in the Woollen Manufactures, than in buying (from the
Protestant Tradesmen) some small quantities of them for their own use, and some
perhaps to Transport by way of Merchandise into other Countries. Nor are the
Gentry or the better sort of them much addicted to the keeping of Flocks, or
raising Sheep; for such of them as are possessed of any considerable quantities
of Land, especially if they be ancient Families, think themselves above any
business of that kind, or at least never mind it, but live after a careless and
prodigal way, pleasing themselves with a great company of Followers, Servants
and Tenants (the last of which are in the nature of Villains to them) and so
that they have but a sufficient number of Sheep for their own use, do not much
care, (nor indeed understand how) to propagate them. Sometimes where their
Women are extrordinary Housewives (which is rare among 'em) they make Frize and
ordinary Linen for the use of their Families, this is all the Manufacture they
are concerned in, and indeed is scarce worth mentioning.

But lest it should be imagined that the Generality of the Irish may be further
concerned in the Manufacture of that Kingdom, 'twill not be amiss to give an
Account of their Commerce and manner of Living; and there are two Degrees of
them; the first is a kind of People that call themselves Gentlemen, and Old
Proprietors, and hope at one time or other to be restored to their ancient
Estates, and the Number of this kind of Men is very considerable; for in the
late War when they were, by virtue of the Act of Repeal, restored to their
diminutive Estates, there were many of them that could not claim above 12, some
not above 10, and other 6 Acres of Land, 50 or 60 Acres were large Fortunes
among them; for it was a Custom among most of the ancient Irish, to make an
equal dividend of whatever Lands they purchased among all their Sons, which is
the true reason, that there are so many of those People in that Country, and
which next to their Priests and Friars are the Persons that, of the whole Irish
Nation, are most dangerous and vexatious to the English: for they think
themselves injured Persons, being (as they say) unjustly dispossessed of their
Estates; those small Proprietors being excluded by the Act of Settlement passed
in that Kingdom after the Wars of 41.

They are generally careful to procure some kind of Learning for their
Children, whose Accomplishments are chiefly the speaking of Latin, Writing
tolerably well, and Playing on the Harp; they think themselves too much
Gentlemen to put their Sons to Trades, or breed them up to any thing that is
Laborious, which is what they never betake themselves to, but sometimes walk
about with their Snush-horns, enquiring for News; heretofore, concerning the
French King and his Successes against the Confederates, but now (I suppose)
their Enquiries will be concerning the Prince of Wales, what kind of Spark he
is like to prove, and whether they may expect ever by his means to be restored
to their Estates; at other times they smoke Tobacco by their Fire sides, or if
the Weather be warm, Sleep, or Lowze themselves under the Hedges, and spend the
rest of their time after some lazy and fruitless manner; but they are always in
a readiness upon the least Commotion, to join the Enemies of England, and by
the assistance of their Clergy, do compel the poor ignorant Common People to
follow them to all the Mischiefs imaginable, giving themselves the Titles of
Colonels, Captains, and what other Officers they think convenient, according to
the Numbers they can assemble.

But it will now be convenient to give some short account of those other poor
common Irish, their Commerce and manner of Living. They are a People of so tame
and cowardly a Disposition, that were they not actuated by their Gentry and
Clergy, and they were in never so great a Tumult, did the English but appear to
them with their Cudgels and Scourges only, they would undoubtedly betake
themselves to their several Labors and Employments, which being considered, it
will appear how far they are concerned in the Woollen Manufactures of that
Kingdom; such of them as live in the plain and fertile parts of the Country,
are generally Slaves to the English, or to their Irish Landlords, and live by
their daily Labor, working for 3 d. and in some places 4 d. a Day and their
Dinner, their Stock is generally a Cow or two, some Goats, and perhaps six or
eight small Irish Sheep, which they clip twice a Year, and convert the Wool
into coarse Frize to cover their Nakedness, the same Clothes serving them
commonly both for wearing by Day, and for Bed clothes by Night; when the Lambs
of their few Sheep do fall, they preserve some small part of them to keep up
their Number, and those they half starve for lucre of the Milk, the rest they
sell in the Markets at 6 d. or 8 d. a piece; and this is what is known to all
those who have had the least abode or acquaintance in those Parts of the
Kingdom where the greatest Numbers of the Irish Inhabit. The only considerable
Manufacture that I have seen or heard of among them, are those great quantities
of coarse Linen, Yarn, which are transported into Bristol, Biddiford,
Liverpoole and other Parts of England.

Now a Law of this kind would be so far from being a Discouragement to that
People of which I am treating, viz. the vulgar Irish, that it would be a very
great Obligation laid upon them; For before the late War in that Kingdom, the
Flocks were grown so numerous in all the plain Parts of the Country, that the
vulgar Irish were driven for the most part into the mountainous and woody Parts
of the Kingdom, except such as were necessary for some Services, in which the
English for want of others, were forced to employ them: Insomuch, that I have
my self very frequently heard them curse the English Sheep with all the
bitterness and rancor imaginable; and pray to God, That he would send a Rot or
a Plague among the Sheep, that the poor of the Country might have greater
scopes of Ground for tillage, etc.

And this was the true Reason, that in the beginning of the late War they made
such barbarous Havoc of that kind of Cattle more than any other, killing
hundreds of them in the Fields, when they had occasion for the Flesh but of a
very few, which did not a little contribute in two or three Years time, to
occasion so great a Scarcity in that plentiful Kingdom, that if the Irish Army
(especially when driven over the Shannon) had not been plentifully relieved
from France, a great many of the Country must have inevitably perished by
Famine.

So that it is a grand mistake to think that the Generality of them are Richer
now than ever; there were undoubtedly a great many particular Persons among
them, who by being more eminent Rapparees than others, and being concerned in
seizing the Protestants Goods, have made considerable Fortunes in the late
Troubles, some of which have Transported themselves and their Effects into
France, and others under the subterfuge of the Articles of Lymerick, Galway,
etc. have sheltered themselves from common Justice, and live splendidly and
securely upon the Spoils of ruined Protestants.

But the Irish in general are a kind of People that cannot keep Riches by them,
for though the Gentry of them had ever so great Rents coming into them, they do
usually spend their half Year's income, in less than three Months, running
partly in Debt for the remainder of the time, and partly spunging on their
Neighbors and Tenants, which latter was looked upon to be so heavy a Burden to
the Commonalty, that there has been an Act of Parliament passed against
Cosherers or Smell-Feasts in that Kingdom: and indeed their extravagance, and
ill management are the true Reasons why the Wine-Merchants, and other Traders
among them have either purchased, or lent Money on the Estates of most of the
ancient Irish Families.

And as for the universal Plunder which the Irish Army the Rapparees, etc. took
from the Protestants before, and in the late War, they were no sooner Masters
of any part of it, but it was immediately destroyed: when they drove away an
Herd of Cattle (which was common with them) they never ceased slaughtering both
Fat and Lean, till they had consumed all, neglecting their Potato's and other
ordinary Food, to which they had been accustomed: when they plundered a House,
they shaked the Feathers out of the Beds into the Streets or High ways, and
made Sacks of the Ticking to carry away the other Goods; they cut the Curtains,
Hangings, Linen, etc. into Clothes; both Men and Women neglecting all manner
of Work, and living upon Spoil and Rapine, which was the means by which that
Country was reduced to that miserable Condition in which the English Army found
it when they reduced it; and yet I doubt not but if the Lands of the English of
Ireland were to be sold, the Irish might soon be furnished with Money from
abroad to purchase them.

Secondly, In order to make good my general Assertion, That the English of
Ireland are like to be the only Sufferers, by the passing a Law pursuant to the
Exon. Petition I cannot avoid saying something of another sort of People that
Inhabit great part of that Kingdom, their Interest, Commerce and Dependence,
and these are the Scotch Dissenters or Presbyterians (as they call Themselves)
of that Nation, as in conjunction with that Party in Scotland, who have lately
run down Episcopacy there.

For I must here declare to the World, that I intend no general national
Reflection, knowing that tho the Kirk of Scotland be now Triumphant, yet there
are still, both there and in Ireland. the remains of the Church of Scots, which
(I hope) God will in his own good Time repair and beautify and that there are
a great many Men of Learning and Wisdom, Honor and Bravery of that Nation,
concerned in all manner of Stations in these three Kingdoms, in the Church, the
Army and the Commonwealth, between whom and our selves I do not think it
reasonable nor fair to make any distinction, since we profess the same Faith,
have been all along embarked in the same common Cause, and (Thanks be to God)
have to very good purpose co-operated toward the attainment of the same End,
which is the security of our Religion and Properties, and that both may be
Established upon Firm and Lasting Foundations in opposition to all manner of
Enemies, according to the Ancient and known Laws of these His Majesty's
Dominions.

And because it is usual with that Party to interpret all things which are said
(upon any occasion whatsoever) disobliging to them as Reflections upon the
Reformed Churches abroad, I do here solemnly profess, that I have a very great
esteem for those Churches, and have not the least intention of saying any thing
that may give them the least Offense; being very sensible, that they are so far
from having an ill opinion of the Church of England, that they are very well
satisfied with her Doctrines, and, if we may believe some Learned Men among
them (as I think in Reason and Charity we ought to do) they tell us, that if
their Bishops would have joined with them in the Reformation, they would not
have rejected an Order so Ancient and Universal in the Christian Church: But
since their Bishops were so tied to their Temporal Interests that they would
not bear a part in that great Work, the Presbytery thought themselves obliged
in Conscience to renounce the gross Idolatries, and Superstitions of the Church
of Rome.

Now these Declarations being made, it will plainly appear, who these are,
whose Interests and Dependence I am to show, are different from those of the
English of Ireland: And though we have too severe an Instance, and Proof, in the
late Revolution in Scotland, that they are not shye either in doing, or saying
any thing that may conduce to the promotion of their Old Cause and Interest;
yet I shall endeavor to express my self in as soft and inoffensive Terms as I
can, without doing wrong to the Subject in hand.

For it is not my purpose, at this time, to enter into a Controversy with them
concerning Religion, but to let them know only, that I would not willingly have
them our Masters, or that it should ever lie in their powers to deal with the
Established Church of Ireland as they did with that of Scotland; for there are
a great many living Monuments of their Cruelties and Barbarities, especially to
the poor Clergy of that Church, whom they were not satisfied by turning out of
their Churches and Livings, without the least provision for their Families; nor
yet, with pillaging and burning their Houses, stripping and abusing their Wives
and Children in many places, but offered such indignities to their Persons, as
were not offered to the Persons of the Protestant Clergy that stayed in Ireland
during the late War in that Kingdom; not that I have a favorable opinion of
the Virtue and Goodness of the Papists of Ireland in general; for I do not
doubt, but they would have out as many Throats as they did in 41. had not the
more considering Persons among their Chiefs foreseen, that in all probability
they must very soon be called to an Account for it; for many of them have since
the late War upon the least disgust, cursed themselves, that they left it in
the power of the English that stayed among them ever to injure them; nor had it
seemed strange to us, if they had proceeded to a Massacre, it being no more
than a repetition of their former Villainies, and what we expected from them.

But it was wonderfully surprising to us, to see a great many of the Episcopal
Clergy of Scotland come into this Kingdom for shelter, in a more miserable
Condition (if 'twere possible) from their own Countrymen, Relations and
Brethren (who call themselves Protestants, and have been the great Champions
for Liberty of Conscience, and Declaimers against Persecution) than of Ireland
did, much about the same time, from their inveterate, irreconcilable Enemies
the Irish; the latter being driven away by force and violence, and in sure hope
of a quick and happy return to their own Country, but the former by Law without
the least prospect of Restoration, which is the most dismal Circumstance that
ever attended any Affliction, and which renders the Damned themselves
completely miserable.

I need not here trouble the Reader with the repetition of those inhumane
Cruelties which were exercised on that poor Clergy; for this Nation has had
sufficient Proofs and Accounts of them, not only in print, but from the Mouths
of a great many, who bore a part in those Sufferings. I shall therefore only
give some few Instances of the Bitterness of some of those People, to which I
was an eyewitness in Ireland. If I mention any other passage, it shall be such
as shall plainly show, what usage we must expect from that Nation, should they
ever be in a condition of Domineering over us. And

First. Being in Belfast, in the beginning of the Year 1690. a little before
his Majesty Landed there, one of the Chaplains of the Army walking on the Key
of that Town in his Gown, was spied by a parcel of Demi-Tarrs in blue Bonnets,
who came in a Boat from Scotland to sell Oatmeal, and Eggs, etc. they were so
transported with Rage at the sight of him, that not considering that they were
not in Scotland (where they had been accustomed to use such Men ill, and were
accounted Religious and Zealous in so doing) they began without more ado to
revile him, and belch out, I know not how many Scotch Curses and opprobrious
words against him, and would in all probability have offered him some Violence,
had they not been soon made to know, by some Gentlemen that were near the
place, that they were not in their own Country, where an Episcopal Clergyman,
especially should he appear in his proper Habit, must expect to be used, as the
Poet says the Owl is, when she happens to appear by Day light: -- a cunctis
expellitur aethere toto. Ovid. Met. All the rest of the Birds fall foul upon
her, as a Bird of Darkness.

Secondly. Immediately after this happened, I met a Gentleman of very good
Sense and Learning, and (I Am very well satisfied) of great Integrity, who was
Chaplain to a Danish Regiment of Horse; he assured me, that being commanded by
his Superiors in Denmark, to fit himself with the same Habit with the Clergy of
England, as soon as he should come into our King's Dominions; and having done
so at York, was soon after obliged to march with that Regiment to Edinburgh,
where he no sooner appeared in a Gown, but he was surprised at the Mobs
flocking about him in great numbers, he perceived that they began to come very
near him, and to take up Dirt, and whatever else the Street afforded, to throw
at him; being in some consternation, and not knowing what they meant, unless it
were because they had discovered him to be a Stranger, not in the least
imagining that the Gown could be so very offensive to them, he made what have
he could to some Persons that looked like Gentlemen, who were walking toward
him, whom he found smiling, and pleased at the Rabbles behavior to him: He
told them, that it was not the Custom of his Country to use Strangers after
that inhumane manner, and that he little expected it, having come so far to
serve the King of England; but that since the Gentlemen encouraged the other in
so great a piece of Rudeness, he would apply to the Army with which he came for
satisfaction for so great an Affront; whereupon finding him to be a Foreigner,
they dispersed the Mobb and begged his pardon, telling him that they thought he
was an English Minister, or they would have rescued him sooner: To which he
replied, That he therefore thought them the greater Barbarians; and that if
they used their Neighbors after that unchristian manner; he was the less
concerned for his Abuse, and had no reason to expect either Civility, or
Good-manners from them.

Thirdly. Another Instance of this kind, to which I was eyewitness, is as
follows; In a few days after that Gentleman told me this Passage, there were
two Clergymen walking in their Gowns upon the Bridge of Belfast, who were also
Chaplains in the Army, to whom I saw one go (who counted himself a topping
Gentleman in the North of Ireland) and take up the Skirt of one of the Gowns in
a gibing manner, telling them in a deriding Tone, and in broad Scotch (though
'twas not his usual Dialect) that the Bischops were put down in Scotland.

Fourthly. I have heard several of the vulgar Scotch of Ireland, belonging to
the Army say, That when the Papists were Conquered, they hoped the Bishops
(meaning the Episcopal Party) should be the next against whom they should
Fight, and I was credibly informed, that it was a frequent Expression among the
Commonalty of them.

These two last Instances I produce, to show that this furious Zeal, and Spirit
of Persecution, is not peculiar to those of Scotland, but that their Friends in
Ireland have their portion of the same: which might be further proved by
several particulars, were it necessary to the main Design and Matter in hand.

Fifthly. But there is one Instance more, to which though I was not an
eyewitness, yet I received the Account from those whose Veracity I do not at
all question, viz. That some poor Gentlewomen who, about the beginning of the
Siege of Londonderry, were sent by their Husbands (who stayed behind them in
that Service) to Scotland for security, when they were Landed there with heavy
Hearts, and probably not very much in their Purses, yet they found within
themselves, some small degrees of Satisfaction and Ease arising from the
consideration of their being safely Landed in a Protestant Country, out of the
noise of continual Allarums, and the Dangers and Fears occasioned by the
Neighborhood of a powerful Enemy, to which for some time before they had been
subject: And there they had for some time, such a Reception as might be
reasonably expected in that Country, till partly by their own unwary Discourse,
but chiefly by the Malice and Treachery of some of their Presbyterian
Neighbors that went over about the same time, they were discovered to be such
as made use of that horrid Book called The Common Prayer; and (which was worst
of all) that one of them was the Wife of a Curate, which is the Title they have
for our Ministers; upon which Discovery, the poor Gentlewomen were turned out
of doors, with as much precipitation, and violence, as if they had escaped from
a City where the Plague raged, or that some Judgment from Heaven must
inevitably fall upon the House that should harbor them; and could have neither
Meat, Drink, nor Lodging for their Money (notwithstanding that Coin is so well
beloved by the Inhabitants of that Country) but were forced to walk further,
where being less known, they were more regarded, and were very glad that they
escaped without Violence.

And now, methinks, they that had so lately cried out against Persecution on
account of Religion, and the barbarity of the Penal Laws, as they did in the
Reign of King Charles II. and the late King James also, till those Managers
which led that unfortunate Prince by the Nose, began to think it Policy, to
caress them, and bring them to side with his Interest against the Church of
England; Methinks (I say) they should not have made such severe applications of
a Law of that kind, as they did in their own Country; and at a juncture of
time, when the King and People of England were engaged, not only in a Foreign
War against France, but in another bloody War in Ireland, and a third in
Scotland.

I will not say, that this proceeding against the Episcopal Church of Scotland,
at that time, looked like an Imposition upon the Necessities of England; but
the World must judge the taking that Advantage, to be ungenerous; and that it
was as much, as if they had said, that since their Assistance was required
against the Common Enemy, the extirpation of Episcopacy was the recompense they
expected, and must have, in consideration of their Services.

And though they could not say, when they were resolved to ruin that Church, as
the Jews did when they were bent upon the Crucifixion of our Savior, We have a
Law among us, and by that Law he ought to die; yet they enacted, among
themselves, a Law to that purpose, which occasioned a great many to side with
Dundee, and opposed His Majesty's Interest in that Kingdom, to the utmost of
their Power, who longed earnestly for this happy Revolution, and expected
thereby to be delivered from the then imminent Danger of Slavery and Popery,
not thinking that they should fall under another no less cruel Bondage.

And indeed, this proceeding might have turned the Hearts of a great many more,
in that Nation, against the Interest of His present Majesty and the People of
England; had not those poor Men wisely considered, that it was the Act of their
own bigoted Countrymen, and therefore instead of taking up Arms against
England, they fled hither in great Numbers, for Succor and Protection; which
may be justly esteemed to be one remarkable Link in that Chain of amazing
Providence, which attended His Sacred Majesty in rescuing these Nations from
Tyranny and Misery: for since the great Principle of Self-preservation was
never more universally acknowledged, than at this Day; we must not believe the
desires of Liberty and Property to be peculiar to our selves alone: and had the
Episcopal Party in Scotland joined entirely with our Enemies, and the
Providence of God had not appeared so visibly in the Affairs of Ireland; but
that Enniskillin and Londonderry had been taken by the Irish, and the late King
James's Army, or a considerable part of it, been transported into Scotland: it
might have altered the face of Affairs, been of fatal Consequence to these
Nations, and an universal prejudice to all the Confederate Princes of Europe.
And whether the War carried on by Dundee and his Accomplices, has been
prejudicial or chargeable to the People of England, is a point which I shall
leave to their own determination.

But that I may obviate an Objection which (I am apprehensive) may here be
raised, I do confess that the Presbyterians as well of Ireland as Scotland,
were in the late War active and assisting in the suppression of the Enemies of
England; and do highly approve their Prudence and Foresight, in rejecting those
Conditions which were in the latter part of the late Reign offered them by the
Papists, from whom they very well knew, they were to expect no manner of
performance, longer than they served their Turn; and do think it was wisely
said by an English Dissenting Minister, that the Papists would make scaffolding
of the Presbytery, to pull down the Church of England, and that when the Work
should be finished, that kind of Lumber would be thought fit for nothing but to
be thrown into the Fire.

Nor do I envy them the free Exercise of their Religion, and the other
Privileges which they enjoy upon these accounts: and do hope they are now
fully convinced that the Cruelties which in the two last Reigns, were exercised
upon them, and they charged upon the Church of England; I hope (I say) that
they are now abundantly convinced, that those bitter Waters proceeded from
another Spring, since it is apparent to the World that those Princes were acted
by Popish Emissaries, who were at the bottom of their Councils.

I am also very much of the Opinion of the beforementioned Mr. W. H. That all
Protestants ought to be united against the Common Enemy; and should think it a
great Happiness, they could, by any fair means be brought to so Heavenly a
Temper; and do desire they will, in order thereto, seriously consider (if as he
says they differ only from us on account of a few unnecessary Ceremonies.) how
great a Mischief it is, on such slight Grounds, to separate from a Protestant
Church established by Law in England and Ireland, respected, beloved, and
honored by all the Reformed Churches abroad, and against which, they can frame
no other material Objection.

But as I have said already, it is not my Business at this time to run into
Religious Controversies, but to contribute my small Endeavors toward the
Security of that Church, and the Prosperity of that Body of Men, of which I
profess my self to be a Member; and though an inconsiderable one, yet such as
must partake both in the Indolence and Sufferings of the whole.

There may perhaps be some in the World, who will pretend to admire at me, that
I should be troubled with the thoughts of Sickness and Misery, in Health and
Prosperity! that I should be disturbed by the Consideration of foul Weather,
when the Heavens smile, and all Nature is gay and pleasant! that I should talk
of the Subversion and Sufferings of a Church, that is but just delivered from
her Enemies, and the hands of them that hate Her, and restored to Peace and
Prosperity; that is countenanced by the Government, and supported by the Laws
of that Country! they will say, that it were enough for me to write after this
melancholy manner, if we were actually Sufferers, and labored under some heavy
Calamity or Oppression.

Indeed this Objection must be allowed to be very rational, had we not too too
clear a prospect of an alteration, if means be not used in time to prevent it;
they may envy the present Serenity of our Clime, our Health, and the soundness
of our Constitution, of which Blessings, though we be very sensible, and do thank
God for them; yet we cannot but take notice of those Clouds that we see thicken
at a distance, which may probably break out upon us (in the midst of our
Summer) in Hail and Thunder: And when we perceive those Symptoms about us,
which are but too sure Prognostics of an approaching Distemper, we think it
highly reasonable to make use of all proper means to prevent it.

We have seen our next Neighboring Church ruined by Men void of Remorse or
Pity; and that the very same, or their Brethren in Ireland have made
considerable advances toward doing the same thing there since the late War,
gaining daily footing in all the Cities, Corporations, and Societies in that
Kingdom, so far that in the most considerable of them, they have been Mayors,
Sheriffs, etc. and that out of Decency and Respect to the Government, they have
waited on the Sword to Church on Sunday Morning in their Formalities, yet they
usually sculked in the Afternoon to a Conventicle, which is a common thing in
the North, and some other Parts of Ireland. Men of this dissembling Principle,
may prove tolerable Magistrates, whilst they are bounded by Law, awed by the
Chief Government of the Nation, and remain in the Stations which they now are;
but when they come to be Knights and Burgesses in Parliament (as in process of
time they are like to be) and the Affairs of the Church come to be debated
before them, then let the sober part of Mankind judge, what may be expected
from their Consultations.

We do therefore think it more prudential to take time by the fore-lock, and
speak before we are ruined, than to trust to such a bloody after-Game as has
been lately repeated in that unfortunate Kingdom. For to believe that if the
Scotch Presbyterians of that Country, had it in their Power, they would not use
the Episcopal Church of Ireland, as their Brethren of Scotland did that with
them, would be as unreasonable as to imagine, that off-sets will not bear the
same Flowers with the main Roots, from whence they were divided, or that Trees
will produce Fruit of a different Species, by being transplanted from one Soil
into another.

I shall therefore further consider them as a People of a different Interest
and Dependence from the English of Ireland; in their Interests, it is plain,
they are linked with their Friends in Scotland, and consequently their main
Dependence must also be upon them, whom they imitate both in their
Ecclesiastical and Civil Affairs, and from thence they take all their Measures
which concern either Religion or Commerce; from thence they are furnished with
their Clergy, and do hold a strict and constant Correspondence with each other.

The number of this People is wonderfully increased in Ireland since the Battle
of the Boyne, in the Year 1690. for by common Computation, above Fourscore
Thousand Families of them have since that time, transplanted themselves from
Scotland into that Kingdom; and they are possessed not only of almost the whole
Province of Vlster, but are in great numbers, in many Parts of the other
Provinces, even in the Counties of Cork, Kerry, and Limerick, which are that
Part of Ireland, that lies most remote from Scotland, and in those Counties
which were the Frontiers in the Years 1690 and 1691. and were wasted by both
Armies, there are many more of this People to be seen than of any other
Inhabitants.

As for their Commerce, it is certain, that many of them in the most
considerable Seaports of that Kingdom, are fallen into the Merchandising Trade
thereof, and by their Correspondence with Scotland and France, have
sufficiently enriched themselves.

But because the happy Conclusion of the Peace, has put it out of their Power
to be any further injurious to the People of England upon the account of
assisting their Enemies, I shall forbear enlarging upon this Particular, and
only add, that the very last Winter, there were such vast Quantities of Corn
and Meal carried to the Northern Parts of Ireland, and so to Scotland; that it
had certainly occasioned a Famine in that plentiful Kingdom of Ireland, had not
the then Lords Justices thereof very timely, and prudently, by their
Proclamation, prohibited the farther Exportation of those Commodities.

Let us now consider this People's Manufacture, not only in the North, but
other Parts of Ireland, where they have fixed themselves since the late War,
and this does generally, if not altogether, consist in Linen Cloth, with which
they do not only furnish Ireland, but do frequently send great Quantities of it
into several Parts of England. This is a Truth so well known to Men of Trade,
and to all such as have had the Opportunity of seeing that Country, or of
having Commerce with that People, that I need not multiply words in proving it.

But it is certain the Commonalty of them are so intent upon this kind of
Manufacture, that the very Husbandmen and their Servants, when they return from
their Labors abroad, such as Plowing, Sowing, Fencing, etc. do employ
themselves by their Fire-sides in this kind of Work, and sit reeling of
Linnen-Yarn, while the Women are busy in Spinning; and by this Constancy and
Diligence, that Country produces great Quantities of good Linen yearly.

But their Woollen Manufacture is so very inconsiderable, that I may justly
say, it bears no more proportion to that of the English of Ireland, than their
Friends in Scotland's Fleet did to the Royal Navy of England some Years ago,
when a reflecting News-monger told us in his printed Paper, That the Scotch
Fleet, consisting of two Frigates, cruising off the North of Ireland, was taken
by two French Privateers.

I do indeed allow, that they make some ordinary Woollen Cloth for their own
use; but that they are concerned in any thing that can be called a Woollen
Manufacture to be transported into other Countries, is what (I never heard)
they so much as pretended.

The Merchants of them (as I have said of the Irish Merchants) do undoubtedly
deal in Woollen Manufactures, which they transport to other Countries, but they
Buy those Commodities from the English of that Kingdom, who there are the only
considerable Manufacturers of that kind.

And from hence it may be easily perceived, how far the Law before mentioned
(if enacted) can affect this kind of Men; the generality of them being not at
all concerned in the Matter: and though it may be some small disadvantage to the
Merchants of them, as well as to others that Trade that way, yet it cannot much
disoblige them, for 'twill be a great means to make them Masters of the Lands
of the English of that Kingdom, for they are the best able and the likeliest of
any to purchase them, being by much the richest People in that Country, or at
least much richer than ever they were before.

This will not appear improbable, if we consider, that though they were despoiled
by the Irish in the beginning, as the English were; yet that the War at length
proved vastly advantageous to them; for Duke Schonberg having landed with the
Army in the North of Ireland in the beginning of the Year 1689. the greater
part of them had the opportunity of settling immediately in their places of
abode, became Victuallers and Suttlers to the Camp: and the Army continuing the
whole Winter after the Camp of Dundalk among them, and being duly paid from
England, the Inhabitants of that Province got the greater part of that Money
for their Meat, Drink, and other necessary Commodities with which they supplied
the Soldiers from England, Scotland, and out of the Product of their own
Country. And that part of the Army which was on the Frontiers that Winter,
brought in considerable Preys of Cattle from the Enemy, which they sold at easy
Rates to the Inhabitants, who by this means began to have some stock on their
Lands again.

In the Year 1690. when the Army marched toward the Enemy, vast Numbers both of
Men and Women followed from thence as Victuallers, Suttlers, etc. and having
plenty of Money purchased most of the vast Preys which were taken by the Army
that Campaign, and drove incredible Numbers of Cattle into Ulster, so that the
Winter following they were able to supply Dublin, and the greater part of
Leinster with Beef, Mutton, etc. and had still their Emissaries with the Army
on the Frontiers, to buy up the Preys, which they took daily from the Enemy in
great Numbers, and which generally, through want of Grass in the Enemies
Quarters were lean, and not fit for present Service.

The Army began no sooner to Rendezvous in the Year 1691. but their old
Acquaintance were up with them again, and followed the same Trade till Galway
and Limerick were Surrenderd, at which juncture having more Money, and indeed
understanding the Laganeers Trade, or Scampering, better than the English, they
swept away most part of the Cattle of Connaught, and Munster with them. And, to
my certain knowledge, within two Months after, the Cows which they bought for 8
or 10 Shillings, were purchased from them by the rest of the Kingdom at five
and fifty Shillings, and some at three Pound a Head; by which means they got
most of the Money, and consequently of the Trade of the Kingdom into their
hands: So that several of them that used before the late War to beat upon the
Hoof after a Pony laden with Pedlars Goods to the Fairs and Markets of the
Kingdom, are now Masters of Ships at Sea, and Warehouses crammed with Merchants
Goods at home.

But it would be as unreasonable to conclude from hence that the whole Country
is Rich; as 'twould be to say, that a Man whose Estate consists of three or
four different Farms, and most of his Cattle and Tenants are crowded into one
of them, that therefore his Lands were all well stocked and inhabited: For
indeed if this be said of the rest of the Nation, it is a very great mistake,
and particularly in relation to the English of that Country, whom I come now

Thirdly, To consider as they are a distinct People both from the Irish and
Scotch, by which I mean the Protestant Families of that People, who first
subdued that Nation, and have from time to time, supported and preserved the
Interest and Title of England therein; never was any Rebellion promoted by the
Irish Natives, but what began with the destruction of those poor Englishmen,
who were sure to be the first sufferers, being most feared and hated by the
Irish, who give them the Title of Clanna Galda in their own Language, which
signifies the Children or Offspring of Englishmen; looking upon them as their
Enemies and Conquerors, that first subdued them, and now enjoy the Estates that
they lost, and which were granted to the others by the Crown of England, in
consideration of their Services in the several Conquests and Rebellions of
Ireland, and the several Provinces, and Parts thereof.

To these must be added those vast numbers of English that have more lately
transplanted themselves and their Families into that Kingdom, and incorporated
with their Friends and Country men which they found there; who are always ready
to welcome and encourage such of the English Nation as desire to settle among
them; that they may be thereby the better able to oppose the common Enemy of
the People of England, whose Interests they esteem to be the same with their
own, and consequently they depend upon them as their constant Friends, to whom
they are to apply in all Emergencies, as the Irish have done of late Years upon
the French; and the Scotch of Ireland, upon their Friends in Scotland.

A sufficient Demonstration hereof we have had in the beginning of the late
Revolution when there was scarce any one of the English of Ireland, that fled
hither for refuge, till the Tyranny at home was over-past, but could point to
the Rock from whence he was hewn, give an account of the Family from whence he
or his Ancestors sprang, and claim (as Mr. Phillips observes in his Book called
The Interest of England in the Preservation of Ireland) a Father, Brother, or
near Kinsman.

And accordingly, we had not only a Charitable, but a Generous Provision made
for us, each of us being enabled to live in some proportion, to his Degree and
Quality in his own Country: till by their Treasure, and their Blood mixed with
ours, they settled us again on our ancient Foundations, restored us to our
Religion, Estates and Liberties and gave us our Judges as at the First, and our
Counselors, as at the beginning. Which inestimable Blessings we received with
Joy and Satisfaction; with all imaginable Gratitude to God, and the great
Instruments by which he perfected our Liberty; to the King and People of
England; for whom we are ready (as one Man) to hazard those Lives, and
Fortunes, which it so lately cost them dear to secure to us.

For though I have had the opportunity of being acquainted with, or at least
knowing by their Character, most of the considerable English Protestants of
that Kingdom, yet I have not heard of twenty Jacobites among them all, and
these too have learned to be so in England, and (if I mistake not) do live here
for the most part, which they may do with greater ease and freedom than in
Ireland, where the very Papists dare not own themselves to be otherwise, than
Friends to King William, and his Government: For we have so lately experimented
the Consequences of a Popish Government, having smarted under those Evils which
only threatened England, or which (we thank God) were removed as soon as they
began; that we think it as unreasonable, that one who resolves to live a
Protestant, should desire that a Popish Prince might Rule over him; as that a
Man should employ a Wolf for his Shepherd, or an Eagle to protect and secure a
Dove-house: But the World sure has had sufficient proofs, that it is next to a
mere Contradiction, that the Protestant Religion should be cherished under the
Wings of Popery. Indeed should I see that come to pass, I should think the
Prophecy fulfilled one way which I never heard it applied before, That the Lion
should lie down with the Lamb, and the sucking Child play on the hole of the
Asp; But we are so well convinced of the Incompatibleness of our Religion and
Popery, that in the whole House of Commons in Ireland, when the Association was
to be Signed, there was but one Man, or two at the most, that so much as bogled
at it; and they too, in spite of their squeamishness, were obliged to do it,
under the penalty of being shamefully expelled that Honorable Assembly: And by
this Rule we may judge of the whole Body of the English of that Nation.

And I would to God that all that call themselves Protestants, and English Men
were so firmly united in their Interests and Affections, so sensible of the
great and mighty Deliverance which has been wrought for them, when they were at
the very brink of Destruction, and ready to be tumbled into an Abyss of Misery;
as the English of Ireland are, there would be very few or no disaffected
Persons in these Nations, that should even wish evil to the present Government,
except the Papists, whom notwithstanding the specious pretenses they may make
to us, we must never depend upon, as true, and hearty Friends.

Nor can I imagine, how it can be expected, the English of that Country should
be of another Disposition than that of which our sufferings have taught us to
be; for we cannot but reflect on the condition in which we were, in the latter
end of the year 1687. and the beginning of (88.) when every stanch Protestant
in that Nation, upon condition we could be sure of such a Deliverer, as God
sent soon after to these Kingdoms, would undoubtedly have cried out, One half
of my Goods I give to the War; as Zaccheus did of his to the Poor, when he
found the Messiah.

But this did not serve our turn in Ireland, and consequently, I presume, none
will deny our sufferings there, to have been much greater than the People of
England: but for the further proof or illustration hereof, let us frame a
comparison, between the personal or corporal sufferings of those which served
in the Army in that Kingdom, and abroad elsewhere; and the losses which the
People of England, and the English of Ireland sustained in their Estates and
Fortunes. And

First, There were a great many of the Army whose Distempers were so easy,
that they were cured by Phlebotomy, and the ordinary Medicines which are used
in common cases; with these I rank those also, whose wounds which they received
in the War, were so favorable that they were brought to digestion, cleansed,
and healed up by gentle means and applications; though both the one and the other
did perhaps lose great part of their Blood, and Strength for a time, yet they
made no great matter of it, but thought themselves happy Men that they escaped
so.

And as these Men suffered in their Persons or Bodies, so we say,
comparatively, the People of England (I mean such as were not Members of the
Army) did in respect of their Estates and Fortunes; their Purses bled
frequently and freely, and they paid incredible Sums of Money toward the
carrying on of the War: But yet they lived quietly in their own Country and
Houses, preserved generally their main Stock, and followed their lawful
Callings and Affairs; which if the English of Ireland could have done, it had
this day been a happy and flourishing Kingdom, though an Object far below either
the Envy or Jealousy of England.

Secondly. Another kind of Sufferers which we have seen in the Army during the
War, are such as have sat quietly and patiently while their Limbs were
amputated, and (which is more dreadful) many of them cauterized or seared with
hot Irons, and all in hopes of preserving their maimed and imperfect Carcasses,
that they might have a Being in the World, and be able to go, or halt about
their Occasions, even this being more eligible than utter Dissolution.

To these Men's Condition, we may liken that of some few of the Protestants of
Ireland, that is in relation to their Worldly Substance, viz. The Tradesmen,
Tailors, Shoemakers, Hatters, etc. which continued in Dublin, and other
Corporations in that Kingdom; though the Irish used these poor Men like Slaves,
and gave them but what they pleased for their Commodities, or their Labor; yet
they did not take all from them, but left them something to live upon, because
they could not want them.

Thirdly. I can compare the Circumstances of the generality of the English of
that Kingdom, the Nobility, Clergy, Gentry and Commonalty, with respect to
their Estates and Fortunes, to none more aptly, than to those great numbers of
Men, that lost their Lives by those malignant Distempers, that for some time
raged in the Army; and fell in Battle by the hands of their Enemies. For I need
not tell the World, that our Enemies were our Masters, that they dispossessed
us of our Churches, Estates, and Houses, and burnt many of the latter to the
ground; destroyed the Improvements that we and our Fathers had been making ever
since the former Settlement, almost through the whole Country; and made us as
poor and miserable as they could. And though (thanks be to God) that poor Church
was not totally destroyed, yet she was reduced to so languishing a Condition,
that she lay panting for Life and gasping; and had she not been powerfully and
timely relieved, must very soon have expired: And yet that Nation has granted
his Majesty (as in Duty and Gratitude they are bound) large Supplies,
considering their mean Circumstances, toward the payment of the Army, without
repining, or murmuring, among any Degree of the English of the Country, from
the highest to the lowest; and will undoubtedly with all cheerfulness
imaginable, be always ready to do the like, according to their abilities, and
the urgency of his Majesty's Occasions.

But to return from this Digression, I must further say, That if all that call
themselves Englishmen, were so entirely United as those of Ireland, England
would not be troubled with one kind of People; who, because they thought
themselves Favorites in the late Kings Reign, must needs be Enemies to the
present; nor with another sort, who are generally for any Government, but that
which is actually in being. In short, setting aside that very small number
which I have already mentioned, a Man may converse with the Protestants of that
Kingdom, with as little danger of falling into the Company of that
unaccountable People called Jacobites; as he is in, when he walks through the
Fields and Meadows thereof, of treading upon Snakes or Adders, or any other
poisonous Vermin. For of all the Clergy of that Established Church of Ireland,
I have not heard of above three or four of any note that were thought worthy of
any Preferment in the Church; who, either out of a principle of Conscience, or
in hopes of great Preferments, upon a Revolution, which I suppose may be now
despaired of, refused to take the Oaths to his present Majesty. Nor was there
one Fellow of the University of Dublin that turned Tail in the late Revolution
on any consideration whatever, or refused the Oaths, when they were tendered to
them: Nor indeed a private Graduat, or inferior Scholar, except two or three
Irish Lubbers, that played the Hypocrite some Years, for a little Bread and
Learning; they indeed appeared in their proper Colors, but their Names are not
worth the Dimensions they would take up in Paper. And thus are both the Clergy
of that Church, and their Congregations unalterably stanch, and firm to the
Government of England both in Church and State, as it is by Law established, to
continue for ever in the hands of Protestant Princes.

And yet these are the only People whom the before mentioned Law (if it should
be enacted) is like severely to affect; for, setting aside those Persons of the
first Quality, that are above any thing of Trade, the English Gentlemen of
Estates, and the Farmers of the Lands of those Noblemen and others, have been
all along, the only considerable Flock masters of that Kingdom; some of them
before the late War, were owners of 18000, others of 15000, some of 10000, some
of 5000, and others of less numbers of Sheep according to their abilities, and
the quantities of Land which they held. And I appeal to any one Man of
Reputation in England, that knew Ireland in the Year 1688, whether this be not
a great Truth, and whether in the Provinces of Leinster and Munster, and the
other Parts of that Kingdom, where the English Plantations lay, were not all
the considerable Sheep-walks in that Nation? And at this day the English there
are owners of the greatest numbers of that kind of Cattle; for as soon as they
were settled in their Estates and Farms, after the late War, they endeavored
to fall into the same Stock. And whether they do not, for the most part supply
this Kingdom with those parcels of Wool that come from thence, the English
Merchants may soon inform themselves by their Factors in that Country; and I
could name the most considerable of those Sheep-masters here or elsewhere, were
there occasion for it.

As for the vulgar English of Ireland, they are the only Woollen Manufacturers,
the Clothiers, Weavers, Dyers, Woosted-Combers, Hatters, and of all other
Trades which belong to this Manufacture, in and throughout the whole Kingdom. I
am very well assured that there are within the City and Suburbs of Dublin,
above 12000 English Families of this kind of Tradesmen, of which there are
computed to be above 50000 in that Nation who were bred to these Callings, and
whose Genius leads them this particular way; and to disable them from following
those Trades, and oblige them to earn their Bread by falling to work about
Linen Manufacture (as I have heard some Men propose since I came to London,
who in their own Opinion, were of no small reach in Matters of Trade, nor in
the Politics neither) would be as hard and impracticable, as 'twould be to
oblige all the Tailors in London to turn Shoemakers, or the Ribbon-Weavers to
turn Clothiers.

There has indeed since the late War, an attempt been made, to set up a Linen
Manufacture in or near Dublin, and some of the greatest Men of the Kingdom were
concerned in it, who to encourage it, laid in considerable Sums of Money; but
(as I heard from them that better understand the matter) it fell very short of
what the Undertakers proposed by it in the beginning, for the Northern People
supply that Country at cheaper Rates than the other could well afford it: Though
it is very probable, that if the Parliament of Ireland give due Encouragement to
such as shall engage in the Linen Manufactures (as we hear they intend to do)
the growing set of young People, as well the English, as others may betake
themselves thereto; and consequently in some time, the Woollen Manufacturers
Trade in that Kingdom, may in a great measure fall of it self: but to impose it
upon the present Generation, is altogether impracticable, and must prove
ruinous to them.

But these are Matters of Fact, and the Proof of them depends upon Testimony,
wherefore I shall only with all becoming Humility, propose to the Honorable
the House of Commons in England, or the Committee appointed by them, to enquire
into Matters of this nature, who, I am sure, will think it reasonable to make a
full Scrutiny into Affairs of that grand Importance, before they give their
positive Opinion of them to the House; I say, I shall only humbly offer to
them, that they will examine some of those English Gentlemen who are
uninterested in that Kingdom, and have had occasion to travel thither both
before and since the late War (of which there are several in, and about London,
and when occasion shall offer, may be easily found) and let them declare their
Knowledge and their Sentiments in this matter, and I do not doubt, but they
will be of the same Opinion with me, that if any one should endeavor to
persuade the Parliament of England to pass such a Law, he must be thought to
level it against the English of that Kingdom only, and that if he be a true
Friend to the English Interest of that Nation, or to the established Church,
either here or there, he must needs be a very great Stranger to the Affairs and
Constitution of that Country.

It Is true, the Parliament of England must see things at that distance with
other Men's Eyes, and may be abused, and imposed upon, by malicious and false
Suggestions, though they were the wisest Assembly upon Earth, as indeed they have
appeared to be, by their wonderful Conduct during the late grand Revolution,
and the Wars after it. But when they are better informed, it is to be hoped they
will think it their Business, rather to encourage, than ruin the English of
that Nation, that is, if any inhabiting there may be thought English Men; for a
Man may travel out of England to Africa, Asia, or America, remove his Family
with him, if he think convenient, live as long as he pleases in the English
Factories of those Countries, and have Sons and Daughters born to him: and if
he and they happen to return into England, they shall not be denied either the
Title or Privilege of English People. But let a Man once land upon Irish
Ground, breath of that Air, drink one Dish of St. Patrick's Well, and
especially if he live there some few Years; upon his return hither, he must
rest satisfied with the odious Character of an Irishman. And yet there are no
People under Heaven that have suffered so much for being English as they have
done; no Amboyna, nor any other Plantation that the English have been Masters
of, in the remotest and most barbarous Parts of the World, have ever seen such
Cruelties acted in them, as have been exercised by the Irish Papists on the
Protestants of Ireland, which will abundantly appear to any one that will be at
the trouble of reading the Histories of that Country, particularly Sir John
Temple's Account of the grand Rebellion begun in the Year 1641.

It must needs therefore be a very great Grief to all considering Persons among
them, to think, that they should be esteemed as Strangers and Foreigners by
their Friends in England; and because they do but begin to look like what they
formerly were, and to recover some part of those great Losses which they
sustained in the late War, that they should be looked upon by England with a
jealous Eye; and because they are suspected to be rich (which God knows, and
they know themselves to their sorrow, is a groundless mistake) that an
effectual course should be taken at once to crush and ruin them: But to show
further, how great a trouble this must needs be to all thinking Men among them,
let us consider the Case of one particular Man, with whom I am very intimately
acquainted. His Grandfather, being the first of the Family, that removed into
that Kingdom, was barbarously murdered for no other reason, but for being an
English Protestant; several others of his nearest Relations perished then upon
the same account, and such of them as escaped with their Lives, were stripped and
ruined, and in the late War both they and he were great Sufferers; he was
himself during that War all along in the King's Service, his Father was
proclaimed Rebel, for raising Men, and holding out a Garrison against the Irish
Army, and killing considerable Numbers of them, and a considerable Sum of Money
offered for his Head; one of this Man's Brother-in-Law was hanged and quartered
in the beginning of the Year 1689. for raising Men for his present Majesty's
Service, and another killed in Flanders, his Brothers and other Relations were
in the Armies of Enniskillin, and Londonderry; and most of them that are
capable of bearing Arms, have been all along the Wars in Flanders in his
Majesty's Service, and that this Man must now be looked upon as an Irish man
and an Alien, debarred of the Privileges of an English man, and those
Commodities with which it has pleased God to bless his Country, rendered
almost useless to him and his Posterity: this Man must certainly think this a
piece of great hardship and cruelty, and it must occasion in him some very
dispiriting and melancholy Considerations.

Though this be literally true, yet I do not make it one Man's Case in
particular; for there are very few of the Protestant English Nobility, Gentry,
or Commonalty of that Kingdom, especially if their Families have been of so
long a standing as the Year 1641. but can truly say that their Case is much
like this, and that something of the same kind has happened to them. So that if
we should suppose that it lay in the Power of England to sink the whole Island
of Ireland into the bottom of the Sea (which a great many do very positively,
though very rashly and groundlesly affirm, would be for the Interest of England)
we might reasonably expect, that they who received us so kindly and
affectionately, when we were in real Distress (of which I have already said
something) would either spare the Country for our sake, or at least imitate
Heaven in the case of Lot and his Family, call us out of that hated place,
before they destroyed it, and provide for us a Zoar elsewhere. Or since they
can only make it poor and miserable, we might also expect, that they would in
some measure consult our Prosperity and Safety, have some kind of tenderness
for us, and at least, reserve us for the last morsel. But on the contrary, though
we be not the offending Party, never could be taxed for any disobedience to
England, upon which we have our whole Dependence in extremity or trouble, and
are the principal Men they expect should stand their Ground, and secure their
Interest in that Country for them, yet we are the only People, who, if this Law
be enacted, are singled out for Destruction.

Now to show farther how great a severity this would be, let us change the
Scene, and suppose that a Law of this nature were intended against the English
Inhabitants of any one of our Foreign Plantations, as those of Newfoundland in
particular, whose Case is not very unlike to ours; the French not long ago
invaded those Coasts, landed a Party of Soldiers there, who committed all
manner of Hostilities wherever they came; took one or more of their
Fortifications, and reduced the Inhabitants, who are Subjects of England, to a
most wretched and lamentable Condition, insomuch that some hundreds of them
were forced to fly for Refuge into other Countries or Plantations. And to
redress these Injuries, England thought convenient to fit out a Squadron of
Ships, with some Regiments of Landforces, which were sent upon that
Expedition, not without a considerable Expense to the Nation. Now this
Expedition being over, and those poor People being settled in their former
Habitations, begin to follow their respective Employments, and retrieve some
part of the great Losses which they sustained by the Enemy; should England now
take up a prejudice against them, give them the denomination of Americans, or
Indians, and impose such severe Rules or Laws upon them, in respect to their
Trade or Commerce; that such of them as could live elsewhere, must quit that
Country, and such other poor People as could not so easily remove from thence,
must be reduced to so miserable and low a Condition, that they must lie
obnoxious to the cruelties and fury of the neighboring Indians, or any other
Enemy that should think fit to attack them: this would, in all probability,
bring England in some few Years, under the necessity either of quitting their
Pretensions to that Colony, or sending another Fleet and Army to regain it, and
would rather be thought Cruelty or Infatuation, than Prudence or good
Management. And yet I know not how it comes to be thought otherwise in
reference to Ireland, which is esteemed by all the wise Men of England, as much
more necessary and precious, than Newfoundland, or any other Plantation or
Colony of that kind, as their Gold and Silver is, in comparison to their
Halfpence and Farthings. And if they rightly consider the matter, they cannot
but conclude, that the English of Ireland (let them call us Irish-men, or what
they please) are a body of Men, which next to themselves in Great Britain, they
ought to love and value more than any People under Heaven; since we are Flesh
of their Flesh, and Bone of their Bone, and there is so natural and intimate a
Relation and Connection between them and us, that we are always ready to stand
or fall, to be happy or miserable with them.

It would be thought very unnatural and barbarous (were there any one so mad as
to be guilty of such a thing) that a Man should be angry with his Hand or Foot,
and should therefore use means to prevent the Circulation of the Blood, and
stop the Passage of the common Nutriment of the Body, into that part: this
would, in all human probability, cause such violent Distempers in the Body, as
might occasion the Stagnation of the whole Mass of Blood, and the Dissolution
of the Body. And this is certainly, in a politic Sense, the Case of England
and Ireland. If it be necessary for the Security, and well being of this
Nation, that the Sovereignty of Ireland should still be continued to the Kings
of England, and yet that the People of England will rather choose to ruin the
entire Interests of their Friends in that Country, than suffer them to turn the
most beneficial Productions thereof, to their Advantage; it may in some time
prove very prejudicial, if not fatal to the People of England themselves, which
will further appear from the more than probable, if not the necessary
Consequences of such a Statute; which I shall endeavor as briefly and plainly
as I can, to offer to the Consideration of such as will vouchsafe to peruse
this Paper. And

1. The first and immediate Consequence that must necessarily follow the
promulgation of such a Law, will be the unavoidable Ruin of those many
Thousands of English Families, who live by the Woollen Manufactures in Ireland,
and in which the Strength of the English Interest in that Kingdom, does in a
great measure consist; when their Trades are rendered useless to them, and they
are incapacitated of earning their Bread thereby; they must (at least the
greater part of them) remove themselves and their Families into some other part
of the World, where they may hope for a livelihood, for in Ireland 'twill be
morally impossible they should have it, since Tradesmen of this kind are
generally Strangers to all Callings, except those in which they were educated.
To England great part of them dare no more venture, than those who since last
Session of Parliament, transplanted themselves from the Friars and other
privileged Places; and though it is not to be believed that the Parliament of
England would deliberately and wilfully do any thing that may lessen the number
of the English, and weaken their own Interest in Ireland; yet if we should
suppose that they should enact such Laws for the Encouragement of those
Tradesmen, by which their Creditors in England must be very easy to them, or
indeed forgive them their whole Debts, even this would not prove a sufficient
motive to them for returning into England; for if they could not live here in
the beginning of their time, much less will they be now able to subsist by what
they shall earn, having been accustomed to the exuberant Plenty and Cheapness
of Ireland, and having generally very numerous Families, that Country being
remarkably fruitful for the procreation of Children.

If they should remove to Scotland, as it is not unlikely many of them would
upon such an occasion, that Country being much cheaper than England, and it
being not improbable that there would be great Encouragements proposed to them
there; they must in all probability imbody with the Scotch, and become one
People with them, in relation both to their Religion, and Civil Interests; for
we know by woeful Experience, that Men of those ordinary Capacities are but too
prone, and easy to be drawn away from the ancient established Church of these
Nations, especially when they can propose to themselves any temporal Advantages
thereby; and by this means, the People of Scotland, with their Correspondents
and Friends in Ireland (both their Interests being inseparable) will not only
be the easier and cheaper furnished with Woollen Manufactures to carry on their
East India Trade, but will be capacitated to Trade to the West Indies also, and
that notwithstanding the Restriction laid, or to be laid upon them by England,
that they should not carry any Commodities to the Western Plantations, except
Servants and Provisions, which is all the People of Ireland are allowed to
transport into that part of the World: they will (I say) by this means be in a
great measure enabled to carry on a Trade to America, that is, if what they
have lately said in the Case of the Royal-Fishery be allowed them; that being a
free, unconquered People, no Laws can affect them, but such as are of their own
making, and that consequently they have a right to Trade abroad wherever the
English do; that there has been lately a Dispute of this kind between the
Gentlemen concerned in the Royal-Fishery, and the People of Scotland,
concerning Freedom and Privilege, I am very well satisfied the former can and
will testify.

But I will allow that this may be a Mistake in me, and that the Scotch must in
this particular be over ruled by England: yet as for their East India Trade,
that is undeniable; the Consequence of which will be, that since there are so
great Immunities allowed them in reference to that Trade, and Piracy is at an
end, they will prosecute it with diligence and vigor, and will, by the
Assistance of their Friends and Correspondents in Ireland, who will undoubtedly
be concerned with them, be enabled to make a considerable progress therein, and
will furnish Ireland with all manner of East India Goods, at much cheaper Rates
than the English Merchants can afford them; So that those considerable Sums of
Money which come yearly out of Ireland, for Silks, Muslins, Bengals, Cotton,
Rice, and all other Commodities which come from the East Indies, (where the
People of Ireland have no manner of Traffic) will be totally lost to England,
and a great means of enriching Scotland.

In order to which end, they will not want the Wool of Ireland, that is, if any
of the Flock-masters of that Kingdom shall think it worth their while to deal
in Sheep, as it cannot well be supposed they will, if this Law be enacted; and
that, in spite of all the Laws that can, or shall be made by England and
Ireland, to prevent them, and all the diligence which shall be used to have
those Laws duly executed, the Scotch (I say) notwithstanding all these means
will have the Wool of Ireland, or great part of it, transported into Scotland,
except we could suppose that there might be Officers day and night on the
Watch, in all the Creeks and Corners of the Sea Coasts of the North of Ireland;
for it being but about three Hours sail from thence to Scotland, they may, in
the dead of night, load their open Boats (in which it is common with them to go
to Market to Ireland) with what Goods they and their Correspondents shall think
convenient, and be at their Port in their own Country, before the next morning,
or at least out of the reach of those concerned in the Revenue of Ireland: and
undoubtedly this has been often practiced for some Years past, to the great
prejudice of England, and the Benefit of France; and we may be sure it will be
more industriously continued now than ever, especiaily if they can find the way
of having it wrought up in their own Country, and sending it abroad to Foreign
Markets; for since there are those People called Owlers even in England, and
under the Eye of the Government, notwithstanding the strict and Penal Laws that
are against them, and the great Care and Diligence that are used to prevent
them, we may very well expect the like Dealings between Ireland and Scotland,
who have much greater Opportunities of carrying on a Commerce of that kind,
than it is possible for England to have with France, or any other Country.

But let us suppose that those ruined Manufacturers should Transport themselves
and their Families into Holland, or other Foreign Countries, and they, and
their Posterity be for ever lost to these Kingdoms; the Irish Popish Merchants
will have then, by reason of the Cheapness of Wool, greater Encouragement for
carrying on their old Woollen Trade with France than ever; for though by Act of
Parliament in Ireland, it is made Felony, without Benefit of Clergy, to
Transport Wool into any Foreign part of the World, except England, or even to
put any on Ship board clandestinely, yet I have seen several that were taken in
the Fact, tried for their Lives, but matters were so ordered by the Interest of
the Merchants of those Towns, where the Offenses were committed, that I never
knew any of the Offenders suffer.

Another way they have for Transporting Wool into France (to make out the
Deficiencies of the former) by which many of the Irish Merchants have
frequently transported whole Ship-loads, to that degree, that they are either
foully belied, or have purchased considerable Estates with the vast sums of
Money which they have gained by that illegal Commerce: for there is a Clause in
the aforesaid Act, which requires that all Persons whatsoever who shall
Transport Wool from Ireland to England, shall before they put it on Shipboard,
enter it into the Custom-House of the respective Port where it is Shipped, and
shall bring sufficient Security to the Collector of the said Custom house, and
enter into Bonds, that the Wool so Shipped should be landed and disposed of, in
some Port of England, and that the Merchants should in a certain limited time,
return Certificates to that purpose from England.

And the Stratagem which they used to evade this, is as follows; First they
entered the Ship in, and sometimes by a wrong Name; and in the next place, they
either brought some Bankrupt Fellows, who pretended to be Men of Credit and
Reputation in the World, to perfect those Bonds which the Law required, and who
could upon occasion easily abscond and frustrate the Design of the Law in that
case; or otherwise, they brought Persons, who by their Habit and Behavior
seemed, and perhaps were substantial Men, but gave themselves Names of Persons
dead long before, or perhaps of such, as they never knew to have been in the
World: And having thus deceived the Officers of the Custom-House, they conveyed
vast quantities of Wool into France: And if at any time the Merchant feared or
heard, that his Ship was discovered to have put this Trick on those concerned
in the Revenue, he immediately gave orders she should be sold, and another
bought in France or Holland. That this has been often practiced, will appear by
the VVool-Bonds taken in Ireland for several Years before the late War, for
some thousands of pounds, subscribed with Names as fictitious as those of John
a Nokes or John-a Styles. And I do really think, that there is now one worthy
Member in the House of Commons of England, who can affirm this to be true, for
he was (if I mistake not) the first discoverer of those Practices, having been
concerned in the Revenues of Ireland for some Years, and may perhaps be best
able to give directions how to prevent that Trade for the future, that is, as
far as it is possible it should be hindered.

For it is but reasonable to conclude, that if Wool be reduced to a lower
value than it was at in those times, as it necessarily must, if that Law be
enacted; that then those Merchants and their Confederates will run all hazards
in carrying on the same beneficial Trade for the future, and 'twill be next to
an impossibility to prevent them; there being Bays and Harbors capable of
receiving Ships in the most desert and mountainous Maritim parts of that
Country; from whence it will not lie in the power of Man to hinder their
conveying of what Commodities they shall think convenient, to any Country where
they may expect a kind Reception.

But it may perhaps be here objected, that the English of that Kingdom are
concerned in this Owling Trade as well as others.

To which I must answer, That if there be some few particular Persons, that
have either married the Daughters, or learned the Manners of the People of the
Land, who have been thus guilty, it is not my business to justify them. But the
English of Ireland, in general, are Men of greater Loyalty, Conscience, and
Honesty, than for private gain to do any thing that may be a wrong to their
King, and opposite to the public good of their Country; the truth of which
will abundantly appear to any one that considers the strict and severe Laws
they have made in relation to this particular. And indeed there are but very
few English Dealers in the Seaports of that Kingdom, where these Cheats are
generally practiced; for besides the underhand Contrivances that have been
frequently made use of to ruin any Englishman that sets up a Trade there, the
adjacent parts of the Country are mostly inhabited by People that will not deal
with any English man, for any thing they can be furnished with by those of
their own Country or Profession; and if the Irish be suffered again to go on
with this VVool-Trade (of which the English of that Country's being prohibited
to go on with their Manufactures, would in a great measure hinder them) it will
be a great means of enabling them to come in for a snack of the Estates of the
English there. For

Secondly. Another Consequence of that Law (if enacted) will be the Ruin of the
English Gentlemen and Farmers, who (as I have already said) are the principal,
if not the only considerable Flock-masters of that Kingdom. For if the
Manufactures be discouraged and run down; and the Manufacturers forced to leave
the Country, the prices of Wool must fall of course, and consequently the value
of Sheep also. The Farmers (whose principal Substance has always consisted in
that kind of Cattle) will not be able to pay their Rents, and in their own
defense must throw up their Leases to their Landlords, who by this means must
needs be fellow sufferers with them, and will neither be well able, nor indeed
willing to hold their Estates in that Kingdom, which will not seem a Paradox,
if we consider,

That the English of that Country are the only sufferers by the late War: many
of them, that had Estates, or a Title to Estates, which was the most they had
in those miserable Times, raised considerable Sums of Money among their Friends
in England, to equip them for the Army; or put them in a condition of returning
into their own Country. Others, who owed Debts before, were by the loss of
their Estates, both real and personal, and the great Interest of Money in that
Kingdom, rendered incapable of paying off those Debts; which are the true
Causes, that so many of the English Estates there are, this day, so deeply
encumbered. It Is not good Manners to name Noblemen, and Gentlemen, upon this
occasion: but this is certainly the Condition of many of the English Landlords
in Ireland, from the highest Rank to the lowest: and the great means which many
of them proposed for the recovery of their losses, and their future security,
were the raising of Flocks, and the encouragement of the Woollen Manufactures;
toward which ends, not a few of them, have laid out great part of what Money
they could procure after the War, in Sheep; and have given great encouragements
to Tradesmen of all kinds, who are fit for that purpose; by letting them
convenient Lands at easy Rates, and building them Workhouses, some at their
own private expense; and others at the public charge, even in the remotest,
and most Irish Counties of that Kingdom; with an intent to plant English
Colonies, that may be able to secure themselves, and snub the Irish, whenever
they shall perceive them begin to grow high and insolent: And if this Law pass,
that Charitable, as well as Useful Design, must necessarily fall to the ground;
and end in the inevitable ruin of those English Manufacturers and Farmers; and
the great detriment of the Landlords; the last of which will, many of them, be
forced to Sell or Mortgage their Estates to satisfy their Creditors.

Or let us suppose (as it is but reasonable we should) that many of the English
Gentlemen of Ireland have been better Husbands than others, and have not only
good Estates in Lands, but have Money by them; so that the loss of their Flocks
cannot be of such very ill consequence to them; but that they may live
plentifully without them, either by Tenanting their Lands with the vulgar
Irish, or by dealing in other Stock, such as Black Cattle, Horses, etc. And let
us suppose that those other Gentlemen, whose Fortunes are encumbered, should by
being good Husbands, or living poorly, have a prospect of getting over those
difficulties, and clearing their Estates in some Years: Yet if the English
Interest be run down, and their Numbers so lessened, as by this Law they must
needs be, neither the one nor the other will think it safe to continue in a
Country, where they have themselves so lately, and their Ancestors so often
heretofore been sufferers: but will rather choose to dispose of their Estates
there, and purchase some small Concerns, where they may live with some
security, and partake of the Privileges of English men or Free Subjects, from
which a Law of this kind must undeniably exclude them.

Now the Purchasers of those Lands, must be either the Irish or the Scotch; or
most probably they will both be Sharers; if the Irish get a considerable part
of them, they will in a few Years be in a condition of affording large
assistance to any Foreign Prince, or pretended Popish-Heir, that may endeavor
to disturb the Peace and Tranquillity of these Kingdoms.

But it is likely the Scotch will be the greater Purchasers, and by that means
grow Rich and Formidable, and able to stand by England with their Lives and
Fortunes, against all that shall oppose them: And to be the same easy and
neighbourly People, that they have been from the time of the ancient Picts
(when Mr. Cambden tells us, their Friends in Scotland began to make frequent
Visits into England) down to our own Times. But lest I should seem to design
this as an Invective, and to incense England against them; and withal to be as
Impertinent, as we should suppose a Stranger to have been, that should have
come into the City of Jerusalem in her prosperity, and told that People a Story
out of their own Chronicles, how vexatious the Gentiles in their neighboring
Countries had been to them for many Ages. I shall therefore only say further,
that both the Irish, and they have, so lately that we cannot yet forget it,
given us evident Demonstrations, how they would deal with us, if we lay at
their Mercy; and this they did at the same time, with this only difference,
that the latter did their Work more effectually than the others; the Irish did
theirs in the time of War and Tyranny, and were themselves, and their
pretended Act of Parliament, soon kicked out of doors. But the Scotch, taking
the advantge of a time when England was not at leisure to take notice of their
Proceedings, ruined the Church of Scotland, by a Law, which is like to prove
but too firm and lasting; which leads me

Thirdly, To a third Consequence, and one that I think, does necessarily and
evidently follow from what has been now said; and that is, that if the High
Court of Parliament should pass such a Law as aforementioned, and either the
Irish, or Scotch become Masters of Ireland, the Church which is now established
there, must inevitably be ruined: which indeed is the main Consideration that
engaged me in this Undertaking.

I heard the Question proposed since I came to London, What the Church had to
do with Trade? or how a Law concerning the Woollen Manufacture could affect it?
as if the whole Body of the People were not of the Church, nor the Clergy
Members of the Commonwealth; but their Interests were different, and did not
stand upon the same Basis with the established English Laws of that Kingdom.
And I think it might as well have been asked, What it concerned the Church of
England, if the grand Fleet had been burnt by the French in the late War? or
the Church of Spain, if the Galleons had been taken by Monsieur Ponty? But
because it may not be thought a good way to answer one Question, by proposing
others, I shall in few words give a direct answer to it: I have already shown
how far this Statute must affect the Laity of the established Church of
Ireland: and shall now endeavor to show how far the Ecclesiastics or the
Church, strictly so called, must be concerned in this matter. Though, methinks,
it is needless to tell the World, that if the Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty,
of that, or any other Nation be reduced to a low Ebb of Fortune, the Clergy
must, by necessary consequence, bear a part in the common Sufferings, except
that part of the World where the Church has engrossed all to herself, and made
the Country poor and miserable; and it is not long since we have by fatal
Experience, found this to be true in Ireland.

But for greater Evidence sake, I shall endeavor to show the Methods, by which
that Church was ruined, to that Degree, that the Clergy who lived in those
Parts of the Country, where the Irish principally inhabited, had for two Years
before the War, little more than the Name of Livings; for they must either have
set their Tithes, etc. to the Irish at what Rates they thought fit to offer, or
they would pay little or none in kind; for the most expeditious means which the
Clergy of that Kingdom had (or indeed have now) for the recovery of their dues,
is a Statute passed in England, in the Twenty Seventh of Henry VIII. which
mentions Ireland as well as England, and ordains, that if any Person being
cited in a Decimary Cause to the Ecclesiastical Court, refused to appear, that
then two Justices of the Peace (whereof one to be of the Quorum) shall upon the
Receipt of a Certificate under the Seal of that Court, signifying his
Contumacy, issue their Warrant against the Party so offending; and if he refuse
to enter sufficient Security, that he will appear at a prefixed time, and pay
what by the said Court shall be adjudged against him, that then he shall be
committed to safe Custody, till he make Satisfaction; which Law was commonly
put in execution in several Diocesses of that Kingdom, and met with no
opposition while Protestant Judges sat on the Bench; but they were no sooner
thrust out, and Popish Judges appointed, but that Practice was declared
illegal, and that Statute to be of no force in Ireland, and several Justices of
the Peace discarded, for having issued their Warrants pursuant thereto.

By another Statute, which was made in Ireland in the Three and Thirtieth Year
of Henry VIII. it is enacted, That if the Party summoned for Detention or
Substraction of Tithes, shall enter his appearance in the Ecclesiastical Court,
and Sentence shall pass there against him, that then two Justices of the Peace,
qualified as aforesaid, shall at the request of the said Court, imprison the
said Offender, without Bail or Main-prize, till he fulfill the Sentence so
pronounced against him. But the intent of this Law was in those days easily
deseated, for the Irish throughout the Kingdom were advised by their Lawyers to
take no notice of any Citations issued out of the Ecclesiastical Courts.

So that the only Method which then remained of proceeding against Offenders of
that kind, was to prosecute them to Excommunication, and to take Writs de
Excommunicat, capient. out of the High Court of Chancery, which by reason of
the great Charge of those Writs, is not to be done, but upon extraordinary
occasions, and where the matter contested is considerable: however, to prevent
even this Practice, as well as to obstruct the common Course of Justice in all
Cases, where a Protestant was concerned against a Papist, the Lord Chancellor
Sir Charles Porter, who was a true Friend to the established Church, and the
English Interest, was displaced to make room for a professed, malicious Papist,
who utterly refused the Clergy the Benefit of the Law in cases of that kind,
and left the Laity of what Communion soever, to pay their Ministers what they
thought convenient; so that it is plain, that if either the Irish, or Scotch
have that one Minister of Justice on their side, that shall be no Friend to the
established Church, but shall discountenance the Proceedings of the
Ecclesiastical Courts, he may himself singly go a great way toward the ruin of
the Protestant Episcopal Clergy of that Nation.

And indeed it happened very well for them, that those Writs were not granted
them by that Popish Lord Chancellor: for he, by the Direction of the Lord
Tyrconnel had made Irish High Sheriffs in most of the Counties of Ireland, who
would execute neither Writ, nor Decree on any Papist, either for Clergyman, or
Layman.

I think likewise that I have laid down sufficient Reasons to make us believe,
that if the Scotch Presbyterians had the Estates of Ireland, and consequently
the Magistracy and Power in their Hands, they would serve the Episcopal Clergy,
and such as should adhere to them, after the same manner. The Question
therefore that remains, is whether it be not probable that the Irish and they
(whose Interests seem now to be so opposite to each other) might upon occasion
of ruining the Episcopal Protestant Church, should they find a convenient
Opportunity for that purpose, be reconciled, and join in that great Work, as
the Evangelist tells us, Pilate and Herod were upon the Trial and Condemnation
of our Savior, notwithstanding the Animosities that were between them before,
Luke 23.12.

Fourthly. Let us suppose that such a Conjunction may never happen between the
Irish and Scotch, but that the Scotch alone may be Masters of Ireland, as in
all probability, they must in some process of time; that is, if the English of
that Kingdom be discouraged by England; that both Scotland and Ireland be of a
piece, and that it is not impossible they may have some Friends and Adherents in
this Kingdom of England; this being supposed, I do not doubt but all
considerate Men, if they will declare their Sentiments ingenuously, will own,
that it may very severely affect the English Nation, and especially the Church
of England, as by Law established; for that sacred Vine had but two main Plants
that sprang from her, the one, which was that of Scotland, is cut up by the
Roots already; and the same sacrilegious Hands, or some of the same ^^amp are
at work on the other, which is that of Ireland; and these two being cleared out
of the way, they may the more readily come at the Main-Body. Though this may seem
to be a very remote Consequence from the aforesaid Law, if enacted, yet it is
not unworthy the thoughts of all such as are well-wishers to the Church, and
the public welfare of England, to whom I shall leave, and earnestly recommend
the further Consideration thereof.

I do not suggest these things through a fear that any evil of this kind may
happen to us during the Reign of his present Glorious Majesty King William; for
if common Gratitude and Honesty, Interest, and the Consideration of those many
excellent things, which he has done for these Kingdoms, and Europe in general,
be not sufficient Motives to keep all manner of Protestants within his
Dominions, firm and loyal to him, yet his Wisdom, Power and Conduct cannot
easily fail of that end. But we must not expect to enjoy always a Prince of his
vast Experience in the World, the wisest of Counselors, and the best, and
bravest of Generals; a Prince of so much Honor, Virtue and Goodness, so highly
valued and esteemed by most of all the Princes of Europe; so formidable to his
Enemies, when he had any that were considerable; so entirely beloved by the
generality of his Subjects; and who has justly merited more Praises, were it
possible to ennumerate them, than the learned and ingenious Eusebius in his
immortal Panegyric, ascribes to Constantine the Emperor, for he it is, that
by his immense Wisdom, and the repeated hazards of his Royal Person, has
secured to us our Estates, our Lives, our Liberties, our Religion; that has
preserved, or rather made the English Nation the greatest People in this part
of the World, and settled these Kingdoms upon such firm Foundations for future
Peace and Happiness, as no Man living remembers us to have stood on before, and
which cannot well be shaken but by disagreement and confusion among our selves.
But my poor Encomiums are but as the Vapors which ascend from Earth toward
Heaven, and my mean Pen would but sully his Glory; for which reason I shall
leave the setting forth his Praises to the Masters of Sense and Eloquence, and
return to the matter in hand, by saying, that we must not expect to be always
happy in a Prince of his wonderful Qualifications: for though his Heroic Spirit
and Actions, by the Divine Assistance, have placed him in the highest Rank of
those which are called Gods upon Earth, yet he must die like a Man and fall
like one of the Princes. And though (thanks be to God) the Wisdom of this Nation
has settled the Succession of the Crown, according to the Hearts desire of all
well-wishers to the present Government and future Monarchy, and we have a fair
prospect of Peace and Happiness under those who are appointed by Law to Reign
over us; yet they are also subject to Mortality, and many unexpected Events,
may happen to a Nation in the present Circumstances of the English, who are not
the most united People in the World among themselves, and must expect, not to
want Popish Pretenders, who whenever they can procure a Power, will think they
have sufficient Right to contend for the Crown.

Now it is not reasonable to believe that the Parliament of England, when they
have considered this matter, and are rightly informed concerning it, will, to
gratify the Designs of any particular Persons, enact a Law that may be fatal to
Posterity; and which perhaps may produce some evil Effects even in this present
Generation, before a great many that are now alive may be summoned to another
World: it being the sure means to ruin a great many Thousands of true Friends
to the established Church of England, and in a great measure to strengthen the
Hands of her Enemies. For it is certain that the English of that Kingdom are
not only most unanimous and hearty in the Interests of the present Government
both in Church and State; but are a People who have been bred to Arms, and have
been most of them in actual Service in the late Wars, and are all ready to
appear in a very considerable Body, whenever his Majesty or his Protestant
Successors shall have occasion to command them; and will, according to their
Abilities, give him, or such his Successors all other reasonable Assistances,
without the least repining or murmuring.

For which Reasons, it will not be unworthy the Grand Council of England to
consider further, that the ruin of that People by such a Law, which seems to
thwart the Methods of Divine Providence, in rendering the Blessings which Heaven
has bestowed upon them, in a great measure, useless to them, must not only be
looked upon, as a very indifferent piece of Policy, but may be esteemed by
Almighty God as a very great Sin, which though it may spring from the root of
Covetousness in some particular Persons; yet if a Law be enacted to that
purpose, it must then become national, and may cause him, who alone can make a
Kingdom rich and great, and happy, to stop the course of his Blessings, and
divert those overflowings of Prosperity, which England may in all human
probability, expect by a firm and lasting Peace: For the making of a Law of
this nature, will not only be the sure means to prevent them from being rich,
who are groundlesly suspected of being so, and the sending of them empty away:
but will be also the taking of the Bread out of Thousands of hungry Mouths, and
will in effect, prove the ruin of a Church and People, that have very often
suffered for the English Nation; and I may say, with a great deal of Truth,
have upon many occasions been eminently serviceable to them, but never offered
them the least provocation. And whether this may be confistent with the Justice
of England, I shall not presume to determine, but since the most Learned
Casuists of the World, have a share in the Legislative Power, I shall humbly
submit the matter to their Resolution.

I shall only propose one thing more to the Consideration of the wise Men of
England, viz. that if they would but agree to make the best of their own
Manufactures, they would be so far from obstructing the People of Ireland's
pursuing theirs; that it is very probable they would in a little time be for
giving them Encouragements for going on vigorously with them: And the true
method of raising the English Manufactures to that pitch of perfection will be
found to be extremely easy and practicable, viz. let the great Men of the
Nation unanimously resolve, that both them selves and their Families will in
their Apparel, be conten with the Fabrics, the Clothes and Stuffs of their own
Country, and that they will discountenance others that shall presume the
contrary; this will undoubtedly influence all such as are in inferior Stations
through these three Kingdoms, and his Majesty's Foreign Plantations: and
ingenious Artists will be hereby encouraged to improve the English
Manufactures, though I am very well assured that there are those in London
already, that will undertake to furnish the Nobility and Gentry of these
Kingdoms with Silks, Stuffs, Clothes, etc. which shall be as rich, beautiful
and serviceable, as any Nation under Heaven need to wish them, and at much
cheaper Rates than it is possible to have them from abroad.

Juvenal deals very freely with the Ancient Romans, and seems to be
passionately concerned, that they (being the greatest People upon Earth) did
ape the Grecians in all particulars in their Habit, in their way of Eating,
Drinking, Discourse and Behavior, and did (as he tells us) do most other
things after the Greek Fashion, and indeed these Nations have been faulty to
that degree in these particulars, with respect to the French, that I have heard
some intelligent Persons affirm, that in the two last Reigns, when an
Ambassador, suppose from Germany, Denmark, or Sweden had a desire to make an
agreeable Figure in the Court of England, he thought it could not be done,
unless he had his Clothes from France, from whence most of the English
Nobility, and they that esteemed themselves to be the fashionable part of the
Gentry had theirs; nor is Apparel the only thing in which they have been vainly
fond of imitating the French, for most of those who reckon themselves the only
genteel People, when they come to an honest English Gentleman's Table, and find
it furnished with good Beef, Mutton, Veal, etc. they cannot away with that
nasty Butchers Meat: Nor is the Poultry or Fowl thought fit for Stomachs of
Quality, except they be so Frenchified, as to loose their natural Taste and
Color; but if they come to another place, and meet with a Dish of Scraps,
which perhaps were detained a Day or two before from the Poor, and that be
tossed up after the French mode, O then it is excellent savory Victuals! little
Master and Miss are not thought to call decently for Bread or Small beer at
Table, unless they can do it in French; nor is the Curtezan of the Town
sufficiently qualified to wheedle her easy Beau, unless she be in some measure
Mistress of the French Tongue; without which indeed, no one can be sufficiently
impertinent, nor bear a part in the noisy Conversation which is now in fashion.
All this is certainly a kind of Homage paid to France, it is a tacit
acknowledgement of some Excellencies in them, of which we are not Masters; and
the owning ourselves obliged to them for the melioration and true use of our
Clothes, Meat, Conversation and other Accommodations and Blessings of this Life.

Though it may not be thought easy to reform in all these particulars at one
time, yet methinks it is but reasonable it should be attempted in relation to
our Clothes, since that would be vastly advantageous to England, in keeping
those great Sums of Money at home, which before the War were sent yearly to
France for Silks, Stuffs, etc. 'twould also be a means of employing many
Thousands of Hands, which by means of the great Importation of Foreign
Commodities of that kind, do want Work; and it is very probable, that instead of
prohibiting the People of Ireland from sending their Manufactures out of their
own Country, their Assistance would be required in furnishing the Western
Plantations with those coarse Woollen Commodities, which they are now by Law,
debarred of sending to any of them.

For since our King has been the Glorious Instrument of retrieving the ancient
Grandeur and Honor of. England, and giving Peace to Europe, the Christian
Princes will undoubtedly pay him the Respects which are justly due to his
Merits: Foreign Nations will be fond of imitating the English Gallantry, and
think London as competent a City for the Education of their young Nobility and
Gentry in Arts and Arms, in Behavior and Manners, as Paris has been this last
Age esteemed by us: and consequently, though perhaps France may think it below
them to imitate our Fashions, or buy our Silks, Stuffs, or Clothes, etc. from
us; yet we shall at least be their Competitors, and other Kingdoms of Europe
will follow the Modes and buy the Manufactures of England: but if the English
Nation will think nothing becoming but what they have from France, it is no
wonder the rest of the World should neglect those things which are despised by
ourselves.

This (I think) is a Consideration much more worthy the Thoughts of the great
Men of England, than that they should stoop at a Game so mean as the poor
inconsiderable Manufactures of Ireland, which, according to the best
Information I can have in this Kingdom, do not amount to the two hundredth part
of those of England, and which, besides their being already prohibited from
being transported to the Western Plantations, are so indifferent, that they
will not sell in any Foreign Markets, where English Commodities can be had, and
yet they are the main Support of a People who (I may safely say) are as
Faithful and Loyal to the Crown of England, while fixed on a Protestant Head,
as Men can be, and whose Interests (I hope) the Wisdom of England will not
think fit to sacrifice to the Covetousness of particular Persons,
notwithstanding the Petition of the Citizens of Exon, etc. by which if they
propose to have considerable Quantities of Irish Wool imported to them, they
have taken the most effectual course to prevent the increase of Sheep, and the
plenty of Wool in that Kingdom, for if a Law should be enacted against the
Exportation of Woollen Manufactures from Ireland to any Foreign Parts, no Man
of common Sense will think it worth his while to deal in Sheep, which are the
most nice and dangerous, and will by that means be the most unprofitable Cattle
in which a Man can deal in that Country.

For notwithstanding the People of Exon's Complaint of the want of Irish Wool,
I can produce undeniable Proof, that the very last Summer the Wool of the
Western part of that Kingdom lay on the Owners Hands for a considerable time,
the Factors concerned for the English, Dublin and Cork Merchants having offered
but five Shillings a Stone for the best Wool of a full Years growth, which is
sixteen Pound Averdupoize Weight, and it is certain that in Dublin the current
Price of it was but seven Shillings and six Pence, and I am ready to
demonstrate that good three Year old Weathers in as full Wool as they could be
at that time of the Year, were sold in November last at five Pound a Score in
the same part of Ireland. So that all the People of Ireland that are now in
England, with whom I have had the Opportunity of Discoursing upon this Subject,
are of Opinion that it had been a greater piece of Prudence in the Inhabitants
of Exon, etc. to have petitioned the Parliament of England, that the People of
Ireland might be encouraged to propagate that kind of Cattle, and not hindered
of their little Manufactures which do not really injure any People in England;
than to prefer a Petition, which if it occasion such a Law as I have already
mentioned, will in all human probability be so grand a Discouragement to the
Sheep masters of Ireland, that the Merchants and Manufacturers of England, will
not find the tenth part of the Wool to be imported from Ireland, which in two
or three Years they might have otherwise expected.

But to conclude the whole, I am partly assured that the main Body of the
People of England are of Opinion, that all effectual means ought to be used,
that the Irish Papists may never grow upon the English of that Nation, and
become again vexatious and chargeable to England: and I think, I have
sufficiently demonstrated that there can be no greater Service done to the main
Body of the vulgar Irish, than the passing of the forementioned Law.

And as for the Scotch, perhaps many in England may think, that they prove as
good Trustees in Ireland, as the English of that Country; and that if the
English Interest there, were ruined or broken, Episcopacy deposed, and
Presbytery established, 'twould do as well. But I am confident all true Friends
to the present happy Constitution of the Government of England and Ireland,
both in Church and State, will be of Opinion, that it will be much more
prudential, and infinitely more advantageous to England, that the Government
and Estates of Ireland should be continued in the Hands of the English, and we
should be preserved in a Condition of standing by England upon any occasion,
both with Men and Money (of which this Law must render us wholly incapable)
than that we should for the bare prospect of some poor inconsiderable Profit to
some particular Persons be weakened, and left at the Mercy of those that it is
known to the World, would have but little Compassion upon us, could they be
assured of carrying their point against us.

This, I say, I believe will be the Opinion of the great, the wise,
Counselors, and Senators of England, to whose Wisdom I most humbly submit what
I have written upon this Subject, and refer the further confideration of what
the Consequences of such a Law, as I have already so often mentioned, may be to
that unfortunate Kingdom of Ireland, and even to England it self: and whose
Consultations, I pray God to direct to the advancement of his own Glory, the
good of his Church, the honor of his Sacred Majesty, and the safety and
welfare of these Kingdoms.

ERRATA.
PAGE 25. lin. 21. read than those. p. 33. l. 3. for that r. though. p. 37. l.
23. for Masters r. Owners, p. 44. l. ^9. dele Families. l. 31. r. 30000. p. 69.
l. 23. dele two.

FINIS.

