A PERFECT NARRATIVE OF THE Grounds and Reasons MOVING Some Officers of the
ARMY in IRELAND TO THE Securing of the Castle of Dublin for the Parliament, On
the 13. of December last; With the Particulars of the Action, and Proceedings
therein.

Published for general satisfaction, by the Comissioners appointed by the Gen:
Council of Officers to attend the Parliament.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Newcomb, over against Bainards-Castle in
Thames Street. 1660.

A perfect Narrative of the Grounds and Reasons moving some Officers of the
Army in Ireland to the securing the Castle of Dublin for the Parliament, etc.
AS no Nation in the World has been exercised (in so short a tract of time)
with more prodigious Revolutions then England; so is it as admirable to observe
the manifold astonishing Providence that are the Concomitants of such
mavelous and frequent Alterations in this State and Commonwealth. The Spirit
of the living Creature has moved in this great Wheel: This Bush has been
often a fire, but hitherto not consumed: God does often threaten and shake his
angry rod over, yet seems unwilling to ruin these Nations. And albeit the
first Part is always acted on the English Stage, the Irish and Scottish Nations
are so far influenced thereby, that they become participants more or less in
her Peace or War, in her prosperity and adversity. To demonstrate this truth,
We having (as we hope) been set on work by the Lord, in the contriving and
execution of the late Change in Ireland, by the evil reports we have heard of
that service, since our repair to this City, finding it necessary, have thought
it our duty to expose to public view this Narrative of the dealings of God
with the Irish Nation; to prevent and remove those disingenuous Misinformations
cast upon that action, by sundry disaffected persons to the Parliaments cause
and interest, and whose malevolent aspects did eminently contribute to their
late Interruption, or to the continuance of it. And waving all former actions,
shall only reflect upon those that have been immediately previous, or
attending, or succeeding that great Enterprise in Ireland. And this we shall do
faithfully, and succinctly.

The laying aside the Single Person, was the bringing in the Parliament; which
after some years discontinuance, was in May 1659. restored to the exercise of
their power by the Army in England, and after owned with general acclamations
and Addresses from all places, and particularly from Ireland. The honor of
which universal compliance from the Army to the Parliament, was snatched away
by a sort of people, whose affections to the wages of unrighteousness, has
characterized them in all the three Nations; and did appropriate that to
themselves alone, blasting as Malignants others really zealous in that great
work: They who were best affected to the Parliament, and most forward in their
Addresses, being by those men branded as Enemies to the Parliament, under the
notion of having once adhered to the Single Person, although the owning that
power in the Single Person, had been in them nothing more then what had been in
the generality of the three Nations, and that after (to a general satisfaction)
obliterated by an Act of Indemnity: And notwithstanding that having had
preferments and advantages above others by the Single Person, none had been
more forward in adoring that very power in the Single Person, then those very
men, who after so upbraided it as a crime in others. These very men were they,
who above others rejoiced in the dissolving the Parliament by the Protector in
the year 1653. And these were they who were for the Rising Sun, and were
eminently industrious in framing and carrying on Addresses to it, from all
places; after all which, having with the Adulterous woman wiped their mouths,
they say, We have done no wickedness. And strange it is, even to astonishment,
how they gained belief with that very Parliament, on which they (even they) had
so trampled: And that notwithstanding all the evils, then, and after breaking
out upon the Nations, flowed from themselves actually, or occasionally; yet
were they esteemed Children of peace, nay Sufferers, and all those evils
charged upon others. And it is to be admired (these things considered) by what
artifices they should so wind themselves into almost a Supremacy of power in
Ireland, kept under them in very vassalage, whereby in the after-change England
it self might have been hazarded. Nor will it be from the purpose, to observe
in part the Method artificially proceeded in, for carrying on their destructive
designs, almost unobserved until the three Nations had been in the evils
thereof well-nigh overwhelmed.

First, they labored the securing to themselves the Army in Ireland, in the
modelling thereof in England, they having the nomination, and presenting all
Commission Officers, who were such as for the most part were fixed to their
Interests, in whatsoever Changes; so as of more then forty Field-Officers,
there were but a very few but what carried on their designs; In the mean while
excluding by misinformations (secret and at distance) Sir Hardress Waller, Sir
Charles Coote, Colonel Ingoldsby, Colonel Theophilus Jones, Colonel Flower,
Colonel Redman, Major Eyres, Lieutenant Colonel. Bret, Major Read, Major
Stanley, and others of known integrity, and all this by false suggestions of
Colonel Axtel, Colonel Barrow, Colonel Sankey, Mr. Roberts, Doctor Worsley,
Doctor Harding etc. then in London, and most of them after hastening into
Ireland, for completing there what remained of the modelling that Army, as to
inferior Officers.

Secondly, they singled out, and gained persons to be entrusted with the
Government of the Army and Nation fitted for their turn, such were Lieutenant
General Ludlow, Colonel Jones, Mr. Corbet, and Colonel Thomlinson, by which
their Instruments (rather then Masters) they in effect ruled, and thereby fixed
in themselves, and in the hands of their Confidents the principal places of
strength in the Nation, victualling each place with three months provision,
together with the County Militiaes, and even the management also of civil
things, as to Sheriffs, Justices of Peace etc. By all which, it is most
apparent, Ireland was intended for their place of refuge, in their distress
elsewhere, and so had it been found to the disturbance of the three Nations,
had Lieutenant General Ludlow in this juncture been admitted (as he hoped) into
his former command, he having been sent for to that end from London, by that
party in Ireland, and sent thence to that purpose by express orders from the
Lord Fleetwood.

Thirdly, that part of the Army in England under their apostatized General,
having contrary to all Faith and Allegiance in October last, again disturbed
the Parliaments sitting; it was then the time for that party in Ireland, to put
in practice what had been before designed; whereunto indeed they seemed to be
now necessitated, for their new created General had ordered by his Letters to
the Commander in chief of the Parliaments forces in Ireland, that subscriptions
should be taken throughout the Army, for owning the Lord Fleetwood as General,
and Colonel Lambert as Major General etc. though in direct opposition to the
Parliament, who enacted and declared to the contrary; it being further by such
subscriptions intended that the Army in Ireland should be engaged for the Army
in England against the Parliament.

The Lord Fleetwood had then required as aforesaid an Election of Agents out of
each Regiment, to be sent into England for assisting with others in framing,
proposeing and imposing a new Model of Government for the three Nations etc. to
the subvertion of the fundamental Laws, and the very being of Parliaments, and
the Liberties of the good people of these Nations in Parliament.

Herein is Lieutenant General Ludlow active in London, by his Letters to his
substitute Colonel Jones, and to others in Ireland; herein are Colonel Jones,
Mr. Corbet, and Colonel Thomlinson, concurring and acting vigorously; therein
falsifying their Faith to the Parliament, contrary to the high trust as
Commissioners of Parliament reposed in them, which their former Title of
Commissioners of Parliament, they cast off, assuming another of Commissioners
of the Commonwealth, that their Guilt be not read in their Forehead, and in the
Front of public Declarations etc. And by all of them orders transmitted into
the several Quarters for hasting the subscriptions and Elections mentioned.

For prevention whereof, or giving at least some stop to such their pernicious
actings against the Parliament, and for preserving (if it might be) the
Parliaments interest in Ireland, about October last it was from the Lord on the
Spirits of his Servants (some dissenting Officers about Dublin) to consider of
some probable means to that purpose.

But the Danger being evident that there should be meetings of such who
declared dissatisfactions and dissented from such acting, and protested
publicly against such designs against the Parliament; therefore the said
dissenting Officers for giving some color to their ways, with less jealousy,
pretended the carrying on a Petition to the Commander in chief, Colonel Jones,
for a general Council of Officers to meet at Dublin to consider of those great
and weighty affairs, wherein three Nations were so highly concerned; by which
general Council (if meeting) it was hoped that a check might be given to the
other party, and that the hands of the dissenters might be strengthened for the
Parliament; or if such a general meeting of Officers on such an occasion should
have bin denied by the Commander in Chief, it would probably return on him and
his ways with greater disadvantage; and in the mean time it was conceived that
the private meetings of the said Dissenting Officers, might be with less
suspicion, supposed to be in order to the matter only of their Petition
mentioned: And for giving yet more countenance to this their design, it was by
them concluded, that Sir Hardress Waller the Major General, should be moved to
appear in the head of them, before the Commander in chief and the
Commissioners of Parliament, for setting forward that desire for a general
Council of Officers; which he freely promised to do, And for gaining to
themselves a party abroad under the same covert of a Petition for a general
Council of Officers, the said Dissenting Officers sent out into the several
Quarters a Petition to be subscribed to that purpose* whereby they gained as to
so much with their friends, with whom they else where Corresponded; they also
thereby hindered in a great measure those Subscriptions p^omoted by the Lord
Fleetwood, and his Instruments in Ireland.

Thereupon Colonel Jones the deputed Commander in chief, well foreseeing what
might be the Issue and Sequel of such Actings; and understanding the
Inconvenienc^^s of not Assenting to that Council of Officers desired, (which
had bin on the first motion rejected); taking new Co^^cels, he resolves on a
Complying with that therein proposed by the Dissenting Officers before the
Petition was delivered; Yet to make it insignificant to their ends, he had
fixed for that purpose on the meeting of those new elected Officers appointed
for the meeting in England, who within few days were expected in Dublin, and
were supposed persons made for that purpose, and that by this means also his
so yielding to the Petitioners, might prove an expedient for stopping their
further prosecution of that their Petition in other places, that hereby the
said Dissenting Officers might be rendered secure, until they should be
surprised and laid up safe; which he intended at the coming in of his Juncto of
Officers, whom he expected; for he the said Colonel Jones had to that end
advised with General Fleetwood, who by his Letters intercepted, ordered the
securing them the Dissenting Officers, and the disarming all others in the
Nation not of their party.

The said Dissenting Officers being now awakened and sensible of the danger to
themselves, but principally of that threatened to the three Nations, and the
Parliaments Interest therein, they thereupon found it necessary to put speedily
in Execution, although but with few hands, what had bin before resolved; in
order whereunto on the 12. of December last they fixed their Resolution, for
acting the very next day to the seizing, and securing the Castle of Dublin; and
of those the Parliaments Commissioners so Perfidiously acting against their
trust.

Some difficulties interposed in the manner, particularly that of five
Companies of Foot Quartered in Dublin, four being of Colonel Lawrences
Regiment, and three Troops of Horse brought in by Colonel Jones for the
security of the Castle and those of his party, not any one of them had bin
hitherto prepared for the work. The persons also managing that work to
Execution were but few ( viz) Colonel Bridges, Major Edward Warren, Leivtenant
Colonel John Warren, Captain Abel Warren, Leivtenant John Thompson, Colonel
Theophilus Jones, Captain Jeonar, Captain Daniel Lisle, Colonel Warden, and
Captain Bond, by whose Foot Company then upon an outgard the Castle was
surprised; notwithstanding which, and many other difficulties, the Persons
mentioned committing the Parliaments Cause in their hands to the Lord, and
willingly offering up themselves, and all dear unto them for a reasonable
Sacrifice to the public, according to former resolutions on the 13 December
about five of the Clock in the afternoon they first Surprised the Castle,
wherein but the very day before was laid up 500. Barrels of Powder newly
landed, besides the former store, and intended for other ends; they afterward
secured Colonel Jones, Chief Baron Corbet, and Colonel Thomlinson, the
Commissioners before mentioned; and having declared for the Parliament
throughout the City of Dublin, they were met with general Acclamations from the
highest to the lowest, both Army and others, expressing all joy, except such as
were of the Adverse party; and all this through mercy without one drop of
Blood, or so much as Tumult. This whole work was begun and perfected within
less then two hours, and within less then so many weeks, in like manner almost
throughout the whole Nation; And the very same night Colonel Edmond Temple,
received Orders for imbodying of five Troops of Horse, with which he afterward
reduced Colonel Pretty, then standing out against the Parliament in Catherlo
Castle.

It now behoving those thus engaged to put themselves into that order whereby
the work in their hands might be carried on (by the blessing of the Lord) the
more Prosperously, and considering the countenance they might have in that
action by the Major General, if he would own them in it, they thereupon desired
his heading them, and that by his hand Orders might pass upon all occasions, he
being the visible Superior Officer then in Ireland, whereunto (they, and that
undertaking appearing for the Parliament) he assented: he having been some
weeks before prepared by some general discourse concerning it.

After upon the Fourteenth of December, was published the Declaration for the
Parliament, which being transmitted by the Post into all parts, with the
particulars of the success, which the Lord was pleased to give unto them his
poor weak Instruments in his Service, they had thereupon daily returns of
joyful approbations, and the owning of their work and profession for the
Parliament against all opposition; and herein is to be remembered to the honor
of the City of Dublin, the readiness and alacrity manifested in this work by
the Mayor and Citizens, generally, both in the first taking of the business,
the very first night, and afterward drawing the City Militia into the field,
which consisted of about 2000 foot, beside horse, for the service of the
Parliament, and still holding on with that faithfulness and zeal which can be
expected from them.

Also Sir Charles Coot Lord President of Connaught, having cast off the
Subscriptions expected from him and his Forces in that Province, his Lordship
with his party declared for the Parliament, and secured the Town of Galway, and
those therein, refusing to join with him in owning the Parliament; his Lordship
did after reduce Colonel Brafield, rendezvouzing and holding out the Castle of
Athlone against the Parliament, and in a short time, settled the whole Province,
and signified by Letters to the Officers in Dublin, that he was ready with his
forces, for what should be further for the Parliaments service.

The like Affairs of the Province of Munster, was carried on by the management
of the Lord Broghill, who with great care and diligence, secured Youghall,
Bandon, Kinsale and other places considerable: The City of Cork also declared
for the Parliament, by means of the Citizens and private Soldiers,
notwithstanding that Colonel Phayer the Governor there, with Colonel Wallis,
and others of that party, had labored much to the contrary, was secured by
Major Wilson, whose behavior was eminent: Also Limerick and Waterford by
Lieutenant Colonel Leigh, who appeared faithful to the Parliament in that great
straight.

As to Vlster, Londonderry being secured by Colonel Gorges, there was little
remaining in that Province of considerable opposition; all there being soon
quieted, especially on the decease of Colonel Cooper, Governor of that
Province, who died in his Chair about the 21. of December.

Matters being thus, through the Blessing of God, in some goodmeasure ordered
at home, the Council of Officers in Dublin, now settle themselves on dispatches
abroad, as for giving a right understanding of themselves and their
Proceedings, so for strengthening as they hoped, the hands of their Friends
elsewhere, cooperating in the same cause with them, and accordingly they did by
several Expresses, give a particular account to General Monck in Scotland; also
to the Parliaments Commissioners of the Army in Portsmouth, and to the Lord
Mayor of London.

And for the better carrying on the work, the Lord Broghill, and the Lord
President of Connaught, were desired by the Council of Officers to repair to
Dublin, on whose Judgment and prudent management of affairs they much depended;
by whose coming were their Councels and actings more enlivened, and all others
better satisfied. And for securing the Army to the Parliaments interests, and
that the endeavors of those attempting the contrary might be prevented, It was
for that end concluded as absolutely necessary, that the Army in Ireland should
be forthwith settled, by removing those from Commands who were disaffected to
the Parliament, and placing others in their room, of whose good affections to
the Parliament they might be confident. Therefore did the Council of Officers
set themselves upon a temporary modeling of the Army, until the Parliaments
pleasure should be therein known; hoping that their end in it (purely the
Service of the Parliament) would be accepted: In which their said Model were
laid aside only such as opposed the Parliament in the Revolutions in England,
or here, or of whose not acting against the Parliament they could not be
satisfied: And such only as showed themselves friends to the Parliament, were
employed.

On the 31. of December, came into the Bay of Dublin Lieutenant General Ludlow,
who from aboard the Oxford-Frigat signified his being there, and expected
admittance to the head of the Army as Commander in chief, which he had by
Commission from the Parliament before its interruption. Whereunto, for the
reasons before mentioned, as also for many other causes, all expressed in a
Charge already exhibited against the said Lieutenant General Ludlow and others
to the Parliament; It was therefore resolved, That it was not consistent with
the safety of the Parliaments Interest in Ireland, that Lieutenant General
Ludlow should be received into the Head of the Army, until the Parliaments
pleasure, on hearing of what should be objected to him, should be signified
concerning him.

And in regard of his so hovering in the Bay of Dublin, whereby he was at hand
in order to distractions in the City, which was threatened and expected by his
party there, who might be considerable if headed by those Officers then
prisoners at Dublin, secured for their opposition to the Parliament, and
conceived dangerous by reason of their interests and disaffection to the
Parliament; therefore did the Council of Officers conceive it necessary, that
the prisoners then in the City should be dispersed and disposed into places
more remote, particularly Colonel John Jones was thereupon removed to the
Castle of Athlone, and others elsewhere.

And whereas Miles Corbet Esquire, and Colonel Thomlinson, had in their
restraint the favor of a confinement to their houses, until the Parliaments
pleasure concerning them should be known, respect being had to the Charge to be
presented against them also; and that he the said Mr. Corbet had fled to
Lieutenant General Ludlow then in the Bay of Dublin; thereupon was Colonel
Thomlinson removed, and for better security of his person, restrained in the
Castle of Dublin.

And having thus far proceeded in settling and securing the Parliaments Interest
and Authority in Ireland; It was also judged expedient by the Major General and
Council of Officers there, during the Parliaments interruption, to take some
speedy order (in regard of the pressing necessity of the Army, then sixteen
months behind of their pay) for the raising of money for the present
maintenance of them. The Council of Officers did advise, That two persons of
each County, and the like number of each City and chief Town, should be elected
by the Protestant inhabitants of the said places, and the Electors and Elected
to be such persons as always manifested their good affections to the
Parliament, and not then in Arms; who were to meet in Dublin so to raise money
by way of Loan, for the temporary supply of the Forces, that so they might not
perish, nor be exposed to the many temptations that such a condition may leave
them open unto, and also to prevent the Free-quartering of the Army upon the
Inhabitants of the Country, a grievance not long to be borne. But within a few
days after, they having received information of the Parliaments sitting, which
came to them some days before the meeting of that Convention; the Council of
Officers sent forth their Dispatches into all Counties and places to stop such
meeting, which was accordingly done. And this is the true account of the
proceedings in this affair, which has made so great a noise in this City, as
if they in Ireland were setting up for themselves, and calling a Parliament to
govern and manage the affairs of that Nation, in opposition to the Parliament
of England.

And for giving the Parliament a due representation of the State of these
Affairs in Ireland, the Council of Officers there have chosen, and ordered us
to be their Commissioners to attend the Parliament for that purpose; and to
endeavor to rid that Army from the insulting Pride and Bondage, under which
they had groaned by an Anabaptistical, and Notionall Party, from whom proceeded
all those confusions, and revolutions this Parliament and Commonwealth have
been exercised, which for some years past, whose casting out as to their
overruling Power in Ireland, (if owned by the Parliament) may be (it is hoped)
to the other Nations, a deliverance also from the like future evils by that
kind of men.

And thus with much integrity and faithfulness, unto that Army whereof we are
unworthy Members, have we given a just account of what the Lord has done in
that Nation for his people, wherein we have purposely omitted many remarkable
Circumstances that attended this great action, least we might appear either
unnecessarily tedious, or foolishly vain glorious; Whereas our aims are
nakedly and sincerely, that God might have the Glory, the Nations settled upon
an honest Basis, and that those prejudices that had been occasioned against the
late Proceedings in that Nation, by the bespattering reports of malignant
Tongues and Pens, might be removed or silenced; So we desire, that all that
fear God, and honor Magistracy and good Government, would join with us in
blessing our gracious God, whose ways are inscrutable for delivering that and
these Nations from the raging power of a devouring Sword; and that our
supplications may be united for the settlement of Peace, with Truth among us;
That every one may sit under his own Vine and Fig Tree, none making them
afraid. John Bridges, Edward Warren, Abel Warren.


FINIS.

