A Brief Account OF THE BEHAVIOR, etc.
BY a Commission of Oyer and Terminer for the Trial of the King's Pretended
Judges, began at the Old Bailey, October. 10th, 1660, the aforesaid Persons with
many others were Sentenced to Death, of which Tho. Harrison, or Major General
Harrison, was the First that was Executed, which was on Saturday the 13th of
October following. According to his Sentence, he was drawn on a Hurdle from
Newgate to Charing Cross, where within certain Rales made on Purpose a Gibbet
was erected. When he came to the sight of the Gallows he was transported with
Joy, and his Servant asked him how he did? He answered, Never better in my
Life: His Servant told him, Sir, there is a Crown of Glory ready for you; O
yes! Said he, I see it. When he was taken off the Sledge the Hangman desired
him to forgive him; I do forgive thee (said he) with all my Heart, as it is a
Sin against me; and told him, he wished him all Happiness; and further said,
Alas poor Man! Thou do it ignorantly; the Lord grant that this Sin may not be
laid to thy Charge; and putting his Hand into his Pocket gave him all the Money
he had; and so parting with his Servant, hugging of him in his Arms, went up
the Ladder with an undaunted Countenance.

Major-Gen. Harrison's Speech upon the Ladder.
Gentlemen!
I Did not expect to have spoken a Word to you at this Time, but seeing there
is Silence commanded I will speak something of the Work God has in Hand in our
Days.;

Many of you have been Witnesses of the Finger of God that has been seen among
us of late Years, in the Deliverance of his People from their Oppressors, and
in bringing to Judgment those that were guilty of the Precious Blood of the
Dear Servants of the Lord: And how God did witness thereto by many wonderful
and evident Testimonies, as it were immediately from Heaven; insomuch that many
of our Enemies, who were Persons of no mean Quality, were forced to confess,
That God was with us; and if God did but stand Neuter they should not value us;
and therefore seeing the Finger of God has been pleading this Cause I shall
not need to speak much to it: In which Work I with others were engaged, for the
which I do from my Soul bless the Name of God, who out of the exceeding Riches
of his Grace accounted me worthy to be instrumental in so Glorious a Work; and
though I am wrongfully charged with Murder and Bloodshed, yet I must tell you I
have kept a good Conscience both toward God, and toward Man; I never had
Malice against any Man, neither did I act maliciously toward any Person, but
as I judged them to be Enemies to God and his People: And the Lord is my
Witness, that I have done what I did out of the Sincerity of my Heart to the
Lord. I bless God I have no Guilt upon my Conscience, but the Spirit of God
bears Witness that my Actions are acceptable to the Lord through Jesus
Christ; though I have been compassed about with manifold Infirmities, Failings
and Inperfections in my Holiest Duties, but in this I have Comfort and
Consolation, that I have Peace with God, and do see all my Sins washed away in
the Blood of my Dear Savior. And I do declare as before the Lord, that I would
not be guilty Wittingly nor Willingly of the Blood of the meanest Son, no, not
for Ten Thousand Worlds, much less of the Blood of such as I am charged with.

I have again and again besought the Lord with Tears to make known his Will and
Mind unto me concerning it, and to this Day he has rather confirmed me in the
Justice of it; and therefore I leave it to him, and to him I commit my Ways;
but some that were Eminent in the Work did wickedly turn aside themselves, and
to set up their Nests on high, which caused great Dishonor to the Name of God,
and the Profession they had made: And the Lord knows I could have suffered more
than this, rather than have fallen in with them in that Iniquity, though I was
offered what I would if I would have joined with them; my Aim in all my
Proceedings was the Glory of God, and the Good of his People, and the Welfare
of the whole Commonwealth.

The People observing him to tremble in his Hands and Legs, he taking notice of
it said.

Gentlemen, By Reason of some Scoffing that I do hear, I judge that some do
think I am afraid to Die, by the shaking I have in my Hands and Knees; I tell
you no, but it is by Reason of much Blood I have lost in the Wars, and many
Wounds I have received in my Body, which caused this Shaking and Weakness in my
Nerves; I have had it this Twelve Years; I speak this to the Praise and Glory
of God, he has carried me above the Fear of Death; and I value not my Life
because I go to my Father, and am assured I shall take it up again.

Gentlemen, Take notice, that for being instrumental in that Cause and Interest
of the Son of God which has been pleaded amongst us, and which God has
witnessed too by Appeals and wonderful Victories, I am brought to this Place to
suffer Death this Day, and if I had Ten Thousand Lives I could freely and
cheerfully lay them down all to Witness to this Matter.

Oh what am I poor Worm, that I should be accounted Worthy to suffer any Thing
for the Sake of my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ! I have gone joyfully and
willingly many a Time to lay down my Life upon the Account of Christ, but never
with so much Joy and Freedom as at this Time: I do not lay down my Life by
constraint, but willingly; for if I had been minded to have run away I might
have had many Opportunities; but being so clear in the Thing I durst not turn
my Back, nor step a Foot out of the Way, by Reason I had been engaged in the
Service of so Glorious and Great a God; however Men presume to call it by hard
Names, yet I believe ever it be long the Lord will make it known from Heaven
that there was more of God in it than Men are now aware of. All the Gods of the
Nations are but Idols; they have Eyes, but see not; and Mouths, but speak not;
and cannot save those that trust in them. But my God is the King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords, before whom all you here, and all Nations, are but as the Drop
of a Bucket. And he will never leave those that truly trust in him, unto whose
Glory I shall surely go, and shall sit on the Right Hand of Christ in Heaven,
it may be to judge those that have Unjustly judged me, Matthew. 25. 33, 34. 1
Cor. 6. 2.

The Sheriff minding him of the shortness of Time, if he had any Thing to say
to the People he might.

He said, I do desire as from my own Soul that they and every one may fear the
Lord; that they may consider their latter End, and so it may be well with them:
And even for the worst of those that have been most malicious against me, from
my Soul I would forgive them all, so far as any Thing concerns me; and so far
as it concerns the Cause and Glory of God, I leave it for him to plead; and as
for the Cause of God, I am willing to justify it by my Sufferings, according
to the good Pleasure of his Will.

I have been this Morning before I came hither so hurried up and down Stairs,
(the meaning whereof I knew not,) that my Spirits are almost spent, therefore
you may not expect much from me.

Oh the greatness of the Love of God to such a Poor, Vile, and Nothing-creature
as I am! What am I that Jesus Christ should shed his Heart's-Blood for me, that
I might be Happy to all Eternity, that I might be made a Son of God, and an
Heir of Heaven! O that Christ should undergo so great Sufferings and Reproaches
for me, and should not I be willing to lay down my Life and suffer Reproaches
for him that has so loved me! Blessed be the Name of God that I have a Life to
lose upon so Glorious and so Honorable an Account.

Then praying to himself with Tears, and having ended, the Hangman pulled down
his Cap; but he thrust it up again, saying.

I have one Word more to the Lord's People, that desire to serve him with an
upright Heart: Let them not think hardly of any of the good Ways of God for all
this; for I have been near this Seven Years a Suffering Person, and have found
the Way of God to be a perfect Way, his Word a tried Word, a Buckler to them
that trust in him, and will make known his Glorious Arm in the sight of all
Nations. And though we may suffer hard Things, yet he has a Gracious End, and
will make for his own Glory, and the good End of his People. Therefore be
cheerful in the Lord your God, hold fast that which you have, and be not afraid
of Suffering, for God will make hard and bitter Things sweet and easy to all
those that trust in him: Keep close to the good Confession you have made of
Jesus Christ, and look to the Recompense of Reward; be not discouraged by
Reason of the Cloud that now is upon you, for the Sun will shine, and God will
give a Testimony unto what he has been doing in a short Time.

And now I desire to commit my Concernment into the Hands of my Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, he that has delivered himself for the Chief of Sinners,
he that came into the World, was made Flesh, and was Crucified, that has Loved
me, and Washed me from my Sins in his own Blood, and is Risen again, sitting at
the Right Hand of God, making Intercession for me.

And as for me, Oh, who am I! Poor, Base, Vile Worm, that God should deal thus
by me; for this will make me come the sooner into his Glory, and to inherit the
Kingdom, and that Crown prepared for me! Oh, I have served a good Lord and
Master, which has helped me from my Beginning to this Day, and has carried me
through many Difficulties, Trials, Straits, and Temptations, and has always
been a very present Help in Time of Trouble; he has covered my Head many Times
in the Day of Battle. By God I have leaped over a Wall, by God I have run
through a Troop, and by my God I will go through this Death, and he will make
it easy to me; Now into thy Hands, O Lord Jesus, I commit my Spirit. After
which Sentence was fully Executed on him, and his Head set on the South-East
End of Westminster Hall, and his Quarters upon the City Gates.

OBSERVATIONS.
TO commit Villainy unparalleled, and bravely to outface Death, is the Badge of
a desperate Traitor, and an unhappy Christian. In this Man's Life I find
nothing of Repentance; as if the Murder of a King, and the Ruin of Church and
State, were of so slight a Consequence, that among Birds of his own Feather
Treason becomes Meritorious, and his Detestable Death a Glorious Martyrdom.

He calls it God's Cause, nay, the very Interest of the Son of God, his
Usurpation he terms the Fear of the Lord; unheard of Impudence! Can God be the
Author of Treason? Or can Man expect Mercy from God's Hands that voluntarily
transgresses? Prosperum and felix scelus virtus, vocatur, was Heathenish
Philosophy, though without Question a Maxim in the Commonwealth of his
Conscience, whilst Religion was made the Stalking-horse to his Rebellion.

Monday following, being the 15th of October, about the same Hour Mr. John
Carew was carried to the same Place of Execution.
WHen he was brought to the Gibbet, before he went up the Ladder, (his Hands
being bound,) he exhorted several Friends standing by to be faithful unto
Death, and not to be ashamed of the Cause for which they suffered, and they
should receive a Crown of Life. And further said to a Friend that stood by,
that he hoped the Truths of the Kingdom which he had Preached up and down would
not be the less esteemed for that he now came to Seal it with his Blood.

Mr. Carew's Speech upon the Ladder.
TRuly it is not Words, nor that which I have to speak in mine own Spirit, will
Glorify God, or give any Advantage to your Souls, or unto me; but it is, if I
may speak a few Words in the Spirit of the Lord, and in the Power of his Might,
and from an Unfeigned Love unto Jesus Christ, that would indeed give me an open
Entrance, and make my Passage very Sweet, and a Blessing may be left behind,
even upon you. The first thing (indeed) that has been very Weighty, (and I
desire to leave it upon all, upon Saints as well upon those that are not
acquainted with Jesus Christ,) that Eternity, Immortality and Eternal Life, it
is a wonderful Thing; the Thoughts and Apprehensions of it are able to swallow
up a poor Soul: We little think what it is; he that knows most of God, and most
of Christ, and has the greatest Measure of the Anointing, he little, little
knows what it is to Appear before the Holy, the most Glorious, the most
Righteous God of Heaven and Earth; to stand before his Judgment Seat, before
Jesus Christ that is at his Right Hand; and where all the Holy Angels are so
ashamed (because of the Glory of God) that they fall down and cover their
Faces, and cry, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty, which art, and wast, and art to
come. And therefore if such Glorious Creatures, if such Excellent Spirits, as
these Seraphims and Cherubims be, if they do fall down before the Glory and
Majesty of this most Excellent and Wonderful God, how should Dust and Ashes do?
And how should they Fear and Tremble to appear before him? And there I say,
think of this, and of the Righteousness of God, as well as of his Glory and
Majesty, and of his Justice; that when for one Sin he threw down the Angels
(those Glorious Spirits) into Hell, and he would take no Ransom or Redemption
for them; and though he has Mercy on the Sons of Men, (according to his own
Election or Purpose, and according to that that he has Purchased for himself
in Christ Jesus before the Foundation of the World was laid,) yet in Time he
made his Son a Sacrifice before Men and Angels, to bring his Chosen Ones to
Glory. That he should take Pleasure to send his own Son out of his Bosom, who
was the Delight of his Soul, and Bruise him for our Sins; yet it pleased the
Father to Bruise him. The most Holy and Righteous God that had but One Son, One
only Begotten Son, (that was the Delight of his Soul,) and should take Pleasure
to Bruise him that we might be Healed, and laid Stripes upon him that we might
be Healed, Oh the Height and Depth, Oh the Length and Breadth of the Love of
God in Christ Jesus unto poor Souls! Oh this is that the Angels do desire to
stoop down and look into, and to know more of this great Mystery of the Love of
God in Christ, and that God should take upon him the Nature of Man! And put him
into that Glorious Union with his own Son; and that he should leave the Angels,
though Christ was made a a little lower than they, for Suffering Death for us:
Yet now, because the Nature of Man is united to the Godhead by Virtue of that
Marriage and Union, we become the Sons of God, and Heirs of Glory. Those that
are Adopted by Jesus Christ, are brought near to the Throne of Glory, are in a
High and Glorious Communion and Fellowship with the Father and Spirit, owned of
all the Holy Angels; and therefore they do stand without the Throne, (as in
several Places of the Revelations,) and round about the Elders, and round those
that were given to the Lamb, (as in the Fifth of the Revelations, and many
other Scriptures,) they stand without; but there is another Company within,
which is the Twenty-four Elders, and Four Living Creatures, they fall down and
worship God, they are nearer than the Angels. Oh! Who has Credited, who has
Believed, this Report? And to whom is the Arm of the Lord Revealed? Oh! How
many Professors are there in this Day, in this Nation, that call upon the Name
of Christ, and that say they shall be Saved by Christ, and do Live and Trust
most in their own Works and Righteousness, and never come to the Knowledge and
Understanding of this great Mystery of the Love of God in Christ? Who never
received those Teachings from the Anointing, and according to the New Covenant,
where it is promised that they shall be all Taught of God; all the Children of
God shall be Taught of him; and there is no one can Teach these but the Father;
none can draw them to the Son but the Father; and no Man can come to the Father
but through the Son: And this great Mystery is both by the Light and Operation
of the Holy Spirit, who makes the New Creature in the Soul: O that God would
pour out of his Holy Spirit, that God would pour out the Spirit of the New
Covenant, and the Spirit of the Gospel, and the Spirit that can declare the
Mystery of God's Word in the Spirit; and that he has made Manifest through
Jesus Christ: O there is much talking and speaking in the Name of Christ! And
how many Men spend little Time in getting Evidences in the Power and
Demonstration of the Spirit, and come to apprehend God in Christ, that speak of
him? Oh! There are few of these the Lord knows. O that the Anointing may be
poured out more now, according to this Faith, in the Way of this Grace, and in
this Love of God, even in the Electing Love of the Father, and in the Redeeming
Blood of Jesus Christ, according to the purchased Possession that he has
obtained through his own Righteousness, wherein God has been Just also, in
justifying the Ungodly; and among them such a poor simple Piece of Dust and
Ashes as I have been, and have to this Day little glorified my Father; and yet
I can call him Father, through some Measure of his Spirit, and Father,
according to the Spirit of Adoption too; and can say, the Lord Jesus has given
himself for me; and I take the Lord Jesus Christ as the great Gift of the
Father, desiring to bear Witness of that Love, and of that wonderful Grace and
Glory, that he has made me Partaker of in and through him. Oh! Blessed be the
God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has called me to this Hope, and
who has made me Partaker of this Glory, that the Saints are Enlightened in.
And now I long to see the Face of this Father, and of his Son, though I have
such a Number of Sins in me, and though I have an Interest in him, and can call
him Father at any Time without doubt, and in full Assurance of Faith in the
Holy Spirit; yet if Jesus Christ were not there to present me Faultless before
the Presence of God I should be afraid to appear before him; but he is able to
do it; and therefore says the Apostle, Now unto him that is able to Save you,
and to present you Faultless before the Presence of his Glory with exceeding
Joy, etc. I am a poor Sinful Piece, full of Iniquity, laden with many Burdens,
that have a Body of Death that I carry about me, and I am now about to lay it
down, and my Soul shall enter into Eternal Life, and be made Perfect in a
Moment, through the Mighty Power of God that has wrought that Glorious Work of
raising Christ from the Dead. Oh! All my Strength, and all my Joy, and all my
Life, is in Christ, and in him alone: And I have a Righteousness already of his
Working, according to his own Grace, and according to his own Mighty Power, and
according to his own Mercy, that he has been pleased to Work in me, and so
has been pleased to keep me in a very Wicked, and in a very Evil Day, by the
Power of his Grace. And I desire to glorify my Father, and many Years have I
been in that Work that has been of late in this Nation; few and evil has been
the Days of my Pilgrimage, but I have desired to serve the Lord with
Faithfulness, and in the Integrity of my Soul, without Prejudice against any
Creature; and it has been the Desire of my Soul to approve my self Faithful
toward God, and toward Man: And what I have done I have done it in Obedience
to the Lord, that I had in my Eye, and in my Heart. There are many Things laid
upon many of those that profess the Kingdom and Glorious Appearance of our Lord
Jesus Christ, as if they were Enemies to Magistracy and Ministry; and as if so
be we were for the Destruction of the Laws and Properties of Mankind, therefore
I shall speak a few Words unto that: And if indeed we were such, we were fit to
be turned out of the World, as some Men think they should do God good Service
in sending such poor Creatures quickly from hence. There is no such thing, I
desire to bear Witnesses to the true MAGISTRACY, that MAGISTRACY that is in the
Word of the Lord. And that true Ministry, which Ministry is a Ministry from the
Anointing, that does bear Witness to the Lord Jesus, and has his Holy Spirit.
That Testimony I desire to bear, and that Testimony I desire to stand faithful
in, with Integrity to the Lord Jesus, as King of Saints, and King of Nations.
And therefore it is, I say, to have a Magistracy as at the first, and
Counselors as at the beginning; Men fearing God, and hating Covetousness; and
that Ministry as does Preach the Everlasting Gospel.

Here Mr. Sheriff interrupted him, saying, It Is desired that you spend the rest
of your Time in preparing your self. Another said, You spend your self, Sir, in
this Discourse Another said, It Rains. Then Mr. Carew said, I will pray.

Mr. Carew his Prayer.
O Most Holy, and most Glorious and Blessed God, the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, the Father of all Glory, the God of the Spirits of all Flesh;
unto thee, unto thee does my Soul desire to come through the New and Living
Way, even through Christ my Righteousness; and in him and through him to he
offered up by the Eternal Spirit a Living and Acceptable Sacrifice, in which
thy Soul delights. O Lord, thou know my Frame, and thou know my Life,
and what a Passage this is, and what a wonderful Thing it is to enter into
Glory, and what a wonderful Thing it is to stand before thee, and to stand in
thy Presence. O Father, Father, let my Soul be filled with thy Joy, and with
Peace in Believing: O let my Heart be in Heaven, while my Body is here; and, O
let me be joined unto the Lord through thine own Spirit before this Separation
be -- O Lord, thou only art able to take hold of my Heart and Spirit; poor
Creatures may speak Words to thee, but Oh! It is thine own Power, and it is
thine own Spirit, that must take hold of the Heart; it is thine own Spirit that
must carry through all; and it has been thy Spirit (Blessed be thy Name) that
has carried me through many Trials, and many Temptations, and many
Difficulties, that thy poor Worm has met with in this Pilgrimage for many
Years. O Blessed be thy Name for all the Goodness, and for all thy Grace, and
for all thy Presence that has been with thy poor Creature far and near. Oh!
Blessed be thy Name that thou have kept me in any Measure Faithful unto thee,
and made me willing to lay down my Life for thy Righteous Work and Cause. O
Lord Bless, Bless thy poor People; O Comfort them in this Day. Pour out
Sevenfold of thy Spirit for what thou do take away in any of thy Servants for
thy Holy Name's sake. O let the Cause and Kingdom of Christ be Dear and
Precious in thy Sight, and Live always! Lord, little do these (poor Creatures)
know, or these Nations know what a Controversy thou have with them. O that
thou would be pleased Graciously to spare this People; spare thy People
however! And let them that love Zion, and favor thy Righteous Cause, be glad
for Ever and Ever. O now Father be Dear to me; do thou receive my Spirits; take
me into thine own Glory; take me into thine own Glory; let me know it is my
Portion, let me know there is a Crown in the Hand of Christ prepared for my
Soul. O Blessed Lord, thou have honored thy poor Creature, and brought him
hitherto, O reward all the Labors of Love in any to him, in Bonds or Death;
and give them a double Reward into their own Bosoms. Reward it so to them and
theirs; Blessed be thy Name that thou have brought thy poor one hither to
suffer in thy Cause. And, O Lord, let thy Spirit be poured forth upon the
Nations until the whole Earth be filled with the Knowledge of thy Glory. And
that Christ Jesus may have all the Honor, and Praise, and Glory, and Dominion,
for Ever and Ever. Amen.

I am so exceeding Dry that my Tongue is ready to stick to my Mouth; but I
would fain speak a little more. Oh Blessed be God! Oh! How many are the
Refreshments I have had from the Presence of my God and Father, sweet and
secret Communion betwixt him and my Soul to Day. And for that my Soul has seen
of his Riches and Kindness; O that I might be more like Christ! For I have been
very unlike to Jesus Christ, very unlike to my Father. But I shall leave all
that is unlike Christ behind; and all his own Workmanship he will purify and
perfect through this Passage into Glory. O my Dear Father, receive my Soul; O
make this Passage sweet, for now I am coming to thee; Lord, help, Lord, spirit
me; fill me with thy Spirit; let me be ever with thee, let me know what it is
to have thee at my Right Hand, that I may not be moved; that in my Soul going
out of the Flesh, I may be let into the Presence of God, and into the Arm of
Jesus Christ. Oh! That my Soul may be breathed forth into the Arms of God, into
the Bosom of Jesus Christ, through the Anointing of the Spirit!

A Friend that stood by said, It is expected you should speak something to the
Matter of your Suffering; the Undersheriff said, It Is not to be suffered. What
are you, that you put on Men to speak? What are you Sir?

Mr. Carew said, Farewell my Dear Friends, Farewell; the Lord keep you Faithful.
The Friend said, We part with you with much Joy in our Souls.

Mr. Carew said to the Executioner, Stay a while, I will speak one Word; and
then said very solemnly, and with a Loud Voice,

Lord Jesus receive my Soul, Lord Jesus, into thy Arms I commend my Spirit; and
so fell asleep.

His Majesty was pleased upon Intercession of his Friends to give his Body to
be Buried.

OBSERVATIONS.
THE Scene is no sooner prepared, and Harison's Part acted, but Carew enters, a
Man that sucked in Treason with his First Milk, one of the Main Props on which
Fanatic Fury Built herself a Fantastic Fabric; one whose Name, like that of
Felton and Ravillack, shall stand stigmatized to Eternity for Treason, Inhumane
Treason, against a Gracious Prince.

Magistracy and Ministry, the Two Eyes of this Land, which like Two Diamonds in
the Crown give a Luster to Majesty, by a pretended Zeal were almost dazzled, and
hourly threatened to be quite put out, whilst Gain was his greatest Godliness.

1. He impudently affirms that it was in the Fear of the Lord he Condemned the
Lord's Vicegerent; pretends at the First to be excused from being a Member of
that Detestable Synod, to palliate his Premeditated Treason; but being once
Seated in the Chariot of Authority, he, Jehu-like, drove on furiously till he
had washed his Hands in that Innocent and Sacred Blood. And so far was he from
repenting for his Villainy, that he was sorry it was beyond his reach to strike
one Blow more at Majesty.

The nex Day, viz. Tuesday, the 16th of October, Mr. John Cook, and Mr. Hugh
Peter's, were carried to their Execution; but First of Mr. Cook, the Appointed
Time being at Hand.
HE asked several times if the Sheriff was not come; saying, Why stays the
Wheels of his Chariot? Why do they drive so heavily? I am ready, Blessed be
God; I have nothing to do but to die.

Word being brought that the Sheriff was come, he made haste to be gone, and
his Wife stepping after him, took him by the Arm, whereupon he said, O do not
hinder me from going to Jesus Christ!

And then with a Cheerful Countenance taking leave of his Friends, he went to
the Sledge that carried him, whereon also was carried the Head of Major General
Thomas Harrison, with the Face bare toward him; and notwithstanding that
Dismal Sight, he passed rejoicingly through the Streets as one borne up by that
Spirit which Man could not cast down. Being come to the Place of Execution,
when he was taken out of the Sledge he said This is the easiest Chariot that
ever I rid in in all my Life.

Being come upon the Ladder, and the Rope put about, his Neck, he rejoiced,
saying, Blessed be the Name of God that I am bound for the Sake of Christ.

Then his Work was to address himself to God, and to that End said, If you
please I shall speak a few Words to God in Prayer.

Mr. Cook's Prayer before his Speech.
MOST Glorious Majesty, this Day is a Representation of that Great Day when all
thy Poor People shall meet together, Multitudes, Multitudes in the Valley of
Derision. Thy Poor, Poor Servant is now come to pay the Debt which he owes to
Nature; Blessed be thy Name that thou have prepared him for it; Blessed be thy
name, Sweet Jesus, Blessed be thy Name. O that all thy Poor People that are
here, if possible, may feel something of that Divine Power and Assistance of
God that thy Poor Servant now feels at this Time; Blessed be thy Name. I am a
Poor Creature, a Poor Sinner, and the Lord might justly withdraw from me, and
leave me to Horror and Searedness if he should deal with me in Justice; but
this has not been his Method (Blessed be his Name) to leave and forsake his
Poor Servant. Lord, let thy Blessing be upon us at this Time, and let thy
Blessing be upon England, and let thy Blessing be upon all these Nations, and
let thy Blessing be upon all that are here. Assist, O Lord, by thy Divine
Power; give us to see much of thy Power; and let not this Meeting be in vain,
but let every one here receive Benefit thereby, to the Praise and Glory of thy
Great Name, and the Everlasting Salvation of all our Souls, (if it be thy
Blessed Will,) through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Having ended his First Prayer, he applies himself to the Sheriff and
Spectators in this following Speech.

Mr. Sheriff and Gentlemen,

THE most Glorious Sight that ever was seen in the World was our Lord Jesus
Christ upon the Cross; and the most Glorious Sight next to that is to see any
poor Creature for him in his Cause.

I desire to speak a few Words, briefly to let you understand what a Glorious
Work the Lord has been pleased to accomplish upon my Spirit. I bless the Lord
I have ransacked into every Corner of my Heart, and I have searched into all my
Sins, Actual and Original, Secret and Open, Known and Unknown, so far as the
Lord has discovered them to me and I have confessed them all with a
Penitential Bleeding Heart, and Contrite Spirit; Blessed be his Name, he has
been pleased to come in abundant Manner, and has been pleased to show me that
the only Remedy is the Blood of Christ; and I have, Blessed be the Lord,
applied that Precious Blood to my Poor Soul, and have laid hold upon a Christ
by a True and Lively Faith; and there is a Sweet Calm and Serenity in my Soul
and Conscience, Blessed, Blessed be thy Name. I desire to glorify God, and to
give him the Glory of all, and to take Shame unto my self for any Sins that I
have ever committed, that I know to be Sin, and therefore I desire to rejoice
in the God of my Salvation, as Isa. 61. 10. I will greatly rejoice in the Lord,
my Soul shall be joyful in my God, for he has clothed me with the Garment of
Salvation, he has covered me with the Robe of Righteousness; as a Bridegroom
decketh himself with Ornaments, and as a Bride adorneth herself with Jewels,
even so the Lord delights in me. And as the Earth brings forth her Buds,
and as the Garden causes the Things that are sown in it to spring forth, so
the Lord will cause Righteousness and Praise to spring forth before all Nations.

And Isa. 43. 9, 10. Ye are my Witnesses, says the Lord; I do desire to bear a
Testimony unto God, and to Jesus Christ, for Justice, and Truth, and
Righteousness, and Holiness.

The Lord knows I have no Malice upon my Heart against any Man or Woman living
upon the Face of the Earth; neither against Jury that found me guilty, nor
Court that passed Sentence; I desire freely to forgive every one from the
Bottom of my Heart. And as concerning this great Dispensation you may (it may
be) desire to hear something of it; truly I say, as to the King's Majesty I
have not any Hard Thoughts concerning him, my Prayer shall be for him that his
Throne may be upheld by Truth, and by Mercy, for by Mercy, Prove. 23. the Throne
is upheld; but I must needs say, that Poor we have been Bought and Sold by our
Brethren as Joseph was.

Brother has betrayed Brother to Death, and that Scripture is in a great
Measure fulfilled, Mat. 10. 21. The Father against the Son, and the Son against
the Father, and Brother shall deliver up Brother to Death. I desire for my own
Part to kiss the Rod; and I do desire (if it may please the King's Majesty)
that no more Blood may be shed after mine; it may be the Lord will put it into
his own Breast.

Here is a Poor Brother coming, I am afraid that he is not fit to die at this
Time; I could wish that his Majesty might show some Mercy.

The Sheriff interrupted in Words to this Effect, Let that alone, for the
King's Majesty has Clemency enough for all but his Father's Murderers.

Mr. Cook replied, Then I shall proceed to speak something concerning my
Profession and Faith, which, I Bless the Lord, is founded upon the Rock Christ
Jesus. I do not expect Salvation for any Thing I have ever done, but only lay
hold upon Christ as a Naked Christ, and there to bottom my Soul.

I can say, to the Praise and Glory of God, that I have endeavored in my
Place, and to my Power, to do that which might be to God's Glory, according to
the best of my Understanding. I have stood for a Gospel Magistracy and
Ministry, and that many Delays in the Law might be removed, (and that Thing I
have much suffered for;) I say it is good for King and People that many Delays
in Matter of Justice should be removed, and that Public Justice might be
speedily and cheaply administered.

And as for my Profession, I am of the Congregational Way, I desire to own it,
and am for Liberty of Conscience, and all that walk humbly and holily before
the Lord, and desire to walk in the Fear of the Lord; and believe it is a
Truth, and there can be nothing said against it. I do confess I am not
convinced of any Thing I have done amiss; as to that I have been charged with I
am not indeed, neither did I understand the Plea of the Court, That if the
Lords and Commons had brought the King to the Bar, and set him over them again,
their bringing him to the Bar had been Treason.

I desire never to repent of any Thing therein I have done, but I desire to own
the Cause of God, and of Christ, and am here to bear witness to it; and so far
as I know any Thing of my self I can freely confess it.

Here the Sheriff interrupted him again, desiring him to forbear any such
Expressions.

Mr. Cook replied, It has not been the Manner of English Men to insult over a
Dying Man, nor in other Countries among Turks and Galliasses.

The Lord Bless every one of us, and help us that we may look more to the
Honor and Glory of God than the Concernments of our own Lives: For alas! What
is a Poor Miserable Life to us, but that therein we might give Honor and Glory
to the God of all our Mercies?

And if there be any here of that Congregation to which I was related in the
time that I lived here, I would commend to them that Scripture, Phil. 2. 7, 18.
Yea, and if I be offered up upon the Sacrifice and Service of the Faith, I Joy
and Rejoice with them all, for the same Cause also do ye Joy and Rejoice with
me. And, Deuteronomy. 18. Verse 11. The Lord God of your Fathers make you a Thousand
Times more than you are, and Bless as he has Promised. The Lord be pleased to
speak Comfort to them, and to all them that Fear the Lord.

The Lord keep England from Popery, and from Superstition, and keep it from
Profaneness, and that there may not be an Inundation of Antichrist in the
Land. And that is all the Harm I wish unto it.

The Lord has Forgiven me many Thousand Talents, and therefore I may well
Forgive those few Pence that are owing unto me. I Bless the Lord I have nothing
lying upon my Conscience, but I can unbosom my self to every one, and to the
Throne of Free Grace, in the simplicity of my Spirit; I have endeavored to do
nothing but with a good Conscience, and through the Integrity of my Heart,
though accompanied with many Frailties.

I desire to Bless the Lord; my Lot was rather in Ireland than here; here I
have been more known where I have given the Offense.

The Sheriff again interrupted him.

Mr. Cook replies, Sir, I pray take notice of it, I think I am the first Man
that ever was Hanged for demanding of Justice, therefore I hope you will not
interrupt me.

I suppose you were there, and do bear me Witness in your Conscience, that
there was not any thing then that I did not Communicate to the Court that I now
speak upon the Ladder.

If you will believe the Words of a dying Man, I say as I must give an Account,
I have nothing lies upon my Conscience. We must all meet together at the Great
Day of the Lord, to give an Account of all our Actions, (and then it will
appear,) the Lord grant we may meet with Joy and Comfort.

I have a Poor Wife and Child, and some Friends left, I desire you that came
along with me to commend to them Isaiah 54. 4, 5, and 10, Verses.

I hope the King and Parliament will consider our Poor Friends as to their
Estates; you know that those Lords that formerly suffered under the Parliament
did not lose all their Estates; I hope there will be some Consideration as to
Justice, (lest that our small Estates prove a Poison amongst their great deal,)
and my Poor Wife and Relations suffer.

The Lord grant that Mercy may be showed, that Mercy and Righteousness may
Magnify and Exalt itself above Justice: I shall not hold you long, I shall
desire in the Fear of the Lord to give my self, (as in Romans 12. 1.) A Living
Sacrifice, Holy and Acceptable unto God, which is but a Reasonable Service.

And so do entreat that I may have a little time to call upon the Lord, unless
there be any thing more desired, or any one that would ask me a Question.

Truly I forgive all from my Heart; I have nothing upon my Heart to accuse any
of them withal. I Bless the Lord I have a clear Conscience; I say it is in the
Integrity and Simplicity of my Heart, (I do now appeal to the Great God, to
whom I must give an Account of what I have done,) knowing that all my Guilt is
washed away in the Blood of Jesus Christ, (and before him I hope to appear,)
and have nothing else to plead any thing at all for me.

And so I hope that I have declared my self with Simplicity and Integrity in a
few Words, that you may understand my Mind.

I shall speak a few Words to the Lord in Prayer, and shall not trouble you
further.

When having prayed a short space he was Executed, and his Head afterward
fixed on the North-East End ofWestminister-Hall.

Observations on Mr. Cook.
IF Treason ever wore a Cloak you may see it here now palliated to the Life; a
quaint Orator struggling for Life under the sad Pressures of a heavy Charge. A
Man Bred up where Law was more in force, at least more studied, than the
Gospel. I am sorry Pearls of Eloquence, and the very Marrow of the Law, should
prove destructive to the Owners.

Sum up all his Virtues in a Schedule, and at the End write Traitor: Can then
his Virtues make me blush to write, Solus in conclavi and test Lucerna? What
he himself at a Public Meeting, and Coelo spectante, was not ashamed to act,
the King must die, and Monarchy with him; could the dull Genius of this Nation
suffer it so tamely? Marius, that Excellent Roman, daunted his Butcher with a
Word, Et tu homo audes necare, C. Marium. And could not Majesty with all its
Charms daunt a Soliciting Cook?

He alleges, he was put on it, nay, fee'd to do what he did; so was Judas when
he Sold his Master: Money is the Root of all Evil, and brought that Famous
Orator Demosthenes, a Brother of the same Fraternity, to a Sore Throat, when
'twas Avaritia non excusat militiam.

Some Memorable Passages of Mr. Hugh Peter's in his Imprisonment at Newgate, and
at the Time of his Execution at Charing Cross, October 16, 1660.
MR. Peter's, as is well known, was exercised under great Conflict in his own
Spirit during the time of his Imprisonment, fearing (as he would often say)
that he should not go through his Sufferings with Courage and Comfort; and said
to his Friends that he was somewhat unprepared for Death, and therefore
unwilling to die; something he said he had committed, and other Things omitted,
which troubled him; but though it was a Cloudy and Dark Day with him for a
Season, yet the Light of God's Grace and Favor would break forth at last.

A Night or Two before he suffered Two of the Episcopal Clergy, who as some
Report were the King's Chaplains, came to give him a Visit; they endeavored to
make Advantage of the present Temptations wherewith he was then assaulted, and
to persuade him to a Repentance and Recantation of his former Activity in the
Parliament Cause, which they endeavored to enforce upon him by a Promise of
Pardon from the King in case he would therein hearken to them. But told them,
He had no Cause in the least to repent of his adhering to that Interest; but
rather that he had in the Prosecution thereof done no more for God and his
People in these Nations; and with Civility dismissing those Visitants, he
applied himself to some other Ministers then present, whom he judged more able
to speak a Word in Season to him under these great Trials, wherewith the Lord
was then pleased to exercise him.

Being carried upon the Sledge to Execution, and made to sit therein within the
Rails at Charing Cross, to behold the Execution of Mr. Cook, one comes to him,
and upbraided him with the Death of the King, bidding him (with opprobrious
Language) to repent: He replied, Friend, you do not well to trample upon a
dying Man, you are greatly mistaken, I had nothing to do in the Death of the
King.

When Mr. Cook was cut down, and brought to be Quartered, one they called
Colonel Turner called to the Sheriffs Men to bring Mr. Peter's near, that he
might see it; and by and by the Hangman came to him, all besmeared in Blood,
and rubbing his Bloody Hands together he (tauntingly) asked, Come, how do you
like this, M. Peter's? How do you like this Work? To whom he replied, I am not
(I thank God) terrified at it, you may do your worst.

When he was going to his Execution he looked about, and espied a Man, to whom
he gave a Piece of Gold, (having bowed it first,) and desired him to go to the
Place where his Daughter lodged, and to carry that to her as a Token from him,
and to let her know, That his Heart was as full of Comfort as it could be, and
that before that Piece should come to her Hands he should be with God in Glory.

Being upon the Ladder he spoke to the Sheriff, saying, Sir, You have here
slain one of the Servants of God before mine Eyes, and have made me to behold
it, on purpose to terrify and discourage me; but God made it an Ordinance to
me for my Strengthening and Encouragement.

When he was going to Die he said, What, Flesh, art thou unwilling to go to God
through the Fire and Jaws of Death? Oh! ( Said he,) this is a good Day, he is
come that I long looked for, and I shall be with him in Glory; and so smiled
when he went away.

What Mr. Peter's said further at his Execution, either in his Speech or Prayer,
it could not be taken, in regard his Voice was low at that time, and the People
uncivil. His Head was afterward set upon London Bridge.

Observations on Mr. Peter's.
A State Juggler dressed in Divinity; a mere Protous, and yet a Regicide; a
Firebrand kindled by the Devil; by whose insinuating Practices, blowing the
Bellows of Rebellion, and belching from an Impure Throat the loathsome Vapors
of Sedition, he not only poisoned the Kingdom, but ruined the Stately Fabric
of an incomparable Monarchy; pretending in his Pulpit that to be the Finger of
the Lord which visibly appears to all Ages to be the Hand of the Devil.

Wednesday, October 17th, Mr. Thomas Scot, and Mr. Gregory Clement, were
brought on several Hurdles to the same Place, where being come, Mr. Scot first
began.

Mr. Scot's Speech upon the Ladder.
GEntlemen, I stand here a Spectacle to God, to Angels, and Men: To God and
Angels, to whom I hope I am shortly a going. And now to you I owe it; to God,
and the Nation, and my self, to say something concerning each. For my self, I
think it may become me to tell you how and why I came hither; and something in
the general, concerning my Capacity. In the Beginning of these Troubles I was
(as many others were) unsatisfied; I saw Liberties and Religion in the Nation
in great Danger, to my best Apprehension; I saw the Approaches of Popery in
great measure coming in upon us: I saw -- Upon which the Sheriff interrupted
him in these Words; If you will betake your self to Prayer you may.

Mr. Scot replied, I shall not speak to reproach any --

The Sheriff interrupted him again, saying, You have but a little time, Mr.
Scot, therefore betake that little time to Prayer.

Mr. Scot replied, It Is according to my Mind to speak what may be said --

Here the Undersheriff interrupted, saying, It has been denied unto your
Predecessors, and will be denied unto you.

Then he prayed as follows.
HOly Lord God, the Great and Glorious God of Heaven and Earth, King of
Nations, and King of Saints; in both which Capacities thy Poor and Unworthy
Creature comes now to bear his Witness in this great Spectacle, before Thee,
Angels and Men: O Lord, were it not for Sin none of these Things had befallen
this Nation, nor my unworthy self; we have all transgressed, and gone astray
from thee by a perpetual Backsliding, even all of all Sorts, Conditions,
Ranks, and Orders of Men: And among them none, none more than thy Poor Unworthy
Creature, who acknowledges the same here before thee, in the Face of Heaven,
and in thy Presence, to which he is very shortly a going; that Glorious Grace
which thou have been pleased to afford unto his Soul in it. O Blessed Lord,
thou have called him forth as a public Spectacle to some in a Condition of
Shame and Reproach, to others of Comfort, and to thy Blessed Self, as one that
is a Witness for thee, that has served thee with all Faithfulness in his Trust
and Public Capacity and Employment. O Lord, they Dispensation to thy Poor
Creature has been Wonderful, Gracious, and Merciful; and he must say to the
Praise of thy Free Grace --

Here the Hangman stooping down to take Drink, which was reached up to him upon
the Ladder, interrupted him; upon which Mr. Scot said, Prithee let me alone, I
have not done; and then proceeded in Prayer, as follows.

-- That this very Condition to which he is now brought he acknowledges is the
very Answer of his Prayer before his going out of England. Thou know, Lord,
he did many times in Prayers and Tears seek thy Bessed Majesty for Counsel, and
for Advice, whether it was his Duty to stay and suffer, or to shelter himself
abroad; and if it were thy Will to take more Honor to thy self by his
Suffering than Living, thou would be pleased to remand him back again, and
bring him hither. And he has observed thy Providence checking of his Way, and
in preserving him all along until he came to this. O Blessed Lord, thy Poor
Creature does acknowledge that thy Ways to his Poor Soul have been of wonderful
Grace and Mercy. But Blessed be thy Glorious Name, the Great God of Heaven and
Earth, he has been pleased to bear him Witness to himself, to Angels, and to
all that hear me this very Day, thy Poor Servant that now stands to suffer had
Joy and much Consolation from God, and from his Cause, more than ever he had
before; I say again, to the Praise of the Free Grace of God, I Bless his Name
he has engaged me in a Cause not to be repented of; I say in a Cause not to be
repented of --

Here the Sheriff interrupted him, saying, Is this your Prayer, Mr. Scot?
Desiring him to forbear those kind of Expressions. Others also told him that he
contradicted himself, and spoke Blasphemy.

Then Mr. Scot said, I shall say no more but this, the Lord I do acknowledge,
that this very Morning in the Dark Chamber I had very much of the Presence of
God, and from thence I take Consolation to my self that his Spirit is with me,
and that he has Sealed unto my Soul the Decrees of Heaven, at least persuaded
my Soul that it will be well with me, and that I am out of all Danger, as to my
Eternal Condition; and that I shall Live and Reign with him there, where all my
Sin shall be done away, which is the Growing Glory of my Soul; and all Tears
wiped away also. O Lord, remember the Price of Blood that has been shed for
the purchasing of the Civil and Christian Liberties. And remember thy Enemies,
that are not Incorrigible Enemies to thy Truth and Holiness; and give them
Understanding to see their Error, and to turn to thee; a Heart Broken, and with
Humiliation, that they may seek God with their whole Heart, that they may be a
Holy or Immanual Nation, a Chosen Generation, a Peculiar People, Zealous of
Good Works, Careful to show forth the Virtue of him that has called them from
Death to Life. The Lord call in all that belong to the Election of Grace
speedily into that Number: Let no Weapon formed against thy Church prosper;
but, Lord, remember Zion, if it be thy Good Pleasure, and repair the Walls of
thy Jerusalem: O Lord, thy Cause lies near the Hearts of thy People; and I bear
thee Witness that I have this Income from thee as the Return of their Prayers:
And that we are supported to bear Witness for thee very Cheerfully, and with
Satisfaction. I desire to be found of thee in Jesus Christ: I do now abhor all
my Sins, and renounce my Services, and do account them all as Dung. Lord, thou
know I have desired to live, that I might serve thee better, and love thee
more: But that I may be with thy self, Oh it is infinitely better, and to
confirm that Testimony which is concerning thy Glorious Will: And thy Will be
done in Earth, as it is in Heaven, by me and all thine, from henceforth and for
evermore. Amen.

Observations on Mr. Scot.
MEN, whose Damnable Actions whilst living, never merited from Good Men the
smallest Credit, being now to be made Sacrifices to Public Vengeance, see how
Saint-like they present themselves on the Stage This Man entered for a Black
Saint in the Calender of Cruelty.

Something as to Mr. Gregory Clements take as follows.
PErhaps some may think it strange that there is so little said as to Mr.
Gregory Clement, who suffered with the rest; therefore this only is to be said
more, (which is known to many,) that Mr. Clement was very silent both in the
Time of his Imprisonment at Newgate, and at the Time and Place of his Execution
at Charing Cross; only thus it is said, that he expressed his Trouble (to some
Friends in the Prison) for yielding so far to the Importunity of his Relations
as to plead guilty to the Indictment: And though he spoke little at the Place
of Execution, yet (so far as could be judged by some discerning Persons that
was near him) he departed this Life in Peace.

The same Day Mr. Ad. Scroop and Mr. John Jones suffered together at the same
Place.

Colonel Scroop's Speech at Execution, October 17, 1660.
YOU see an Object here that has been in a better Place; but howsoever the
Lord Jesus Christ has sent me to this Place I should Die, I have no Animosity
nor Malice against any Man, nor ever had I; neither have I any Evil Will to
those that brought me hither, nor to the Jury that found me Guilty, nor Judges
that passed Sentence, nor to him through whose Means I was brought here to
suffer. I say once more the Lord forgive him; I shall not Name him, for I come
not hither to reflect upon any Man's Person.

I will not tell you what my Breeding has been, because it is not good for any
Man (especially at such a time as this) to boast of his Lineage or Breeding;
but this I shall say, that I was Born and Bred a Gentleman.

As for my Carriage it may be some that look upon me here knows what it has
been: Howsoever the Lord knows all, and the Lord God is Judge of all, and he
will judge; I shall submit my self to his Judgment, which is a Righteous
Judgment. The Judgment of Men may go Wrong, but God's Judgment is Right; I
shall submit to his Way. The Lord he is the Rock of Ages, and my Support under
this great Weight that is now upon me: I look up to him alone; the Lord Jesus
Christ is my Savior and my Redeemer; I am going into his Arms, Blessed be his
Name: I follow him; he is gone before me the same Way; therefore it is no
Reproach or Shame to follow the Lord Jesus Christ, to Die in his Cause; for
that is it which I judge I am now going to do.

That which I do desire of you (here are a great many Spectators both on the
Right Hand and on the Left) is, that this Day may represent to you the General
Day of the Judgment of Christ, where you must appear, and there every Man must
receive according to their Works: And at that time it will be known, I say, at
that time it will be known and seen, whose Works are Righteous, and whose are
not; therefore I would wish you, and desire you to judge Charitably of me.

Observations on Colonel Scroop.
IF Birth or Education can render a Man Accomplished without doubt Col. Scroop
deserves a favorable Censure; but as the smallest Spot is soonest discerned in
a white Garment, so Treason dishonours the highest Extraction, and leaves a
Blot in the Scutcheon of Nobility. A Candid Nature obliges me to love the Man,
yet my own Conscience, and that solemn Commandment, Fear God and Honor the
King, makes me Pity what I cannot ^ustifie, and Condemn the Treason as a Person
that once ^ov'd the Traitor.

Coll. John Jones his Speech upon the Ladder, October 17, 1660.
THere is Two Things that are necessary now I am going through this narrow Gate
or Passage to the Eternal Majesty; I say Two Things are necessary as to the
Occasion of my coming hither, to receive my Father's good Pleasure.

First, Peace with God. Secondly, Peace with Man.

I shall speak something to each of these; and in the first Place speak
something of the Court wherein I received the Sen^ence. It has been reported,
as I was told, that I confessed ^his Fact, and confessed that I were guilty of
Murder, as under those several-Expressions that are in the Indictment, viz. --

I desire to clear my self before the Lord, and before the World, in that
Particular; for should I grant that I was guil^y in Reality and Truth of
Murder and Malice, viz. -- (...) should belie my own Conscience, and draw upon
me a greater Weight than I could bear; but thus far I do confess, (...) was
willing to make the Work as short as I could; and because I would not stand so
long I told them I would take the first Jury that came; and when a Jury was
called, then I did Confess so much as I was convinced of as to the Matter ^f
Fact; I desire you will judge charitably of this that I speak at this Time, as
in the Presence of the Lord, that it is not really, ( viz. that I acknowledged
my self guilty of Murder, I had no such Thing in my Heart.

I must Confess I very freely quit his Majesty, considerin^ what he does in
this Case is the Part of a Loving Son to a Father, especially the Judges
telling him that it is the Law and I conceive that the Court did nothing but
what they (...) their best Understandings judged Right as to Law; therefo^^ I
freely acquit the Court, though there was not enough said (...) satisfy such a
Poor Creature as I am in so great and deep Point as that was. As for all
others, I do not know an^ Man on the Earth to whom I do bear any Malice, but I
a^ in perfect Charity with all Men, and I hope the Lord is (...) Charity with
me; and therefore as I desire to have Forgivenes^ my self from all those that I
have offended, even so I do freely Forgive all those that have in any Measure
offended me.

The next Thing is toward God, and it is that which should be last upon my
Heart: It is not expected that I should give an Account here of my State and
Condition, for that is betwixt God and my own Soul; and I do, through the Grace
and Goodness of God, firmly believe, that my Redemption i^ wrought, and my
Pardon is sealed, and that I shall be immediately in my Father's Arms, and that
I shall be translated and brought to behold the Lord Jesus Christ in Glory with
Comfort, and Fullness of Joy.

Col. Jones his Prayer.
BLessed Lord God, thou art the great Opener, open unto my Soul the Lord Jesus
Christ, who will lead me into the Ways of Truth and Life; O God Save me, make
Good all the Pledges of thy Love unto my Soul! Oh make all the Promises which I
have believed all the Days of my Life, make them now Good unto my Soul, giving
me the full Enjoyment of thy self: I desire to Bless and Praise thy Name for
this Hour that thou have brought me to. Oh, what am I poor Worm that thou
should give me this Opportunity to suffer for thy Name, and to acknowledge
thy Mercies before so great a Congregation at this Place. Holy Father, Holy
Father, Oh that thou would now rain down Blessings from Heaven upon thy Poor
Creatures that do hear and behold this Action this Day! Oh that thou would
sanctify this Thing to them, and let Poor England be a Land of Truth and
Happiness! O Lord, let England flourish! And Oh that thou would make thy
Angel of L^ght to go before thy People: Good God, we pray thee keep off those
great Judgments that hang over the Heads of these Nations, because they have
sinned against thee: Through thy Name sanctify us; let not thy Name be
reproached; Dear Father, receive my Soul, I am ready to come unto thee: Blessed
Father, into thy Hand I commend my Spirit, thou have Redeemed me, Blessed be
thy Name, in that thou have opened the Treasures of thy Love unto my poor Soul.
Thou have given me this Hope, whereof I need not be ashamed! Blessed be thy
Name my Spirit is full of Joy. Oh Holy Father, Holy Father, I pray thee let thy
Blessing come down upon thy Poor People. Look upon me, Holy Father, stretch out
thine Arms to carry me over this Brook; I pray thee stand by me, Dear Father; I
cast my self into thy Hand, I commit my Soul unto thee.

Then speaking to the Sheriff, said, Mr. Sheriff, I must needs return you many
Thanks for your Civility.

Sheriff replied, I am glad to hear such an Ingenious Confession, and that you
make such an End, and that you have not gone into any reviling Language, as
some others have done before.

After this he committed his Soul to God, and so departed.

Observations on Colonel Jones.
IF Old Age could free a Man from Punishment, then had Col. Jones a good Plea
in the Court of Antiquity; his Gray Hairs pleaded much Gravity, but Reverence
is not due to Traitors; to be Zealous in a Bad Cause argues a Conscience fit
for Villainy.

The Last of these Ten Persons ordered for Execution were Col. Dan. Axtel, and
Col. Fran. Hacker, who on the 19th of October, Two Days after the Death of
Scroop and Jones, were drawn upon One Sledge to Tyburn.
THey were brought forth of Prison; the Sledge being ready for them, they took
their leave of some Friends that stood at the Door, and Col. Axtel desired them
to be at the Place of Execution; and both entering the Sledge, they cast up
their Eyes toward that God to whom they were coming; then with a cheerful
Countenance setting themselves down, they were drawn to Tyburn, the Place of
Execution, where a Cart was set ready, into which they both ascended, their
Countenance not at all Changed, though now the King of Terror stared them in
the Face; the Ropes being then put about their Necks, and a burning Fire
kindled before their Faces; first, Col. Axtel applies himself to the Sheriff in
these following Words.

Col. Axtel's Speech at Tyburn, October 12, 1660.
MR. Sheriff, I am now, as you see, come to the Place of Execution, according
to my Sentence: I desire your Leave that I may speak Freely, and without
Interruption, first to this People, and then to God, for it is the last I shall
speak in this World, and I hope it will redound to your Account.

Mr. Sheriff's Reply. Sir, you know what the Court prohibited you to speak, and
what was spoken at the Bar of the Court was there desired, therefore it is
needless to repeat it here. I hope you will keep to the present Business that
concerns you, and not go out into Impertinencies; and because you have but a
little Time, spend it to your best Advantage, and the Good of the People, and
then you shall not be interrupted. Or to the same Effect.

Col. Axtel begins, I say the very Cause for which I have engaged, is contained
in this Book of God, ( having the Bible in his Hand,) both in the Civil and
Religious Rights of it, which I leave to you, giving the Book to Mr. Knowles.

You see a Dead Man Living, and yet I hope I shall Live to all Eternity,
through the Mediation of Jesus Christ, the Mediator of the Covenant of
Free Grace.

I must truly tell you, that before these late Wars it pleased the Lord to call
me by his Grace, through the Work of the Ministry; and afterward keeping a Day
of Humiliation in Fasting and Prayer with Mr. Simon Ash, Mr. Love, Mr.
Woodcock, and other Ministers in Laurence-Lane, they did so clearly State the
Cause of the Parliament, that I was fully convinced in my own Conscience of the
Justness of the War, and thereupon engaged in the Parliament Service, (which as
I did and do believe) was the Cause of the Lord, I ventred my Life freely for
it, and now Die for it.

Then Mr. Sheriff said to this Purpose, Sir, remember your self.

Col. Axtel proceeds; and after the Work of the Lord was done in England, my
Lot cast me in the Service of Ireland, and I thank the Lord I was serviceable
to the English Nation in that Country, and have discharged my Duty fully
according to the Trust committed to me there.

As for the Fact for which I now suffer, it is for Words, only for Words, and
but for Words; and the Sentence is already reversed in my own Conscience, and
it will be reversed by Jesus Christ by and by. I pray God from the very Bottom
of my Soul to forgive all that have had any Hand in my Death, both Witnesses
and Jury, and the Court that passed Sentence; for considering the Doctrine of
our Lord Jesus Christ, as he has laid it down, Matthew. 5. 44. It has been said
of Old Time, Love your Neighbors and Hate your Enemies; but I say unto you,
Love your Enemies, and pray for them that hate and despitefully use you, that
you may be the Children of your Father which is in Heaven.

I desire according to this Doctrine from the Bottom of my Heart that God would
give them true Repentance, and not lay their Sin to their Charge, nor my Blood,
which by God's Law and Man's (I think) could not justly have been brought here
to suffer. But I bless God I have some comfortable Assurance that I shall be
embraced in the Arms of Christ, and have Cause to hope that his Spirit shall
carry my Soul into the Father's Hands.

And if the Glory of this Sunshine be so great, the Sun then shining Bright,)
how much more is the Glory of the Son of God, who is the Sun of Righteousness.

I think it convenient to give you some Account of my Faith.

I believe all Things written in the Old and New Testament, in the Principles
and Doctrine of a Believers Faith; I believe the Blessed Ordinances of Christ,
that it is our Duty to hear the Word preached, to seek unto God in Prayer, and
to perform Family Duties, and to walk in the Communion of Saints; and for my
own Part I am a Member of a Congregation which I judge to be the Way of Christ,
(and were it for that only I were to Die I could Witness to it,) which is a
Company of Men Born again by his Grace, that walk in the Ways of Christ
Blameless and Harmeless. I Believe Jesus Christ died for Poor Sinners, of whom
I am Chief, as the Apostle Paul says, This is a faithful Saying, and worthy of
all Acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the World to save Sinners, of whom
I am Chief. And if the Apostle might say so, much more may I.

My Friends and Countrymen, I have Reason to bewail my own unprofitable Life,
having been very unfruitful unto the People of the Lord; the Lord knows I have
much fault upon my Heart, were it not for the Blood of Christ that cleanses
and washes me, according to his Promise, saying, I loved you, and washed away
your Sins in my own Blood; for there is no Remission of Sins without the Blood
of Christ. I desire you all to loath and cast off Sin; it were better to Suffer
than to Sin; it is better to Die than to Sin; nothing could grieve our Savior
our but Sin, and therefore have a Care of that: You and I must meet one Day at
the Bar of Christ, and the Son of God shall be our Judge, for God has
committed all Judgment to the Son, That all Men should Honor the Son as they
Honor the Father. This Day is a resemblance of that Day, therefore be serious:
Beg as much Good to your Immortal Souls as I expect to enjoy by and by. I
beseech you beg of God that he would save your Souls, and omit no Opportunity
through the Strength of the Lord to Believe, and put your Trust in the Lord
Jesus Christ; be sure to Labor after Assurance of your Interest in him, or
else you will be of all Men most miserable; for I of Men were most miserable if
I had not believed, To see the Goodness of the Lord in the Land of the Living.

Blessed be the Lord that brings me into this State, let the Way or Means be
what it will; it is God's Sovereignty who made these Creatures, to dispose of
them how he pleases, and God has ordained this Death for me from all
Eternity. The Lord Christ often prayed, Thy Will be done; this is the Lord's
Will. He has numbered my Days, and my Times are in his Hand. Many seek the
Ruler's Favor, but every ones Judgment is from the Lord. When Pilate said unto
Christ, Know thou not that I have Power to Crucify thee? Christ answered
him, Thou could have no Power against me, except it were given thee from
above. Therefore I acknowedge the Righteous Hand of God he is Righteous, but I
am Sinful, Therefore will I bear God's Indignation; because I have sinned
against him.

It is said of Jesus Christ, That for the Joy set before him, he endured the
Cross, and despised the Shame, and is set down at the Right Hand of God, where
I hope to see him by and by in Glory and Majesty, and to see his Angels and
Believers worshipping of him, and therefore I despise the Shame. Our Savior
died upon the Cross without Sin; I am a sinful Creature, a wretched Sinner, and
shall I expect better than he that was my Master? He who was Holy, and never
had a sinful Thought in all his Life; and died not for himself, but for us,
that we might Live through his Death; that through his Poverty we might be made
Rich. And Christ having done this for his People, it should not be in their
Eyes thought a despicable Thing that we should suffer for him, having been
engaged in the Work of God. But Christ must prevail in Righteousness, and he
will prevail.

Now Mr. Sheriff I thank you for your Civility, and for this leave.

After this Col. Hacker spoke something privately to him, whereupon Col. Axtel
said, Mr. Sheriff, Must we both Die together?

Mr. Sheriff answered, Yes.

Then Col. Hacker read a Paper which he had in his Hand, a Copy whereof
follows.

FRiends and Countrymen, All that have known me in my best Estate, have not
known me to be a Man of Oratory; and that God has not given me the Gift of
Utterance, as to others, therefore I have only this briefly to say unto you
that are Spectators: As the Parliament stated the War, I did out of Judgment
and Conscience, join with them in the Common Cause, and have through Grace have
been faithful to it according to my Measure. And as for that which now I am
condemned for, I do freely forgive both Judges, Jury and Witnesses, and all
others; and I thank the Lord, to whom I am now going, at whose Tribunal I must
render an Account, I have nothing lies upon my Conscience as Guilt whereof I am
now Condemned, and do not doubt but to have the Sentence reverst. I do now
apply my self unto God by Prayer, and do desire the Hearty Prayers of all that
fear God, that I may have a sweet Passage from this Mortal Life, to that
Immortal Life which God has prepared for all that are in Christ Jesus.

Francis Hacker.

After the reading of this he desired that Col. Axtel would be both their Mouth
to God in Prayer.

And then Col. Axtel said, I desire all that fear the Lord to hear me with
Patience, and to lift up their Hearts to seek the Lord with me, that we may
have his Strength, and the Presence of his Spirit, from this World to
Everlasting Life.

After he had ended his Prayer he gave the Sheriff Thanks again for his
Civility, and turning to Colonel Hacker, they saluted and embraced each other
in their Arms, and said, The Lord sweeten our Passage, and give us a happy
Meeting with himself in Glory.

Then pulling his Cap over his Eyes, expected, as is supposed, that the Cart
should be drawn away, with his Hands lifted up he uttered these Words with a
Loud and Audible Voice, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit; but the Cart staying a
little longer, he lift up his Hands the Second Time, and with the like Audible
and Loud Voice said, Into thy Hands, O Father, I commend my Spirit: And yet in
regard there was no Man found to put forward the Horse to draw away the Cart
until the Common Hangman came down out of the Cart himself to do it, the
Carman, as many Witnesses affirm, saying, He would lose his Cart and Horse
before he would have a Hand in hanging such a Man, by this he had Opportunity
to lift up his Hands, and utter the like the Third Time also.

Observations on Mr. Axtel and Mr. Hacker.
THE last Actors in this Bloody Tragedy are now entered upon the Stage, and
seeing they were joined in their Lives, I thought it fit to leave them as I
found them.

These were guilty of that Horrid Murder, in daring to protect what is a Sin
to think. Axtel guarded those Bloody Shambles where Virtue and Majesty stood
like Lambs before the Butcher; and now having brought the Ship of our King's
Life, tossed upon the Tumultuous Surges of so many uncertain Fortunes, almost
into the Harbor of their Malice, he bids Rebellion cast an Anchor on the
dangerous Sands of the Good Old Cause. Thus when all good Christians Hearts
were melted in the Furnace of Affliction, to see Majesty lie a Bleeding, and
Pleading for Life in every Honest Heart, before so sad a Tribunal. This
Gentleman spent his Time in raising his Soldiers Spirits to a Pitch of Mirth,
laughing at their Squibs, extremely pleased that Majesty rise offended with
such sad Perfumes from the Seat where he sat, which was suddenly to stumble at
a Block, and pass unregarded to a cold Grave.

FINIS.

