Oh ye Magistrates in and about this City of LONDON.
WHy will you fight against the Lord God, the Creator of all things, and assure
as the Lord our God lives, that which you have done, and are a doing against
the innocent people of God called QUAKERS is done against the Lord, and you are
found fighters against him; and do you think that you are stronger then he?
though we are contemptible unto you, and seem but as Grasshoppers before you,
you shall one day know, that the Lord God of Heaven and Earth is on our side,
and he is our Captain, and is with us in all our sufferings under you. Oh
consider, you are but as potsherds before our God; for the Nations of the earth
are but as the drops of the bucket, and as the small dust of the balance
before him, and he brings Princes to nothing, he makes the Judges of the
earth as vanity; yea, they shall not be planted, yea, they shall not be sown,
yea, their stocks shall not take root in the earth, and he the Lord of Hosts
shall blow upon them, and they shall wither, and the whirlewinde shall take
them as stubble, Isa. 40.23, 24. Then where will you find a hiding place from
the storm that must come upon all that fight against God, and the people that
he has chosen, and also gathered by the might of his omnipotent Power: Oh, why
will you deal so unadvisedly in this matter of so great concernment which
concerns God and the Consciences of men, that you will not suffer the Lords
innocent people, who fear his dreadful name, and who stands in the gap, that
his wrath be not poured forth upon you for your high provoking sins; and among
many, this is one of a very deep dye, the not suffering his people to meet to
wait upon him, and to pray unto him, and to worship him in his own way, in the
holy fear of his name, and to reverence, honor, and obey him as they ought to
do in peace: And it is well known that we do meet peaceably; till you and your
Officers come to molest and disturb our peaceable Meetings; so that when the
peace is broken at any time, you or your Officers are the causers of it, that
should preserve the peace, and protect them that are peaceable: and we can call
God, Angels, and Men to witness for us against you, that we meet in the peace
of God, and we have peace in our hearts with God, and to all men, and so we
meet in his holy fear, and in obedience to his requirings, as all the servants
of God did in all Ages: and so we know right well what we do; and therefore he
has learned us, that we must not fear you, (O Men) that must die, whose breath
is in your nostrils; and if we should fear men we should soon forget the Lord
our maker; nor we must not fear your close and straight Prisons, nor your
Banishments, nor Deaths, nor the lingering sufferings which you do or may
inflict upon us, nor the hastening of the Execution of your new invented Law
against us, which you are hastening the execution of to the ruin of us and our
families, which have much been oppressed already for several years together,
and will be accounted for in the day of our God, and our sufferings do cry
already, and will cry more loud, and will be very piercing. Oh that you would
consider! can you bear and endure the heavy and doleful, and piercing cry (that
will pierce the heavens against you) of them that will be left fatherless and
widows, which will be so when their dear Husbands and Fathers shall be taken
from them, and also their near and dear relations separated the one from the
other by your cruelty, and to be exposed to all manner of sufferings and
servitude and bondages, being to be sold as slaves out of other native
Country, and to become Captives in strange Lands, and this for no other cause,
but for meeting in peace to worship the Lord God. Oh! will not the sound of
this go over all Nations, and the folly thereof be made manifest, that an
innocent harmless people, which are a support to the Nation, and have as true a
right in it, being freely born in the same, and have not in the least forfeited
their birthright by any evil whatsoever; that such a people should be sold and
banished, who are industrious and faithful in all their dealings that most men
desire to deal with them, because of their faithful dealings, and keeping their
word and promises. O ye Rulers in England, are ye so void of gravity and policy
as to banish the very support and well-being of your Nation, which consists of
Manufactures and Tradesmen, and also to banish such as God is well pleased
with, and for whose sake the viols of his wrath are yet stopped, that they are
not poured forth upon this Nation, which will undoubtedly be poured upon you
when God suffers you to pull it down upon your selves, by your forcing his
just Lots from among you. Oh! do you think that God has forsaken the earth?
Nay, he has not, nor will not forsake his people that call and cry upon him
for help, because they have no help in the earth but him; and as sure as the
Lord our God lives, that brought the Children of Israel out of Egyptian
bondage, and through the Red Sea, and delivered them from under Pharaohs yoke,
and his cruel Taskmasters; he will arise for the sighing of the poor, and for
the crying of the needy, and he will plead our cause against the highest of our
enemies; but however, we in Gods holy fear are freely resigned up to stand in
the cause of our God, for it is his cause, and so we are not careful in this
matter, whether God will deliver us out of these your cruel intentions yea or
nay: But this God does engage our hearts to stand in the truth, that we
certainly know to be the truth, which he has made manifest unto us; for which
truths sake we suffer by you, and for no evil doing: And we would have you to
know, that the weight of all our sufferings will lie upon them that are the
causers of it, and that will be a weight that ye will not know how to bear; but
bear it you must that have a hand in it: and the cry of our distressed Wives
and Children, and near and dear relations will intercede unto our God against
you; besides the cries of many fafamilies which have a dependence upon us in
point of Trade, that will feel the want of such as may be banished, on whom
their dependence has been to maintain themselves, Wives, and Children, and
their want will cry against you; and besides all this, though now it may be not
believed by you, you may feel the weight of that word of our Lord Jesus Christ,
which says, He that offends one of those his little ones that believe in his
name, it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck and
he thrown into the midst of the sea: though now you may cast these words and
many more of the same kind and nature behind your backs, you will one day
feel the weight of them except ye repent. Oh! my soul can desire that
repentance may not be hid from your eyes; and therefore my exhortation to you
is in Gods fear, Repent, and do no more hurt to them that would not hurt one
hair of your heads, but seek your and all men's good, and have a pity for you,
and have tender bowels of compassion toward you, and can freely forgive you
for all the sufferings we have sustained by you, though we have little hopes as
from man, that we shall be delivered from your cruel prosecuting against us,
because we see and feel your resolution: and be it known unto you we are
resolved, and not in any headiness, or rashness, nor forwardness, or
stubborness, nor in any way of contempt, but in Gods holy fear, and in the
weightiness of our minds, being staid and settled in true soberness and
serious consideration, that we may not turn our backs upon the cause of our
God: now because we are like to suffer all manner of sufferings, if we keep to
that principle of himself which we know he has made known unto us; and now if
we should deny the Lord before men, he might justly deny us and depart from us;
and therefore upon these weighty considerations are we resolved to stand to our
principles, and we know that our resolution is grounded upon a better
foundation then yours can be; for God has resolved us, and that with full
purpose of heart to cleave to the cause of our God; but your resolves are out
of Gods fear, and from your own wills; but ours are to the crossing of our own
wills, and your resolution is from the wisdom which is from beneath, which is
earthly and sensual, but ours is from the wisdom that is from above, which is
pure, peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, as much might be said in
this case; and we know that our God is stronger then all the force you can
raise against us; and your trust is in the arm of flesh, and outward force and
strength, but our trust is in the living God, and we know you are in the
friendship of the world, which is enmity against God. O therefore that you
would mind that saying, Love not the world, nor the things of the world; for
he that loves the world the love of the Father is not in him: And so I have in
a few lines cleared my conscience unto you, whether you will hear or forbear,
and we could desire that you would manifest your selves so moderate that we
might reason a little with you of a matter of so great concernment, as touches
our well-being both here and for ever hereafter: but however we can say, the
Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver; the Lord is our King, and he will
save us; and to him we are freely given up whatever you do unto us.

William Brend.
The 22 of the 6. Month, 1664. From Newgate.

