A Seasonable Warning, AND WHOLESOME ADVICE
For Merchants, Owners and Masters of Ships, and that are Occupied in thegreat
waters, where the Lord, the Mighty Jehovah makes his path.
GIve Ear unto this. You having to do with the strong and mighty Winds which
may turn to your advantage or disadvantage: And therefore he that rides on the
Wings thereof you are to be subject unto, and you are to hear and fear the
great and wonderful power of this God, who is our God, that the world (in
scorn) call QVAKERS: And this is to warn you that you meddle not, nor have to
do in Transporting them, which are innocent as we are in this day, for God is
our God, and he has and is redeeming many to serve, honor and obey him, to
worship him, in his own spirit and truth, in their peaceable meeting together,
according to his requirings, and for which we have been Imprisonned and are now
sentenced to Banishment, and so to be Transported by some of you, out of our
native Country, and from ou^ ^ar Wives and Children, and near and dear
Relations, and so to be exposed to slavery and bondage, and much hardship;
(...) for no other cause but for serving and obeying the Lord, as is before
mentioned: And therefore if you meddle, or have any thing to do in Transporting
us, you must expect our God will be against you for so doing; and he is mighty
and wonderful in strength, and exceeding great in all his dealings, and
wonderful in his counsels, to infatuate and bring to nothing the Purposes and
Counsels of them that meddle in this Matter, and will certainly cross their
ends that seeks to make an advantage of such an opportunity that may be
presented unto them, to encourage them in hope of gain, but will turn to to
their loss, because it it is against God, his truth and innocent people; and
therefore consider well this thing, that you be not ensnared to engage one way
or other, but make our case your own, that you would not so be dealt by your
selves, and consider the cry of the Widows state, and Fatherless Children, and
their near and dear Relations, which will be very loud and piercing, and they
will be heard by the righteous and just Judge of Heaven and Earth: And can you
be so hard-hearted to endure without remorse that sad and mournful Cry, which
can do no less but rise in the hearts of such who are concerned in the same;
and truly Friends, we know in whom we have believed in, and so are freely given
up to suffer what the Lord will permit men that know us not, to do unto us;
Read of this kind of Merchandise in Rev. 18. 11, 12, 13, 14.
yet we can do no less but in tenderness to all, to warn you, that you may not
meddle, nor be partakers of the sins of such that are our Enemies, and not ours
only, but the Lords, that so you may not be partakers of the Reward due to such
a work, as to persecute, and that to Banishment, and (for ought we or you know
to death) the innocent people of God, that he has raised up by the migt of his
own power to stand faithful unto him, in this day of trial, and so dare not
deny the just principle of him which leads us to meet in faithfulness to
worship him in this day of the great and many oppositions wherein many turn
their backs upon God and his truth, which we cannot do, but desire still to
follow him through great and many Tribulations: And therefore in Love to you
all, both to your Souls and Bodies, and that you may not have a Curse in your
Estates, not be blasted in your Trading from Sea to Sea, and from Land to Land:
And if you do Trafick to those Islands which we are sentenced to be Banished
unto Jamaica and Barbados, you may not be blasted in your designs thither;
and that you may not have a Curse to follow you do I write; and that I may be
clear of you that may undertake to Transport us without our knowledge or
consent whatever events may follow; and I can truly say I desire no man's hurt,
but seek the good of all men, yea, the good of mine Enemies, both here, and for
ever hereafter; and to deal plainly with all men, and that they may know that
the mighty God of Israel does take our parts and owns us in all our sufferings
and will assuredly be avenged on all such as seek our hurt, because we serve
and obey him, yea, he will reprove Kings for the sake of his innocent people,
of which we are, and we can do no less then pray for the peace of Jerusalem,
for they shall prosper that love it: And if so, as true it is, then consider
what must be the portion of them that hate it, and persecute, and oppress,
imprison, Banish and Transport the innocent ones thereof for their Conscience
toward God, or have a hand in the same, it must not be a Blessing nor
Prosperity, but a Curse, a Blast from the Lord, and therefore be warned of this
thing, least (...) will be indignation and wrath from God, who is a God of
Judgment; so (...) mighty God who rules the Winds and (...) at his pleasure,
that he may (...), nor engage to Transport (...) and Servants of the living
(...) first with them before you intermeddle (...)atter, which is of a weighty
concernment if you (...) that have, or may have to do in the sam^.

The 17th of the 10th Month, 1664. And this is from a Lover of all Men now
Prisoner in Newgate, sentenced to be Banished to Jamaica, known to some by Name
WILLIAM BREND.


