BRETHREN in INIQUITY: OR A BEARDLESS Pair: Held forth in a DIALOGUE BETWIXT
TITCHBURN AND IRETON, PRISONERS in the TOWER OF LONDON.

Printed for Daniel Webb, in the year 1660.

A DIALOGVE BETWEEN Alderman TITCHBVRN AND Alderman IRETON, Prisoners in the
Tower of London.
Titchburn. LAg I, pray, play fellow, do you begin, here is a new Game called
Law, and I always was, and could still wish my self a stranger to it.


Ireton. Sir, this is no Pageant or Boys play, the Bowling stone of the State
is settled, and you are nickt; besides, you have been prime, and a Ringleader,
and have had a lucky hand on it these many years, what aile you to hang so a
Rump.


Titchburn. I perceive you are not sensible of the Condition you are in, that
you enquire so idly after my grief; you think you were Cock a horse, or a
Beggar mounted with a fools Baubles in the Portmanteau, and that being the
utmost end of your ambitious Coxcomb, which you have attained to; you think not
of the troubles of the Saints (the Justice of the Kingdom) but think to escape
with an Ignoramus.


Ireton. I am no Lord like your Honor, to be tried by my Peers, I do not hope
nor imagine to be acquitted by any wise Jury; and therefore I am the less
pensive and melancholy at this disaster, wherein I think I show my self wifer
then your yesterday Lordship, for my wisdom is from the Ancients that teach
men (as Dogs are learned) Patience.


Titchburn. My good Lord, be not offended at my snarling, I confess Patience
upon force, is a remedy for a Phanatique; but we fellow sufferers ought not to
exasperate one another, I know our zeal is quickly kindled, but now there wants
oil in our Lamp (here in the way to Canaan, I could hint to you his late
Highness Oliver's Nose) we ought in Charity of Brethren, and fellow laborers,
to take care that the snuff may not stink in the Nostrils of the Heathen; by
our own blowing out the once bright flame of our Purity and Honesty.


Ireton. My Lord, fools speak truth (I understand you never took me for any
thing else) your Apish Government of the City, your severe Discipline of the
Herb-women and Haglers, made me so Pragmatical; for as the times went, the
Affairs of the State were managed just like a Market, nothing but for money,
and my Majoralty fell in such a year, so many Alterations and Changes in my
short rule, that I knew not where abouts to be; they say I was Lord Mayor, but
in truth I was Clerk of the Market to Wallingford-House.


Titchburn. I, Brother Ireton, had that noble Council of Officers endured that
shitten storm of Hazleriggs, (for which wicked enterprise he is ready to hang
himself) you and I had been Canting still of the merits of the Good Old Cause,
with abundance of Credit and Reputation, and I would have filcht Expressions of
Piety from unknown unheard of Authors, and you should have borrowed as many
from Mr. Griffith of the Charter House; I wonder who has bespewed (or beshit
rather) all our Glory, as he said in the last Sermon before you at Paul's.


Ireton. You will be a Cynick still, and rode and bite at your friends, as well
as your fetters; the first are as willing to be rid of you, as you are of the
other (and it is the general vogue, you will be rid of both together, else Dun
is abused.)


Titchburn. I am sorry I did not put that fellow out of that Employment, he
fell once into my handling, for not burning a fellow soundly, according to my
Order; but he found favor from me by an humble Petition, yet he looked so
disastrously upon me, when he put it into my hand, that I am more then
suspicious he will throroughly burn me, Bowels and all.


Ireton. My Lord, you burnt with your own hands the Kings Declaration from
Worcester, and the Hangman through your hot zeal lost his labor, in common
Justice, therefore it is requisite that he should have right done him; and that
he should make up his days work with some employment about your Lordship.


Titch. Bro. Ireton, I writ a godly book called A Cluster of Grapes, the Title
was Ominous, and serves the turn; for we Canaanites will like good fellows hang
together in bunches.


Ireton. Pardon me, I Will rather stay here till Autumn, and taste some of the
sour Grapes that grow upon these walls; by your favor, I am not so far in the
mire as your self, and I have got little else besides an ill name, and that
partly I had from my Brother the Devils Deputy in Ireland: Sir an ill name, is
by the Proverb, but half hanging.


Titchb Were not you a Colonel of Horse, were not you like to be Lord Major
twice, do you think to have these Honors for nothing? besides, did not you
cheat the State of the Customs, for the whole space of a month? Sir, you are
in the same Predicament as Pennington, Harvay, and my self: But suppose you had
not wit enough of your own to compass an Estate, yet Sir, you shall answer for
the Portion you had with your fist Wife, which was got by roasting of Brooms
for the Servants on Sunday nights.


Ireton. Nay, if you be thereabouts with Tom Prides Bears, and have the faculty
of railing (as Oliver had of swearing, when he was angry) its time to take you
down, or truss you up: what think you of Mr. Windust: Sir, were not you the
great overseer of the Alehouses, the Pot informer, the Bawds and Whores
Secretary, the great Caball of all the lewdness in the Town; for all your
starcht grave superciliousness? was not your Privado your familiar Mr. Bunbury,
a fine Companion for an Alderman? Have you not a perfect L^st of all the smug
young Auxiliaries in the Town, which folks stick not to say is high Treason
against the Female Sex; nay Sir, were not you President of the New Artillery
Company in Finsbury, and did you not continue so till they were so weary of
you, and your solemn impertinencies, that they formally disowned and abhorred
you?


Titchb. Good Sir, what think you (if you shun perchance the Gallows, as you
vainly promise your self, for you are a mischeivous fool none of Gods making)
of your riotous attempt upon the Liberties of the Fleet-Prison) did not you
pimp and peep to into Bawdy-houses in that Lane under pretense of your power of
Jurisdiction there? who pays for those Escapes there? in troth Sir, we both
lack such a venturous Lord Mayor as your self, for this Liberty of the Tower;
for then we would both run away together, though I cannot tell whether except
to Jamaica; for there is no other Harbor or Sanctuary for us in any part of the
world, our Faction and party are so known and detested.


Ireton. What a Curse and misfortune attends us, we cannot have a word or two,
but presently we must together by the ears, and rip up things like
Billingsgate, this very trick ruined the Rump and Lambert, and our whole Gang;
but yet now you are speaking of getting out hence, I can be friends with you
with all my heart, I suppose you know some private house where we may lie
secure till we have a fair wind, it is high time to consider of it, e're the
King come, for he will be strongly importuned for justice against us.


Tichb. But how shall we get out hence, now Morley is not Lieutenant of the
Tower; and for my own part, I can find no more Connivence or Favor, then if I
had never bore Authority here.


Ireton. My Lord, it is unlucky returning over the mud in the Moat, for then we
shall be caught again, what think you of a Disguise.


Titchb. Very well, but what, they say I am as notorious as Miles Corbet the
Jew, but tell me what Disguise.


Ireton. I know you are well-beloved of the Herb-women, in your New Market in
Paul's Churchyard; and therefore I would advise you to send thither for a bunch
of Carrots to make you a Beard, and on my life that will carry it.


Titchb. I thank you Sir, I can help you to such another Masquing business.


Ireton. What Is that?


Titchb. Mol Cutpurses Falling Band, Doublet and Petty-coats, in which she
looked like a man, that the guard will never take you for.


Ireton. Any way so we may be gone hence, do you good my Lord contrive, and
I Will do as you bid me; but what shall we do for the brace of Five hundred
pounds you and I sent Lambert?


Titchb. It is come to that pass, that you and I must be losers by the Public
Faith; they cry a riddance of us is fitter then acquittance, come Dun I am
ready.


FINIS.

