THE ROYAL STANDARD OF King Charles the II. PRESENTED To the Public view of
all true Subjects, Presbyterians, Independants, and others, both in the City of
LONDON, and the Respective Counties throughout the Kingdom of ENGLAND, and
Dominion of WALES. Written by the Lady Charlette, Countess of Bregy, that
Oracle of Wit and Eloquence, and most Illustrious Ornament of the Court of
France. And now Translated into English, for the pleasure and satisfaction of
all his Majesty's Subjects that understand not French.

LONDON, Printed for G. HORTON. 1660.

The Royal Standard OF King Charles the II. Drawn by the so much celebrated Pen
of the Countess of Bregy in France.
IN this Picture of the valiant CHARLES, you shall at once behold (together
with all the accomplishments of a Worthy King, and a most deserving Gentleman)
the representation of the greatest events that fortune can produce; since that
a Throne established by a long succession of Ancestors, and by a Government as
just as gentle, has been overthrown before our eyes without any other cause to
this great mutation, then the inconstancy of all humain things; which is such,
that ordinarily a new evil is still preferred before a wonted good; although by
the experience of all preceding Ages, the people might have learnt that they
can hope neither for repose not happiness, but under the Dominion of their
lawful Prince.

He whose Image I now am graving is of so high blood, that by right of
succession it renders him Master of three Kingdoms, of which one alone is
capable to make a great KING; and the Possession of the three has made so
powerful Princes, that usually they looked upon their neighbors only to make
alliances with them, and not to seek support from them. The riches of their
Country, the security and happiness they enjoy, leaving them nothing they
desire, and little to fear.

CHARLES was born in the midst of all this glory, and was a long time amorously
beheld as the hope of all his people, but a Constellation as powerful as cruel,
having raised a storm in the midst of all his calm, did so confound the order
of things, that their eyes being no longer able to suffer the brightness of the
Sun; we saw on a sudden a King without Subjects, and at last, (alas) Subjects
without a King. Let us there constrain our memory, and not suffer it to
represent unto us what it was that rendered CHARLES so early a Successor to
three great Kingdoms, but rather let us divert our thoughts by discoursing of
the merit that makes him worthy to Possess them.

And beginning with his Person, I must tell you it is like his virtues, Great
and Royal: and that there is found in his looks something so illustrious and so
awful, that without knowing who He is, it procures Him from all that see him
the respect of a King. His goodly Stature, his long black curled hair, his
manly and becoming motions, his Martial countenance, illustrated with those
equally charming and Commanding eyes, accompanied with such a graceful Majesty
as shines upon his brow, tender him the man in the World of the best Mind,
without being at all beholding to beauty for any of his advantages; and truly
after having seen him, it is no more to be counted as a thing desirable, since
that without it, it is possible to be so amiable and so accomplished as is this
Prince.

Whose mind is Wise, Judicious and capable of al that's great and good; whose
humor is gentle, civil and gallant; insomuch, that some can boast to have
often had a share in His disquiets. For His heart it is as Royal as His birth,
which renders Him Liberal, Valiant, and so truly Generous, that I know not
whether I ought more to admire His Justice, Gratitude and Munificence toward
His suffering friends, or His Kingly Clemency, Confidence and Bounty toward
His reconciled Enemies.

The frequent exposal of His life to the dangers He has past, do sufficiently
convince that he loves it less then glory, and has hitherto employed it only
to render Himself now worthy to Compel fortune to restore unto Him His
Kingdoms, of which she had for so many years usurped the Revenge with so much
shame unto her self, and so much Calamity to the people, that found themselves
subject to all the Changes of her Caprices.

Who all this time had been only constant in suffering, nothing to fall out
favorable for CHARLES, whilst He seems to have been unfortunate to no other
end, but that He might become more Worthy to Command; since that turning His
exile to His advantage, he has learnt out of the different politics of his
allies all that might one day conduce to make Him obeyed through esteem, and
served through love and inclination. How successefully he has labored to
enrich Himself with all the qualities that ought to accompany a Great Prince,
is evident by the Zeal is now seen in his Subjects to return to His obedience,
who if he were not their King by Birth he should be by Election.

Heaven would not suffer that second Causes should have any share in this
Prodigious revolution, to the end that CHARLES might know it was only the hand
of God that Crowned Him; since He has made him. Conquer without Arms, and in
an instant given him the hearts of all his Subjects, making him find one so
faithful amongst them as that illustrious Person, who has redeemed the honor
of his Nation, and made himself an example to the world, that behold him for
ever Crowned by the hands of glory, in a manner more rate and more worthy of
envy then are the Diadems of Kings; for having carried unto His, the auguste
Present of three Crowns and Scepters that heaven-sends back unto Him; which
will find in CHARLES an arm so Worthy to bear that glorious weight, that
henceforth the Principal employments of renown shall be to travel through all
the Empires of the Earth, and inform them of the glorious Reign of CHARLES, and
the great felicity of his people: Proclaiming to all the Universe, that never
Throne was more Worthily filled then that in which CHARLES the second is
seated, and whereof His generous and invincible Brothers are become the
Defenders.

An Appendix to the Standard-Royall.
Having made a serious review of the precedent Rural lines of this most worthy
Countess, the Illustrious Ornament of the Court of France, give me leave, in
the next place, to make a discovery of the obsequious ways, of some of the
grand impostors, and most Prodigious Oppressors that ever any age of the world
produced; who made Reformation their pretense, to gratify their own Avarice,
introduced themselves, and involved the people into a far more then Babylonish
Tyranny, imposing upon the Church and State, beyond all impudence or example.
And if we look upon a party of the Scottish Nation, what there sordid actions
produced, by deceiving their Brethren, selling their King, betraying his Son,
and by all their perfidie; but a slavery more then Egyptian, and an infamy as
unparalled, as their treason and ingratitude.

Look nerer home on those whom they had engaged amongst us here, and tell me if
there be a Person of them left, that can show me his prize, unless it be that
of his Sacriledg, which he, or his Nephews must certainly vomit up again: What
is become of this ignorant and furious zeal, this pretense of an universal
perfection in the Religious and the Secular, after all that blood and Treasure,
Rapine and Injustice, which has been exhausted, and perpetuated by these sons
of Thunder? Where is the King, whom they swear to make so glorious, but meant
it in his Martyrdom? Where is the Classis, and the Assembly, the Lay-elder;
all that gear of Scottish discipline, and the fine new Trinkets of Reformation?
Were not all these raken out of their hand, while now they were in the height
of their pride and triumph? And their dull General made to serve the execution
of their Sovereign, and then to be turned of himself as a property no more of
use to their designs? Their riches, and their strength in which they trusted,
and the Parliament which they even idolized, in sum, the prey they had
contended for at the expense of so much sin and damnation, seized upon by those
very instruments, which they had raised to serve their insatiable avarice, and
prodigious disloyalty. For so it pleased God to chastise their implacable
persecution of an excellent Prince, with a slavery under such a Tyrant, as not
being contented to butcher even some upon the Scaffold, sold diverse of them for
slaves, and others he exild into cruel banishment, without pretense of Law, or
the least commiseration; that those who before had no mercy on others, might
find none themselves; till upon some hope of their Repentance, and future
moderation, it pleased God to put his hook into the nostrils of that proud
Leviathan, and send him to his place, after he had thus mortified the fury of
the Presbyterians. For unless God himself should utter his voice from Heaven,
yea, and that a mighty voice, can there any thing in the world be more evident,
then his indignation at those wretches and bare fact Impostors, who, one after
another, usurped upon us, taking them off at the very point of aspiring, and
praecipitating the glory and ambition of these men, before those that were, but
now, their adoarers, and that had prostituted their consciences to serve their
lusts? To call him the Moses, the Man of God, the Joshua, the Savior of
Israel; and after all this, to treat the Thing his son with addresses no less
then blasphemous, whose Father (as themselves confess to be the most infamous
Hypocrite and prossegate Atheist of all the Usurpers that ever any age
produced) had made them his Vassalls, and would have intaild them so to his
posterity for ever?

But behold the scean is again changed, not by the Royal party, the Common
Enemy, or a foreign power; but by the despicable Rumpe of a Parliament, which
that Mountebank had formerly served himself of, and had raised him to that
pitch, and investiture: But see withal, how soon these triflers and puppets of
policy are blown away, with all their pack of modells and childish Chimaeras.

For the rest, I despise to blot paper with a recital of those wretched
Intirludes, Farces and Fantasms, which appeared in the several intervalls;
because they were nothing but the effects of an extreme gyddiness, and
unparellel'd levity. Yet these were those various despensations and providence
in their journey to that holy land of purchases and profits, to which they have
from time to time appeald for the justification of their proceedings, whilst
they were, indeed, no other then the manifest Judgments of God upon their
rebellion and their ambition: I say nothing of their hypocritical fasts, and
pretended numiliations, previous to the succeeding plots, and suppositions
Revelations, that the godly might fall into the hands of your Captains, because
they were bugbears, and became ridiculous even to the common people.

FINIS.

