Brevis Demonstratio. THE TRUTH AND EXCELLENCY OF Christian Religion
DEMONSTRATED AGAINST Jews, Mahometans, and Heathens. PUBLISHED At the desire of
some Learned men, and for the satisfaction of all Rational Persons in ENGLAND.

LONDON, Printed for William Crook, at the Three Bibles on Fleet-Bridge
M.DC.LXV.

THE Advertisement.
THis small Tract, is extant in Latin, under the Title of Brevis Demonstratio
Religionis Christianae veritatis, and subjoined to Brenius his Notes, on the
Old and New Testaments. The Author's Name, is not there so much as intimated,
neither has it yet, in any degree of certainty, arrived at these parts. The
Translation of it, was at first undertaken, with a single aim, at the Advantage
of English-Readers, and is now set out, not without the Encouragement and
Recommendation of such, as may be judged, to understand well, the concerns of
Christian Religion, and the necessities of the Professors of it. Whether or no,
this Concise Piece, considered in its strength of Arguments, Perspicuity of
Style, Evidence of Reason, Exactness of Method, and Comprehensiveness of
Matter, does, in a little compass, plead its own Cause, and implead opposite
pretenses, more effectually and to better purposes, than some of the same
complexion with itself, have done, is freely left, to the Censure and
dijudication of those that have read them, and shall charge their judgments to
a concurrence, in the perusal of this. To make this Translation correspondent,
in every point, with the Original, the subsequent Passages and words, ought to
be inserted, according to these References;

Page 3. line 28. * in external and superstitious rites, neither

P. 7. l. 32. * and did scarcely contain the first lineaments of perfect
virtue, so that even in heathen Philosophers, are found more perfect Precepts,
concerning some virtues ('specially those that belong to the contempt of
worldly things, Temperance, and Patience) than in Moses: whence also we read,
that some holy men of that Religion, led lives more excellent than those
Precepts; Moses pray's for his Enemies, Exodus xxxii. Numb. xi. and elsewhere
often; which yet was not commanded in his law. David also, is an Example of
greater Meekness than was prescribed in the law, ii. Sam. xvi. and xvii.

Page 15. l. 21. Divine man. Page 18. l. 26. Divine man.
The unfaithfulness and confidence of the Printer, have occasioned these ERRATA.
PAge 2. line 18. read Comparatively, l. ult. Alcoran. p. 3. l 22. a blessed,
l. 23. an heavenly. p. 4. l. 22. accommodated. l. 30 of so great. p. 5. l. 20.
for But r. Now. l. 25. f. seriously r. servilely. p. 6. l. 18. f. induced r.
embraced. p. 7. l. 12. Abyssines. l. 13. Spain; p. 8. l. 14. f. as r. or. l.
22. (2.) p. 9. l. 9 dele f. l. 14. (3.) p. 10. l. 13. Babylonish. p. 11. l. 10.
intrinsecal. l. 20. f. moderate r. modern. p. 12. l. 25. Alcoran. p. 14. l. 5.
accommodate. l. 18. calm. l. 21. and taste. l. ult. XIV. p. 15. l. 16. a
Truth. r. as can be seen in this. Which. p. 16. l. 4. f. was r. were. p. 17. l.
5. Syria-Palestine, l. 19. Archives. p. 18. l. 18. r. never at all deny. p. 19.
l. 10. Oral. l. 12. Alcoran. p. 20. l. 21. an holy. p. 22. l. 9. writings. l.
21. f. Religion r. Believing. p. 25. l. 23. apparelled. l. 28. makes. p. 27. l.
6. nothing else. l. 24. worship. p. 28. l. 28. Precepts delivered by the most
excellent Philosophers with the Precepts contained. p. 30. l. 1. f. six r.
four. l. 20. f. and r. or. l. 27. f. had r. has. p. 31. l. 13. dele the. l.
21. Religion, l. 23. Morney, l. 25. Savanarola.

Brevis Demonstratio; Or, a brief DEMONSTRATION OF THE TRUTH OF Christian
Religion.
I. FOr the demonstration of the fundamentals of Christian Religion, it is
necessary to inquire, which is that Religion revealed by God, wherein the most
perfect way of worshipping God is contained? Here now all the Religions that
are or ever have been in the world, are to be taken and examined by the Rule of
right reason; and out of them all that is to be acknowledged genuine and truly
divine, which prescribes that manner of serving God, which is most perfect and
most agreeable to the Principles of sound Reason. But least any should think it
too hard a task, to examine all the sorts of Religions in the world, or be
affrighted with the vast difficulty of Inquiry, among so many differences of
Opinions concerning God and his Worship, we will abridge this toil. For the so
diverse kinds of Religion may be reduced to four Heads or Ranks: For whatever
Religion either was or is, is either Heathenish or Jewish, or Christian or
Mohammedan. Now then out of all these we will demonstrate, that the Christian
Religion is the truest, and that by two Arguments.

II. The first is taken from the highest perfection of this Religion, which
argues most strongly that it was not devised by the wit of man, but that it
proceeded from God out of Heaven. For either all Religion is to be rejected,
and God and his Providence wholly to be denied, (which we shall prove cannot be
done without folly, yea madness) or it must needs be; that this Religion (which
is so perfect in all respects, that nothing is wanting to it, which is required
to the best way of worshipping God) is true, and divinely delivered and
revealed. For whether you consider it comparitively or absolutely, you shall
find it to be most perfect. For it not only very far excells in perfection,
all the Religions, which any where are or have been in the world, but also it
is impossible, that another more perfect according to right reason, could be
imagined or invented.

III. Both which that they may appear, as well its Nature as Adjuncts, or some
of its most divine Effects, are briefly to be looked into. But we ought not to
judge of its nature from elsewhere, then from those Books which are confessed
by all the Professors of this Religion, although differing among themselves, to
contain Christian Religion. For as a Judgment ought to to be made of the
Religion of the Gentiles out of the Books of the Heathen; of the Mohammedan, out
of the Books of the Alcaron; of the Jewish Religion out of the Books of Moses;
so it is fit to judge of Christian Religion out of those Books, which all
Christians believe and confess, to have been written by the first Authors of
this Religion. Which Books shall thereby be proved to be of divine and
undeniable Authority, when it is proved that in them is contained a description
of a most perfect and most divine Religion.

IV. The nature of Christian Religion is to be considered either in respect of
Parts, or in respect of Qualities; its parts are promises and precepts. What
can be more sublime and perfect, then the promises of Christian Religion? In
this life a few things truly belonging to the body, and necessary for
sustenance are promised, that the Christian Religion might be by so much the
more perfect: But in the mean time there is promised that which exceeds all
earthly Goods, even the highest and paternal favor of God, offering pardon to
them that repent of all their past sins, and that they might not sin for time
to come, the gift of the Holy Spirit (a necessary help to the performance of
the duties of Piety) and also a peculiar Guard of Angels. But after Death there
is promised a return to Life, blessed Immortality, a heavenly Kingdom in
conjunction with a most pleasant Aspect of the supreme Deity, and the
fellowship of blessed Spirits. The Precepts also are suitable to so sublime
Promises. There is nothing wanting in them to the highest sanctity; forasmuch
as Christian Piety consists not * in bodily washing, but in true renovation of
mind, in subduing of the flesh and affections, in an unconquerable patience
under evils, in a constant meekness, in a perfect abstinence from hurting
others, in a cheerful readiness to help them, in a continual celebration of
the Name of God, and studious exercise of fervent Prayer, in a diligent
regulating of all actions, words and thoughts, in a full faith and trust in
God, in a most ardent desire of celestial Immortality and serious meditation of
divine things, in a true contempt of the World, its Riches, Honors and
Pleasures, and if there be any thing else, which Reason dictates to be joined
with Virtue.

V. Neither may any man say that the precepts of Virtue would have been more
perfect, if we had been enjoined perpetual abstinence from Marriage, as also
from Meat and Drink, or if there had been no remission of sins, no reward
proposed to them that do well, that so men might be drawn by the love of Virtue
alone, not hope of reward. For who sees not that such things can have no place
in men, as are above their strength and nature? It is therefore great
imprudence to require of them so great perfection. In which matter the Heathen
Philososophers extremely doted, who dreamed of I know not what empty Notions of
Virtue, as if conversing in Plato's Commonwealth, they had had a purpose to
form the life of celestial Persons, not the manners of mortal and frail men.
The perfection of precepts is to be accomodated to the model of the strength
and nature of those to whom they are prescribed. So sound Reason, so Prudence
injoynes. For who would praise him, that should impose on a Child of three
years old, a Burden that can scarce be born by a strong man of full age. In
this very thing therefore the high perfection and wisdom of Christian Religion
is manifest, that it delivers most divine precepts, and prescribes a Doctrine
of great piety, as greater cannot agree to mortal men; yet nevertheless it does
not only not exceed humane strength, but also is not hard to be performed, as
we shall show by and by.

VI. We shall now speak of the qualities of Christian Religion, which appertain
to the perfection of its nature, they are these:

1. That it is universal, not peculiar to one Nation only, but common to all
men of all Kindreds, Nations, Ages, Conditions and Sexes.

2. That it is spiritual both in its precepts and promises, in those requiring
internal purity of mind, not external cleansing of the body; and in these
propounding not carnal but spiritual benefits.

3. That it is easy, because it invites men to piety by a most ample and
inestimable reward; for the greatness of the reward lessens and takes away all
the difficulty of the labor. Again, because it many ways assists humane
imbecility, in the course of virtue, by the holy Spirit, inasmuch as thereby
men's minds are confirmed in the Truth, cleared in doubts, encouraged in
dangers, and filled with a sure hope of eternal Life. Thirdly, because it
prescribes nothing but what is exactly consonant to reason: but those things
are more easily done, the equity whereof the Understanding sees, and the reason
of which we perceive; then those things, which why they are to be done, we know
not. That is the part of ingenuous men, or (as I may so say) of Sons, who are
not ignorant of what the Father does; This of Servants, who are seriously
treated, and to whom is given no reason of designs, but are led by the mere
Authority of the Commander. That makes that what is commanded be done willingly
and cheerfully; this unwillingly and by constraint.

VII. Let us now come to the Adjuncts or Effects of Christian Religion, and
they are discerned in the altogether divine and wonderful propagation of it,
in which these things following are to be noted.

1. That many thousands of men of all sorts, forsaking their Countrey-Religion,
to which they were accustomed from their youth, embraced it in great numbers.

2. That very suddenly, that is, in the space of thirty years, or thereabouts,
as appears by Histories, it spread it self far and near, not only in Judea,
and all Asia, yea through the whole Roman Empire, but beyond it also, it
sounded in the ears of Parthians and Indians.

3. That it extirpated Paganism, so that the Religion of Christ increasing,
that came to nothing, neither is there any memory of it now extant, save in
Books only.

4. That being not supported by Arms and worldly power it increased so much,
and for near three hundred years, before the Emperor Constantine induced it,
it was promoted by the means only of private men.

5. That by mean, contemptible, simple men and Idiots it was first delivered
and divulged.

6. That all the wise and mighty of this world were against it; yet
notwithstanding, neither by the craft of the Jews, nor power of the Roman
Caesar's, (whereof ten are reckoned chief Persecutors of this Religion) nor yet
of other Heathens could it be suppressed.

7. That innumerable companies of its Professors by no, though never so cruel
pains and torments, no not by any the most ignominious death, suffered
themselves to be affrighted from it.

8. That it has nothing in it grateful to the flesh, it loses not the reins
to licentiousness, it opens not the way to pleasures nor honors, it allures
not men by the commodities of this life, but rather deprives them of them,
least any should think that the so prosperous success of its propagation were
to be ascribed to a Doctrine, flattering and pleasing the lusts of men.

9. That it has continued now a thousand six hundred sixty years and upward,
without any interruption.

10. That at this day it is so largely spread, that it has filled almost the
whole world; for it possesses not only all Europe, but also Macedonia,
Thracia, and the Isles of the Aegean Sea are filled with it, and both under the
Turk and Tartar live Christians innumerable; in Africa, also in the Kingdom
of the Abissines, Congo and Dangali; also in Peruvia and New Spain in Goa, and
the Islands unto which the Dutch and Spaniards have Commerce, touching which
Geographers may be consulted.

Lastly, They are not wanting in America, as testifies Acosta, and others,
that have written of the American Affairs. Certainly all these things are an
Argument that God takes care of this Religion, and that by his providence it
was upheld and propagated.

VIII. These things being considered, it is easy to perceive that other
Religions are not to be compared with this. For as to the Jewish, Christian
Religion indeed gives testimony to it, that it also had God for its Author;
but (1) its great imperfection shows it was given but for a time only; for
whether you consider the promises, they according to the letter did contain
only temporal and worldly things, in which surely the chiefest Good could not
consist; and no man can deny but God might give better then they; or whether
you consider the precepts they for the most part were in prescribing
Ceremonies, * or whether you consider the latitude and extent, it was
restrained to one Nation only, neither did God take course that it should be
preached to other Nations; yea, its nature was such, that it could not concern
other Nations, which appears even from the sacrifices, which ought not to be
offered but in Palestine, and by the Tribe of Levi: whence it is, that even at
this day the Jews being banished from their Native Country abstain from
sacrificing. So neither could the Laws concerning First Fruits, Tithes, and
Festival Assemblies, Exodus 34.26. Deuteronomy. 26.23. also 12.5, 6.16.16. be observed
by all Nations. Either therefore other Nations ought never to worship God, and
consequently God had in vain given to the greatest part of men the use of
reason and will, which are the instruments of Religion, which to say is absurd:
as of necessity another Religion was to be delivered by God, which should
concern all the men in the world. For although it was so for a time, that the
other Nations besides the Jews, were destitute of Divine Revelation, and that
by the certain counsel of God, namely, because of the voluntary defection of
those Nations from God to idolatry and impiety, yet it is absurd to hold that
they were so rejected of God for ever.

2. That it was to be abrogated, the prophesies which are extant in their
prophetic Books do show: among which that place in Jeremy, 31.31. is eminent,
where God promises to make a New Covenant with his people, different from that
of Moses. Also Dan. 9.24. where the Coming of the Messiah, the desolation of
the City Jerusalem, the destruction of the Temple, and the abolition of
Sacrifices is foretold. It was granted to Aaron's posterity alone to offer
Sacrifice, and that in the Country of their Fathers: but in Psalm. 110. there
is promifed a Priest, not according to the order of Aaron, but according to the
order of Melchisedeck, that is, such an one as should have neither Predecessor
nor Successor in the Priesthood. It is foretold in Isaiah 19.19. Chron. 66.18.
to the end, Mal. 1.11. that the Gentiles also should be worshippers of God, and
offer Sacrifices to him, and be his Priests. The Jews in the Law were
commanded to keep Festivals; but now Isa. 1.11. and so forward, God says, That
he disdained as their Sacrifices, so also their appointed Times and
Feast-dayes, and that he was weary to bear them; and Isa. 66.23. it is
foretold, That if it should come to pass, that the Worship of God should be
perpetual, and not performed on certain days only, but every day; to wit,
from Sabbath to Sabbath, and from New Moon to New Moon.

3. That the Jewish Religion is indeed abrogated, and that those prophesies are
fulfilled, the thing it self shows. For that place in which God had fixed the
Seat of his public Worship is taken away, and quite overthrown, together with
the Temple, its Ornaments and Sacred Vessels: so that the Temple could never be
restored, although Julian attempted it, as Ammianus Marcellinus a Heathen
Writer testifies, lib. 23. But he says that he was hindered by fearful balls
of fire, which did spring out of the foundations, and consumed men. The
Priesthoods and Rites of Sacrifices instituted by God, belonging to Divine
Worship, and the distinction of Tribes was taken away, so that a great part of
the Mosaical Laws lie now neglected by the Jews, and can by no means be kept.
The very people of the Jews so much heretofore beloved of God for their
Ancestors, now for more then a thousand six hundred years dispersed and
banished out of their Country, are become the laughing stock, the dregs and
talk of all other people and Nations, which is against the promises of the
Covenant, in which earthly happiness was proposed to the Jews, Deuteronomy. 28. God
indeed threatens them even with banishment and all kinds of adversity, if they
should transgress: but to them that should from their hearts repent; and return
to obedience, he promises that he will show mercy to them, and bring them back
from the utmost corners of the world to their Country again, Deuteronomy. 30. Nehem.
1.8, 9. But Isa. 54.7, etc. God says that he will be angry with his people but
a little while, but now after so great an interval of time there is as yet no
hope of a better condition, and return into their Country: from that time
there has not been any Prophet among them, there is none sent by God to comfort
them, which yet was done heretofore in the Babilonish Captivity, which though
it was most heavy, yet it lasted only seventy years.

IX. Neither ought it to move any one that it was promised that that Old
Covenant should be perpetual and everlasting. For the word everlasting or
perpetual is not always taken for an infinite duration, but for a very long
time, which is usual as well in common speech as in Holy Writ. So it is said
that the Land of Canaan should be an everlasting possession to the seed of
Abraham, Genesis 17.8. out of which nevertheless they were ejected: in like manner
that the sacrifice should be perpetual, Lev. 6.20. which notwithstanding is now
ceased among the Jews. It is said Exodus 21.6. that the Servant should serve his
Master for ever. The divine Prophet David says, that he would praise God for
ever, that is, all the days of his life, Psalm. 52.9. It is said that Samuel
should abide in the Temple for ever, 1 Samuel 1.22. The hills also are said to be
everlasting, Genesis 49.26. The earth to abide for ever, Eccles. 1.4. By that
manner of speech therefore are distinguished the Laws that were to endure as
long as the Jewish Religion should last, from those which were constituted for
a certain time, such were some of those that were prescribed to the Jews in the
Wilderness, Exodus 35.26, 27. Neither is it to be thought that God did so bind
himself by those words that he should not change any thing, as to intimate,
that he would not have any thing changed by men: For God made Laws not to
himself, but to men. He has always power of abrogating Laws that have been
once made, especially those that are not founded in intrinsical honesty, but
such as are of a middle and indifferent nature, and depend upon the mere will
of the Commander, (such are all Ceremonial Laws) but his Creatures cannot do so.

X. Hitherto we have showed out of the Mosaical and and Prophetic Books, how
imperfect the Jewish Religion is. But you will acknowledge the same to be more
imperfect, and confess it to be no ways agreeable to reason, if you look into
the Talmudick Books (which are stuffed with vain Tradition and old Wives
Fables) and upon the various superstitions of the moderate Jews. You shall find
their God weeping for ruined Jerusalem, and reading daily in the Law, besides
other most absurd things concerning Behemoth and Leviathan.

XI. If the Jewish Religion which had God for its Author, gives place to the
Christian, much more the Mohammedan and Heathenish. The Mohammedan indeed is
later then the Christian, and it cannot deny that Christ the Author of it, was
a divine man. Now that the Mohammedan Religion is false, appears chiefly from
these reasons:

1. Because it is contrary to the Christian Religion, which we have showed to
be true and given by God, and has taken away very many of its Laws; for
whatsoever is contrary to Truth is false.

2. Because instead of Christ's precepts it has substituted baser Laws; and it
is far more imperfect then the Christian, as well in its promises as precepts.
For it promises nothing but carnal things, and has recalled Circumcision,
which together with other Ceremonies had been abrogated by Christ. But it is no
ways credible, that God after so perfect a Religion as the Christian is, would
propose to the World a more imperfect one, seeing it does not become the most
wise God to descend from high to low things, but rather go on from imperfection
to perfection.

3. Because it has been established and propagated by Arms and carnal force,
and is even still preserved by the same.

4. Because in matters of Faith it forbids inquiry after Truth, and takes away
all, yea a modest liberty of disputing, and also keeps the people from reading
the Books which it accounts sacred, whereby it makes it self forthwith
suspected, as if it were not good wares, which is forbid to be viewed and
searched.

5. Because Mahomet the Author of it was a most profane man; for he was a long
time a Ravisher, and always given to Women: Hence it is that in his Alcaron,
many obscene and foul things are read. But that God by an unclean man would
institute any holy Religion, is by no means agreeable to reason.

XII. The Heathen Religion remains, which truly does not deserve to be brought
into comparison with the Christian, so manifest is its falsity and turpitude
even from these reasons:

1. Because it had no promises nor precepts from God: of which two things true
Religion does consist.

2. Because it believed not one most High God, but divided the Government of
the World amongst many gods, not subordinate one to another.

3. Because it affirmed concerning its gods, things most filthy and abhorrent
from all honesty, describing their Lusts, Quarrels, Thefts, and I know not what
wickednesses.

4. Because it was not ashamed to worship things inanimate, and Brutes far
inferior in dignity to men.

5. Because it was burdened with Rites that were partly ridiculous and
foolish, partly obscene and impure, partly horrid and cruel: All which things
every one does easily perceive are contrary to sound reason. But in Christian
Religion you shall find no such thing, which also by its coming in wholly
blotted out and entinguished that Heathenish Religion, as we have before
hinted. If any one would show us beside this old one, some other Paganish
Religion in the World at this day, its falsity also would forthwith appear, if
it were compared with the Christian. For rectum est index sui and obliqui,
Truth shows both it self and falsehood.

XIII. Thus we have demonstrated that Christian Religion considered both
absolutely and in it self, and also compared with all other Religions is most
perfect. Now if you demand how it came to pass, that God did not presently in
the first Ages of the World institute it among men, there are more then one
reason at hand.

1. Because men were at the beginning not capable of so great perfection. For
mankind had after a sort its Infancy, Childhood, and Youth, which needed as it
were the first Elements of Religion, that so it might by little and little be
prepared for higher things, and brought to perfection. Neither in Arts did men
forthwith come, or were as it were at one leap brought to the highest
perfection; but humane industry did from rude beginnings, as it were by steps,
ascend and aspire to it. It became therefore a prudent Lawgiver to accomodate
himself to the capacity of those that were to be instructed, and not so much to
consider his own wisdom, as the dullness of those that were to be taught. So
are Parents and Masters wont to proceed prudently in the instructing of their
Children and Scholars. Therefore it became also the most wise God in delivering
precepts of Religion, to proceed by little and little from the more imperfect
ones to those that were more perfect.

2. Because by this deferring of the perfect Religion unto more adult times,
God would excite in the minds of men a greater alacrity to entertain it. For
long fasting is the best Sauce for meat most sweet in it self, and after long
Storms and Tempests the smiling Calms is more grateful. God would therefore
that men should first be thoroughly sensible of their most miserable condition
without hope of immortality, taste all the evils of mortality, that afterward
when the promise of eternal felicity had shined forth from Heaven, all men
every where might by so much the more eagerly fly together to so joyful a
message, and should embrace it with both their Arms. Neither indeed do Mortals
now behave themselves becoming enough so great a good: What think you would
have been done, if presently from the beginning of the World the way to Heaven
had lain open to mankind; and so men might think that the right of the heavenly
Inheritance was as it were a thing natural to them, and offered as their due?

The Truth of the Christian Religion being demonstrated from its great
perfection, we shall now bring another Argument which even alone would be
sufficient to prove the matter in hand: yea, which most evidently demonstrates
not only the Truth of Christian Religion, but also both the Existence and
Providence of God against impious Atheists. So that all that has hitherto been
spoken, may hence take very much strength and weight. And it is drawn from
History and Chronology; for either no History is true, and credit is to be
denied to all things done, whether written or spoken, and the same are to be
accounted mere Fables and Fictions; or if this be absurd, all must confess,
that that which is delivered in Historical Monuments touching Christian
Religion revealed by God is true; for there can be no History shown, in which
are to be found, I will not say more, but as many Arguments, Testimonies, and
Marks of Truth, which that it may appear, there are two things in all to be
proved by us.

1. That sometimes there was in the world such an one as Christ Jesus, who is
said to be the Author of this Religion.

2. That this Jesus was a Divine Person, and the true Messiah or Savior of the
world, sent by God to institute this Religion. When both these are proved,
there will remain no doubt, not only of Christian Religion, that it is most
true and to be received by all, but also of God, that he is, and that he takes
care of Mankind.

XV. The former can be proved without much ado, yea, it scarce needs proof. For
who can doubt that Christ was upon the earth, when he sees the Religion, which
has its name from him, to be extant even at this very day? for this is all one
as if one should doubt whether Mahomet the Author of the Mohammedan Religion,
which he knows to be extant, was ever in being? or when he hears Aristotle's
Doctrine taught in the Schools, whether Aristotle ever was? or when he reads
the Histories of what was done by the Romans, Greeks, and Macedonians should
doubt whether there ever was either those Nations, or the Writers of those
things? But if any be either so stupid or ignorant of those things that are
done in the world, he shall be convinced by the Testimony of the whole world.
For,

1. Thousands of Christians are witnesses, which we have showed above, to have
filled almost all the corners of the Earth.

2. The very bitterest enemies of Christian Religion are witnesses. For both
the Mahometans and all the Jews do testify it, among those in the Alcoran,
among these in the Thalmudick Books many things are read concerning Christ.
Lastly, the most famous Writers of the Heathens have made mention of him, among
others Tacitus, Suetonius, Pliny junior, Aelias Pampridius, Aelias Spartianus,
Flavius Vepiscus, Eutropius, Ammianus Marcellinus; the words of some of whom
shall be produced afterward. From the same does appear both the place and time,
when and where he lived, by whom he was put to death, to wit, in the Reign of
Tiberius, and by the Governor Pontius Pilate, also that he rose up in Judea:
for Tacitus calls Judea the source of this evil, meaning Christian Religion;
some of the ancient Christians in their time, that is, well nigh two Ages after
the Birth of Christ, testify, That the Acts of Pilate were extant, and kept in
the Roman Archives, in which all things done in Judea by and with Christ, were
written to Tiberius the Emperor, and the Roman Senate by Pilate, then
President there. And that these do not testify this falsely, appears from
hence, That writing Apologies for the Christistians to the Roman Caesar's, they
so confidently appealed to those Acts and public Records. These are the words
of Tertullian in his Apologetick: Tiberius therefore, in whose time the Chrian
Name came into the world, after he understood out of Syria, Palestine, that
which there had manifested the Truth of his (Christ) Divinity, proposed it to
the Senate with the Prerogative of his Suffrage; the Senate, because they did
not approve, rejected it; Caesar persisted in his opinion, threatening danger to
the Accusers of Christians. Consult your Commentaries, there ye shall find,
that Nero did first rage with the Imperial sword against this Sect, then
chiefly springing up at Rome. It is most remarkable, that in the same
Apologetick he cites out of the same Acts of Pilate, a Testimony concerning the
darkness that miraculously happened about the Passion of Christ at Midday. In
the same moment (says he) the Day was darkened, even when the Sun was at the
highest: verily they also that knew not it had relation to Christ, thought it
was an Eclipse: and yet ye have this disaster of the world recorded in your
Archives, Justin Martyr also in his Apology to Antoninus Plus writes in these
words; That these things were so done, ye may know out of the Acts that were
written under Pilate. And again, And who has done these things ye may know out
of those Records that were written under Pilate. With what face I pray could
they so grossly lie before the Emperors? How easily might they be detected and
convicted of falsehood? How dear would this lie have cost them, if either there
were no such Acts, or that those things they affirmed of Christ were not extant
in them? The same Authors, that they might show that Christ was born in the
time of the general Tax under Augustus, as it is set down in the Gospel
according to Luke, appealed to the Tax-rolls, and referred the Gentiles to
them, in which the description of that Tax was as yet in that time extant, and
there was read the Name of Jesus born of Mary in Bethlehem. For thus says
Tertullian lib. 6. against Marcion. Lastly, concerning the Tax [or Enrolling]
of Augustus, which the Roman Archives keep as a most faithful witness of our
Lords Nativity: And afterward. But it is also manifest that the Tax [or
Enrolling] under Augustus, was made at this time in Judea by Sentius
Saturninus, in which they might find out his Parentage. And in the Book against
the Jews: For he was of the Country of Bethlehem, and of the House of David,
as by the Romans, Mary, of whom is born Christ, was reckoned in the Tax-rell.
Chrysostom later then Tertullian affirms, That as yet in his time those Rolls
and the Name of Jesus in them were extant. There were also many of the Heathens
who wrote against Christian Religion, such were Celsus, Porphyrius, Julian: but
they, by reason of the clear evidence of the thing, did never deny but that
there was such an one as Christ. But in a matter most evident, what needs much
proof, especially seeing that from the later particular which we have
undertaken to prove, the former also will be manifest, and necessarily follow?
therefore omitting this, we will now proceed with Gods assistance to the proof
of that.

XVI. As to the later then, namely, that Jesus was a Divine Person, and sent
from God, that will without doubt be sufficiently proved, when we shall have
proved that this Jesus was famous for stupendous miracles, led a most holy
life, and underwent most direful torments, and an ignominious death upon the
Cross for the cause of his Religion; and afterward the third day was raised by
God from the dead, and taken up into Heaven, and from thence he shed forth upon
the Disciples plentifully of the holy Spirit, and sent them to teach all
Nations his Doctrine.

XVII. Now this is proved by three reasons. The first is, That there are
undoubted witnesses of this matter, and such whose Testimony cannot but be
true; but those witnesses are,

1. As to his death and miracles, the very mortal enemies of Christian
Religion, whose Testimony surely in this case is free from all suspicion of
fraud. And they are first the Jews, from whose both or all Confession and
Talmudick Writings every one may know it; Secondly, The Mahometans in the
Alcaron; Thirdly, the Heathens, of whom are Celsus and Julian, who although
they detracted much from Christ in the Writings which they set out against
Christians, yet they did not deny his cruel death and miracles; which appears
from their resutation by Origin and Cyril.

2. The witnesses of all those things, which we have related concerning Christ,
were his Disciples, who lived in that Age, and especially his twelve Apostles,
to whom was added also a thirteenth, who of a most fierce enemy became a
Disciple of Christ, being called from Heaven to give witness to him. Neither
matters it, that his Disciples only bear witness of his Resurrection and
Exaltation; for such things as these no one but his Disciples could witness.
For who could see Christ raised again, and reigning in Heaven, and not become
his Disciple? It suffices that the Testimony of those Disciples is beyond all
exception.

XVIII. But that their Testimony was such is proved,

1. Because they confirmed their Testimony by most Divine Miracles, in healing
Diseases incurable by humane Art, in raising the Dead, and casting out Devils;
but that they did these things will by and by appear.

2. Because it is certain that those witnesses could neither be deceived, nor
would deceive. That they could not be deceived is manifest, 1. Because they
were not only Ear but Eyewitnesses. 2. Because they witnessed a thing, not
once only seen, but approved by frequent and often repeated Experiments for
forty days together, and not looked upon with the eyes only, but handled also
with the hands. 3. Because there was not only one witness, but besides five
hundred together, that at one and the same time saw Christ after he was risen,
and unto whom Paul appealeth, 1 Cor. 15.6. (which liars are not wont to do)
there were thirteen chief witnesses in a special manner chosen and appointed to
testify this very thing. So many persons could not possibly be deceived in
things exposed to their senses. It remains to be proved that they would not
deceive, which is hence manifest:

1. Because they were honest men, and of holy and unblameable life: so that
they were never accused, much less convicted of any real crime, no not by their
most malicious enemies, among whom they conversed.

2. Because this Profession cost them the greatest sufferings and perils,
neither did they gain by this way either riches, or honor, or glory; but on
the contrary incurred the bitterest hatred of the whole world, and drew upon
themselves an Heap and Pile of most grievous Afflictions, which by a bare
denial of this thing, they might have avoided. Well says Ovid;

-- Cum sint praemia falsi
Nulla, ratam debet testis habere fidem:
When falsehood reward has none,
That witness is a faithful one.
How much more ought the credit of that witness to be held Authentic, when the
Testimony has not only no reward, but moreover draws along with it perils,
scourgings, banishments, contumelies, imprisonments, and all manner of most
terrible deaths? If they had been such perverse men, as that they would lie on
set purpose, certainly they would not have feigned with so great damage to
themselves a thing so odious and hateful, and would rather curry favor with
the Nobles and People of the Jews, whom they knew to hate Christ with a perfect
hatred, then by a false and so odious an affirmation, to have provoked and
stirred up their minds against them: for this is the manner of Impostors, and
those that love lying, to contrive nothing sooner then that which they think
will be most grateful to their Hearers: and as Fishers are wont to bait their
hooks with such things as they know the fishes like; so these also, that they
may insinuate into the minds of men, love to tell those things which they know
will please them, and accommodate their words to tickle their ears. But these
despising pleasures, and contemning both the hatred and kindness of men,
underwent both an infamous life and death for the profession of this thing;
what place is here for suspicion of any the least untruth. Neither may you
think that this Argument is infringed by the example of those, who even for the
sake of a false Religion and Doctrine, bear oftentimes cruel torments, yea and
stick not to spend their lives on it: For it is one thing to die for a false
Doctrine, which thou believe to be true; another thing to die for a salfe
Doctrine, which thou know to be false, and feigned by thy self: Of the first
there are very many examples, but of the later it is impossible that among men
in their wits, and not extremely mad, there should be any example at all. But
the most divine Writing of the Apostles, and full of profond Wisdom, which we
have in our hands, do more then enough vindicate them from the imputation of
foolishness and madness.

XIX. A second reason, whereby the resurrection of Christ and his Divinity is
proved, is this; namely, That so many thousands of men in all Nations believed
on him; not only of the common sort, but also of the Learned, Wise men, and
Philosophers. And they so believed, that they suffered not themselves to be
deterred from this Faith by any Persecutions, yea, or cruel Death. And this is
so much the more wonderful, in that the obstacles to Religion were almost
infinite. They were hindered, (1) By an inveterate love of the Religions of
their Country, received by long Custom. Who knows not how zealous the Jews
are, and were always in their Religion? and no man can doubt the same of the
Heathens, that knows that Socrates was therefore condemned at Athens, because
he seemed to introduce a new Religion.

2. By the ignominious Death of Christ; for how hard think you was it, to
believe in one that was crucified, and to take him for Master and Lord, whom
the Jews hanged upon a Cross as a wicked and heinous Offender, tortured with
all kinds of contumely and cruelty? Hence Paul the Apostle not without cause
writes, 1 Cor. 1.23. that he preached Christ crucified, to the Jews a
stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness.

3. By the harshness of the precepts; for the Doctrine of Christ bade open war
to all carnal Concupiscences, and confined men to a strait path.

4. They were hindered by the incredibility of the things promised: We declare
unto you (says the Apostle) 1 Cor. 2.9. things that eye has not seen, nor ear
heard, neither have come into the mind of man, which God has prepared for them
that love him. But we do not easily believe things that we see not; as one
said, Our hands are eyed, they believe nothing but what they see. Great
happiness indeed is promised, but not till after death. In the mean time
visible things that are present are to be forgone, for the hope of invisible
that are future.

5. By the means of the persons, by whom the Doctrine of Christ was preached:
For they were of the common sort of men, Unlearned, Fishers, Publicans.
Moreover few, such as neither splendor of birth had made illustrious, nor
fortune conspicuous, nor multitude formidable, nor power venerable, nor wit
admitable, nor favor of Nobles acceptable, nor any Art or Eloquence made fit
to bend and allure the minds of Mortals. And nevertheless Synagogues, Schools,
Academies, Cities, Towns, Kingdoms, and Empires, yielded to, and believed
these simple men. What Aristotle? what Plato? what Chrysippus, or Epicurus has
got so many Disciples, and persuaded so many men of their Doctrine? although
they were most famous for wit and learning: How many thousands of thousands
have the Apostles, those simple and unlearned Fishers, drawn unto Christ! So
that it was truly foretold them by Christ, that they should become Fishers of
men.

6. By the simple and blunt way of teaching. The Apostles used not artificial
and elaborate speech, neither affected and composed to deceive, but vulgar and
common. Our preaching (says Paul, 1 Cor. 2.4.) was not with persuasive words
of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirt, and of power. They used not
force to compel Dissenters, not fraud to deceive the unwary, not carnal threats
to terrify the obstinate. They used only persuasion, and that simple and
inartificial. But who would believe, that the armed World could by persuasion
alone, be subdued by unarmed weak men, endued with no Authority or privilege?

7. By the most grievous sufferings, that were to be born or expected daily by
all and singular the Professors of Christ. There was never any sort of men, no
Sect, that was vexed with so many and so great Calamities, as of the Christian
Religion. All the Powers, Malice, Wits of all degrees, Emperors, Kings, and
People, had conspired for their destruction. Diverse kinds of cruelty, most
exquisite manners of death were invented. The innocent Christians were not
only despoiled of all their Goods, not only banished, and exposed to the
hatred, injuries, and contumelies of all men, but were condemned to wild
Beasts, to Mines, and Quarries. Some were Stoned, some were cast into Rivers;
one was Sawn asunder, another was Flayed alive, another was Roasted in the
fire, the whole Assembly sometimes with their Meeting House was burnt together
to ashes. Witnesses of these things are the ancient Histories written, not
only by Christian, but even by Heathen Authors. Tacitus thus describes Nero's
cruelty against the Christians, Annals 15. Therefore to extinguish the rumor
(to wit of firing the City by the command of Nero) Nero falsely accused and
punished most grievously certain people, hated for their wickedness, which the
common sort called Christians. The Author of that Name was Christ, who in
Tyberius his Reign, was put to death under Pontius Pilate, Procurator of Judea.
And their dangerous superstition suppressed for the time, burst forth again;
not only through Judea, where it first began, but in the City also, whither
all wicked and shameful things run from all parts, and are solemnized and
esteemed. First they were apprehended which confessed that Religion; then by
their detection, an infinite multitude were convicted, not so much for setting
the Town on fire, as for the hate of all men against them. Such as were
condemned, were scorned, and mocked, and covered in wild Beasts skins, and torn
in pieces with Dogs, or fastened on the Cross, or burnt in fire; and when the
day failed, they were burnt in the night to give light. Nero had made the
prospect of his Gardens fit for that spectacle, and caused Shows to to be set
forth in the Cirque, and himself either apparalled like a Waggoner, shuffled
among the people, or ran the race with them. Whereupon pity was taken on those
persons, though guilty and deserving exemplary punishment, seeing they suffered
not for any public good, but to satisfy one man's cruelty only. Suetonius
also in the life of Nero make mention of the sufferings which the Christians
endured, when he says, The Christians, a sort of people addicted to a new and
mischievous superstition, were punished. So does this Heathen judge of
Christian Religion, therefore because it was joined with contumely of the
Heathen gods and their worship. But that I may not here relate all the
Testimonies of the Heathens touching Christians, one most clear Testimony of
Pliny junior shall serve instead of all. He in Epist. 97. ad Trajan. lib. 10.
of Epistles, consulting Trajan what was to be done with Christians, and how
they were to be punished, expresses (1) The torments they suffered, and the
Christians constancy. In the mean time with those that were convented before
me, as being Christians I followed this method. I asked them if they were
Christians: those that confessed I asked again and again, threatening
punishment. I commanded those that were constant to be had away. For I doubted
not whatsoever it was they confessed, but that pertinacy and inflexible
obstinacy ought to be punished. As if indeed perseverance in a good cause were
pertinacy. By and by he writes that some of them were Roman Citizens; and
afterward, by process of time, as it uses to be, the crime diffused it self.
So Christian Religion increased by the very sufferings, and took growth and
strength from the very persecutions. Furthermore relating how he had brought
some to this, that while he led them an example they would call on the gods,
and supplicate with Wine and Frankincense the Images of Caesar and of the
Deities, besides would curse Christ; he adds, Those that are indeed Christians,
are said to be such as cannot be compelled to any such thing. Behold a high
commendation of true Christians! Secondly, he sets out the Religion and Worship
of Christians: But they affirmed that the sum either of their fault or error
was this, That they were wont to meet together on a certain day before
daylight, to sing among themselves by turns a Song to Christ, as to a God; and
to bind themselves in covenant, not to any wickedness, but that they would not
commit any theft, nor robberies, nor adulteries, that they would not betray
their Trust, nor being required deny that which was entrusted, which being
finished it was their manner to depart and come together again to take meat,
but promiscuous and harmless. At length he says, That having used torments to
search out the Truth, He found nothing but a wicked and excessive superstition.
But how wicked it was appears from his own relation. Thirdly, he tells how
great a multitude of Christians there was: For it seems to me a matter worthy
consultation, especially because of the number of the endangered: for many of
every Age, of every Degree of both Sexes are and will be brought into danger.
For the contagion of this Superstition is diffused, not only through Cities,
but also Towns and Countries, which it seems possible to stop and amend. Surely
it is manifest enough, that the Temples which were now almost desolate begin to
be frequented, and the solemn worship that was long intermitted to be repeated,
and the Sacrifices are every where sold, for which lately there was rarely
found any buyers. Hence it appears from whence so great a hatred of Heathens
against Christians sprang, to wit, because they saw that utter destruction and
ruin was seizing on their Idols and Paganish Worships by means of Christian
Religion. But Pliny was greatly frustrated in this, that he hoped that
Christian Religion could be stopped and extinguished by those punishments. For
how vain all endeavors of Tyrants and Enemies were in suppressing the Gospel,
and hindering its course, experience it self is witness.

XX. Seeing therefore the Christians endured so many and so great things,
seeing they had so many obstacles, and yet firmly adhered to Christ: what other
cause could there be thereof then the great and invincible power of Truth,
which the Apostles confirmed both by the example of their unblameable piety and
cruel death, and chiefly by miracles never before heard or seen. But if any one
shall obstinately deny that miracles accompanied the Church of Christ in its
beginning, he considers not that he asserts a far greater miracle then ever
was, to wit, that so great a multitude of men, and almost the whole world
should be converted without miracles. But there is no doubt but these Primitive
Christians were diligent and industrious enough in examining those miracles,
and searching out the Truth of Christian Religion; seeing therein not only
their eternal salvation, but also their present life and all their fortunes
were concerned. Very wittily and truly says Pliny, Singuli decipere and decipi
possunt, nemo omnes, neminem omnes fefellerunt; Every one may deceive, and be
deceived; no man has deceived all men, nor have all men deceived any. This
Argument therefore is of so great moment, that no man in his wits can gainsay
it.

XXI. The third way of proving the Divinity of Christ is taken hence, That the
History of the Resurrection and Glorification of Christ is contained in the
sacred Books of the New Testament. But that those Books are of Divine Authority
is proved,

1. Because they contain the most perfect way of worshipping God, and living
piously: such as neither men nor Devil could devise; not men, as it appears
from comparing the Precepts contained in this Book; not the Devil, because he
being an enemy of all virtue, cannot be the Author of so holy a Doctrine.

2. Because there are extant in them many Predictions concerning things future,
which we see afterward really fulfilled and proved true by the event. 1.
Concerning the destruction of the City Jerusalem, and the subversion of the
Temple, Mat. 24. Luke 19.43, 44. 2. Concerning the Conversion of the Gentiles
to Christ, Mat. 21.23, etc. Mat. 8.11. 3. Concerning the great and sudden
propagation of Christian Religion, Mat. 13.31, 32, 33. John 12.32. 4.
Concerning its perpetual Duration, Luke 1.33. Mat. 28.20. John 14.16. 5.
Concerning the most grievous persecutions of Christians, Mat. 10.17, 21, 34.
That I say nothing now of the Prediction of Christ concerning his own
sufferings and Death, as also his Resurrection after three days, Mat. 16.21.
Luke 18.31, 32, 33. which unless the event had confirmed, his Disciples would
at no hand have believed in him. For by this so evidently false Prediction, he
had betrayed himself to be an Impostor and Liar.

3. Because they were written by the Apostles, or by the familiar Companions of
the Apostles, whom we have showed a little before to have been Divine Men, and
such as neither could nor would lie.

XXII. This one thing therefore remains now to be proved, to wit, that the
Books of the New Covenant were written by the Apostles, and those whose Names
they bear. But to prove that, we need no other Argument then the Testimony and
consent of the ancient Christians, which were nearer the times of the Apostles.
All these whose writings we have, acknowledge these Books for the genuine
writings of the Apostles and Evangelists. And it is certain they used the
utmost diligence in searching out the Truth of this matter. See the Epistles of
Ignatius, who flourished soon after the destruction of Jerusalem. See Justin
Martyr, who lived about the hundred and fiftieth year of Christ. Irenaeus about
the two hundred and thirty. Clemens Alexandrinus about the year two hundred and
six. Tertullian about the year two hundred and eight, who also mentions, That
even the authentic writings of the Apostles were yet extant in some Churches
in his time, lib. de Praescrip. cont. Haeret. See Origin about the year two
hundred and thirty. Eusebius the Ecclesiastic Historian about the year three
hundred, who from the best Antiquities extracted especially the Truth of these
Books, differencing the genuine Apostolic writings from the spurious and
counterfeit; and again, of the true and Canonical Books showing which without
any Controversy were always in all Churches accounted for genuine; and of
which there was in the beginning some doubt, but so, as afterward the matter
being better tried the doubt ceased. Add to this the great multitude of
Ecclesiastical Doctors after the time of Constantine the Great, and among them
chiefly Jerome, an exact Searcher of this matter. But neither have the Jews in
times past, nor Pagans ever raised a Controversy with the Christians touching
these Books, as to say they were feigned by the Christians, and falsely
attributed to the Apostles: nay farther, Cyril testifies in the tenth Book he
wrote against Julian, That that Heathen Emperor and Apostate, a most bitter
Persecutor of Christians, does openly confess it, That the writings of Matthew,
Mark, Luke, Peter, Paul are the same that Christians read under those names. We
see then that this so unanimous and uniform consent concerning these Books, had
continued without interruption to this day, that is, for more then sixteen
hundred years. Behold, into how various Sects Christians have for a long time
been, and are now divided: how dispersed and different in Regions, Tongues,
Wits, Opinions, and notwithstanding their so much disagreeing in many chief
Points of Doctrine, they all agree in this, That they constantly and
unanimously believe these writings to be Apostolical, and of divine Authority,
why we should depart from so ancient and perpetual a consent, there is no
reason. But without reason to doubt of or contradict a thing universally
received is foolish. By what other reason I pray does it appear at this day,
that the works of Livie, Tacitus, Curtius, Virgil, are those which are ascribed
to them, but by the consent of all the Learned, of which there is no cause to
doubt; and if any one doubt he may deservedly be counted a fool. Neither yet
was it ever enquired into the Books of those Authors with so great industry, as
into the Truth of the New Testament, because that in the Books of the profane
Authors men are little concerned; but in this Book they believe their eternal
felicity is placed. Wherefore also it is to be reckoned, that we have
sufficiently proved the Authority of the Sacred Scriptures, since we have
proved they cannot be doubted of without folly.

If any desire more concerning this Subject, let him read S. de Authoritate S.
Scripturae, Hugo Grotius, of the Truth of Christian Religion. Episcopius
Institut. Theolog. de Messia, and de libris Novi Testamenti. But he that is not
satisfied with these, let him read Philip More of the Truth of Christian
Religion, Raimundus Sebundus, Ludovicus Vives, Savaenarola, and many others,
who have more then sufficiently polished this Subject, as well with
Philosophical subtilty, as great Learning and Eloquence.

FINIS.
Books newly printed for, and are to be sold by William Crook, at the three
Bibles on Fleet-Bridge. 1665.
CAlliopes Cabinet opened, wherein Gentlemen may be informed how to adorn
themselves for Funerals, Feasting, and other Heroic Meetings. Also here
Gentlemen may know their place and worth in Honor, with all the Degrees of
Honor, etc. By James Salter. 1665.

Sixty nine Aenigmatical Courtiers, all exactly drawn to the life from several
Persons Humors and Dispositions, pleasant and full of delight. By R. F. Esquire;

The Complete Vineyard, or the best way for planting of Vines in England,
wherein are set forth the whole Circumstances, necessary for planting a
Vineyard. By William Hughes. 1665.

Sir Thomas Herbert's Travels, with many Additions, newly Printed again. 1665.

Hugonis Grotii baptizatorum Puerorum Institutio, alternis Interrogationibus
and Responsionibus. Cui accesserunt Graeca ejusdem Metaphrasis. A Christop.
Wase Reg. Col. Cant. Et Anglicana Versio a Fran. Goldsmith Armig. etc. Item
Catalogus omnium Operum Hugonis Grotii ad calcem adjectus est. 1665.

The Royal Stem, being an Account of all the most considerable Passages by Land
and Sea, since William the Conqueror to this very Time, with a Picture of King
Charles the Second: all in a Broad Sheet, fit for Studies or Closets.

Now at the Press,
Solamen Aegrorum, sive Ternarias Medicamentorum Chymicorum, ad omnes
ferimorbos curandum, maxim deplorato, and grandes felicissime inventa Remedia.
Authore Everardo Maynwaringo, Phil. and Med. Doctore. 80.


