Folly and Envy DETECTED: In some Brief Observations on a Late Scandalous
Pamphlet, Subscribed by D. S. Entitled, An Answer to several Passages,
Citations and Charges, in a Book published by Fran. Bugg, Styled, New Rome
Arraigned, etc.

By R. Bridgman.

Prove. 10.18. He that hides Hatred with lying Lips, and he that utters a
Slander, is a Fool.

James 3.16. -- Where Envying and Strife is, there is Confusion, and every Evil
Work.

London, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, near the Meeting House in
White-Hart-Court in Grace-Church-Sreet, and at the Crooked-Billet in
Holywell-Lane near Shoreditch, 1694.

Folly and Envy Detected, etc.
THE Author tells us, He has for several Years observed diverse Contentious
Books writ by Fran. Bugg and Geo. Whitehead one against the other; which having
read, proceeds to give his Sense of the Matter.

1. He apprehends the tendency of F. B's striving, is to have several Errors
Retracted and Condemned.

2. That Geo. Whitehead 's Contention is to Cover and Cloak many Errors and
Weaknesses, which he and all True Christians ought to Condemn, etc.

He proceeds to tell us, That Brevity is designed by him, and what he writes is
done in order, (if happily it might be so) to appease the Fury of an Enraged
Adversary, meaning F. B.

But this his Sense and Apprehension, he Imposes upon his Reader without any
due Proof or Rational Consequence.

He confesses F.B. is a provoked and an enraged Adversary, and I may add, that
he is a great and declared Apostate, sufficiently manifest to be so, by those
Books, (which this Author confesses he has Read.)

Now with what good Reason or Conscience can any apprehend the tendency of F.
B's striving, is to have several Errors Retracted and Condemned? Is it likely a
Person gone into so much Error, Envy and Rage, should strive, or be Zealous to
have Truth cleared from Error?

And could D. S. fall upon no better expedient to appease the Fury of such an
enraged Adversary, than to join Issue with him, in his furious attempts upon
the Religious Reputations of both the Living and the Dead; Men that have
Hazarded, and some even laid down their Lives in the Service and Defense of the
Blessed Truth.

Is this like the Office of a true Peacemaker, or Mark of a true Christian
Quaker, as this D. S. would be esteemed; but his Folly is manifest, and the
burden of his Iniquity must be laid upon his own Head.

He Blames F. B. for Raking in the Ashes of the Dead, Compare p. 4. with p. 7,
9, 10, and 11.
(as he Terms it) and himself is found in the same Work; he blames F. B. for
Reproaching a People that believes all things according to Scripture, and would
not have him vilify any part of their Society upon the score of the Ignorance
or Folly of any pretended Member; yet himself upon no better score or proof
than a perhaps, or for ought he knows, vilifies some, or a part of the same
Society, and that with no less than denying him that was Born of the Virgin
Mary, to be Christ the Savior of the World. He tells F.B. That if at any time
he has found any Man or Men under the Name of a Quaker guilty of Error of any
kind, relating to the Christian Religion, that he ought to pray to God on their
behalf; and yet himself declares, That if at any time any pretended Member that
may be Dead, or yet is in Being, did ever deny Jesus of Nazareth to be the
Savior of the World, he is Disowned for the same, and deemed no less than
guilty of Blasphemy in the superlative degree, which I affirm, according to
Scripture, is a Sin ought not to be prayed for, it not having the Promise of
Forgiveness either in this World, or in that which is to come.

What Contradiction and Confusion is here, and how much unlike a Christian
Quaker to vilify, some (or a part of their Society) upon no better proof than
a perhaps, or for ought he knows?

May I not with the same sort of Reason argue against him, that perhaps, or for
ought I know, it may be undeniably proved upon him, that he is a Thief or a
Murderer; to be sure, if a professed Quaker, a very false and treacherous
Brother?

All the proof he brings against G. W. is F. B's Charges and Accusations, with
his own positive Sense and Judgment, and yet even in that, he is also found
inconsistent with himself; for though in the beginning he apprehends G.W's
Contention (as he calls it) is to Cover and Cloak many Errors, etc. yet in his
Answer to the Second Objection, page 6. G. W. is but supposed to be guilty in
part; and adds, that it is hoped he may see his weakness in so doing; but still
no instance produced, wherein G.W. has been either weak, or wicked, which to
Cover or Cloak many and gross Errors, must be.

However, it seems it is his Sense and Judgment, and so it is, that Light and
Darkness are manifest Beings, which as much bespeaks his Skill in Philosophy,
as the other does his Title to Christianity.

Yet he would seem tender of the Christian Religion, giving it as his Sense and
Judgment, p. 3. That the many Books of Contention, writ by G. W. and others,
has done much hurt to it, and would be glad if it should please God to put it
into the Hearts of the Governors and Rulers of the Nation to condemn them, and
order them all to be Burnt. Then no need of Explanations and Emendations
Requested in the Postscript.

But why must they be Burnt? The Matter (it seems) is Distasteful; Apostates
and Unruly Spirits like not to have their Fruits made manifest, and their
Rebellion against the Light rebuked; and that which would have the Books Burnt,
in all probability in its next step would have the Authors Burnt also, lest
there should be any more such Books.

But he proceeds in Answer to another of F. B's. Accusations against G.
Whitehead, page 6th. Object. 3. wherein G. W. is accused for endeavoring to
cover several Errors in some Persons in Pensilvania. D. S. in Answer
insinuates, that if G. W. or any others do wink or connive at the aforesaid
blasphemous expressions, (cited by F. B.) he or they are Judged to be equally
guilty with them.

Now to show the Disingenuity of this D. S. who it is supposed has Read the
Yearly Meeting Paper, (which he so much Inveighs against, p. 15.) wherein no
doubt he believes G. W. with others were concerned: It Is therein declared,

That if there be any Gross Errors, etc. held by any professing Truth in
America; such Persons ought to be diligently Instructed and Admonished by
faithful Friends in those Parts; and if they shall wilfully persist after being
duly informed, then such are to be dealt with according to Gospel Order.

Does this look like endeavoring to cover any such gross Errors, or does
advising such to be duly Instructed and Admonished, and upon their wilful
persistance, to be further dealt with according to Gospel Order, look like
Conniving or Winking at them; away with such Malicious Insinuations.

But this D. S. (who, in a Malapart Pragmatical style, would be deemed, the
Representative of the True Christian Quakers* is for Censuring and
Excomunicating (Pope like) without the consent of the Church, and that not only
many that are alive, but even several that are dead. For,

He charges (upon F. B's. Accusation) several Eminent, Ancient Friends, p. 9,
10, 11. with no less than great and high Blasphemy, particularly G Fox, Josiah
Coal, J. Audland, and James Parnell, Men that were great sufferers for Truth,
and who (being deceased) laid down their heads in Peace, and were never
disowned by any Christian Quaker; but were sincerely Loved and Esteemed by
them, and their Innocence being already elsewhere vindicated (and that in some
of those Books, this Author would so gladly have Burnt) I need say the less,
but refer to them; supposing there may have been some defect in Expression: by
which means the matter has not been left so well guarded against the Exceptions
of Malicious Cavillers, who, no doubt (were it not for the general Authority of
the Holy Scriptures) would be as ready to make their Exceptions, against many
Sentences or Expressions therein also.

But I would fain know why it must be deemed (by D. S.) such a great weakness
in G. Fox, to set his Name to the Book called the Battle-door, wherein some
other Men, more Learned in those many Languages were also concerned; must he
not tho (as this D. S. scornfully suggests) he was a Shoemaker, and bred an
Illiterate Man, (which it is likely enough, to use his own Phrase, he knew not
but by History or Tradition:) I say must it therefore follow that G. F. knew
not the signification of Tu Nos and Vos, But Even as a Parrot (which this
Author says Can well Talk so far as he has been Taught.

It Is true, a Parrot may be Taught to speak Tu, nos and vos; but I presume it is
above the skill of this Doctor to Teach a Parrot the signification of Tu nos
and vos, which no doubt G. Fox had, as well as also some knowledge of the
Hebrew Tongue.

Again in his Answer to F. B's. charge recited by him, against Isaac Penington,
D. S. positively charges the matter of the said Citation as an undeniable Error
in J. P. proceeding from a defect in his understanding, which no doubt (as he
says) were but that worthy Man, J. P. in being, he would readily retract the
slip of his Pen, not only in that matter, but in any other of the like Import.

Methinks then a slip of his Pen (were it so in J. P.) ought not to be charged
upon him as an undeniable Error, proceeding from a defect in his understanding;
so no more ought a slip of the Pen, were it so in the other Friends
abovementioned, be charged as Great and High Blasphemy: But it is plain that
the Old Adversary, and false Accuser of the Brethren is very ready to lay hold
on every seeming occasion, to endeavor (through his several Instruments) to
blast the Reputation of these Good-men, that the Blessing of their Labor and
Memory might not Increase, or remain among the Living.

But should I, or any other be as ready as this D. S. or F. B. to lay hold upon
every slip of a Pen, or unguarded Sentence or Expression; we might have and
make work enough.

For Instance, might I not (in such a way of arguing) positively charge D. S.
(whatever Notion he may have of the pre-existence) that he denies or at least
questions a future Existence, by his saying, If that Worthy Man (J. P.) were in
being, as if after Death there was no being or existence; but I am not either
so Captious, or Uncharitable toward him in that Matter.

Again in his Third Page, He desires every true Believer in Christ Jesus, and
Follower of him, that they would bear his Image; as if he may be truly Believed
in and followed, and his Image not born: Does not this at best appear to be a
slip of his Pen? And yet how ready is D. S. to mark out such in others.

As to this frequent professing Faith in Jesus of Nazareth, and therein
distinguishing, himself and others to be the most or only Christian Quakers, so
long as he or they show forth no better Fruits, to what purpose is it to take
any notice of their Faith.

And notwithstanding he is so ready, to refer and recommend such as he would
have know more of the Quakers Faith, to the first part of a little Treatise,
Entitled the Principles of Truth; Written by J. Crook. It Is plain enough,
whatever be his talk, or knowledge, he is but little acquainted with the True
Christian Quakers Faith, which is attended with Christian Charity, and teaches
to exercise a Conscience void of offense both toward God, and toward Man.

London, October. 11. 1694. Robert Bridgman.

A POSTSCRIPT by way of Caution and Consideration.
WHereas D. S. in his Postscript seems to request all those that are living,
whose former or latter Writings are in any sort Defective; that they would
write Explanations and Emendations upon them, as also on those of which the
Authors may be Dead, (yet in his Third Page declares) that he would be glad if
God would put it into the Hearts of the Governors and Rulers of the Nations to
Condemn them, and order them all to be Burnt. Now I do herein tenderly Caution
this D. S. or any other who may presume, to correct or amend what they shall
apprehend or suppose to be offensive; that they be very careful how they
detract from the due credit and esteem of any approved writer, or writing
concerned in Testimony to the Blessed Truth, least they be found so touching
the Lord's Anointed as to hurt his Prophets, and justly fall under the Reproof
of the Hypocrite, who would behold a More in his Brothers Eye, but considered
not the Beam which was in his own. Mat. 7th. 3, 4, and 5, Verses.

And I offer it to D. S. his Consideration, whether it can be any Evidence of
good Breeding, or Christianity, so to Reproach and Revile G. W. (an Elder in
the same Profession he pretends to) and that upon no better or other produced
Evidence, than that of an Enraged Adversary, viz. F. B. Is it not very
Scandalous and Wicked, to publish it in print to the World, that G. W. is
guilty, not only of Covering and Cloaking many Errors, but also of being a
continual Contentious Scribler, and guilty of giving Base and Scurrilous
Language. Does D. S. pretend a Venerable Esteem of the Scripture, and yet so
much forget or reject the Apostles advise, Not to Rebuke an Elder, but Entreat
him as a Father: Nor to Receive an Accusation against such, but before Two or
Three Witnesses.

Indeed it is no wonder D. S. has concealed his Name, for he may well be ashamed
of such Work; and I would advise him, whoever he be to take the shame to
himself, by (...) publicly acknowledging his Folly, that so through unfeigned
Repentance he may find Mercy, and learn to do so no more.

Advertisement.
SInce the foregoing went to the Press, I have seen another Pamphlet,
Entitled, Something by way of Reply to a Paper lately published in the City
Mercury, etc. Signed G. W.

The foregoing Reproof and Rebuke to D. S. may serve also in Answer to that
Pa^^^^; unless the Author had wrote something more worth Notice, and put his
Name to it.


