A Brief Abstract and Narrative of the several Spoils, Depredations, Losses and
Damages, suffered by Sir William Courten, Sir Paul Pyndar, and William Courten
Esquire deceased, annexed to a Petition of the Proprietors and Creditors, depending
in PARLIAMENT.
SIR William Courten in the year 1626. being informed by several Masters of
Ships employed in his Service, that there was an Island near the Caribbees, not
Inhabited by any People or Nation whatsoever; and that the Soil was good, and
well Situated for Plantation and Defense; whereupon Sir William Courten, at
his proper Costs and Charges, Equipped and Furnished several Ships with Men,
Women, and all kind of Materials and Provisions necessary both for Planting,
and to defend themselves.

In the year 1627. the Factors and Servants of Sir William Courten having made
several Plantations, procured diverse Indians from the Main-Land, with all sorts
of Seeds and Roots to instruct the English in Planting Tobacco, Indigo, Cotton,
Sugarcanes, etc. and named the Island Barbados.

Sir William Courten then procured Letters Patents dated 27th. of February
1627. for the Government of the said Island, in the name of the Earl of
Pembroke, who gave a Deputation (by Sir William Courten's appointment) to
Captain John Powell, with Instructions for the Government thereof conformable
to the Laws of England.

Sir William Courten, being so legally possessed of the said Island, as the
first Occupant, and in the quiet possession thereof for the space of two years,
and upwards, having expended thirty thousand Pounds Sterling in Materials,
Provisions, Fortifications Plantations and Buildings: James late Earl of
Carlisle, in the year 1629. under a pretense of being Lord Proprietor, by
Patent, of all the Caribbee Islands, did, by Force of Arms, and other indirect
Practices of several Persons, under his pretended Grant, forceably enter into
the said Island, and disposessed Sir William Courten of his Forts, Houses and
Plantations, to the inestimable Damage of Sir William Courten, his Heirs and
Creditors, against the Laws and Originals of all Right and Property.

The said Earl of Carslile, in those days, being more powerful at Court than
the Earl of Pembroke; Sir William Courten, by all his Addresses to the King and
Council, could not find any Relief; And there being no Parliament from the time
of that violent Entry and Intrusion for the space of 12 Years together, during
Sir William Courten's Life, and his Sons Prosperity, the said Earl of Carlisle,
and his Accomplices, took advantage thereof, to continue the Possession, and
granted a long Lease of the said Island to the Lord Willoughby, which expired
in the year 1669. who granted several parcels of the said Island to several
Planters and others, at yearly Rents.

In the year 1646. Several debates arising between the Lord Willoughby, and the
old Planters, concerning the original Right of the Island and Plantations;
Complaint was made thereof to the Long Parliament; Whereupon the Merchants of
London claiming several Plantations by Purchase, trumpt up Sir William
Courten's Title to shelter themselves against the Earl of Carlisle's Patent,
which was declared null and void. And William Courten, Esquire Son and Heir of Sir
William Courten, having absented himself, for his own and his Fathers vast
Debts, occasioned by the said Spoi^s, and other Losses hereafter mentioned, the
Lady Katherine his Wife, appeared in defense of his Right.

Then Endeavors were used by the Creditors, for annexing the said Island to
the Crown of England, by Act of Parliament, as a County Palatine, with a
Proviso contained therein, That an exact Survey should be made, and the
Original Costs and Damages of Sir William Courten Levied upon an Equitable Tax
for the Benefit of the Heir and Creditors, but the several Revolutions in the
Government obstructed the same, yet continually Claimed ever since.

Sir William Courten, Endimion Porter, Esquire Thomas Kynaston Merchant, and
others, in Company with them, in the year 1635. (The late King being informed
that the East India Company of England had wasted several great Joynt-Stocks by
their ill Conduct and Management of that Trade,) were persuaded by the King to
undertake Trading-voyages to the East-India's, China and Japan, and gave Sir
William and his Partners a Patent accordingly; who made Contracts with several
Viceroys, and settled several Factories at Maccoa, Carwar and other parts near
the Seacoast; Sir Paul Pyndar having advanced the Sum of 36000 l. in that
first Expedition, under Captain John Weddall, Captain Nath. Mountnay and
others, (the Ships named the Dragon and Katherine, Richly Laden, homeward
bound) were lost, both Ships, Goods and Men, not without great suspicion of
being Sunk or Burnt by the Dutch.

In the year 1641. William Courten Esquire Son, and Heir and sole Executor of Sir
Will. Courten, and his Partners, set forth the Ships named, the Bona Esperanza,
and Henry Bona Adventura (inter alia) upon the said Trading-voyages for supply
of their Factories, and in the year 1643. the Ship Bona Esperanza was most
injuriously seized, by two Men of War belonging to the East India Company of
the Netherlands, in the streights of Malacca, from whence both Ship and Goods
Were carried to Batavia, and there de facto confiscated, without any due
Process at Law, and converted to the said East India Companies use, under
pretense that Courten traded with the Portugals their Enemies.

In the same year the Ship called the Henry Bona Adventura, with her Lading,
was taken into the possession of the said Company, by other of their Officers,
and men of War, near the Island of Mauritius, and also converted to their own
use, in all to the Damage of Mr. Courten, and the rest of the Proprietors 85000
l. Sterling, as by evident proofs taken in the High-Court of Admiralty appears.

Sir Paul Pyndar having an assignment of 5500 l. out of the said two Ships,
employed Jonas Abeeles at Amsterdam, in the year 1648. by procuration to
implead the said East India Company for the said Money, with Interest, who
intimated Sir Paul Pyndar's right, but could not obtain the said 5500 l. The
Company alleging that Jacob Pergens had notwithstanding Jonas Abeeles protest
and interdiction given security by Peter Boudaen of Middleburgh, to save the
Company harmless and indempnified from Sir Paul Pyndar; whereupon the Directors
at the Chamber in Middleburgh, paid Pergens accordingly, without any right
thereunto, Mr. Courten having assigned his Share and Interest to Sir Edward
Littleton, and Sir Paul Pyndar, in the year 1642. toward payment of his Debts.

In the year 1654. upon a Treaty of Peace and common Alliance between Oliver
Cromwell and the States General, when the East India Company of the Netherlands
paid the English old Company 84000 l. Sterling toward the Spoils and
Depredations at Amboyna. It was agreed that the Spoils and Depredations upon
the two Ships, Bona Esperanza, and Henry Bona Adventura, should be referred to
the Protestant Cantons of Switzerland, to determine what Reparations should be
made for the same; But they could not be persuaded to meet upon that Affair, or
to intermeddle therein. So the matter rested in statu quo.

Upon the Kings most happy Restoration, in the year 1660. several
Appliacations were made by the Proprietors, to his Majesty in Council, for
Restitution and Reparations of the Debt and Damages; Whereupon several
Recommendations were made to the States General by His Majesty accordingly, and
at last agreed in the Treaty 1662. that full and entire Reparations should be
made for the said two Ships and their Lading, to the persons Interessed and
Injured.

In pursuance whereof, Solicitations were made to the States General, and the
East India Company of the Netherlands, for the space of two years together,
without any effect.

In the year 1665. the Debt and Damages were stated upon the Kings command, by
Dr. Exton, Judge of the Admiralty, which then amounted to the sum of 151612 l.
sterling; whereupon Letters Patents for Reprizals passed judicially, under the
Great Seal of England, to Sir Edward Turnor, Knight. and George Carew Esquire their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, for recovery thereof, with Costs and
Damages, on behalf of themselves, and others intetessed.

In which Patent it is expressly granted and declared by His Majesty, That the
said Commission shall remain and be in full Force and Power, to the said Turnor
and Carew, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, for recovery of the
said 151612 l. with Costs and Damages, notwithstanding any Peace or
Correspondency to be made or renewed between the King and the States,
concerning any Public or General Differences or Reprizals. And further, That
although it should happen that all Hostility between the King and the States
should cease; Yet his Majesty grants and declares, That this particular
Commission should remain in full Force and Power, until the said Debt, Damages,
Costs and Charges shall be recovered, and received, or a Composition be made
for the same, between the East India Company, and the said Turnor and Carew,
their Executors, Administrators and Assigns:

In the year 1666. A third part of the said Debt was assigned to John Graham
Esquire and John Brown, Gent. on the behalf of themselves and other Creditors with
power to recover the same by Force of the Patent, as by the said Deed of
assignment, and Schedule of the Creditors annexed, dated the 14th. of May,
1666. appears.

In pursuance whereof, several small Frigates were equipped and set forth; But
in regard the Hollanders and Zealanders traded under the Colors of Flemmings,
Swedes, Hamburgers, Lubecker., Dantzickers, and others in Alliance with
England, most of the Ships and Goods taken by Force of the said Patent, were
claimed under those pretenses, and discharged by the Admiralty; So that there
was not (bona fide) 1500 l. reprized of the said Debt, Damages and Costs' as by
the Register in the Admiralty appears.

In the year 1667, A Peace and common Alliance was concluded between the King
and the States General at Breda, wherein is mentioned, notwithstanding the
Kings special Grant aforesaid, that particular Letters of Reprizals ought to be
comprehended and revoked by the said Treaty, although the Patent remains upon
Record under those Conditions, Grants, and Limitations, wherein the Subjects,
by the common Law of England, are vested both with an Interest, and an
Authority coupled together for recovering their Satisfaction.

The said Grant being made of Common Right, as the Law directs, cannot be
revoked or made void, or suspended by Proclamation, without Reparations to the
Persons interessed, otherwise the Laws and Statutes of this Realm would be
rendered inneffectual, by a failer of Justice.

In the year 1672. New differences being arisen between the King and the States
General, the persons interessed and injured, concerning the Bona Esperanza, and
Henry Bona Adventurae, made fresh applications to the King and Council for
relief in a public way; Whereupon the said Debt and Damages was revived, and
expressly declared by the King and Council that the Treaty at Breda was void,
and of no effect; and that His Majesty would in this particular case of Pyndar
and Courten, (as he was in Justice and Honor bound to do,) see that the Debt
and Damages aforesaid, should be satisfied and repayed, and gave Instructions
to Sir Lionel Jenkins and Sir Joseph Williamson, his Ambassadors and
Plenipotentaries at Cologne, to that end and purpose accordingly, as by the
Original Orders, Declarations and Reports, may appears.

In the year 1674, Another Treaty of Peace and Common Alliance was concluded at
London, between the King and the States General, wherein it was agreed that
800000 Patacoons should be paid to His Majesty by the States General, at four
yearly payments; the first upon Ratifiing of the Treaty, and by the 7th.
Article thereof confirmed the Treaty at Breda, and all former Treaties, without
any other notice of Pyndar or Courten's Debt and Damages.

Upon the said Ratification 200000 Patacoons were assigned, and paid to
Alderman Backwel for other Services, and the 600000 remaining were transferred
to the Prince of Orange, upon pretense of old Debts due to his Father and
Grandfather, from the late King, although the said Prince made his Fortune (in
that War and Alliance) of all the Blood and Treasure spent therein, being
restored to his Ancestors Honors and Offices, enriching himself, as Lord High
Admiral by the tenths out of all English Ships and Goods, taken the last War.
And notwithstanding the Proprietors of the Bona Esperanza, and Henry Bona
Adventura, made several Addresses to the King and the States General
respectively, that some part of the Patacoons might be appled toward
satisfaction of their Debt, Damages and Costs aforesaid, (which remains still
in statu quo,) yet nothing could be obtained in this special Case, incumbent
upon the East India Company of Holland, the States General, and the Crown of
England.

In the year 1676. Several Actions depending at Law in Middleburgh, Amsterdam,
and the Hague, upon Obligations, Bills of Exchange, and Merchants Accounts,
amounting to 128600 l. or thereabouts, against the said Jacob Pergens, and the
Heirs and Executors of Peter Boudaen and Sir Peter Courten, who were
Copartners with Sir William Courten in the Linen-Trade, were positively
interdicted by the States of Holland and Zealand; And the Judges by express
Orders of the said States, prohibited from doing any manner of Justice to the
Heirs, Executors Administrators, or Assigns of Sir William Courten, Sir Paul
Pyndar, Sir Edward Littleton, and William Courten Esquire deceased; upon pretense
they were released, and discharged by the two last Treaties of common Alliance
between the King and the States General; (which are forced Interpetations
against all common Sense and Reason) several Applications were made to the King
and Council, that right might be done, by His Majesty's most gracious
Interposition and effectual recommendation to the States of Holland and
Zealand, or by further Reprizals against those two Provinces respectively, but
no Relief could be obtained thereupon, according to the merits of the said
Cause.

In the Month of April, 1680. The Creditors, under Graham and Brown's
assignment, considering the Premises, and that the States were at Peace with
all Nations, and even with their Confederates the Algerines; The said Creditors
agreed to set forth 2 or 3 Frigates to reprize their proportion of the said Debt
and Damages, in pursuance of their Grant aforesaid, as Assignees under the
Patent, and so entered their Ships in the Admiralty, under the Command of
Captain Compton Gwyther, Captain Roger Hawkshead, and Captain Thomas Wood
accordingly.

There cannot be found the like Parallel in any Kingdom or Nation in the World,
that two such Persons as Sir William Courten and Sir Paul Pyndar, that had such
vast Estates, so employed in the Service of their King and Country, that were
ever so neglected, and their Families after them, so long appealing for
Justice, without any Redress, still lying under those Circumstances of
Discouragement, that no Relation or Servant of theirs, were ever preferred or
admitted into any Public Employment since the Kings Restoration, not so much
as to a Land-waiters-place at the Custom-house.

To the Honorable the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses in PARLIAMENT Assembled.
The Humble Petition of Thomas Kynaston Merchant, (surviving Partner and
Adventurer with Sir William Courten to the East Indies) William Courten Esquire
Grandchild and Heir of Sir William Courten Knight, deceased; George Carew Esquire
Administrator of the Goods and Chattels of Sir Paul Pyndar Knight, deceased,
with his Will annexed; Thomas Coppin Esquire Gilbert Crouch Gent. one of the
Executors and Assignee of Francis late Earl of Shrewsbury; and James Boeve
Merchant, on behalf of themselves, and diverse other Families in England.
Shows,
THat your Petitioners, their Ancestors and Testators, having been spoiled,
grieved and oppressed many years together, in Barbados, and other parts of the
East and West Indies, as also in the Provinces of Hollandand Zealand, and even
at home, to their inestimable loss and damages, and the miserable distress of
many Orphans and Widows, whose Moneys (put out at Interest into the hands of
Sir William Courten, and Sir Paul Pyndar) were employed in Plantations,
Navigation and Commerce, to the great Improvement of the Nation.

Your Petitioners made several Applications to His Majesty, and the Lords of
His most Honorable Privy-Councel, for Relief, and to others Delegated from the
King, but could obtain no effectual Redress in the premises, as by the Cases
annexed appears.

That your Petitioners have been denied the ordinary course of Law and Justice
in the due prosecution of their Rights and Properties, upon Civil Actions in
Holland and Zealand, to the great Contempt of the King and Kingdom, and the
particular and intolerable Loss and Damages of your Petitioners, and others
His Majesty's good Subjects, upon pretense that their particular Debts and
Damages were discharged and released by Treaties of Common Alliance.

That your Petitioners have likewise been obstructed in the due Execution of
their Judicial Proceedings in England, by Orders of the Council Table; whereby
they have been much prejudiced in their Liberties, Properties and Estates,
contrary to the Fundamental Laws and Statutes of the Realm.

Now forasmuch as your Petitioners are left without all other Remedy, and it
being of most dangerous Consequence to all Civil Society and Commerce, to
suffer any failer of Justice to the Subjects of England, either at home or
abroad; a necessity lies upon your Petitioners, according to the inherent
Rights and Privileges of Englishmen, to make their applications to your
Honors for Redress.

Your Petitioners therefore do most humbly pray, That their Grievances and
Oppressions may be taken into the most serious Consideration of this Honorable
House, That after Examination thereof by a Select Committee, your Petitioners
may be relieved by an Effectual Recommendation made to His Majesty, or by such
other ways and means as to your Wisdoms shall seem meet.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc.


