A brief account of the GRAMMAR-LECTVRE, in King's Head Court near the Theater
Royal, Drury Lane; Where Children are with great ease and speed perfectly
taught the Latin Tongue, without being slavishly put to needless torture, or
endless trouble; and nothing is demanded for their Teaching, or for Books, till
the business is Performed.
WHereas diverse Gentlemen, Citizens, and others, call frequently upon us, and
either find us not within, or at least so busy, as that we have not time to
satisfy them about our Method etc. Concerning which they enquire: We have
caused this rude and unpolisht Sheet to be Printed, to which we refer them, and
all others, at present, for satisfaction; which shall be given them as briefly,
as plainly, and as fully, as the good old Axiom, Artis est celare Artem, will
permit; for a secret which has cost us almost 30. Years Study, and the perusal
of all Authors whatsoever that have writ on this subject, is not to be too far
discovered to every body.

They may be pleased therefore to understand, that we are not over eagerly
desirous of too many Scholars at once, Paucis contenti auditoribus, taking but
few at a time, and with our good will receiving none who are deeply engaged in
other Schools; our design being to do good to Mankind in general, and at the
same time to do no harm to any particular Individual, by taking away his
Scholars, or reflecting upon his way of Teaching, or the like.

Next, as for the Childrens coming but once or twice a Week, which some (who
are great admirers of, and servants to blind custom) will not bear with; they
may please to take notice, that if need be, they may come oftener; thrice, four
times, five times, six times a Week; but their coming will be only a needless
trouble to themselves and us; for we can with the same labor give them enough
to ruminate upon for half a Week, as for half a Day: In short, if Parents send
their Children any whether to learn, let them send them thither where they
shall be well taught, whether they stay a long time, or not (that is all one;)
but if they send them only to be kept out of harms way so long, there are
enough old Women, or ordinary mean Pedants, who will do their business for two
pence a Week.

As for the Price, that is reasonable, only altering as the capacity of the
Learner is quicker or slower; there being more or less pains to be taken with
him accordingly.

Then as for the Method, they may please to know, that this business (so much
wondered at, and thought impossible to be done, yet) is really performed by
these means,

First, By bringing the Grammer-Rules and Authors to the capacity of the
Learners, and not screwing and forcing their capacity to them.

Secondly, By teaching every particular Youth singly by himself (for
certainty's sake) all the Rules and Intrigues of the Language.

Thirdly, By giving them full liberty, as to the time and place of studying;
they hear the Lecture in few words, and then ruminate upon it when they will,
and where they will, in the morning or afternoon, at home, or in the fields;
but stay not to hinder one another by noise, childish fooleries, or the like.

Fourthly, By using them with all possible gentleness and lenity; there are no
Rodds marching up and down the room, to fright them, and keep them in fear and
bondage, all the while they are present; Such fear and dread necessarily
hindering their effectual tending of their business, the removal thereof, on
the other side, must much further their proficiency.

Oxford, and the Authors put into their hands at first dash, to be as difficult
as any they ever meet with afterward; now how senseless and irrational this
is, let any man judge: Those who have gone about to make new Grammers, they
have only affronted the Canon, and rendered things hard and difficult before,
more hard and more difficult: And why Irregular words must needs be picked out
to be the Examples of the Declensions and Conjugations; and why the Grammar
Rules, and Memorial Verses, should be in Latin, which Language the Youth or
Child is supposed not yet to understand, Wise persons cannot yet discover the
reason: Give Children easy Rules, and easy Books, and then something will be
done; but if we must for ever (...), and because Youth have all along been
taught in a dull blundering way, therefore they must be taught so still;
Knowing men will doubt, which is most to be pitied, the folly of the Teacher,
or the misfortune of the Learner.

others do; and if they understand it, so; if not, there is no provision made
for their help; Some things they learn over half a score times, other things
they learn not at all, or not so perfectly as to understand them; whereas
(alas!) every Learner should be taught the Fundamentalls by himself, and not
take them by chance; for at that rate it may so happen, as that he may not
attain them all his life; Give him the whole Scheme in his head, and then he
will be able to go on vigorously, comfortably and effectually, to make himself
by degrees Master of the Language.

Latin, that is anoher case, and we have our times to let them come, and also
stay together long enough for that purpose.

Delerant reges, plectuntur Achivi, the fault is sometimes in the Teacher,
sometimes in the way of teaching; but the poor children they are beaten for not
understanding that, which 'twas impossible they should undrestand, having not
been told it at all (it may be) or at least not in that manner as for them to
comprehend it: It Is true, we know there are diverse most excellent, ingenuous,
discreet and learned persons, who do use their Scholars in a noble and
ingenuous way; only for fear of a thing called (...), they have not yet entered
upon the Right Easy and Speedy way of teaching, which we much wonder at;
(these men's persons we love and respect, nay we highly esteem and honor them;
and should any line here written reflect upon, or endamage them in the least,
we would recant all we have said, and give over this whole business:) Others
there are also of a lower sphere, good, industrious, honest men, who bring up
their Scholars in a kind and gentle way, and make no more use of their power
of correction than just needs must; (these are to be commended and encouraged,
and withal, shown the right way of instructing Youth:) But in too many places
we are sure it is otherwise; Children being taken and beaten most barbarously,
they know not why, or wherefore, nor never shall; We have often seen innocent,
ingenuous, industrious Youths, when they have taken pains, as it had been for
their lives, and studied all day and all night, till 2, or 3, a Clock in the
morning, yet next day they have been scourged 10, 16, 20, lashes, when no
reason could possibly be assigned, why they should be so inhumanely used; and
therefore the reason indeed, was only and merely because the roguy leacherous
Paedagogue had a mind to whip them: Now of all Cruelties, Leacherous cruelty is
the worst, and woe to them who fall under it; But of this, as also of the
Rogueries of some flustering Pedants, the World shall hear more at large ere
long both in Prose and Verse; for, as some extravagant Persons have one way of
satisfying their lusts, others other ways: So Some Schoolmasters on the Boys
breeches
Curry their own heat and itches.
Hudibr.

We are verily persuaded, and have good and firm grounds to believe, that many
take up that Calling, and continue in it to their old age, for that power's
sake which is most unjustly allowed them of correcting their Scholars, when and
how they please; Now what a sad thing it is for the same Person that delights
in the execution, to be both Judge and Executioner, we need not say; To tell
you what we think however, and what wiser Men than we think likewise, 'twere
far better that Learning perished out of the Earth, than such horrid cruelties
should be permitted, as are daily exercised in diverse places; it would make
your hair stand an end, and your very heart bleed (how hardy soever you are) to
be a Spectator of what is done in that way, we know where. The common Objection
to all that has been discoursed upon this head, is, That Children will not
learn without being beaten, and that soundly too sometimes; To which we return
this Answer, That if it be meant Universally, it is a downright falsehood;
there being many Children who really love ingenuity, love their Book, and will
do whatsoever is set them to do with a words speaking; but if indeed it be
meant of some particulars, it must be granted to be true; but then such of whom
it is true, were better be set to some other employment, and not be put almost a
third part of their lives to continual slavery; for, to be kept always poring
upon Books, which they hate, and to groan every day under the Birch, is in our
opinion little better; and he at the Oar or Mines, is far the happier of the
two: Some Parents indeed will have their Children to School; they will subject
them to the humor of the Teacher, to be lasht, Ad libitum plagosi Orbilij,
just as those poor deluded Heathen of old, they would sacrifice their tender
Infants to Moloch, and other Devils; we know not whether the Children have
cause to thank them; nay, we know hundreds who do not thank them, but
afterward in their riper years make them wish with akeing hearts, they had
followed the Poets advice, Praeconem facias vel Architectum.

This brief Account we desire all parties concerned, to accept of at present
for their own ease and ours: And if any ignorant pragmatical Person find fault
with any thing here writ, truly we value it not; If any serious understanding
Gentlemen be offended at any passage, we presume upon their pardon, at long
run, there being no just cause of offense given in the least; We having wronged
no body at all, but only in a noble and generous way (with some pains and more
cost) done our endeavor to have our English Youth no more abused, and the
World no longer cheated.

FINIS.
London, Printed by T. M. for the Author, 1667.

TOgether with this you will receive a Specimen of a most laborious and useful
Undertaking recommended by the Testimony of many Eminent persons, as deserving
encouragement from all such as are lovers of Religion and Learning. Had the
Compiler's Estate been equal to his Industry, he had needed no help to have
brought it forth into the World: But since the computed Charge so much exceeds
his abilities, it is necessary to desire the moderate aids of others, that his
Labors may be serviceable to the public. Knowing therefore your ability to
judge and your inclinations to encourage matters of this nature, it has been
thought fit in a special manner to recommend the promotion of this Work to your
care, and to entreat you to be active in the furtherance of it by procuring the
Subscriptions of your neighbors and acquaintance, especially those of the
Gentry and Ministry, upon the Conditions here proposed: For which, besides the
satisfaction you will receive in doing so good a work, and the expression of
your affections to Religion and Learning, you shall have the grateful
acknowledgment of the Compiler, and of (...)


