A Brief RELATION OF THE PROCEEDINGS IN THE Kingdom of Scotland, As it is
certified by LETTERS From Persons of quallity residing in EDINBURGH. Dated June
the 20. 1648.

LONDON, Printed for R. B. 1648.

THE TRVE COPY OF A LETTER SENT Unto a Member of the honorable House of Commons
from a Gentleman of quallity now in Edinburgh in Scotland bearing date the 20
of this instant June, 1648.
Honored Sir, and my most faithful Friend,
THis serves as to acknowledge your former favors, so to put you in mind that
now things being come to the height, its time with heart and hand to be seen
valiant for God and his cause; And doubtless he himself will appear when the
oppression of his people, and the pride and cruelty of the enemy is at the
height; for never the like pride and oppression was ever seen here in Scotland,
these papers enclosed will show the particulars: Present my service to your
brother my honored friend.

Sir I am Your real Friend and faithful Servant.

A Paper dated at Edinburgh the 13 June 1648.
THe Parliament at eleven of the clock at night on saturday last adjourned for
two years; they have left a Committee of States with the same power the
Parliament had: It is conceived by many of themselves that they adjourned so
hastily in fear least that the Parliament of England should have sent them
their resolutions and consent to a Treaty with the King, which to avoid they
brake up the Parliament.

This week all active instruments have been employed to raise an Army, all
opposers are imprisoned or plundered or both, and as fast as a Troop is raised
they are sent to a Roundheads house there to quarter, and in a few days they
devour him quite; this hope of free quarter and plunder raises Troops apace,
especially since they are assured of much better when they come into England.

An act passed in the Parliament that all men shall be imprisoned and their
goods seized that should not assist in the raising of this Army; whereupon
thousands run away, some to one place, some to another, and many are daily
imprisoned and plundered to nothing, and this happens only upon the godly and
religious Party, who make conscience of the cause of God, the Covenant, and
will not go against it.

Another act was made that all men must swear to obey and execute all the acts
made by this Parliament; whereupon diverse Lords and others of quallity are
gone, and at this instant several Troops are plundering their goods and
ruinating their houses.

The Malignant Party here hope in one month to make ready an army to march
into England, which they will do certainly if no force appear upon the borders
to oppose them, but if any opposition be made them the Malignants will find
work enough on both sides.

The Assembly of the Kirk made an act the same day that the Parliament made
theirs for the raising of their Army, that whasoever Minister in Scotland
should not warn their Congregation of the unlawfulness of this War and
Engagement against England and the Covenant, and do not let their people know
that this War is against the cause of God, in which both Kingdoms are engaged in
one solemn Covenant, should be suspended and deprived from their Ministry; and
in order thereunto never did any Ministers show such valor and courage even to
the faces of the greatest in Scotland, and that upon the very last Lords day.

The Marquess of Argile is safely armed in his own Country, there are two
Regiments of Foot that have deserted the Army, are gone unto him, they were
first raised by him; and thousands in Scotland expect that Lords stirring, but
indeed should any place or party rise whilst the whole Army is thus upon them,
nothing can be done to their advantage, but if a considerable Force come once
upon the borders from England, certainly there will be strange turnings here.

To conclude, you never saw the Cavaleirs and deboist party in England, when
they were at their highest, so scoff at and revile the religious Ministry, the
cause and Covenant of God, as these do here that are of Hamiltons party; and it
is verily believed, that many godly Ministers will be compelled to flee into
England speedily for safety and protection.

A Paper of the 20th of June. 1648.
The enclosed was intended for you the last week, but was stayed with other
Letters by order from the State, since which time here is very little
alteration; the Force that is raised, and can be spared by this Kingdom, are
now sent to quarter at Dunfreese, 24. miles from Carlyle, and many suppose they
intend to join speedily with Langdale, they are in number thirteen hundred
Horse, and twenty five hundred Foot, and by this you may easily see who gave
order to Langdale to take Barwick and Carlyle, and if Langdale be no speedily
relieved by them, he and his Fellow Cavaliers will blaze out all the truth, And
declare upon whose order and Commission they were sent thither, but a few days
will show very much of their wicked design against all that have taken the
Covenant, and engaged in both Kingdoms in this cause of God and his truth
against the Antichristian enemy, and a very small body of soldiers upon the
borders will destroy all their design, and make them not dare to leave their own
Country, however the Ministers deserve high commendations, and do strange
things, they fear no Forces, but protest against the proceedings of the great
Duke and his party, and no doubt but God in a very short time will here their
prayers, and be avenged of this ungodly party that are like those of ours in
England, professed enemies to the Gospel of Christ, and the ways of holiness
and truth.

FINIS.

