A Brief REMONSTRANCE TOUCHING The Pre-emption of TYN, and the Coynages
thereof. April ye 25.
AMong the many Temptations that all Princes and Powers are exposed to, this is
none of the least; their liableness to receive false Representations of things
upon the account of Profit and Advantage from Persons, who for the most part,
make use of such pretenses to promote some low or base interest of their own,
or sometimes do it ignorantly, not knowing or considering the whole, or the
circumstances which might complete the truth of such Relations; but so much as
may hold forth the pretended profit, supposing that, would be grateful in it
self, and they may possibly ingratiate themselves thereby.

By means of this Temptation, and such Suggestions, it has also been the
unhappiness of the poor Tynners of Cornwall, upon every new change of Government
or Power in this Nation, which have been many within these few years, still to
be interrupted and called off from their hard labor and employment, to answer
to the name and title of Preemption and Coynages of their Tyn, as if, of all
men, the poor Tynners were born slaves; and what were a Monopoly in the case of
any other Native, were none in theirs: But being born in chains never to be
shaken off, must intail them to posterity, from generation to generation.

Now the endeavors of this Paper shall be to undeceive, and rightly to inform
all such as have only looked into this business, through the wrong Mediums
before mentioned, and to set Preemption and Coynages upon their true Basis and
Foundations: Which to do, it will be necessary to lay down, First, The Original
of Preemption, its Foundation and Bounds. Secondly, What it is in it self, and
its own nature? Thirdly, What has been the judgment of every Age concerning
Preemption, when it was in use, since it had a name in England, and then we
shall come to speak of Coynages?


And for the first, It will not be denied by any, being so evident by diverse
ancient Authors and Records, that there were Tynners and Tyn-workers before the
Conquest, yea, in Augustus Caesar's time, as Judge Dodridge reports out of
Diodorus Siculus, and therefore they owed not their liberty and privilege of
digging for Tyn to any of the Kings of England, but that they had it ab initio,
and by prescription, which does also appear by diverse words in some of their
antientest Charters, as Sicut ab antiquo consuetudine and sicut hactenus
usitatum, Charter of K. John.
etc. But as it is acknowledged by all, the most specious and probable
Foundation of Preemption, is from that clause in the Charter granted to the
Tynners by King Edward the first, Anno 32. of Nisi nos vel heredes nostri
stannum illud emere volumus: There being found no mention of the word in elder
times, nor ever any grant of the Emption of Tyn, till after this Charter.

Now how far this clause may rationally extend, First, it does appear, That it
amounted to no more than a benefit and preferment of buying the Tyn before any
Subject at the price current, or as the King and they could agree, as it is
fully expressed in Brighams Pattent, when after near Two hundred years sleep it
was revived in the Three and fortieth year of Queen Elizabeth, which has been
publicly and often acknowledged by the Council that heretofore pleaded for
Preemption; and that this clause cannot well be extended further, may be proved
by reason, and the very construction which the words in that Charter will bear,
which immediately precede this clause, which are these, Et quod omnes
Stannatores nostri Stann' illud sic ponderatum licite vendere possint cuicunque
voluerint in villis praedict' faciend' inde nobis Cunagium, and alias
consuetudines debitas and usitatas, nisi nos vel heredes nostri, etc. By which
they have leave to sell their Tyn to whom they will, unless the King will buy
it, and then it will follow, That he must buy as they can sell which is, to
whom they will, or that offers most; otherwise the first and last clause will
seem to figh: one against another: And this will more fully appear from the
nature of the word it self, for he Privilege and Prerogative reserved in this
clause is Preemption. Now all Emption does presuppose a contract, and as there
is a correlation between the Contractors and the Contractee; so in every
Contract of Emption, the Law of Nations requires two things, First, a voluntary
and mutual consent of two parties, the buyer and the seller; and then the
Tynner cannot be compelled to sell his Tyn against his will. And secondly, a
proportion of price to the value of the commodity, and then the Kings of
England could never impose a price upon their Tyn, and consequently could not
take it at their own price, by any warrant in this clause.

And so much may suffice to clear the Original Foundation, and Bounds of
Preemption.

Secondly, It is also evident, that Preemption in this its Primitive
Institution, and Native color, is nevertheless a Monopoly, for that it
ingrosses the most staple and native commodity of this Nation into particular
hands ( viz. the Kings Farmers,) who are to have the sole managery thereof, to
the prejudice not only of all the other Merchants and people of the Nation,
who have an equal right to the Emption, and Transportation thereof, but also of
the Tynners themselves, who cannot be Merchants of their own goods, but are
bounded to a price which they must acquiesce in, during the time of the Farm,
though their Commodity come to be worth double in the Nation and abroad, during
that time.

Thirdly, As to the judgment of every Age since that Charter, concerning
Preemption when it was in use, it will appear, that though there have been but
few Presidents for it (not so many as for Ship Money) and but few Grants made
of the Emption of Tyn by some of the Kings of England, and those still at the
prizes which were then current, and never imposed; (for they desire it may be
observed there never was, nor can be urged in any age, till of late, the
imposing of a price upon the Tynners goods) yet seldom or never were there any
such Grants, but they were from first to last complained of as oppressions, and
so presented in succeeding Parliament; yea, commonly made null, and revoked by
those Kings that granted them, whereof you may take a short view in these
particular instances.

The first Grant found after this Charter of 32 Edw. 1. was made by his Son,
Edward the Second, to Anthony de Pessaign, which was revoked in the tenth year
of his Reign, and left by him to the Barons of the Exchequer (who could be no
Farmers) to do therein, Prout ante concessionem praedictam fieri solebat; yet
the same year there was another Grant made, De emptione Stagminis, to one
Abington, the Kings Butler, which was afterward revoked in the fourteenth year
of his Reign, upon those grounds, That it was in oppressionem populi, and
contra tenorem Charte pris sui, etc. And commands the Sheriff to make
Proclamation throughout the County, that all Tynners that had any Tyn to sell
after the Coynage, and Coynage due paid, might sell their Tyn (prout decet)
without any impediment or contradiction, according to the Charter of his
Father, wherein there is both a construction of that Charter, and the judgment
of that time concerning Preemption.

The next Grant that appears to be made, was 12 Edw. 3. to Richard Suthorp, and
Moneron (upon pretense of the Kings most urgent occasions for the defense, and
saving of the Kingdom) to seize the Tyn of Cornwall and Devon into their hands
for his use, yet so, that they should give good security for it, according to
such a price as should be agreed between them and the Tynners; yet the same
year upon complaint to the Parliament held at Northampton, there was a
revocation of their Grant, and a restoration of the Tyn.

In the 21 year of Edw. 3. there was another Lease granted of the Tyn to one
Tydeman of Lymbrick, which was complained of the same year in Parliament by the
Merchants of England, for that the Tyn was engrossed by one man, which was wont
to be sold to all the Merchants of the Kingdom; and receiving no satisfactory
answer that Parliament, Come it is ont fait de tout temps
that they might sell their Tyn to any that would buy it, without the restraint
of the Prince, as they had done heretofore at all times.

From Edward the third, down along to Edward the sixth, there is not found or
urged any one Grant or Lease of the Emption of Tyn, though in the long interval
of that time, their Charters have been confirmed by all or most of the Viz 8 R.
2. 1 Edw. 4. 3 Hen. 7. 27 Hen 7. 3 Hen. 8. 1 Edw. 6.
Kings that intervened; yea, twice by Henry the seventh, in one of whose
Charters, viz. 27 Hen. 7. this clause concerning Preemption of Nisi nos, etc.
is wholly declined and omitted, though it be well known he was a Prince, wise
and wary, and had Empson and Dudley.
Instruments active enough to promote and execute what ever might advance his
Revenue by any colorable pretense, from Prerogative or Law: And though 7 Edw.
6. there was then a Lease made to Gilbert Srockhouse, of the Preemption of Tyn,
with as much easiness and respect to the Tynners as could be desired, viz. That
he should give as much as any other Merchant had, or did give, and sell but at
a half penny profit in every pound to others, yet this was revoked I Q. Mary, by
the Lords of the Council, as prejudicial to the Tynners; so it continued free
till the latter end of Q. Elizabeth's Reign, and then a Lease was granted to
Brigham and Wymes, for the first buying of Tyn, at such prizes as they and the
Tynners could agree, with the reservation of 2000 l per annum Rent to Her
Majesty, and no more; yet this Lease was understood and comprehended by K.
James, under the notion of a Monopoly, and an invasion of the Liberty of the
Subject (as well as some other Pattents) and so after long debate with his
Council, revoked by Proclamation in the first year of his Reign, as therein may
at large appear: It is very true, that 5 Jacobi there being a glut of Tyn in
the Country, more then the Kingdom, or Foreign parts could take off, the
Tynners easily consented to a new Farm of their Tyn, for the price then
current, of 28 l. per 1000 w. to the Tynners, and 2000 l. to the King; but
within a few years after, that the gain of the sole Emption and Transportation
of their Tyn came to be felt and understood by the Merchants, Preemption was
advanced to 8000 l. per annum, and so grew higher and higher, as the times grew
worse, with some petty increase of price to the tynners, till it came to 14000
l. per annum, and more, and so continued till the expiration of the late
Farmers Pattent, which was since the beginning of the great Parliament. And
then the Tynners having served out the time of their Bondage, and being no
longer under that state, able to preserve themselves and their Families from
Ruin, addressed several Petitions to the Parliament for Liberty; where after
several years attendance upon reference to several Committees, much opposition
and contestation at length one of their Petitions was read in the House, and
referred to the Committee for the Navy; where Preemption was solemnly debated
in the presence of the Attorney General, and by the Vote of the whole
Committee, judged to be a grievance, and to be taken away as will appear in the
Records and Acts of that Committee, still ready to be produced: By virtue
whereof, and of the Act of Parliament for Excise or New Impost, the Tynners
after their Tyn stamped and coined at their respective Blowing-houses, sell the
same from time to time to their best Merchant, as they are enabled to do by
Authority of the said Act, paying the duty of Excise.

And thus you have a short view of the state of Preemption, and what has been
done upon it from its Original to this day. There is one Objection which needs
answering before we come to Coynages, and that is this.

Object. 1. That if Tyn be out of Farm, and at liberty, the Tynner would be but
a prey to every Merchant, and the Tynners by underselling one another, would
quickly destroy themselves, and all Tyn-working.

Answ. This Objection, though it be countenanced by wise men is yet a Mystery,
and it must necessarily argue a great weakness and want of common discretion in
the Tynner above other men, to dispose of his goods to his best advantage; from
whence this must proceed, otherwise why should not the same mischief and
inconvenience befall those that trade in Fish, and other not so choice
Commodities as this, peculiar to this Kingdom, and that County alone.

But secondly, This inconvenience never followed but upon a glut of Tyn, as is
before said, but there is no ground for this fear now, when the quantity is so
small, that the Manufactures of the Kingdom are able to employ near the whole
bulk of Tyn that is made in the year, as it is at present.

But thirdly, There is an answer to it, against which there is no rising up,
and that is from sense, and six or seven years experience; and we use to say,
Non est disputandum de gustu, There is no disputing against ones sense, and
common experience, which can evidence, That in the various changes and
obstructions of Trade that have been within these few years, yet the Tynners
have still had a far better price, then ever they could have under a Farm, and
for the most part 4 l. and above, and at this day 4 l. 8 s. per centum for
their Tyn; yea, the Backs and Bellies of the poor Tynners, the present better
condition of their Families, their Wives and Children, comparing it with that
misery and pennury they endured formerly; are so many living monuments to
upbraid the Tyranny of such as imposed Preemption, and evident Arguments from
Sense, how much Liberty is better then Bondage, from which Sense it is
believed, they will not easily be drawn upon any pretenses to leave their
Freedom, and return into Egypt. And if all this were not sufficient, you may
have to evince this truth, the suffrage not only of many Merchants and Factors
in Cornwall, who get a livelihood by the buying and disposition of this
Commodity, which they dared not touch in the days of Preemption, but also of
the Pewterers of London, who are not ashamed to affirm, Their Company is 20000
l. better in estate since they had Freedom to buy at the first Market, then
they were when Retailers from the Farmers. And so much for Preemption.

Obj. But what may be said, why Coynages may not be revived, and that ancient
due of 4 s. per centum, imposed and paid for Coynage of their Tyn?

To this it is answered, First, That it is most evident there is no necessity
of reviving that old way of Coynages, since all the Tyn is, and has been
coined and stamped for several years past at the Blowing-houses, by the
Officers for the Excise, with the Commonwealth Arms; by which, upon the payment
of the Excise due, it becomes current, and is saleable: And which way of
Coining is conceived to be far better, and more convenient than the old, as
shall be cleared by and by.

And secondly, The State loses not the 4 s. per centum Coynage due, but has
the same Revenue paid in the Excise, and more. The payment whereof, it is
believed the Tynners are content, should be ascertained upon them, if any urge
the uncertainty or contingency of the Excise; but it is conceived, it will not
be suitable to grounds of policy and prudence, to load that Native, and most
staple Commodity of this Nation, with extraordinary and unnecessary Taxes,
which may discourage the Tynner from working Tyn, and put him upon Husbandry,
and other employments more profitable, as is done in Devon; seeing this would
destroy all manner of Revenue, together with that ancient Commodity peculiar to
this Nation, and that County alone, and be an utter ruin to many thousand
Families in England, whose livelihoods depend on the manufactures thereof.

But thirdly, We humbly desire that it may be considered upon what legal or
equitable ground the old way of Coynage, or Coynage due, may be imposed at
present, seeing the Duchy of Cornwall, of which this was a part, is dissolved,
the Manors and Lands, yea, the Coynage-houses sold to several persons; who
have bought their Lands without Reservation of any Privilege or Immunities to
the Tynner. Now it is well known, that before, as well as in the Charter
granted by the Kings of England to the Tynners, there were not only for the
sake of Preemption (for that was so inconsiderable a benefit, as was not made
use of for two hundred years) but for those ancient Coynage dues, the Tynners
were to have a Lord-warden and Vice-warden, to determine all Causes arising in
the Stannaries, and were not to be tried in any other Court, were to be free in
all Markets and Fairs from any Toll, etc. were to dig in any the Princes Wastes
or Moors without control, were to bring and carry watercourse over the
Princes and other men's Lands, and many other privileges, which it cannot be
thought the Purchasers of those Lands will now allow the Tynner: And then let
it be seriously considered, whether it be equitable and just to return the
Tynner to his Burdens, without his privileges, and to the payment of that, for
which it is not possible for him to enjoy the consideration.

Obj. But if the State would take off the Excise, were it not better to revive
Coynages, and pay the dues that way?

To this we answer, That we humbly conceive the old way of Coynage is not
better at present, either as it respects the State; who first have the same
Revenue by the Excise, without the charge of so many Officers and Encumbrances,
as are incident to Coynages, (the best friends to Coynages, and this Objection,
being either by those that hope to have a share in the Offices attending
Coynages, or some Merchants that wish well to Preemption, and know the reviving
of Coynages the next way to introduce it,) and secondly, who have it also with
less danger of embezzling, for the Excise dues are to be paid, as soon as the
Tyn is blown, and before it be carried from the Blowing-house, the Coynage due
long after, not before the set times of Coynage, which may be a temptation to
the Necessitous Tynner, in that interval, to sell and embezzle his Tyn without
Coynage, or paying any dues.

Secondly, Not better for the Tynner, who by the Excise may sell his Tyn. and
have it stamped and coined as soon as it is blown, to supply his necessities;
whereas the other way, he must stay till the solemn times of Coynage, and
before that time to supply his necessity, be compelled to pawn, possibly, or
sell his tyn underhand, and under price to the Regrator. which Judge Dodridge
in his Book of the Duchy of Cornwall observes, was the misery which the
interval of Coynage exposed the poor Tynner to, in those days, and which is
like to return upon them again, if they return to Coynages. Neither is it
better for the Tynner in this respect, that by the Excise he pays nothing
before his Tyn be sold; but by the way of Coynages he must pay the 4 s. for
Coynage, though he borrow it, and cannot sell his Tyn.

Object. But is there not an absolute necessity of a Say-master to say and tare
the Tyn, to keep that excellent Commodity from embasing?

To this it is answered, That though the Interest of the Tynner lie in having
such an Officer, as much as the Merchants, to whom the Tyn bought is at present
ordinarily warranted by the Tynner; yet such an Officer may be appointed, as
with the consent of the Tynner, so without Coynages; for as the Officer for the
Excise has and does Coin the Tyn at the Blowing-house, so may the Say-master
say it there, with a like, and no more trouble.

To conclude therefore, We humbly desire it may be considered, whether it were
not more agreeable to Justice and Policy, to leave the Tynner to a quiet
proceeding in his Calling, in the observation of those Laws and Rules, by
which, for some years past, and at present, he does dispose of his own Goods,
then (...) discompose him by setting on foot any Antiquated, or other ways,
^^^rein if the Tynner should not walk, or trangress, it were worth (...)
enquiring, how he were justly punishable, seeing he governs himself by the Rule
of an Act of Parliament, in force, and unrepealed; and is willingly content to
live in obedience thereunto, until the next Parliament take further course or
order therein.

FINIS.

