A Brief HISTORY OF THE Rise, Growth, Reign, Supports, and sudden fatal Foyl of
POPERY, during the three Years and an half of JAMES the SECOND, King of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland.

Together with a Description of the Six Popish Pillars,

THE Anabaptists, Presbyterians, Quakers, Independants, Roman Catholics, and
Popish Churchmen.


The perpetual Addressers of the King.

The Second Edition.

Prove. XXIV. ver. 21. My Son, Fear thou the Lord and the King: And meddle not
with them that are given to Change.

LONDON, Printed for the Author: And are to be Sold by most Booksellers in
London and Westminster, 1690.

AN HISTORY OF THE Rise, Growth, Reign, Supports, and sudden fatal Foyl of
POPERY, etc.
RAiling Accusation was such a thing as Michael the Archangel durst not use
against the Devil, (Jud. 9.) But when Men speak Evil, in such cases by surmise
only, of things which they know not, and that of Dignities, (ver. 10. 8.) Then
woe unto Them, (says the Apostle) for that they are in the way of Cain, and
are greedily running after the error of Balaam for reward, and are threatened
that They shall perish in the gainsaying of Korah, (ver. 11.) These are spots
in our feasts. Now in all National and Public Affairs, it is the Duty of all
good Christians to perform all Offices and acts of duty with utmost Charity, as
They tender the welfare of the common good of Their Country wherein They
inhabit: But of all such National Affairs, none call louder for acts of pure
Charity, than the Election of grave and wise Magistrates and Counselors, who
are to sit at the Helm, in order to manage the great Councils of a whole
Kingdom. Wherefore to hear of Schisms and Factions in such cases, savors
exceedingly of the spirit and temper of Cain, who slew his Brother, and why?
But because his own works were evil, and his Brothers good, (Joh. 3.12.). Was
it any wrong to the City of London, that it had yet More men of Reputation, to
stand as Candidates to be Elected Members of Parliament, to serve for that most
famous and Metropolitan City of the Kingdom, and that over and above, and
besides what had served immediately before? Surely no, but rather it is for the
glory of that Noble City, that it has such variety of Choice. But was it so,
that the Reputation and fame, of the wisdom and virtue of the New Members, did
make the loudest noise above the Old Ones; yet why should this breed so much
the more envy? What needed Malicious Lies to be strown into the Vulgar Ears, in
order to suppress the noise of Virtue and Honor? Or what needed the Clamours
of Anabaptists, Presbyterians, Quakers, and Congregational-Men, that cried down
the choice by such Men as They said, [would bring in King James again to Reign
over us?] That Popery is one of the greatest Annoyances that can befall this
Kingdom, and the bitterest Pill that can be prescribed for the Subjects, here,
to take, is a Doctrine past Dispute. And to be an Instrument to introduce such
Members of Parliament, as shall purposely endeavor to set up such a Prince as
certainly will Establish Popery in all that ever He can do, savors neither of
Charity toward this Church or Kingdom of England, nor of Piety toward God.
What King James has done, is too well known. And we cannot say, but the Sin of
the People, has justly deserved all that has befallen us; and not only so,
but also the whole of all those fears upon us, that they should have come to
pass even as we feared. And what the wrath of God, because of our Sins, has
yet behind, to throw upon us, God knows! And we may justly dread! However, it
becomes not us to speak evil of Kings, especially so nearly Related unto such,
by whose means we have received good things. Leaving therefore that wickedness
to be acted only by the wicked and devilish Railers; let us only for the good
of this Church and Kingdom, make a strict inquiry out of the Public and Weekly
Gazettes, who and what They were, who were the greatest promoters of all these
Evil things, for the sake of which we cry out so much against King James.

On February the 6th. 1684. King Charles the II. Died. And on the same day was
Proclaimed James the II. as His only Brother, and Heir. And afterward King
James the Second having confirmed all Officers in Place as were before, came
into the Privy Council Chamber, and spoke, saying to this effect as follows;
[That He would follow His Brothers Example in Clemency and Tenderness to His
People. That He would endeavor to preserve the Government both in Church and
State, as then it was by Law Established. That He would always take care to
Defend and Support the Church of England. That He would never invade any Man's
Property. That He would go as far as any Man in preserving the Defense of this
Nation in all its just Rights and Liberties.]

This Speech by the King's Command was made Public. How He has kept His Royal
Word, God knows, it becomes not me to say.

On February the 11th. came in the first Address from Portsmouth Garrison, and
the Society of Lincolns Inn, Congratulating His Majesty's Accession to the
Throne, and promising Obedience. And henceforwards came in more February the
4th. from Ipswich: The East India Company, Merchants of the Levant: The Bishop
and Clergy of London: The Inner Temple, Middle Temple London, Gray's Inn,
Portsmouth Corporation, Wells in Somersetshire, Westminster, etc. And on the
same day was King Charles the Second Buried Privately at Westminster in the
Evening.

Henceforward followed Addresses from all Counties and most of the Great Towns
all over England, Scotland and Ireland, and from most Parts of His Majesty's
Dominions. And Ambassadors from all the Neighboring Kingdoms and States did
Congratulate.

On April the 23d. 1685. King James the Second, with Mary His Queen, were both
Crowned at Westminster with great Pomp and State; at what time His Majesty took
His Oath to do all things according to what he had before promised, on the day
he came first to be King.

Now, presently after His Majesty came to the Crown, He began to show Himself a
Papist, and openly went to Mass at His Palace at St. James's. Notwithstanding
which, infinite numbers of Addresses of Congratulation were continually coming
in unto His Coronation, and after.

On the 23d. of April also met the Parliament called in Scotland. Which being
Met, did greatly Congratulate His Majesty's Accession to the Throne, with
promises of much Obedience. And this Parliament made an Act to confirm and
secure the Protestant Religion as it was then Established, by Archbishops and
Bishops; and did promise in a Letter to the King, to do their best to Extirpate
Fanatacism, as in those days They counted and called the Presbyterian
Government.

On May the 23d. the English Parliament Met at Westminster. At what time His
Majesty renewed His Promises made at His first coming to the Crown, viz. To
maintain the Church of England and the Property of the Subject. And withal gave
notice of Argyle Landed in Scotland. And immediately the Lords first, and then
the Commons, were thankful for the King's Speech, and promised to assist him
against Argyle; who coming in well furnished with Armor, Ships and Men, as his
case stood, yet met with small Encouragement, managed his business very meanly,
fought Cowardly, and in a Month's time was utterly ruined and broken, Himself
taken, his Son Charles (as was thought) Dead, and all his Company broken. He
was executed on the First of July, 1685.

On June the 13th. the Duke of Monmouth, with two or three small Vessels,
loaded with a good quantity of Arms, and a few Men, Landed at Lyme in
Dorset-shire. But against him also the Parliament unanimously joined with the
King, and giving Him Money to raise an Army, Declared the Duke of Monmouth
Traitor by Act of Parliament. But the Duke increasing his Army mightily at
Taunton in Somersetshire; managed his Affairs with a notable Conduct and
Courage: But finally at Wells his Army beginning to Plunder, and to break out
into Debauchery, he soon after Perished in a Pitched Battle, some Three miles
from Bridgewater; where being worsted for want of good Horsemen. His Foot
fought well, until overpowered by the King's Cannons, and His Horse and Foot
all together upon them, the Field was lost; and soon after the Duke was Taken,
July the 8th. being hid in a Ditch; and being brought to London, he was
Beheaded on Tower Hill: the 15th. of July, 1685. But the L -- d G -- y being
also Taken, Confessed the Confederates, and was Saved.

On July the 12th. was a day of Thanksgiving for the Success of these
Victories. Richard Goodenough was also Taken, who after confessed the
Accomplices, and saved his Life. But Ferguson Escaped. Major Wildman, Mr.
Speak, Mr. Trenchard, and others. The Lord Delamere, Earl of Stamford, and Lord
Brandon, were made Prisoners.

From these stirs of Civil Wars, it came to pass that a standing Army was ever
after kept up by the King, and the Parliament Adjourned and Prorogued from time
to time, it was paid out of the King's own Revenues. And hence Popery increased
with much advance, the Queen and one Father Petre, much spurring on.

On November the 9th. the Parliament met at Westminster, according to
Adjournment; at what time the King excusing His Standing-Army kept up, and
several Officers allowed against Law, who had not taken the Test. The
Parliament not pleased herewith, were soon Prorogued.

On March the 11th. came forth His Majesty's Proclamation of General Pardon,
not without many Exceptions.

1686. In the Army Popish Officers by degrees filled all vacant Places: As also
French and Irish Popish Soldiers mingled in most Troops and Companies. Papists
also were admitted into Privy Council; were made Judges, Sheriffs and Justices,
without taking the Test. And in February, 1686. the Earl of Tyrconnel a great
Papist, Succeeded the Earl of Clarendon, Lieutenant of Ireland. And the Earl of
Rochester refusing to become a Papist, was put out of Place of High Treasurer.

On February the 24th. was Published His Majesty's Proclamation for Liberty of
Conscience to Papists, and all others as could be trusted in the Kingdom of
Scotland. For which the Lords of the Privy Council of that Kingdom, returned
their Thanks. Thus His Majesty by uniting the Popish and Presbyterian Interest
in Scotland, began to lessen the Authority of the then present established
Church by Protestant Bishops.

By this time the Deputy of Ireland being become a Papist, and much of the
Council; the Army there; the Sheriffs, Judges and Justices also being mostly
Popish, or Popishly affected, Persons in Popish Rebels Estates began to be
thrust out apace, even by Law too, by means of those Judges and Sheriffs; and
Popish Robbers also multiplied, insomuch as little safety for Protestants began
to appear in that Kingdom. To quiet which last Oppression, came forth the
Proclamation from the Deputy, February the 21st.

On March the 18th. His Majesty declared His intention to grant Liberty of
Conscience unto all Persons of what Persuasion soever: And the better to Father
His design, He Prorogued the Parliament to November 87. And on April the 4th.
1687, His Majesty's Declaration to all His loving Subjects for Liberty of
Conscience came forth.

Hence followed a crowd of Congratulatory Addresses, from all sorts of
Dissenters. The first who began this Holy Dance after His Majesty's Pipe, was a
great number of Anabaptists in and about London; and being delivered by several
of the Chief of them, April the 14th. was called,

The Humble Address of diverse of Your Majesty's Subjects in and about the City
of London, commonly called Anabaptists; and says,

WE Your Majesty's most Humble and Loyal Sabjects, who have been of a Long time
great Sufferers, by the severe Execution of Poenal Laws about matters of
Religion, (unto which for Conscience sake we could not conform) cannot
sufficiently pay those acknowledgments we owe to Your Majesty for your late
Most Gracious Declaration, whereby we are not only delivered from our past
Distresses, and our Families from Ruin, but are also allowed the free exercise
of our Religion; which is dearer to us than any Worldly Enjoyment.

Great Sir, it is the fense of this invaluable Favor, and benefit derived to Us
from Your Royal Clemency, that compels us once more to Prostrate our selves at
Your Majestics Feet, with the tender of our most humble Thanks for that Peace
and Liberty which both we and all other Dissen^ers do now enjoy; and rest
confident of, under Your most Gracious Protection.

And being our selves most firmly resolved (as in Conscience bound) to
endeavor to the utmost to give that proof of our Duty and Fidelity to Your
Majesty, that you may never have occasion to repent of Your Princely favor
toward us. We cannot but rest confident, That such demonstrations as these of
Your Majesty's tender care of the Prosperity and quiet of Your Peaceable
Subjects of all sorts, (though differing in some Sentiments of Religion) will
so absolutely command the Hearts of them all, that the only Emulation among
them will be, who may approve themselves best worthy of your Majesty's favor,
and contribute most toward the glory and happiness of your Reign.

And that God Almighty by pouring out His signal Blessings upon Your Majesty,
Your Royal Posterity, Government, and People, will be pleased to convince the
whole World of the Wisdom and truth of Your Majesty's Sentiments, etc.]

Such were the whileom thoughts of the Anabaptists, of King James,
notwithstanding all His endeavors of advancing Popery, who appeared in this
Address,

A sort of People avowing themselves so exceedingly obliged to King James for
favors done them, that their utmost proof of Duty and Fidelity to His Majesty,
can never enough satisfy; until They give Him occasion never to repent of
those princely favors to them. Which if so, then either by this Address they
think themselves bound in Conscience to adventure their Lives to Restore Him
again to His Throne: (for otherwise he must needs repent of His Princely
favors to them, in vain bestowed:) Or else they have hereby declared
themselves, a company of mere empty flattering Sycophants, promising that which
they never intended. And now was it true as is said in the Address, then are
they themselves the Men bound to bring in King James, against all sense of the
Opinion of His most Excellent Majesty King William, in His Declaration
expressed, and of the late Parliament, in declaring the Government of the
Kingdom by King James to be Forfeited, by reason of Mis-government. Or if
otherwise, (they say what they never intended.) Then is no Credit to be given
to any thing they say; their Tongues are no Slander; the Anabaptists in and
about London, are a Profligate People, of the Sperm of John of Leydon and
Knipperdoling; a company of branded Hypocrites, never to be believed or trusted.

They pretend to have an absolute Confidence in King James, as to His tender
care of the Peace and quiet of His Subjects; they pretend to strive against all
Dissenters with Emulation, to do more for Him than all of them. They pretend to
be bound to Wish, Pray, and Fight, and to do all that may be done, that His
Majesty and the Prince of Wales His Son, and His Government may be Blessed. And
so by consequence they must hold, that all opposers ought to be Accursed. And
yet these Men cried out against the late choosers of New Members, [ That they
would bring in King James again.]

On May the 10th. was presented to the King, [The most Humble Address of the
Anabaptists in Leichestershire.] Wherein these also acknowledge as the former,
Their Thankfulness for the King's Declaration; and promising most faithfully
and ambitiously to Serve Him with their Obedience and Loyalty in all ways to
ihe best of His Advantage; Praying for Him and His Posterity. And on May the
14th. came in more of the same from Exeter in the same County.

On May the 17th. was Presented the Humble Address of the Independents and
Anabaptists of Gloucester-shire, Magnifying His Majesty's Wisdom and Clemency
with Hyperbolical Language, stiling Him the Rightful Father of His Dominions;
Praying Him there may be a Total Abolishment of the Poenal Statutes concerning
Religion, and promising Him Exemplary Loyalty; and concluding with [Long Live
and Reign King James the Just.]

On May the 21st. was Presented [The Humble Address of the Anabaptists of
Stafford, Derby and Nottingham shires] promising Their utmost Loyalty to Him,
even unto the making of Him Great throughout all the World. And at the same
time came forth another Address of the Anabaptists of Che-shire, Shrop-shire
and Staffordshire, stiling His Majesty, A Prince by Heaven designed for the
highest Pattern of Royal Goodness and true Policy; and promising to serve Him
with such ready Obedience and steadfast Loyalty, to the utmost of their
Capacity, in their Station, as it shall not be possible for any other Subjects
to exceed.

On May the 28th. was presented to His Majesty the Humble Address of the
Anabaptists of the City of Bristol; acknowledging, promising, and wishing much
after the manner as those before.

On June the 18th. was Presented the Humble Address of the Anabaptists of Kent,
acknowledging, promising and wishing like their preceding Brethren;
acknowledging the King, though a (Zealous Papist) yet the most tender and
affectionate Prince that ever swayed the Scepter of His Empire; out-doing all
expectation and desert of His Subjects; promising Submission to Him under God,
and that unfeignedly, in all things commanded them by Him; Praying that God may
grant Him whatsoever may be needful, for His then present and future Happiness.

On June the 29th. was Presented to His Majesty the Humble Address of the
Anabaptists of Middlesex, Hertford, Bucks, Oxon, Warwick, Northampton, Lincoln,
Huntington, Bedford, Cambridge, Essex, Kent Surry, Sussex, Southampton and
Dorset-shires, Confirming with very Hyperbolical Compliments, all things before
promised and owned by the rest of Their preceding Brethren.

And after all these was presented, yet one more Humble Address of the
Anabaptists of Oxford, Abbington, and Wantage, with the same Flatteries and
Warranties as their Fellows. They had once before Addressed in that of the
Counties of Oxon and Berks: But it seems these Anabaptisto-Papists could not
rest so without a peculiar application, so proud it seems they were of their
Interest in a Popish Prince.

And by all these Addresses, it appears plainly, that not only the most part,
if not all the Anabaptists in and about London, but all over England, have
voluntarily and freely engaged themselves unto their utmost to aid and assist
King James in taking off the Test and all Poenal Laws; and by consequence to
open the ancient Flood gates of Stoppage, and to let in an Inundation of
Popery, to overrun and drown not only the Church of England, but also the
whole Kingdom, with an overflow of Popish Oppressions.

Now true it is, that Liberty of Conscience is a matter not reasonably of any
Power to be denied unto any of its Subjects, and cannot be spoken against. But
Liberty of Schism is quite another thing, and such as Holy Writ utterly Abhors.
It is the will of God [ that all Christians be of one mind, Ephesians. 4.1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 6. 1 Cor. 1.10.] And we know what an heinous thing it was esteemed by St.
Paul, [That there were Divisions in the Church, the Members dividing and
separating into Parties, (ver. 11, 12, etc.)] And these things both Magistrates
and Ministers ought to remedy to the best of their skill. And in Old times they
were always esteemed good Kings who punished Innovations in Religion, and that
with Severity. And the Apostles in the New Testament were as urgent to the same
purpose, [to reject all Heretics, ( Tit. 3.10.2 Joh. ver. 9, 10, 11. and 3 John ver. 9, 10.)] Such Paul accurseth, ( Gal. 1.8.) And wishes such
Perverters who trouble the Church, that they might be cut off, ( Gal. 5.12.)

Consider we therefore, that the Anabaptists, being a pernicious sort of
People, dangerous both to Church and State, wherever they have crept into
Power: As was manifest at Amsterdam, and after at Munster in Germany, and since
in England, in times of the late Rebellion: And are a Sect that do hold
Dectrines destructive to the Peace of Church and State, denying the Power of
the Civil Magistrate in many things; and do maintain a Church against a Church,
and Altar against Altar in the same Church; and set up Lay Preachers, and
maintain Re-baptizing. All which Doctrines, being by the General Councils in
purest Primitive times Forbidden, and Accursed and declared to be Schismatical
and Haeretical, cannot be called matters of Conscience, no more than Theft and
Fornication can be so called. Against Re baptizing, see Can. 4. Apost. and Can.
Prim. Carthag. confirmed by the [Can. Secund. Council. Oecumen. Constant.]
against Lay-Preachers, and setting up Altar against Altar, see Can. 16, and 17.
Council. Millev. and all the first six General Councils. Now whatsoever is
Condemned by any of the Six, or at least Four first General Councils, cannot be
maintained as matter of Conscience, it being plain matter of Schism. And all
Schism is by the Magistrate to be punished equally with Murder and Adultery,
and therefore not to be Tolerated. And yet we see how friendly these Haereticks
and Schismatics, the Anabaptists and Papists do Hug each other; no Hand and
Glove did ever better fit one the other.

It was six Weeks after the Anabaptists ever any other Sect advanced, the poor
Men of the West only excepted, (who being Pardoned their Lives, had just cause
to be thankful.) But Thousands of their Fellows had not that opportunity. And
yet on April the 30th the Presbyterians, Quakers, and Independents, came in
altogether of a Cluster: Whereof the Presbyterians marched in the Front, whose
Humble Address was presented to His Majesty, by the name of Several Ministers
of the Gospel in and about the City of London, commonly called Presbyterians;
Who [Acknowledging with great joy, His Majesty's Royal bounty and Christian
judgment, and Fatherly inclination to Them, and Their just security under His
Protection: And promising with a constant Emulation, that They will strive to
be most forward and faithful, in Their Allegiance to His Person and Crown; do
wish and pray He may enjoy a long Reign over Them.]

The Anabaptists were forward in their Promises, but these appear as it were
their Rivals, striving to outdo them. At the same time also was Presented the [
Humble Address of Their Brethren and Kinsfolks of Westminster.] Who the Place
and style considered, do evidence these Anonymous Addressers to have been Mr.
Alsop and his Flock, who presenting the Addrese, spoke as follows, [Oh, that we
had but Windows in our Hearts, that Your Majesty might see our Loyalty!]
Bespeaking themselves much to the same purpose with the London Presbyters, but
in a more gilded Style and Hyperbolick Language, do promise high both by
Prayers and Endeavors, to contrive a most blessed Union between the King and
His Papists on the one hand, and Themselves on the other; Which things
seriously weighed; read but their Promises and Subscriptions, and then who will
be judge, let him speak but plain truth, and so tell who are in earnest those
Men (whatever they give out) who are for the bringing in again of King James
the Second, and a Popish Government! Or if not, then say at least what pitiful
Flatterers have been those London Presbyterians, Ministers of the Gospel, and
Loyal Subjects of Westminster, but Men of a Punick Faith, no more to be
believed than the Impostor Mahomet, who by his Golden Promises drew in a third
part of the World to be his Proselytes, in expectation of his coming at a
Thousand years end, to give them the Rule all over the World! But his day being
long since come and gone, the good Man forgetting his Word, fell fast asleep,
and his Faith became transmigrated into a very Lie. And such was the Faith of
these doubty Presbyterians unto King James, when he stood most in need of them.

On May the 14th. was presented The Humble Thanks of several Subjects of Exon
and the County of Devon, Nonconformists: Acknowledging His Majesty, Their free,
Gracious and wonderful Deliverer: Declaring that They had no hand in the
Rebellion of 85. And that they do heartily hate that, and all Rebellion upon
any pretense whatsoever. That they are thankful for the Liberty given by the
Declaration of Indulgence the 4th. of April, 1687. And do promise all due
Obedience; and pray for God's greatest Blessings on His Majesty.

Now all other Addressers were wont to say in their Addresses what Persuasion
they were of: Only the Presbyterians as if ashamed to appear plainly courting
Popery, in many of their first Addresses concealed their name of Presbyterian.
But by the name Noncon, almost proper to that Sect alone, and by the Style, we
humbly conceive what these Addressers were; the Brethren of Mr. Knox and
Buchanan, and lineally Descended from that Generation of the Assembly of 48,
who held King Charles the First, while the Independents and Anabaptists cut off
His Head: And yet lo how demurely they can wipe their Mouths like the Whore in
the Proverbs, (Chapter 30.20.) saying, they have done no hurt, and how much they
abhor Rebellion upon any pretense whatsoever; while at the same time it is the
known Principle of those of that Persuasion, That their Kings may be
Excommunicated, called to account, and Condemned and Executed. See Buch. de
jure Regni, etc.

On May the 21st. was presented [ The Humble Address of the Nonconforming Loyal
Subjects of New Castle upon Tyne. Acknowledging wonderful Thanks for His
Majesty's Indulgence; stiling him a Peaceably disposed Prince, and promising
cheerful and dutiful Obedience to Him, and to serve Him at their utmost Hazard.

On May the 25th. was presented [ The Humble Address of the Dissenting Subjects
of Taunton in Somersetshire:] Acknowledging His Majesty's Indulgence to be a
greater Obligation to them to Duty and Allegiance, than all the Oaths, Tests
and Subscriptions that could have been Imposed: Promising His Majesty shall
never repent of those Favors to them: And wishing and praying, that all the
Blessings of Heaven may for ever Crown His Sacred Majesty.

On May the 28th. was presented [ The Hamble Address of the Presbyterians of
Bristol;] proclaiming their Acquaintance with His Majesty, of Old, and before
He came to the Crown, and how in those days, He had promised His intentions of
Indulgence to them: Declaring that they question not in the least His
resolution to preserve this their Happiness with the enjoyments of their
Properties, according to the assurances of His Declaration, since they knew it
to proceed from a mature Judgment, and a Principle rooted in His Majesty: And
promising to outdo all Men of their Capacity, in all such things which have a
tendency toward the promoting the Peace and Prosperity of His Majesty's Reign:
And praying for Him with imploring words, that His Majesty's self and Family,
(viz. The Prince of Wales) may abound with the best of Blessings.

Lo we, what a Discovery is here confessed out of this Address, of a
Confoederacy between the Papists and Presbyterians, of long standing, in order
to promote the King's Declaration of Indulgence, for Liberty of Conscience, or
rather of the common Schisms that both those Sects are guilty of. But who will
think that these Presbyterians of Bristol were the only Men of such
Confoederacy, without their Brethren of London! And if not, then let any
reasonable Man be judge who they are that are for the bringing in again of
King, James, and not only so, but are obliged by promise so to do; and have no
ways to disengage themselves unto him left, but by proclaiming themselves the
greatest Impostors in nature, the loudest Liars and veriest Vilains living: For
it is manifest to all the Kingdom, that how much soever in King James's time
the Properties were Invaded of the Church of England men, yet those of the
Presbyterians, Anabaptists, Quakers, Independents, Roman Catholics and
Popish-Churchmen, were never stirred.

On June the 4th. was presented [ The Humble Address of the Presbyterians of
Norwich.] In all acknowledgments, Declarations and Promises, striving to overdo
their Brethren of Bristol, concluding and heartily crying with one Voice, [Let
the King live for ever.] whence say we with Admiration, Oh what a great King
James man was this Presbyterian; or else he was as great an Impostor!

On Jame the 7th. was presented [ The Humble Address of the Loyal Subjects of
Teverton in Devon-shire; (that is, the Dissenters or Presbyterians there) in
all things concurring with their Brethren of Norwich, only in variety of new
Language, somewhat different.]

On June the 11th. was presented [ The Humble Address of several Benchers and
Barristers of the Middle Temple.] Giving Thanks for the Gracious Declaration
for Toleration, and asserting His Majesty's Royal Prerogative, and wishing him
a long, happy and glorious Reign. But what were these Lawyers? Not Quakers nor
Anabaptists sure, Presbyterians they might be, and perhaps some Papists. We
have only hinted the matter of Fact. And rarely can be found any Divided Party
without some Lawyers among them, especially where a Cause is Thriving.

On June the 14th. was presented [ The Humble Address of the Subjects of
Plymouth, Nonconformists or Presbyterians; wherein appears a concurrence with
their Brethren in all Acknowledgments, Promises and Wishes, and words, only in
different Language.

At the same time was presented [ The Humble Address of many Thousand Citizens
of Coventry.] Much to the same purpose with those of Plymouth.

At the same time also was presented [ The Humble Address of the Merchants and
considerable Traders of Exon.] These also ( Noncons, or Presbyterians) Giving
great Thanks for the Declaration of Indulgence, did unanimously declare as the
Resolution of one Man, that when ever His Majesty's Occasions should require
it; That the utmost drop of their Blood, and expense of their Fortunes should
be at His Majesty's dispose; and concluded Wishing and Imploring God Almighty,
that so Wise, Pious and Just a Monarch may be a long Ruler and Conservator in
Peace and Happiness, of the Kingdoms and Dominions belonging to His Imperial
Crown.

At the same time also, much to the same purpose, was presented the [ Humble
Address of the Protestant Dissenting Subjects of Berwick upon Tweed. And of the
Loyal Dissenting Subjects of Marlborough in Wiltshire.

On June the 20th. the Humble Address of the Presbyterian Ministers and their
Congregations, in and about Dublin in Ireland, was presented to King James,
being Transmitted to Him by the Lord Deputy the Earl of Tyrconnel, a fierce
Papist, and against the Law put in place, without taking the Test.
Notwithstanding these pretended Protestants called Presbyterians, in order to
Support their sinful Schism of Factious Conventions, by maintaining Altar
against Altar, against the Good Canons of the Holy General Councils, did
shamefully comply with the most designing Papists, against all Laws of God and
man, to trample under foot both Law and Religion; Flattering the King's Majesty
like their Fellows in England, with their Hyperbolick thanks for His
Suppressing the good Laws of the Kingdom, and promising to stand by Him with
encouragements past room for fear in His Royal Breast. And yet lo, how much it
is since come to pass, that through the Treachery of these Promises His
Flattered and Deluded Majesty has been utterly overwhelmed with endless Fears,
and desperate Hopes.

On June the 25th. was presented the Humble Address of several Dissenting
Ministers, that is, Presbyterians of the West part of Somersetshire,
proclaiming His Majesty's transcendent Goodness, and wishing him the Choicest
of all Blessings in Heaven and Earth; (that is, never to be interrupted in His
Reign by His Highness the Prince of Orange, or any other Mortal breathing) but
that His Reign may be long and Prosperous, and to be had in remembrance to all
Generations, etc.

On July the 1st. was presented the Humble and Thankful Address of the most
Loyal Subjects, (that is, the Presbyterians) of Kings-bridge in Devonshire,
Thanking and Promising like their Fellows.

And on July the 9th. was presented another of the fame from the Loyal
Subjects, (Nonconforming Presbyterians) in and about York. And another of the
same from those of Malden, Cogshal, Chelmsford, Braintree, Witham, and Halsted
in Essex. This was stuffed with very much of affected Language: Acknowledging
Miraculous Providence preserving His Majesty by Sea and Land, as it were on
purpose to suppress and stifle the good Laws of this Kingdom: Which act
agreeing with these Men's Lusts, though against the Wisdom and Sense of the
whole Kingdom met in Parliament, these do style to do great Services designed
of the Almighty to be done by Him. And this they style the most Melodious Harp
to Charm all evil Spirits, that many other Princes had no skill to use, etc.
Which Passages whether they savor more of affected Nonsense, or of a sort of
Blasphemous Flattery, by calling Good, Evil, or Evil, Good, I leave to the
Readers Censure.

On July the 12th. was presented [The Humble Address of the Loyal Subjects (or
Presbyterians) of Wellingborough, Kettering, Rothwell, Wellford and Creaton in
Northamptonshire.] Promising, Admiring, Flattering, etc. as the rest: But
especially magnifying His Majesty's Royal word, though he was a Papist, and
promising to men by Papists, reputed Heretics, as the Laws of the Medes and
Persians, unalterable.

On July the 17th. were presented three Presbyterian Addresses, whereof one
from South Molton, and another from Ashburton in Devonshire, and a third from
the Shire Town of Northampton, Promising after the old rate, excepting that
that from Northampton kept more within compass of Moderation than any which had
gone before.

On July the 23d. came in the Humble Address of the Loyal Subjects, (otherwise
Presbyterians) of the Province of Munster in Ireland, Transmitted by the Earl
of Tyrconnel. And another from the County of Essex. Both full of Flatteries as
before.

On July the 26th. was presented from the Noncon Ministers of Lanca-shire, the
like Flattering Address to His Majesty. And on the 30th. of the same, came in
another of the Noncons of the Wapentake of Loynsdale in the same County, also
stufft with the like Flatteries. And on August the 2d. came in the like from
the Presbyterians of Colchester; Promising to answer His Majesty's transcendent
Grace toward them, with as constant Obedience toward Him: Wishing and Praying
for all the Divine Beatitudes of God, to be poured on His Majesty and Royal
Family.

On August the 9th. was presented the [ Humble Address of all the Presbyterian
Ministers in Scotland] Promising to become Loyal Subjects, yea though against
all their Practices and Principles to the contrary, the King being at the same
time a known Papist.

On August the 13th. came in the Address of the Protestant Dissenters of
Plymouth: Acknowledging and Promising much after the rate of those of Essex
Mart Towns. And another at the same time from Sheffeild in Yorkshire; not
without its Flatteries. Another Aug. 18th. of the same Stamp from Cockermouth
in Cumberland. And another at the same time from Leathward in the same County.
But that of the Dissenting Merchants and Tradesmen in and about London,
exceeded at the same time, exceeded for Flattery and Blasphemy; comparing King
James a known Popish Prince, to Moses, and our Poenal Laws, to the Yoke,
Slavery and Bondage of Egypt; and worse than that. And that of the Dutiful and
Obedient Subjects of Chichester; comparing the King's Act of Indulgence with
the greatest acts of Wisdom, and extolling it unto the Skies. And that of the
Freemen of Bath, August the 22d. Acknowledging the Kings undoubted Prerogative
by His Gracious Declaration to stifle the force of Law, which they call
consistent with true Piety; were notoriously Flattering.

On August the 25th. was presented the conceited Humble Address of the
Dissenting Protestants of Romsey, Ringwood, Fordingbridge and Christ-Church in
Hant-shire, fond and full of Flattery.

On August the 29th. was brought forth the Address of Worcester Presbyterian
Ministers, and of the Master Builders and other Artificers about London. And of
the Protestant Dissenters about Shrewsbury. And of the Peaceable Dissenters of
Namptwich, Wem, and Whit-church in Shrop-shire. And of the Protestant
Dissenters of Oswestree in the same County. All bespeaking the Common Language
of their Fellows.

September the 1st. came forth the Addresses of the Dissenters of Chester. Of
the Loving (Subjects, called Presbyterians) of Macclesfeild. And September the
8th. of the Loyal Subjects the Stroudwater Clothiers in Gloucester-shire. And
of the Freemen of the Borough of Banbury, and of the Inhabitants of
Dorchester. And September the 12th. of the Protestant Dissenters of
Oxfordshire. And on September the 15th. of the Presbyterian Ministers of Derby
and Nottingham-Shires: All full of Flattery, and promising dutiful Obedience.

On September the 22d. came out the Address of the Presbyterian Ministers of
Edenburg and Canongate, starting this New Doctrine, that there is no
inconsistency betwixt true Loyalty and Presbyterian Principles, etc. And yet
time has since shown the quite contrary from the same Ministers. On September
the 29th. the thankful Address of the Protestant Dissenters of Salisbury, the
Devizes, Cane, Chippenham, Westbury, Warmister, Throw-bridge and Bradford in
Wiltshire. All speaking after the same Canting way of flattery. The

The Humble Address of the Electors of Ladgeshal in Wiltshire, at the same time
promised always to choose such Members as should be Faithful and Serviceable to
the Crown; that is, unto the Popish Interest, the King being a known Papist. At
the same time also the Addresses of the Loyal Subjects of Andover, Whit-church
and Clotford, bespeak the old Language of Flattery. And that of the Subjects of
Cirencester in Gloucester-shire, coming forth at the same time, promising to
choose such Members as shall comply with His Majesty in putting down Poenal
Laws, and by consequence promote Popery. Also at the same time the Address of
the Noncons of Reading, Abbington and Newbury. And another of the Presbyterians
of Nottingham. Also October the 6th. the Address of the Loyal Subjects the
Combers, Weavers, and other Laborers of Taunton in Somersetshire. Also
October the 17th. of the Presbyterian Ministers and their Congregation in East
Somersetshire, Bath, Shipton, Froom Bruton, Wincaunton, Milburn, Frary,
Inscomb. And another from the truly Loyal Subjects of Honiton in Devon-shire.
Also another from the Loyal Subjects of Pembrook, Carmarthen, Cardigan, and the
Town of Swanzey in Glamorgan-shire, Presbyterian Ministers, Independents and
Anabaptists, with their Congregations. Also another of the Dutiful Subjects,
the Noncons of Kingston upon Thames. Also another from the Dutiful Dissenting
Subjects of Cambridge. Also another from the Presbyterian Subjects of Hull, and
of two numerous Congregations there. Also another from Weobly in Hereford
shire. Also another from the the Loyal and Faithful Subjects of Portsmouth. All
promising Mountains of Obedience, and extolling His Indulgence; whereof those
of Hull and Weobly do much exceed. On October the 24th. followed the Addresses
of the Presbyterians of King's Lynne, and of the Noncon Ministers of
Dorset-shire. And on November the 3d. the Impatient, but most Loyal Subjects,
the Free holders and others of Chard in Somersetshire. On November the 14th.
the Presbyterians of Maidstone. On November the 21st. the Dissenting Subjects
of Jews in Sussex; and the Protestant Dissenting Subjects of Canterbury in
Kent. And of the Obedient Dissenters of Tenterden, Cranbrok, and Staplehurst in
Kent. On December the 1st. the Ministers of the Gospel in New England, and the
Loyal Inhahabitants of Hertford, did bring forth their several Addresses of
Thanks, and promises of Obedience, and all possible good Wishes: Whereof those
of Hertford promised to choose Members for Parliament as should be acceptable
to His Majesty, and supporters of His Prerogative.

On December the 15th. several Ministers Dissenters of Leichestershire, were
the last which presented their Flattering Address unto His Majesty King James
the Second.

Now these Presbyterians are a new Sect of Schismatics, Introduced by Mr. John
Calvin at Geneva; from whence they have spread their Doctrines into Germany and
France, and into Scotland, and also into England: And are so called from the
Parity of their Clergy, being all Presbyters, without any Bishops or
Superintendants among them. And are a People generally affecting Government by
a Commonwealth, and hating Monarchy in the State as well as in the Church. And
as appears by their Writings and Practices, they hold with Papists and Jesuits,
that Kings may be Excommunicated and Deposed; and in case of a Corrupt Prince,
they hold Rebellion to be no Crime. [ Buchanan de jure Regni, and the practices
of the late Wars of the Parliament, 1641. against their King, Charles the
First.]

The first who attempted to introduce this Presbyterian Schism, was Aerius, who
was therefore Branded by the Church for a Schismatic: But being nipp'd in the
Bud, in those days he had no Disciples. Howbeit this Presbyterianism is a Rent
from the Church, opposing all the Six first General Councils, which do forbid
any Presbyter in contempt of his Bishop, to gather any separate Congregation of
his own, [Can. Apost. xxxii.] Nicaeni Council. Can. 16. Arelatens Council. Can.
19. Gangren. Council. Can. 6. Antiochen. Council. Can. 5. Carthaginens. Council.
ii. Can. 11.] And forbid any Bishop to be Ordained without three Bishops, and
any Presbyter or Deacon to be Ordained without one Bishop present, [ Nicaeni
Council, ii. Can 4. Can. 6. Can. Apost. 1, 2, 7.] Ant. Council. Can. 9. The
Canons of these General Councils of the Holy Primitive times, are the Bonds of
the Church, which whosoever breaks, is a Schismatic. And there can be no
pretense of Conscience to justify Schism: but the Magistrate ought to punish
it. And though Liberty of Conscience ought to be allowed, yet no Liberty of
Schism. And though in case the Magistrate shall dispense with the punishment of
Schism, and we know not under God, who shall call him to account for such
Neglect: Yet is it a sin which God will certainly Punish; and therefore woe be
unto those Flatterers who in such Cases, do call Evil Good, and Good, Evil!

Next after that of the Presbyterian Ministers, was Published on the same day
April the 30th. 1687. [ The Humble and Thankful Address of the King's Subjects,
commonly called Quakers, in and about the City of London.] And these also glory
in it, that they were of Cabinet Council with the King, acknowledging that They
were privy to the design of the Declaration for Liberty, long before it came
forth; and with great joy declare Their Thanks, that they have such a King of
such a Principle, promising Him always to approve themselves His faithful and
loving Subjects.

And on May the 25th. came forth [ The Humble and grateful Acknowledgment of
the peaceable Subjects called Quakers in this Kingdom, from their usual Yearly
Meeting in London, the 19th. day of the Third Month, Vulgarly called May, 1687.
Bespeaking in all things as the former, in the name of the Quakers all over
England.

On June the 18th. came forth [ The grateful Acknowledgement of the People
called Quakers of Scotland] Proclaiming God's wonderful Providence, who made
the King's retiring into their Country give an happy turn to His Affairs, to
the Defeating the Designs of His Enemies; acknowledging His great Kindnesses to
them, for favoring them in 1679. And so proceeding in Hyperbolical
Thankfulness, they conclude with promises of Obedience. On August the 18th.
much after the same rate was brought in from the Quakers of the West of
Scotland. And on August the 26th. came the like from the Quakers of Ireland,
Transmitted to the King by the Earl of Tyrconnel, the Lord Deputy there. On
September the 29th. (the King being in His Progress) the [ Hearty welcome and
humble Salutation of the peaceable Subjects, called Quakers, of Wales and the
North West of England.] Bespeaking in their Canting way their welcome of him
into those Parts; their joy of Him, and promises of Obedience. And so also came
in the [ Humble Congratulation of the peaceable Subjects of Bristol, called
Quakers;] bespeaking much as the rest.

These Quakers generally, an Ignorant sort of People, of uncertain Principles
of Religion, and without any orderly Confession of Faith, have broached many
old Haeresies; and as is apparent, have many hidden Papists among them, and are
thought to be much Popishly inclined; and many of them appear as it were
Paganish, and seem as if inspired with Diabolical Delusions and Enthusiasms;
and are a dangerous sort of Haereticks, pretending to be perfect in
Righteousness, full of the Light of the Spirit, do much debase if not deny the
use of God's holy Ordinances, pretending to be above them: And therefore
plainly appearing to be a People void of all Conscience, damnable Haereticks:
And yet these also under pretense of Liberty of Conscience, must have Liberty
to sow their Tares of Haeresies all over the three Kingdoms of England,
Scotland and Ireland, and boast themselves as the great Confidents of King
James the Second. And among the rest of the Pillars of Popery, Voted for the
Old Members in London, and were of the number of those Upbraiders of the New
Members, [That they would bring in King James again.]

After that of the Quakers, on the same day, April the 30th. 1687. came forth
the Humble Address of the Loyal Subjects of the Congregational Persuasion,
(otherwise called Independants) in and about the City of London. Acknowledging
His Majesty's Declaration a Transcendent and Unparalled favor, promising
their constant Endeavor to answer His Majesty's just Expectations from them,
(that is, to choose Members of Parliament for His Majesty's Interest) Approving
themselves in Inclination as well as Duty, His Majesty's most Loyal Subjects.

These were the chief and prime actors in the Murder of King Charles the
First, as the Principal designers in the whole Tragedy: And yet now to see to,
are as Zealous to make amends for all their Regicide, by a most firm Affection
and Diligence to maintain His Son in all His Popish Designs, as from their own
Profession is most plainly signified.

On May the 14th. the [ Gratulatory Address of the People of the Congregational
Persuasion of the City of Norwich] was presented to His Majesty; Acknowledging
Him Placed on the Throne of this Realm by the most High God, as Natural, Legal,
and Rightful King, (it seems notwithstanding His being a Zealous Papist, and
violently Transgressing against the known Laws of the Land;) yet in the whole
course of his Reign a Wise and Merciful King. Also acknowledging that they are
for Monarchy, as the only An cient, Legal and Rightful Government of this
Nation. (It is to be remembered, that these were the late Oliverians, who turned
out the Rump, to set up the Protector.) That His Majesty has taken care as a
Common Father, for the good of all his People: Wherefore they shall adhere unto
him as their King, with all Loyalty, Fidelity and hearty Service to their power.

On May the 17th. was Published the Address of the Independents and Anabaptists
together: of which already said in the Anabaptist Address for Gloucester.

Now these Independents either spoke truth from their Hearts, or Dissembled: If
the last, Then who shall believe them hereafter? If the first, Then they are
still in their Hearts for the bringing in of King James again. And if so, why
then upbraided they the New Members of London, lately Nominated, that they
would bring him in? But will they say they are Changed, yet must they go for
Impostors and false Villains; for King James kept fair with them to the last,
however he Oppressed the Churchmen. But what can we expect from the Sons of
Murderers? They smell of the Blood of the Father; they are false to the Son,
and cannot be true to the Grandchild. And it is to be feared in the end will be
found false to their own Souls.

On May the 28th. came forth the Joint Address of the Independents and
Anabaptists of Bristol: which has been mentioned before in the Addresses of
Anabaptists. And on June the 11th. appeared another Address of the Loyal
Subjects of the Congregational Persuasion dwelling in Ipswich, Eury St.
Edmunds, etc. in Suffolk: Acknowledging King James to be their Covering Cherub;
under whose refreshing Shadow they promise themselves Rest: Promising truly to
subserve therefore the Interest of His Majesty's Power and Greatness: Which in
plain terms, was as much as to say, [The Advance of the Popish Religion.] At
the same time also was Published, the Humble Address of the Most Dutiful and
Loyal Subjects of the Congregational Persuasion of Great Yarmouth in Norfolk.
Acknowledging, Praising, promising, and Praying, as their Fellows before them.
On July the 4th. became Public the Humble Address of the Loyal Subjects of the
Congregational Persuasion of Bidford in Devonshire. And another August the 2d.
of the same, of the Norfolkshire-men. And another September the 1st. of the
Presbyterian and Congregational Nonconformists of Macclesfeild in Cheshire. And
another September the 29th, of the Congregational Persuasion of the Counties of
North Wales and Shrewsbury. And October the 17th. another of the same, together
with the Presbyterians and Anabaptists of Pembroke, Caermarthen, Cardigan and
Swansey, in Glamorganshire. And November the 14th. Another of the same from
Hitching and Hertford in Hertford-shire. All bespeaking much to the same
purpose, in extolling the Virtue and Wisdom of King James, and promising Him
their utmost Service in furtherance of His Designs. Only this last more
expressly promises, to do their utmost that such Persons may be chosen to sit in
Parliament as will concur with His Majesty that Liberty may be settled by an
unalterable Law, and that His Majesty may be the greatest Monarch on Earth.

Such was the Sense of these Independent Addresses. Now these Independents are
a sort of Schismatics, adhering partly with the Presbyterians, and partly with
the Anabaptists, and in a middle way between both, are a sort of Heretics who
denying the power of Bishops in Ordination and Constitution of Churches,
against all Orders; of Christ and his Apostles, set up Churches in the name of
Themselves, dependent upon no other Authority except the Elections of the
People: And being Renders of Christ's Seamless Coat, ought to have been
Suppressed: However having nothing of any case of Conscience to plead for Their
Schisms, ought rather (as men weed out Tares from among their Wheat) to have
been rooted up out of God's Church; or at least ought not to have been
Cherished, as when the Tares are suffered to overtop and shoulder out the good
seed. However, Liberty of Conscience ought not to have been made a Cloak for
Liberty of Schism.

Such were the four first Pillars of Popery. Which four having begun the Work,
anon after followed certain popishly inclined Members of the Church of England,
who minding the love of the World more than their Religion they professed,
Flattered the King's Majesty with their Addresses also. The first beginners
were the Unanimous Address of the Bishop, Dean, and Chapter of the Cathedral
Church of Durham, and the rest of the Clergy of that Dioecess, on May the 17th.
1687. Acknowledging His Majesty's favor in promising to Protect His
Archbishops, Bishops, and Clergy, etc.

Now His Majesty by His Declaration of Toleration, had broken down the Hedge
whereby the Rights of the Church were to be preserved, and had let in the
Wild-Beasts, the Swine to devour the Grapes, and the Kine to break down the
Boughs, and the Wild-Boar to root up the Trees of God's Vineyard; only the
Archbishops, etc. were Protected to stand by and look on without Molestation,
but were to have no power to fray one Cow, or to hunt out one Hog, do they
never so much Mischief. Now the truth is, the Declaration of Indulgence, was a
thing Inconsistent with it self: That His Majesty should at once protect and
maintain all manner of Haereticks and Schismatics, which destroy the Church;
and yet do as much for the Pastors of the Flock, who are to defend the Church
from such destroying Wolves as are the Haereticks, etc. That he should at once
maintain the Canons of Holy Councils, which are the true Rights of the Church,
and yet at the same time maintain all those who break those Canons to pieces!
And yet lo how these tame Cattle come in with their Address to Thank His
Majesty, that in preserving the Thieves and Robbers, He promises
notwithstanding, that he will not destroy the Householder. This was an odd sort
of Flattery; like the Man who meeting his Physician, prayed him not to be angry
that he was not yet Sick. But to guess at these men's meaning the Bishop, Dean,
Chapter, and Clergy, among the Quakers, Anabaptists, Presbyterians, and
Independents, Addressing for the Declaration: It must follow that either the
Men designing in conclusion to turn Papists, were found also among the
Addressers, in hopes upon the fall of the Church, to share in her Spoils: Or
else at best they were a sort of timorous Rats, who thinking the House to be
falling down, did run between the Legs of the Destroyers for Refuge.

After these, came in the Addresses of the Mayor, Aldermen, Common Council and
Freemen of the City of Durham; bespeaking the very Language of their Right
Reverend Bishop, May 28. And at the same time was published the Humble Address
of the Lord Bishop, the Dean and Prebendaries of the Cathedral Church of
Chester, and the rest of the Clergy of the Arch deanries of Chester and
Richmond, etc. Then followed the Address, of the Mayor, Aldermen, etc. of
Richmond and Chester, the Subjects of the Right Reverend Father of those
Places. June 11th. next follows the Address of the Bishop, Dean, Arch Deacon
and Clergy of the Diocese of Lincoln. (Now to guess at the length of Hercules
by his Foot, we know that ten for one of that Dioecess opposed the Address; and
yet it is called the Address of the Arch deacons and Clergy; and so it was of
some of them: And thus it is probable it was also in the Dioecess of Durham and
Chester. This July the 1st. And on the 5th. was public that of the Dean and
Chapter of Rippon in Yorkshire. Then followed that of the Bishop and Clergy of
the Dioecess of Coventry and Litchfield, July 9th. And lastly, though long
first, came out the Address of the Bishop and Clergy of the Diocese of St.
David's: (that is, of the new made Bishop, for it seems the Dying Bishop was not
for it) Now all these Churchmen wrote after one Copy, which was from Durham.
There was also an Address of certain pretended Churchmen of the City of
London; but it was only a name of what was not, by some certain pretenders. And
indeed all the five Episcopal Addressers, though true Bishops, yet were but
pretended Churchmen, while they became perfect Pillars of Popery.

Lastly, after all the rest had begun, the sixth and last, and main Pillar of
Popery presented it self, The Humble Address of His Majesty's Roman Catholic
Subjects, which appeared May the 28th. Now, whatever the rest were, these were
certainly in earnest in all their acknowledgments, applauses, promises and good
wishes. But what is most remarkable in their Address is, that they say, [That
they can do no less than thank God and His Majesty, for such an happy Expedient
as His Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, for the ease and comfort of all
His loving Subjects.] Now, it is against the professed Principles of the
Roman Catholic Religion to allow Liberty of Conscience in matters of Haeresie
and Schism, as they do esteem all Presbyterians and Anabaptists, Quakers and
Independents to be such. And in truth it is no wonder, that they who count it a
Principle of their Religion to Aequivocate, or in plain terms to Lie for
advantage, can admit it into their practice to comply with the worst of
Heretics in order to carry on their Design, in breaking down the good Laws
which are the sense of the Church of England. And this they may as aptly
consent to do, as practically to dissemble themselves to be Quakers among the
Quakers, and Anabaptists among the Anabaptists, in order to increase Schism and
Heresy in a strange Church, that they may with the more safety establish that
great Schism of their own, Popery. And thus we find the Roman Catholics, the
Anabaptists, the Presbyterians, Quakers; Independents, and Popishly inclined
Churchmen, all linked together in as fast a Bond of Friendship, as faith and
truth by Vows and Promises can tie them together, in furthering the Declaration
and Design of Establishing Liberty of Conscience upon the Basis of Heresy and
Schism; and finally to introduce Popery.

Now after this Foundation laid, wherever any of these Six sorts of Papish
Pillar-men got in to be a Mayor of a Corporation, thence immediately followed
an Address from that Corporation, to the same effect as each Sect had before
Addressed. But hitherto His Majesty had transgressed no Laws, excepting that he
had admitted Popish Officers into the Army, and into other Places of Trust, for
which He pleaded Necessity. However the Parliament then in force, not approving
thereof, was Dissolved after two Adjournments, and ten Prorogations in
effectual, was finally Dissolved July 2d. 1687. Notwithstanding Necessity had
no Law; that putting in of Popish Officers in all Places of Trust was to be
born with. On February 12th. 1686, the Earl of Clarendon being Removed, the
Earl of Tyrconnel was settled Lord Lieutenant of Ireland. And on March 11th.
Henry Lord Arundel of Wardour a Papist, was made Lord Privy Seal. About the
same time, or before, the Earl of Rochester, Uncle to the King's two Daughters,
for standing firm to the Protestant Religion according to the Church of
England, was removed out of Place from being Lord Treasurer, and the Place put
into Commissioners hands Popishly inclined: And the Earl of Sunderland a
Papist, was made Lord President of the Council. On February 8th. the Lord
Castlemain, His Majesty's Ambassador to the Pope, had Audience. But after the
Addresses once began to come in thick, then the King ventured to receive a
Public Ambassador from the Pope, with all the Honors and Ceremonies usually
observed on the like Occasion: This was done at Windsor, on July 5th. 1687. And
on November 11th. Father Petre the King's Confessor and Clerk of the Closet,
was Sworn of His Majesty's Privy Council, and took his Place at the Board. And
on November 17th. was published a Book called, An Agreement between the Church
of England and Church of Rome, Evinced from the Concertation of some of her
Sons, with their Brethren the Dissenters. Such was the Fruit of the Addresses
made by the Sir Pillars of Popery. On December 11th. His Majesty being
encouraged by the abundance of Addresses, began to view the List of His
Justices of the Peace in all the Counties, and of the Deputy Lieutenants, and
to turn out of Place all such as would not be for His Declaration of Liberty of
Conscience, and for taking off the Penal Laws and Test. Whence great numbers in
all Counties were turned out, and Phanaticks, Papists, and popishly inclined
Persons, came into Place. And about the same time, or soon after, all
Corporations were Regulated by absolute Power, and all Men adhering to the Law
were turned out, and Phanaticks, Papists, and popishly inclined Persons were
put in place. And hence it came to pass that all the Corporations in London
became Regulated, and filled with Heretics and Schismatics; whence followed
infinite Addresses from all these New Corporations, and from all the New
Modeled Companies. After this it was that the Ecclesiastical Commissioners had
been put in power, and had begun to execute great power of Oppression over many
of His Majesty's Conscientious Subjects. The Right Reverend Father in God, the
Lord Bishop of London, beloved of most Men for his Fatherly care of the Church,
against all Law and Reason had been Suspended. And on December 10th. The
President and Fellows of Magdalen College in Oxford, against all Law and
Conscience were decreed and pronounced incapable of being admitted into any
Ecclesiastical Dignity. These by force appointed by the Commissioners, contrary
to all Rules of Law, had been turned out of their Freeholds on the 30th. of
November before. On January the 23d. was published [The King's right of
Indulgence in Spiritual Matters, with the Equity thereof Asserted. By a Person
of Honor.] About this time Commissioners were appointed, and made Enquiry
after all Moneys received for Fines, in the case of Seditious Meetings called
Conventicles. March the 1st. was published a Book called, [ The Legality of the
Court held by His Majesty's Commissioners Defended: And also A Defense of the
Doctrine and holy Rites of the Roman Catholic Church. Against Dr. Burnet's
Mystery of Iniquity Unveiled.] Unto such an height of Popery was the Kingdom
ascended, and all by means of the Sir Pillars of Addressers; for alas, the
Popish Interest of it self was pitifully inconsiderable: But by the union and
conjunction of these Sir Pillars, it began to look formidably. And the King
presuming upon the strength of the Pillars, was merely drawn in and encouraged,
beyond all His hope at His Coronation, when he first promised, and then Swore,
to defend and maintain the Laws of the Land. Whence it may be safely
maintained, that wherein soever His Majesty has acted against Law, as is now
generally alleged, contrary to his Oaths and Promises, although the Breach was
really His own proper act, yet the greatest blame thereof, lies at their Doors,
who by pleading Conscience to do the greatest Wickedness, drew him in to comply
with them; and by promising to stand by and assist hiw to the last Breath,
encouraged him to do what otherwise in all likelihood He never had intended.
For when it was declared by His Majesty on April the 27th. 1688, what was His
Majesty's further will and pleasure concerning His Declaration of Indulgence,
He said expressly. [We are encouraged by multitudes of Addresses, and by many
other Assuances we receive from Our Subjects of all Persuasions, as Testimonies
of their Satisfaction and Duty, to see it preserved without Distinction.] And
in the same Declaration he further says, [ In pursuance of this we have been
forced to make many Changet both of Civil and Military Officers throughout our
Dominions, etc.] Whence it fully appears, that what by means of the Addresses
and by means of private Assurances from the Parties Addressing before the
Addresses came forth, His Majesty was unhappily drawn in to do all those things
which are counted ill, ever since his Reign. For as may be well observed, many
Addresses do boast of a Confederacy with His Majesty, as to the substance
matter of their Addresses, from before the time of His Majesty's coming to the
Crown.

Hence followed the Orders issued forth, directed unto the Arch bishops,
Bishops, and the Clergy, to read the King's Declaration in all their Provinces,
Dioecesses and Churches therein. Which thing they humbly conceiving to be a
matter against the known Laws of the Land, and not fit to be done, so many of
them as were then in London, did humbly Petition His Majesty to be excused from
such reading, and showed their Reasons in their Petition. But this Petition
being judged Scandalous, the Archbishop, and Bishops of St. Asaph, Ely,
Chichester, Bath and Wells, Peterborough, and Bristol, were Summoned before the
Lords of the Council, and after Appearance, were committed to the Tower, June
8th. but Bailed out, came to their Trial, and were Acquitted unto the great joy
of the People, though to the great Grief of all Addressers. During these times
were strict enquiries made after all Ministers who refused to read the King's
Declaration in their Churches, by the Lords Commissioners for Ecclesiastical
Affairs; but the Chancellors in most parts delaying the Returns, farther time
was given. But ever the day appointed came no, a new face of Affairs happened.
About these times also came in new Addresses thick and threefold,
congratulating for the Birth of the Prince of Wales. But in these Addresses the
several Pillars of Popery appeared not distinctly as before: But in all
Corporations, Grand Juries, and meetings of Justices, which at that time were
fo far Purged, as most of them were either Papists, or Popishly inclined; or
Anabaptists, Presbyterians, Quakers, or Independents. All which promoting the
Design. Addresses innumerable ceased not, until the King himself Addressed
beyond Sea. But at length news arrived of His Highness the Prince of Orange
preparing as if he would Invade England; whence King James being immediately
smitten with a sudden astonishment, sent for His Pillars about him; the
Presbyterian Ministers, the Independents, the Anabaptists, the Quakers, the
Roman Catholics, and the Popishly inclined; who all protested, that they
believed the Prince of Wales to be undoubtedly his Son: And one Dr. Bates being
Spokesman for the Presbyterians, spoke with great confidence how much they were
bound to believe His word; and so said they all, and promised to assist him to
the utmost. Also many or most of those Ministers, Presbyterian or Independent,
who had fled into Holland for shelter, because of the Duke of Monmouth's or the
Earl of Argyle's Insurrections, wherein they had been concerned, had returned
home, and laid themselves at the King's Foot, and were admitted to kiss his
Hand, and were esteemed White Boys: Some also of the Gentlemen returned and
became great Sticklers of King James, but the preparations from Holland damped
all. For King James Drooping in Spirit, all His Pillars could not keep up His
Heart. For on the last or September the Bishop of London was restored to his
Dioecess. On October the 2d. came forth the general Pardon, and the Charter was
restored to the City. On the 5th. the Ecclesiastical Commission was Dissolved.
And on the 12th. the Bishop of Winchester had a Commission to restore the
Rights of Magdalen College Oxford, Whence followed the restitution and
Fellows. On the 17th. all Rights were restored to the Corporations. Hence all
the Pillars of Popery beginning to reel and totter, on November the 5th His
Highness the Prince of Orange Landed. But after some face of Resistance for
some time appearing at Salisbury, on November the 26th. His Majesty returned to
London, from Salisbury. The 11th. of December he privately withdrew from
White Hall. On the 12th. the Lord Chancellor was Taken and carried to the
Tower. On December the 16th. King James returned to White Hall, and on the next
Morning went quite off. And His Highness the Prince of Orange came to St.
James's. And thus fell flat all the Sir Pillars of Popery.

May it please God that Truth may flourish, and that Popery appear no more. But
God's Will be done.

Let all good Men do their Duty; and then Blessed shall be the Dead who Die in
the Lord, and their Works shall follow them.


