A BRIEF DECLARATION Of the State of the Account of all MONEYS Received and
Paid, As well for and toward the REPARATION of the Cathedral Church of St.
PAUL, London, Before the great and dreadful FIRE, as for and toward the
REBUILDING thereof, With other necessary Works and Expenses done and disbursed
in Order to the Beginning of the said Work of Rebuilding.
Printed and Published for Information of all such as desire to be satisfied in
the Proceedings therein, and have, or shall hereafter Contribute toward so
Pious and Honorable a Work.

THere was Paid into the Chamber of London, and into the Office of the said
Works, in the Convocation-House-Yard, there, since His late Majesty's
Restoration, to the 25th Day of March, 1685. the Sum of 126564 l. 13 s. 5 d. (
viz. as hereafter follows.)

l. s. d. l. s. d. By His late Majesty's Gift upon Arrears of Impropriations,
not pardoned by the Act of Indemnity 002626 18 11 126564 13 05 By Fines and
Forfeitures upon the Green-Wax, which ended Feb. 15. 1678. 000527 01 04 By the
Imposition of Coals at 4 d. per Chaldron 068945 00 00 By the Clergy, in Gifts,
Legacies and Subscriptions 026035 19 06 By the Nobility and Gentry, etc. in
Gifts, Legacies and Subscriptions 012006 11 09 By Collections upon His late
Majesty's Letters Patents, of which the Clergy gave a considerable Part, but
the Particulars cannot be discovered for want of Returns of Duplicates from
many of the Diocesses in England, where the Archdeacons, and their Officers,
Ministers and Churchwardens, have been very remiss in pursuing the Directions
in the Letters Patents: Tho some others have been very diligent, who have not
only made speedy Returns, but also in distinct Particulars; as in the Diocesses
of Canterbury, London, Sarum, Gloucester, and Carlisle, the Arch-Deaconries of
Northampton, Leicester, Chester, and some others 014625 19 05 By old Materials
sold (being either useless or cumbersome.) 001360 07 05 By Commutation upon
Pennances. 000436 05 00 THere has been Expended, in the Reparation of the
Church before the Fire of London; In Repairing the West End of it after the
same Fire, which succeeded not, but fell down, the Walls and Pillars being
perished by the Fire; Refining 194 Tuns of Lead out of the Rubbish; Repairing
the Convocation-House; Building Offices; Making Designs and Models; Taking down
the great vast ruinous Steeple, and the Walls and Pillars of the Church;
Maintaining the Cranes and Ways in the Isle of Portland; Removing the Materials
and clearing the Ground (in order to lay a new Foundation) begun on the First
day of May, 1674. the Foundation it self being begun, and the first Stone laid,
on the 21 day of June 1675 following 020958 09 03 126292 04 05 There has been
Paid and Expended in the Rebuilding of the said Church, since it was first
begun, to the last day of March, 1685, as appears by the Particulars of the
Book of Accounts 103693 03 02 And there is more Due to Masons for Stones
wrought and not set, and for other Work wrought and set, which cannot be yet
exactly measured, and other Expenses for Stone and other Materials: all which,
upon a reasonable Estimate and Conjecture, will amount to 001640 12 00 And then
there will remain in Cash to Balance this Account 000272 09 00 2/4; Besides
what remains in the Chamber of London of the Coal-Money, amounting to 002352 01
05

THE Work, now in hand, contains the Chore and Side-Isles, Eastward from the
Dome or Steeple; The Dome; Cross-Isles; South and North-Portico's; And part of
the Body of the Church Westward: All which extend in length, from East to West,
425 Feet. The Chore and Side-Isles, and Body of the Church, in Breadth, from
North to South, 121 Feet; And the Dome, with the Cross-Isles and Portico's, 310
Feet, The Dome being 108 Feet in Diameter within the Walls. Under all which are
fair, large and stately Vaults, being 18 Feet and high from the Floor to the
Crown of the Arch; In Length, from East to West within the Walls, 310 Feet, in
Breadth 107 Feet, and in Breadth, under the Dome and Cross Isles, 236 Feet. The
Foundation of the Fabric being 22 Feet deep below the Surface of the
Churchyard, and in many places 35 Feet deep: And the Fabric above-Ground (
viz. the Steeple, Cross-Isles, Vestry's, Portico's, and the Chore to the
East End) are 56 Feet high. So that the whole Height of the said Building, from
the first Foundation to the uppermost part, is 78 Feet high, and in some
Places, 91 Feet high. That Part of the Building, Westward from the Dome, is 34
Feet above the Ground of the Churchyard, the inside Pillars excepted, which
are brought up to the Floor of the Body of the Church.

The Space of Ground, upon which the Legs of the Steeple and the Dome it self
do stand, contains half an Acre, half a Quarter of an Acre, and almost 4
Perches: The Steeple standing upon 8 smaller Legs or Pillars, and 4 greater
ones; in one of which great ones is a very large Pair of Stairs, and within the
other 3 are fair and stately Vestry's; And every one of the greater Pillars
stand upon 1360 Feet of Ground superficial Measure, and every one of the lesser
ones upon 380 Feet: The Cross-Isles, a Quarter of an Acre wanting one Rod; The
Portico's, that is the North and South Porch's, Entrance into the Church, half
a Quarter of an Acre, and 7 Perches; And the Space of Ground, upon which the
Foundation of the new Fabric now stands, and so far as they are now laid,
contain very near 2 Acres.

SInce the Beginning of this new Fabric there has been brought into the
Stores of the Church 20000 Tuns of Portland and other Stones; 17500 Hundred's
of Lime, and upwards, each Hundred containing 25 Bushels; 12000 Tuns of Sand,
besides three times the quantity of old Sand sifted out of the Rubbish; 15000
Loads of Bricks, and upwards; 2000 Loads of Timber, Boards and Balks, and
upwards; 700 Masts, great and small, and upwards; 240 Hundred-Weights of Ropes,
and upwards; 990 Hundred-Weights of Nails.

There have been carried away 47000 Loads of Rubbish, and upwards; and old
Foundation-Walls hewed up, (which Work was, for the most part, more troublesome
and painful, than Digging in the Quarry) 1550 Cubical Yards, and upwards,

THE Books of Receipts and Payments are remaining in the Office of Works near
the said Church, and are to be seen and perused by any Person, that desires to
be more particularly satisfied, or will be pleased to promote the said Work.

Also a Fair Table is hung up (exposed to public View) within the said
Building, wherein the Names of all considerable Benefactors are Registered, with
their respective Donations; there being no more Space left here, in this single
Sheet, than to mention l. s. d. The late Archbishop Juxon's Legacy of 2000 00
00 The late Archbishop Sheldon's Gift, in his Lifetime, of 2000 00 00 The late
Archbishop of York's Gift of 1850 00 00 The late Bishop of Winton's Gift of
1818 14 06 Edw. Swift of Lincoln's Inn Esquire; his Legacy of 1000 00 00 Dame
Dionese Williamson, of Hales-hall in Norfolk, her Gift of 2100 00 00 The Lady
Rows's Gift of 0800 00 00 Editha Chaffin of Guilford Spinster's Gift of 1253 09
06 Ann Holbech, late Wife of Dr. Thomas Holbech, her Legacy of 0500 00 00 The
Lady Rich, Relict of Sir Thomas Rich, 500 l. and 50 l. more left by her Husband
to a pious use, and by her applied to this 0550 00 00 Jasper Main, Canon of
Christ-Church in Oxford, his Legacy of 0500 00 00 William Evat Clerk's Legacy
of 0300 00 00 The Dean and Chapter of St. Paul's 3526 01 03 William Sancroft,
D. D. Dean of St. Paul's, (now Lord Archbishop of Canterbury) besides his
Proportion of the Annual Payment of the Dean and Chapter, 500 l. and since that
time 650 l. in all 1150 00 00 The University of Oxford. 0621 17 04 The
University of Cambridge (besides their promise of more) 1067 11 06 Benjamin,
late Lord Bishop of Ely, 0500 00 00 Peter, late Lord Bishop of Ely, 450 l.
besides 50 l. at his Consecration, in all 0500 00 00

Those, which we are forced to omit here, are to be seen in the TABLE
abovementioned: As the Lord Roberts, late Lord Privy Seal; A Concealed Person
by Mr. Bathurst; Dr. Hamy; Dr. Jones, Subdean of the King's-Chappel; Dr. Ball,
Master of the Temple; Tobias Rustat Esquire; Yeoman of the Robes; Mr. Barnabas Oly
Clerk; Mr. John Hanson of Lothbury; Ralph Snow Esquire; Sir Thomas Chichley; Sir
Thomas Allen of Finchley; Sir Charles Pitfield; James Ravenscroft Esquire; Sir
Thomas Exton; Sir Leoline Jenkins; Mrs. Margaret Turner; The Earl of
Burlington; Sir Stephen Fox; The Lady Wyld, Relict of Sir William Wyld; Sir
Thomas Bridges of Covent Garden: Each of which gave a 100 l. a piece, etc.

John Tillison, Clerk of the Works.


