A Brief MEMORIAL WHEREIN The present Case of the Ancient Leasees, the Inward
Pawn Sub-Tenants, and the Outward Pawn present Tenants, of the Royal Exchange
truly, and impartially STATED. AS ALSO Some ANIMADVERSIONS and remarkable
passages relating to the present and public revenue of the said Place: with
some modest proposals for the future benefit and most certain advantage of the
same. HUMBLY Presented To the Consideration of the Right Honorable Sir Robert
Viner Knight and Baronet, Lord Mayor of the City of London: and to the rest of
the Right Worshipful and Worthy Members of the grand Committee for GRESHAM
Affairs.

By an Unfeigned Welwisher to the Flourishing Estate of the City of London, and
in particular to all the present Inhabitants of the Royal Exchange, within the
said Place.

LONDON Printed Anno Dom. 1674.

To the Reader.
Reader.
I fairly salute thee, if Courteous if not whoever thou art that take up this
small piece into thy hands, and peradventure at first sight art somewhat
concerned and offended at the very title page thereof. I would advise thee by
all means to forbear railing against it, (railings and invectives being no
powerful charms, but rather weak and contemptible means to convince the reasons
of men) until thou have diligently and thoroughly (laying aside all prejudice)
perused and examined the same And that, not then neither (unless thou have a
mind to betray at once too much of thy humane frailty and imbecility) without
thou art able to appear upon the stage and expose to public view more solid
and substantial arguments, than are herein contained, in confutation thereof.
This I thought requisite to advertise thee, by reason I do already foresee an
approaching storm upon this very account. But yet if thou have a mind, and art
willing to enter the lists; I will assure thee for thy encouragement therein,
thou shall find so Fair, so Noble, so generous a Combatant, that if thy
arguments are conclusive, he shall be as willing and ready to make an ingenuous
and public recantation of his present mistakes.

Farewell.

TO THE Right Honorable, and to the Right Worshipful Committee for Gresham
Affairs.
My Lord Mayor and you the worthy Knights and Gentlemen, Members of the grand
Committee.
HAving for several years last past, been very conversant and held a good
correspondence with the inhabitants, (many of them being my worthy and much
respected friends and intimate acquaintance) of your Royal Exchange. I am able
to say this of them by experience, that I do verily believe, there is no
particular number of people whatsoever (take them number for number,) within
the walls of your City of London and Suburbs thereof (more especially
considering there being so many of the same trade) as do live more peaceably
and lovingly together than these do. A notable instance hereof (as a
confirmation of what I have here asserted) may plainly appear, by their loving
and neighbourly meeting together every 17th. day of November yearly, to
celebrate and sollemnize the ever blessed memory of Queen Elizabeth's
Coronation, whom (as our Ancestors have declared unto us) gave the first name
and appellation unto your Royal Exchange, At which time also, they have their
Chaplin pro tempore, that so they may be excited, and stirred up to works of
Charity unto their decayed Members, and for the more Grace, Gravity and
Sobriety of their present sollemnity: And the front of their Stewards printed
Tickets for their Annual invitation, does usually run after this manner, Viz.
For the Continuance of Amity and Unity, and our ancient Society, you are hereby
desired, etc.

But so it is (May it please your good Lordship and Worships) that sometime
before, and since the late dreadful fire, there have been (upon several
pretenses) such animosities, feuds and contentions risen amongst them, very few
comparatively (the more is the Pity) being of that most heroic, and noble
Spirit, and temper; as to mind the public good and concernment of the said
place before their own private and particular self interest) so that by means
thereof, it has doubtless very much hindered and obstructed the present
flourishing estate of your Royal Exchange, as by the sequel of this memorial
(the which by the instance and request of some particular Friends is now
exposed to public view) will more fully and plainly appear.

The Premises considered, and as a member of the City of London, having a very
great kindness, vallue and respect for your Royal Exchange, and in particular
for several of my good Friends and Acquaintance within the said Place, I was
much affected therewith, and thereupon, of late, have made it my business
somewhat to enquire into the true state of Affairs, (and truly before my strict
enquiry by reason of the perpetual clamors, and fair pretenses of every Party,
I found it was a very hard matter rightly to understand them) as to their said
Animosities before mentioned. And herein it was many times a pleasant
divertisement to hear these contesting parties, so much at variance and
contention one with another, when I observed that interest, particular self
interest with most of them, (especially among the grandees) lay still at the
bottom. Yet not suffering my self to be biassed, (although I did many times
love to take the weakest part, being my natural constitution to vindicate the
oppressed innocent) nor to be born down with the clamours and railings, but
with the reasons of Men. I got this fair advantage thereby as (I am persuaded)
in some good measure to inform both my self, and you, of the right of the case:
And upon the whole matter, I do find, that their said animosities are never
likely to be reconciled (and so consequently your Royal Exchange never likely
to be in a flourishing condition) until you who are the worthy Members of the
grand Committee, shall put your helping hands to the Plough, and shall please
by the interposition of your power and authority to accomplish the same.
Wherefore that so happy and so desirable an effect (for as the Schoolmen say,
sublata causa tollitur effectus) as the flourishing condition of your Royal
Exchange, may in your days (that is during your Sessions as members of this
Honorable Court) be compleately and effectually accomplished: The Author
thought, it would be an acceptable service to the Major part of those who are
concerned upon your Royal Exchange, (the ancient Leasees only excepted) to
present you with a memorial (wherein all your Tenants cases should be fairly
and truly stated) the which in all the submissive and respective terms
imaginable, he does here most humbly present unto your Lordship and Worships
most grave and prudent considerations.

This being premised by way of introduction, I am now to give a particular
account of all these contesting Parties before mentioned, and herein I shall
not (neither for Fear nor Favor) mince the matter before you, whereby to
conceal any thing as material to my present purpose or requisite and necessary
for your information, so that all things appearing so fair, naked and open (and
driving on no design of particular self interest, enough to mar the best cause
in the world) I hope in time there will be such a right understanding between
you and your present Tenants, as that neither you nor they for the future will
have any cause to repent the publication hereof.

And now these contesting Parties, in and related unto the Royal Exchange, you
have them reduced already in the Title page unto these three heads, viz.

1. The Ancient Leasees. 2. The inward Pawn Sub-tenants. 3. The outward pawn
Present-Tenants.
And all these I will take them in their Order as here they present themselves,
in manner and form as follows.

And first for the Ancient Leasees (they being Stars of the first magnitude I
must give them the precedence) I presume it is not necessary nor requisite,
that I should give you a particular Catalogue here in print of every one of
them by name, (this were indeed to pull down an old house here, upon my Head)
but only let you know, that as such, they are those who before the late
dreadful Fire had given over their Trades (having renewed before hand several
of them their Leasees for 21 years) let their Shops (full of braded wares) at
most unreasonable rates, viz. for 30, 40, and 50 pounds per annum for one
single Shop in your Royal Exchange, and in fine they are such, who for several
years last past have lived, they and their Heirs (and would willingly for ever
be at the same lock, as making a better livelihood thereby than keeping Shops
themselves) upon the labors and careful endeavors of many poor young People,
who by means thereof have not been able, comfortably to provide for themselves
and Families, nor to bear up under such intolerable and insupportable burdens.

And of these Leasees, there are two sorts, viz.

1. Ancient. 2. Modern.
I am forced to make use of, and borrow this distinction on purpose hereafter
to avoid a mistake, and a misunderstanding from the Leasees themselves. I call
him a Modern Leasee, who is in actual possession by Lease of his own Shop (and
long may he peaecably and quietly enjoy his said posession,) and among these
there are at this day here and there one, who have Leases of more Shops than
their own; and these do also (like the precedent Leasees) let the said Shops at
an extraordinary rate, and these men do now take up the cudgels and plead in
the behalf of the Ancient Leasees (it being in this respect their own proper
case) as if they were here always personally present to defend themselves.
Wherefore these ensuing lines are not designed nor intended against them as
they are Modern but as they are Ancient Leasees.

And now to my present purpose.

These are the men who after the late most dreadful Fire, did so bitterly
exclaim against (like so many Bears robbed of their whelps: and yet clearly
upon a mistaken notion as the sequel hereof will plainly demonstrate) your
building of double Pawns within your Royal Exchange, and that their Children as
yet unborn would be bound to curse those who were the first projectors or
petitioners for the same, although in the mean time (as if they had never heard
of lex talionis) they do not say, whose Children will be bound to pray for them
whose Fathers have been ruined and undone by wrack-rents, before they came to
be Ancient Leasees. And Moreover, That a late Book, the Title whereof was
LONDON'S NONSVCH, (wherein double Pawns by the Author thereof was proposed)
deserved to be burnt by the common Hangman for the contents thereof. Wherefore
in vindication of all those who did petition for double Pawns, and in
particular for all those who gave their suffrages for the publication of the
said Book. I dare here take up the cudgels and will fairly, and modestly argue
the rationality, and honest design of that Book, (as having diligently perused
the same) against the stoutest and most rigid Leasee of them all. And pray what
was the design of that book, (if a man now may be so bold as to ask them) if
any of you have read it, or have any desire to peruse the same, (I fear very
few of the former Committees, by reason of the bitter railings and clamors of
the Leasees against it, although licensed by Authority, though it worth their
perusal) you will find that the main and principal design of the Author therein
(and for the jocular and pleasant part thereof he gives a particular account,
in his Epistle dedicatory to this Honorable Court) was, That inasmuch as the
grand Committee had voted for double Pawns, and that they had stretched the
dimensions of the said Place, unto a far greater compass than formerly, that
they would please thereupon to make provision therein for four pair of stairs,
and four Balconies within the inward Walks thereof; and also that they would
please to be moderate in their Rents and Fines, and that two sides of the said
place might be converted into deep Shops and that the Trades therein, by the
interposition of their authority (before they let any new Leases,) might be so
orderly placed (just as it is at this day in the New Exchange, where two of the
same Trade cannot be placed together) so as that they should not interfere or
be prejudicial one to another. Lo here now (in paucis Verbis) the design of
that most malignant and contemptible Book, and if this was not then and will be
still the interest of your selves (in respect of your present, and future
revenue) and also the interest of all your Tenants (as to their equal
accommodation) I must ingenuously here declare. I have no reason nor
understanding (as to the premises) now left or remaining in me. But it is well
that I have an instance ready at hand (which will be right worthy also of your
Honors particular observation) for confirmation hereof, (and an instance taken
pro Confesso from an adverse Party is a dilemma indeed) viz. That those very
men, who did so much clamor, and most bitterly inveigh against the said Book as
ridiculous, nonsensical, scandalous (and many the like opprobrious and
contemptible terms) did in a short time after come to the said Author, and to
the rest of your outward pawn Tenants, to request them, that inasmuch as they
wanted Air in their inward Walks, that they would please to join with them in
an humble petition to the grand Committee, to procure themselves four Balconies
within the said Place: unto the which they did very willingly and readily
assent, although according to the narrow and straight laced principles of mere
policy and self interest, it was a disadvantage unto them, and although their
petition was thereupon granted, yet the said Balconies are now but a botch, in
comparison of what they might have been, had they been built before those
prison Windows, (as a worthy member of this Committee, by name Sir Thomas
Player coming upon a surveigh was pleased to call them) were first erected.

And Moreover, that you may see how miserably these men were mistaken in their
present notions, they would now be glad withal their hearts to see all those
things proposed in the said Book, really and effectually accomplished. For as
double Pawns was therein proposed, it would rather have fortified their wrack
rents (the more would have been the pity) for the remaining time of their
Leases, than have impaired or diminished (which was their darling notion
wherein they were so much in the dark) any part or parcel thereof. And
therefore what shall a man say to these things, but only monstrum, horrendum,
inform, ingens, cui lumen ademptum! and the truth of it is, undigested
principles and false notions (as not being guided by reason) once sucked in,
has been in all ages of most pernicious and dangerous consequence both to
Church and State. So that now as briefly as I could (and as the matter would
bear) I have here given you the true state and present condition of these
ancient Leasees, and as for their present design now on foot (and so furiously
carried on withal the fair shows, and most specious pretenses imaginable) for
Leases of 21 years (although their arguments for the same, as I could easily
make appear, are but weak, sophistical, fallacious and of a dismal consequence)
the which looking with so ugly and deformed a countenance, I hope the Young men
in the outward Walks will wash their hands in innocence, and will not desire to
be of their Councels nor Faction therein, nor yet suffer themselves to be
admitted (though it seems some of them have been courted and invited thereunto,
because of going hand in hand to the grand Committee to make their design more
feiseable) but they have hitherto had the grace to refuse themselves to be
Members of their private Cabal,

And as for their Tenant-rights so much insisted upon and cried up amongst
them, as much as was the great Diana of Ephesus, Whereas in re vera after their
Leases are expired they have no more legal right or pretense thereunto (as
being your propriety and estate) than a Porter that goes every day along the
Streets with his burden at his back. And here I would willingly be informed by
this Honorable Court, of this one question, viz, Who has the more legal and
Tenant-right in equity and good Conscience to renew the Leases of your said
Shops, him that has paid a wrack rent of about 40 or 50 pounds per Annum for
one single Shop for 10 or 20 years together, or him that has paid about 12 or
14 pounds per annum for the same term, and if you will not please to resolve
me in this question, pray let it be propounded to the Ancient Leasees (when
they come next before you with their humble petition for Leases of 21 years
more) to give their answer thereunto, and it is prayed that their humble
petition their Tenant-rights, and their 21 years Leases may out of your Court
be dismissed together. And as for an abatement of their present rents, it is my
humble request unto this Honorable Court (so long as they shall continue in
actual possession) that you would please to use them as kindly as you can.

Having dispatched the ancient Leasees, I come now to the poor Sub-tenants,
which present themselves next in order; and these I have placed in the Center,
because we usually say, In Medio consistit Virtus; so that I hope you will take
special notice of them: But by reason I have also made bold to present you with
an Humble Petition in their behalfs, (wherein their Case likewise is fairly and
truly stated) and have prayed, that you would please to take them into your
particular care and protection; I presume I need not trouble you much further
in this place, upon their Account.

But only there is one very material Objection and stumbling block to be
removed out of the way, before they can sound a Victory, or can conclude, that
their future Happiness, Tranquillity and Redemption, is approaching, or near at
hand, and that is this: Viz.

That although you did formerly make a most famous Order (as being then truly
sensible of the former Estate and Condition of your poor Sub-tenants) which if
it was then made like the Laws of the Medes and Persians, unalterable, it
deserves to be engraven upon the Walls of your Royal Exchange, next to Sir
William Turner, in Letters of Gold, Viz.

That those only who should be in actual Possession at or near the Expiration
of any of your future Leases, should be permitted to Renew. But so it is, That
since the late dreadful Fire, this Order has been much infringed, and you
have taken 5 l. a piece of several of the ancient Leasees, to Renew again for
Eleven years (so that, Tempora mutantur, and New Lords, New Laws.) But it is
hoped, that upon second thoughts, and upon your Petitioners present Complaint,
you will not permit them to Renew; but will still construe this Transaction,
with reference and respect first had to your former Order, unless you did
repeal and make void the said Order after the late Fire, and before you did
receive their said Five pounds, or else that you did not take any notice
thereof, as not remembering in what a Condition those Sub-tenants had been; or
else that you took it for granted, that all those Leasees; who had paid in
their Five pounds, had been in actual possession; and if so, you may very well
return them their Money again, as under a mistake: But if this for the present
cannot be avoided, it is hoped for the future (as Leases do fall into your
hands) you will please to take a special and particular care in relation
thereunto.

And now it comes into my mind, I remember a remarkable Passage of an ancient
Shopkeeper (as I have been informed) of your Royal Exchange, which being
pertinent to the business in hand, I have thought good here to insert, Viz.

That the good old Man having paid a Wrack-rent for the space of several years
together, for his Dwelling House, but at length, when his Landlords Lease from
the Company was near expired, as he was sitting one Night by the Fire, with his
Children about him, there knocks a man at his door with this Message, viz. That
he came from the Master and Wardens of such a Company, to give him Notice, that
he must come such a day to the Hall (as being the immediate Tenant) to Renew
the Lease of his House: At which the good old Man was so much overjoyed and
transported, as that he thought it was a good Angel in Humane shape, that did
appear to bring him such welcome and such acceptable Tidings. The Application
hereof I leave to your most worthy selves; and if it should so happen, that in
process of time, Mr. Godfrey, or any of your Officers, should chance to be any
of these good Angels, I question not but the honest and true-hearted
Sub-tenants, would give them honest content and satisfaction for their pains.

And now to close, in relation to these Sub-tenants, I do verily believe that
many of them are but in a mean and low Condition: And the truth of it is, what
with the Rent for their Houses, what with the Charge for their Families, what
with the loss in Braded Wares, what with the Alteration of Fashions, (but only
this is an Age of Wonders, or else one might well stand amazed, and be
astonished, at the most prodigious Humor, and strange fickleness of the Age
upon this very Account,) what with desperate Debts, and what with bad Trading,
they need not have wrack Landlords, (if possibly to be avoided;) for furious
Lievtenants to bring up the Rear (unless Trading should thereupon flow in upon
them like a mighty flood) in order to their more speedy, and sometimes most
certain Ruin.

And when men are in Durance, Bondage and Slavery, for them to use all fair and
probable Means whereby to Redeem themselves out of the said Captivity, I think
this is no Sin, nor Offense either to God or Man. But the ancient Leasees will
not admit, nor by no means swallow this down for Orthodox Doctrine, and will
say, That those who go about, and are Instrumental in destroying of their
Tenant-rights, and their interest in future Leases, (the which, with the Locks,
Shackles and Fetters which they have put upon them, they do think are as good
both to them and their Heirs, as Land of Inheritance) do deserve to be severely
and exemplarily chastised: But whether the ancient Leasees, or the poor
Sub-tenants Doctrine in this particular, be true or false, Sub Judice lis est.

And now to proceed to my Third and last Enterprise, viz. To the Outward
Pawn-tenants: And as I have placed the ancient Leasees in the front of the
Battle, that so they may lead the Van, (and because I humbly conceive they have
been the Duces omnium malorum, of all these late Animosities, I have thereupon
thought good to put them into the Forlorn Hope, and peradventure upon that
Account, if they should chance to meet with a brisk Rencounter before the Grand
Committee, it is probable they may come off with broken Pates, or which is
worse, with the loss of several of their limbs; that is, with the loss of some
branches of their future and wrack-rented Revenues;) so I have placed the
Sub-tenants in the Center, hoping thereby (being now shrouded under your
safeguard and protection) there they may be safe and secure enough from the
Annoyance and danger of the Enemy. And now as to your Outward Pawn-tenants,
although they come last in Order, yet they stand in the Second place of Honor,
whereupon I am resolved to make these my Noble Lievtenants, and do not question
but they may prove valiant Champions to bring up the Rear.

These are the men therefore (Right Honorable and Right Worshipful) who came
lately out of the Land of Egypt (pray pardon the similitude and all others of
the like nature as being added only by way of illustration) and were redeemed
from their Captivity therein by your most valiant and noble hands, in hopes
that in a short time you would have placed them in a Land flowing with Milk and
Honey, but so it is (may it please your good Lordship and Worships) that by the
inauspicious influence of some superior Planets being predominant or by some
other unlucky interposition (for they know not where certainly to fix it,
although I could here give a shrewd guess as to the true cause and reason
thereof) they do find themselves still in the Wilderness, and are at this time
in their Journey no farther than the waters of Marah, and as for their daily
sustenance they cry out for help, help (and it is you Right Honorable, and you
Right Worshipful, and you only, that can work a Miracle for them) or else in
a short time, they say, they shall famish in this barren Wilderness for want of
Bread, they mean for want of Trading, by reason of the Inconveniences of their
present station.

But yet once again, these are the Men (Right Honorable, and Right
Worshipful) which have listed themselves under your Protection; these are the
Men that have marched under your Conduct, and have obeyed your Commands: these
are the men that have fought your Battles, (that is, vindicated your Honor
upon all Occasions, in building this most stately, and most magnificent
Structure of the Royal Exchange, and of your building double Pawns therein:)
These are the Men who have kept possession of your Shops (although to some of
them a most apparent loss and disadvantage; witness in particular, by name Mr.
William Rutland junior,) when others of a more pusillanimous and faint-hearted
spirit, upon their first entrance into the Battle did immediately quit the
field, (returning again to their Garlic and Onions) and left their
fellow soldiers to shift for themselves, and yet notwithstanding maugre all
the reproach and contempt that have been cast upon your Outward Pawns, (such
as, By-Walks, Turn-again-lanes, Backside of Mother Browns Barn, and the like;
but you may guess from whence these Appellations came, and to what end
designed,) have still stoutly held out (although so strongly begirt with such
strong and potent Assailants) in hopes that relief would come in its proper
season, and that must be when you are possessed with a clear understanding of
the right of their Case, and of the reason of things, and then surely you are
Obliged in Honor (considering all these precedent Circumstances) to rally up
your Forces to raise the siege, and to relieve your Garrison, and that with all
Expedition, lest that they should be so put to their shifts, as that they could
not hold out much longer, but must be forced to surrender up your Fort Royal
upon dishonorable terms, and so in conclusion be made Prisoners of War. And
this may now commodiously be done (for it lies within your power, de facto, at
present, to effect the same,) by answering their Expectations, by satisfying
their Desires, by granting their Petitions, and by harkening to their Proposals
whenever they shall make Application unto you, wherein your public Interest
shall be concerned, as well as their own Convenience and Accommodation.

But inasmuch as these Outward Pawn-tenants, have at this day a Petition before
you, with Reasons annexed thereunto, wherein they have stated their own present
Case, (and I cannot imagine who can state their own Case, or show where their
shoes pinch them, better than themselves) unto their said Petition and Reasons
therefore I shall at present most humbly refer you.

And in the mean time, inasmuch as in my Introduction I gave you a hint, that I
would not conceal any thing from you, either for fear or favor, as material to
my present purpose, or necessary for your Information; give me leave then in
pursuance thereof, here to represent unto you some of their private
Whisperings, and present Sentiments, when they do usually meet together upon
these public Concerns; the which being duly weighed, considered and digested,
among your worthy selves, for ought I know it may prove hereafter of singular
Use, Benefit and Advantage, for the public interest of your Royal Exchange.

And wherein these Tenants of yours have Reason on their side, I hope you will
please to give me leave to say something in their Vindication; but if not, I
shall be as free on the other hand to declaim against them.

Imprimis therefore, and ante omnia, They do say, that ever since they did
petition the Grand Committee for double Pawns (they mean that Committee, who
were first appointed for Re-building of the Royal Exchange) inasmuch as it has
not answered all those Ends and Purposes, as to the Income and Revenue which at
first they did design thereby, some of the said Members (and who are yet
continued) have had some prejudice against them upon that very Account; And
whenever since they have made any humble Proposal, in order to the general and
public Advantage of the said Place, or for their own Convenience and
Accommodation, they do find that this has always been a blot in their
Escutcheons, as to their Accomplishment thereof; For some of the said Members
usually rising up and declaring, That these were the Men that did first
petition them for Double Pawns; so that they have been constrained to go home
again much discontented, since all has been dashed upon this account: So that
in Answer hereunto, I must needs enter my Protest, and say, That these
Gentlemen are somewhat too partial in relation thereunto; for although these
Tenants of yours did petition for double Pawns, yet surely they did not impose
upon the Committee in their so doing; for doubtless they did follow the
Dictates of their own Reasons and Apprehensions, notwithstanding their said
Petition; And this does plainly appear by the Consequence thereof, for in many
things they have gone quite contrary to their said Petition; and if they had
not, they never would have troubled the Court afterward so often as they have
done, to make some convenient Alterations in the said Place. And although
before the late most dreadful Fire, there were too small a number of small
Shops therein, and it was a very great shame and disparagement, to see your
Royal Exchange cut and mangled, divided and sub-divided, into halves, quarters,
and three-quarter Shops, and at such an excessive Rate also, as that it was
almost impossible for any Person to live comfortably therein; so now (as the
matter has been ordered) there is on the other hand, too great a number of
small Shops therein: But as Double Pawns were modestly proposed (though not
imposed) and had it taken Effect, there would not have been one small Shop too
many at this day in the said place. And here under this Head, I will not omit
one thing more, which they do say (and peradventure may be one occult Reason
why their modest Proposals have been always so much slighted and contemned)
viz. That some leading Members of this Honorable Court, have taken a
particular prejudice and displeasure against one of your Outward-Pawn Tenants,
(and that clearly upon a mistake, and a false Report) in a business, wherein as
to matter of Fact he was as innocent as the Child that is yet unborn.

But to proceed a little further, (for things of this and the like nature
coming to light, may at length turn to some good Account;) in the next place
they do say, That when they did lately petition for the turning of the Stairs
on the North-side, and for some other convenient Alterations to be made in your
Outward Pawns, whereby they might in some measure be equally accommodated with
the rest of their Neighbors, the Committee did not deal so fairly, heartily,
and openly with them, as was expected:

For when they came first before them, there came some persons also of the
inward Pawn (who it seems had heard of their intentions) and desired of the
Court that they would please to give them admission into their presence, that
so they might hear the said proposals for alterations, as well as themselves,
but being asked the question, whether they came there by virtue of any power or
authority from the rest of their Neighbors, their answer was in the Negative,
but however as to their desire, the Court asking the petitioners whether they
were willing thereunto, whose answer was in the Affirmative (but with a
proviso) they were immediately admitted thereupon, and upon the hearing and
debate of the said proposals, the Court told them; that if they would come hand
in hand by a joint consent, their business was half done, for they said they
would do any thing in reason for the general good of the whole Exchange, and
therefore they did advise those inward Pawn Gentlemen to return again unto the
place from whence they came, and to consult with their principals, and assemble
their Neighbors together, and come again as authorized from them, with
arguments against the said proposals, and then they mould be further heard, And
as for the outward Pawn Tenants they told them that they need not come again in
a body, but only two or three of them deputed from the whole, would be
sufficient to come and receive an answer to their humble petition, whereupon
they went away very well satisfied for that time, with so fair, so modest, and
so generous an answer; but it seems it was to fair weather to last long, for
behold immediately afterward came this approaching storm, viz.

The next Court day comes Mr. Rutland, Mr. Duke, and Mr. Henry Joyce,
(according to the Courts own order and appointment) with full power and
authority, from the rest of their Neighbors (under their own hands, which they
did produce in Court) to represent the whole. But no persons came from the
inward Pawn (for at that time and at present, the major part of the Royal
Exchange will not be against convenient alterations, but only some particular
men who are particularly concerned in the inward Pawns) whereupon the Court did
immediately send for the persons aforesaid to come before them, but no
commission yet could they produce, neither had they (according to the Courts
advice) assembled their Neighbors, but only kept a very great clamoring, and
herein it is observable that they were called in separately from the rest,
although before the other party were very free and willing to admit of them
jointly to make their defense. But when Arguments cannot do, then Policy must;
and this they knew full well, that your said Tenants if they might be permitted
to be heard, were able to answer to every iota, tittle, and point, which they
should allege in opposition unto the said alterations.

But however the Court did dismiss the said outward Pawn Tenants very abruptly
at that time, but withal that it was very probable they might farther consider
of their said proposals, if they would still come hand in hand, whereas as they
went home together with those inward Pawn Gentlemen, and going to the Tavern
afterward to drink a glass of Wine together, (which was kindly done of them
all notwithstanding their opposition so furiously one against another) one of
them rounded his Companion in the ear, but it must be a very great secret, and
under the Rose also (and as we usually say in vino veritas) viz. That they
might set their hearts at rest and be quiet, for the Committee had faithfully
promised them that they would make no alterations, whereupon they were so
dissatisfied and discontented, that they say, they have great cause to take it
unkindly from the Court, this their unkind and unexpected dealings with them,
and that they did then resolve never to trouble the Court more, upon that
account, or upon any other account whatsoever. And these very men have as
little reason to complain for want of a trade as any persons in the Exchange
whatsoever, only they thought, that by the turning of the Stairs on the
Northside, some water might have run by their Mills which made them so eager
and furious in opposition thereunto, whereas if their Shops stood in one of the
quarters of Morefields next Bedlam gate (in the way that they deal in) they
could not miss of Trade (and plain dealing is best, although the crafty
Politician says that he that uses it will dye a beggar.) And here farther they
do say, that when at any time they come into your Court, they must observe that
distance, they must so place their words, they must observe that order and
method in their deportment, for fear of displeasing some Member or other, who
will immediately repute them either saucy, peremptory or too pragmatical, that
your eyes being so much upon them (and many times they say they are caught up
before they are down,) they have such an awe and dread upon their Spirits, for
fear of giving offense, so that many times they cannot say what they would, and
have to say, upon this very account. Whereas one would think in reason, that
Landlords should be as free to permit their Tenants to speak to them in all
cases whatsoever (paying the due respects which they owe unto the quality of
their persons, and to the place where they are assembled in Court) as they are
free to receive their rents from their said Tenants. And although sometimes it
may fall out that a man may take a bargain of his Landlord, as that his House,
his Land, or Shop, may be very well worth and better than the Money that he
pays for the same, yet your present Tenants do say (and I am very apt to
believe them therein,) that their Money is far better at present, (nay double
the value, as I shall make it appear hereafter by undeniable reasons) than any
of yours said Shops, So that upon the whole matter, I dare engage in the behalf
of all your outward Pawn Tenants (here and there one only excepted which do
drive very considerable Trades) that in regard of those most unavoidable
circumstances and inconveniences which do always attend the said place (many
whereof are hinted in the Sub-Tenants case) if any of them could get else where
but 100 pounds per Annum a piece, toward the present ma intenance of
themselves and Families, they would then straightway bid adieu to all their
concerns within your Royal Exchange. And this (if seriously weighed and
considered) is a miserable case, that a man must be constrained to give his
constant attendance in the said place, and yet (in regard of the said
inconveniences) shall not be able to get 100 pounds per annum for his present
maintenance, and yet when it is got (although out of the fire too, because the
place at present is more like Birchin lane, than a Royal Exchange) the one
moity thereof must go, toward the payment of his Landlords for his house and
Shop.

And if this be their present case, and if this were the late proceedings of
the Court against them, alas! poor men what shall I say, Where will they center
at last in hopes of releif, and when will the time come, wherein they may truly
say, that their halcion days are approaching, and that they may lift up their
Heads, for their redemption draws nigh. And now a little to plead their cause
upon the precedent circumstances. As to matter of Alterations, all men in the
world will allow this to be reason, viz. That you should endeavor to make both
your Pawns as Equal as possibly you can, for the general Accommodation of the
whole, (inasmuch as all are equally and alike concerned, as to matter of
Rents,) or else, that you should make such a proportionable Abatement and
Allowance, according to the real and apparent difference of the said place.

But for some men to persuade you, That in making any convenient Alterations
(such as Turning the Stairs, and taking down the Posts on the North-side, and
making the East and West Side into Large Shops, and the like,) would destroy
and impair your Inward Pawn-Rents, (which it seems was their grand Objection,
and the Committee did swallow it without chewing) is such a Windmill and a
Chimaera, as I could easily make it appear, (only self-interest men will put
on a good face upon any thing whatsoever, though never so incongruous and
inconsistent with Humane Reason, and as we proverbially say, Audaces Fortuna
juvat, cum in terga removetur Modestia,) That I must here most earnestly
beseech your good Lordship and Worships, that you would not henceforward suffer
your selves (by any prevailing Party, or pretense whatsoever) to be born down
with the Clamours and Railings, but with the Reasons of Men: For if you should
make at this day what Alterations you please, without the consent and
approbation of the Ancient and Modern Leasees (for they were both Modern which
came then before you) or being frighted with their Bug-bears, or allured with
their Charms, as to the danger that may ensue thereby; yet it is Ten thousand
pounds to a Nut-shell, but the present Inhabitants and Sub-tenants of the said
inward Pawns, (wherein there is at present above Threescore of your said Shops
let upon the Wrack,) may be brought over and persuaded by very good words to
accept of your Leases (when they are expired) at your present Rents, if in case
hereafter it does appear, that you cannot possibly afford them at a cheaper
Rate.

And moreover some of them do likewise say, That the Walks of your Royal
Exchange are so extreme and pitiful Narrow, so that both the Exchanges at the
other end of the Town (and many times their Customers by way of Emulation, for
their respects and value they have for those Exchanges, take notice thereof) do
far surpass and outvie them upon that very Account. And again some do say,
(which although it be a jocular and a pleasant Reason, yet there may be much of
truth therein) viz. That by reason the Stairs of your Royal Exchange are built
so high, they have of late, lost most of their Tissical, Consumptive and
shortwinded Customers within the City of London, and Suburbs thereof, (the
which being of so vast an extent, and a place so Populous, may arise to a very
great number) which in Gresham College was a considerable branch of their
present Revenue.

And here by the way, Had you made your Accommodation for such small Trades as
are now in your Royal Exchange below stairs, in those extreme parts which you
have purchased and taken in, but bring you in nothing considerable (by reason
you would not have it stand contiguous, in order to the greater safety and
security for the future of the said place) and that the said Shops should have
fronted toward the Merchants (with double Pillars, although they are now but
single) just as it was in Gresham-Colledge; and also, that you had made above
stairs but one long single Pawn, and but one Roof, with large and deep Shops
therein, fitting for Mercers, Silk-men, Indian-gown Men, Popes-head-Alley Men,
and all other wholesale Men of the present Inhabitants as have occasion (by
reason of their Trades) to make use of large Shops, you had then made it the
most famous place for Accommodation of Trades, this day in the whole World: And
it would have brought you in what Revenue you had pleased in Reason to require
for the same. And if the City of London, and Right Worshipful Company of
Mercers, should condescend so far, as to spare (or to procure) so much Money
whereby to make it still after the same Manner (the Consent of all Parties
concerned being first had and obtained) I dare forfeit all the Concerns I have
in the World, (in regard I am able to make it out by most solid, substantial
rational demonstrations) that in seven years time it would turn to Account. And
if this can be made out, then lay your hands to the Plough yet once again, and
the Lord prosper the work of your hands, and your handiwork. But I fear,
should this but once be undertaken, both the Exchanges at the other end of the
Town, would immediately petition the Parliament to put a stop to your
proceedings therein, and also that they would please to make an Act, That your
Royal Exchange, should henceforward remain and be continued for ever in the
same Manner and Form as it is at this day, any Law, Statute, Proclamation,
Proviso, or By-law, to the contrary, notwithstanding.

Moreover, I do verily believe, that the Merchants of London, if once proposed
unto them, would be willing to contribute their proportions (and that in a very
considerable measure) for their particular Accommodations. And for my own part,
were I for to take my choice, I had much rather give you 30 l. per annum for
one single Shop below stairs, of Eight Foot, so accommodated, than give you
Five pounds per annum for one Shop above of the same Dimensions; and I could
wish with all my heart, that some worthy, wealthy and most Noble Citizen, that
in consideration of the Premises, (which would be so much to his Honor, and to
his everlasting praise and renown) would please to make his own hands his
present Executors, and would present you with a Bag of Gold of Twenty or Thirty
thousand pounds, to be expended after this Manner, and would but make me one of
his Surveyers and Overseers of the Work; I would then not only forfeit all my
Concerns, but my Life it self, if I did not make your Royal Exchange in a short
time, the most Famous, most Noble (setting aside the magnificence of the
Structure, which you have already accomplished) and most Renowned place for
Accommodation of Trades, as any place this day under the cope of Heaven. Pray
pardon this small digression of mine, although it should never turn to any
Account. But in good earnest, (and I do most solemnly here protest, in
confirmation thereof) that had I such an Estate as many of our wealthy and
worthy Citizens have, of some Thirty or Forty thousand pounds a Man, I would
willingly (with all my Soul) advance the one Moiety (for the Honor of the City
of London, and the Glory of the Nation) in order to the Accomplishment thereof.
But to proceed:

These outward Pawn Tenants (notwithstanding their former bad success) have it
seems adventured to present themselves before you yet once more, as being of
late animated and encouraged thereunto by some worthy Members of this Grand
Committee, in particular, by name, Mr. Warden Godfrey: So that you see they are
willing to embrace any Opportunity, to take hold on every Twig to save
themselves, that so at last they may arrive at their desired Haven. But it
seems it is not at present (by reason of their former ill success) for any
Alterations, (although that would be in some cases essentially necessary to the
future Benefit and Advantage of the whole Exchange) but for a general Abatement
of their present Rents. But what with the influence of some predominant and
prevailing Party, what with the former prejudice and misinformation of some of
your own worthy Members, what with the Clamors and Railings of some particular
and self-interested persons, (whose Eyes will be evil, because peradventure
yours may be good,) especially the ancient Leasees: They do not know how they
shall speed, or what good success they shall have therein, only they do hope,
that since that Committee is changed, your Resolutions may not be the same, and
that they may say, Tempora mutantur, and vos mutabimini in illis.

And now in consideration of the Premises, and upon the whole matter therein
contained, peradventure you may here reply and say, viz.

1. That those Persons whose particular Interests I have here undertaken, have
certainly obliged themselves by some particular Contract and Agreement, or else
by some verbal Promises, to present you with some large and Noble Present and
Gratuity for your pains and Expenses, or else doubtless you would never have so
zealously, and so passionately espoused (as you have done in this Memorial now
presented unto us) their Cause therein.

But as to this, I will extempore and directly answer to the matter in hand,
and will assure your good Lordship and Worships, (and verbo Christiani verum
est,) That there is no one Person within the walls of your Royal Exchange (as
an Inhabitant thereof) that has made any such particular Contract, Agreement,
or any verbal Promise with me upon that Account, nor but two of them (before it
went to the Press) that I ever gave any hint of my Intentions or Resolutions
therein, in order thereunto.

2. But as to matter of Alterations, it is very probable you may here also
reply and say, That you are in some measure satisfied with the Reasons thereof
(although the former Committees hitherto have been born down therein by the
prevalency of parties, and for want of a true information of the right of the
Case) and that thereupon you are resolved to take that and the poor Sub-Tenants
Case together very suddenly (and that upon mature deliberation) into your most
sollemn and serious considerations, and that you will take all the care
imaginable for the future, that the innocent shall be protected, that the
oppressor shall be discountenanced, and that the honest and plain hearted
(though modest and bashful) shall be encouraged and emboldened to speak their
own Sentiments: and that all your Tenants in general (who are immediate
possessors) shall be so fairly, and so nobly treated by an equal accommodation,
that they shall have no cause to complain hence forward, the one against the
other; and if this be your answer hereunto I do here in their behalfs present
you with my most humble and hearty thanks. But,

3. As to any general abatement of their present rents (durus est hic sermo) it
is such a thing, such an hard matter to swallow down, as cannot possibly enter
as yet, not so much as into your private thoughts (as you are chosen trustees)
for performance thereof, inasmuch as there lies such a grand weight and strong
objection against it, as that it is as possible almost to remove Mountains, as
it is to remove the said objection out of the way, and although you are
convinced and satisfied, that your Tenants (rebus sic stantibus) according to
the several circumstances and inconveniences herein so largely declared, ought
to sit but at very moderate rents, yet until some of the outward or inward
Pawn Tenants can solve this objection and remove it out of the way; you must
turn your deafears unto the charmer (as you have here so powerfully
endeavored) although he should charm never so loud, and the objection (in
paucis Verbis) is this, viz.

Object. That you have kept a very fair account of the whole charge of your
rebuilding the Royal Exchange, and in the sum total, you do find it does
amount unto a very great sum, and that you have no other way or mean whereby
to reimburse your selves, but upon the present in habitants of the said place,
wherein you have taken such care so to moderate and proportion the rents and
the rates (...) your Shops therein, according to the computation of you charge,
desiring but a very little more by an annual rent and future revenue for the
same, than the bare interest of the money does amount unto (the principal still
remaining within the walls of the said building) so that you cannot possibly
afford your Shops at a cheaper rate than at present you do demand for them.

This objection (I must confess) seems so fair, so equitable, and so reasonable
at the very first appearance that one would think it were enough (without any
farther progress) to stop the mouths of all persons whatsoever, from making any
reflections upon the members of the grand Committee for their putting such a
present rate upon their said Shops. And I must confess I should be here very
unwilling to enter the lists, whereby to solve this objection or to give any
answer thereunto, so far forth as to give the City and Company any offense
therein, yet if they would please to give me leave, so far as if I were one of
their present Tenants (and peradventure I have been formerly somewhat related
unto the said place) I would then so scan this objection, by taking it in
pieces, and off from the hinges, as that I do not question but I should make it
appear, in a far different dress, and although in my answer I expect no offense
to be taken on the Companies side, yet as to the City side if I make it appear,
by dint of argument and by undeniable reasons: that they may afford their said
Shops at a great deal cheaper rate, than at present they do; I hope then (as
they are persons of honor, and intelligent agents, and so consequently men
endued with reason and understanding) they will immediately fall down, and be
captivated with the most sweet and harmonious voice of her powerful charms.

And here by the way, before I come directly to the matter (...) hand, ( viz.
to the more sollid and substantial part of my resent undertaking) I think it
not impertinent, but rather ^ery requisite and necessary (in order to prepare
your minds unto a more gentle and easy reception of the subsequent arguments)
to put you in mind and by way of remembrance to represent unto you, how that
many worthy Persons, and worthy Citizens, (as well as your selves) have since
the late dreadful fire (in order to the rebuilding of the City of London, out
of a noble and public Spirit, because they would not have it remain and lie
still buried in its own Ashes, but (like the Phaenix out of its flames) would
rather contribute their assistance and endeavors, to have it raised again with
more beauty and luster than formerly) have laid out many thousand pounds, in
building of Houses and Warehouses; and other conveniences for the
accomplishment thereof: but yet when these accommodations have been built by
them. What with the deadness of Trading, what with the Poverty of the
Inhabitants, (as having not yet recovered their great losses, by reason of the
late Conflagration) what with the inconvenience of the Situation of the said
Houses, or of the inconvenience of the building of them as not commodious and
fitting for Merchants in the place where they stand, and what by reason of
putting too great a rate upon them at the first, (and this is enough in all
conscience alone to mar all their primary and public intentions whatsover,
and then no marvel that they have had no better success) and the like: They
have been so much blown upon, as that at last they have been glad to take what
they could get in reason (which they might have had at the first) for the same,
and thereby have been such considerable loosers (whereas they might have been
sufficient gainers) as that I do believe they have not made 4 per Cent. for the
laying out of their Moneys. And you cannot be ignorant likewise how that many
hundreds of Landlords in the Country have of late years had their Farms thrown
up into their hands, and their Tenants have been in arrears for Rent, some two,
and some three years together, (although you endeavor to receive yours every
quarter, and are the best rents in the world, were they once moderated with a
quantum meruit) and by reason of the badness of Trade and Corn not yiedling a
price, their said Landlords have been constrained to take what they could get,
and that sometimes has not been the one Moiety; and to take an extreme Course
against them, has been but a weak Refuge; (for it was never yet known, that a
Prison could work such a Miracle, as to pay Debts when the Person has it not)
and afterward have let them to other Tenants at a far less Price, or to them
again with a very considerable Abatement. The Application hereof, I leave to
your worthy selves.

And here I am heartily glad, that I need not go far for a proof of this point,
inasmuch as I can produce two notable and most famous Instances within the
walls of your most stately and most magnificent Fabric, for confirmation
hereof: The one is of a moderate and Noble Leasee, by name Mr. Edward Carleton,
(pray let him not be named or ranked among the precedent ones, unless it be for
a President and a good Example to all those as shall hereafter arrive unto the
same pitch of Honor as to be ancient Leasees) who rather than he would stay
for a Customer to give him 150 l. Fine, and 100 l. per annum, for one of your
great Shops (which was your first Market-price) has let it since, as I am
informed, unto honest Mr. Stephen Proctor, for less than 40 l. per annum. The
other Instance is of your most worthy selves, in your Noble and generous
condescensions, in Letting of late, (although formerly you might have had a far
better price, but it was then refused) a Shop of the same dimensions, for or
near the same rate. So that from hence I may very well argue with you both
ways, viz. Either a majore ad minus, aut a minore ad majus, from these two
great Shops, to the rest of the small Shops proportionably, or else from this
small and generous Exordium, until you shall have passed through the whole
entire Body of your Royal Exchange, and so by degrees happily meet again (where
you so fairly began) by the same Noble and generous Conclusion. And that you
may the rather be excited hereunto, and not any longer suffer your said place
to stand upon this tottering and sandy foundation, some of you may very well
remember what a precaution and early advertisement this Honorable Court had
given them by the aforesaid Author of that Book called Londons Nonsuch (the
which the Leasees out of the singular favor, love and respect which they bore
unto his Person, or rather unto the Ancient and good old cause of wrack rents,
or some other good causes and considerations them thereunto moving, were
pleased to style Londons Nonsense.) In these words. viz.

Take heed lest by your Rents and Fines you build not on the Sand.

Surely he saw then something beforehand, which it seems has since came to
pass in a very great measure.

And O! the miserable effects and most dangerous consequents in all matters and
things either in Ecclesiastical or temporal affairs whatsoever, in winding and
scrueing them up to the highest pitch, and it is ten to one, but in such
proceedings and transactions they do mar and break all at the last: whereas
were there a mediocrity and a mean used in all these concerns, things then
would run in a far clearer and more Crystal Channel, and the world it self
would be at a far better pass, than it is at this day.

And as I remember one of the Kings of France once, commanding his Secretary to
write down the best single word that ever he read in his life, he immediately
(in obedience to his Majesty's pleasure) writes down this word, viz. MODERATION.

And this is no more nor no less than what we are all enjoined and commanded
upon sacred record, in these plain and intelligible words, viz. Let your
Moderation be known unto all Men, etc. And truly for all men who are
intelligent agents, et ergo rational Creatures, to be modest, humble and
courteous in all their affairs and transactions whatsoever, is a most laudable,
commendable and a most excellent virtue (like Dame nature her self, who is
moderate in all her desires, and when over charged we do but put her out of her
course and disturb her, and she takes it as a very great affront and injury
offered unto her worthy self) And how many Persons are there now at this day,
yet surviving within the limits and territories of his Majesty's Realms and
Dominions, who were formerly in Power and Authority, and for want of making use
of this thing called Moderation, did mar and break all their designs and
enterprises whatsoever, and did split themselves upon the Rock of Extremity and
Presumption, as little dreaming there might come a day of an Account? and if a
man had been inspired from Heaven in those days, with the Spirit of Prophecy,
(although many times by natural reason, one may give a shrewd guess of
subsequent consequences, by precedent circumstances) and had gone to them and
told them: Gentlemen, my humble request unto you is, that you would please to
let your Moderation be known unto all Men, for my Lord the Kings most Excellent
Majesty is near at hand, I warrant you such a Person would have been esteemed
most ridiculous, impertinent, fanatical and contemptible.

But if they had taken it into their serious thoughts and considerations, and
thereupon had embraced Moderation, they would not have suffered so much
reproach and contempt in their honor and reputation, as some of them (I do
pity them with all my heart) have done since his Majesty's Restoration. And
for any person whatsoever now adays to make any reflection upon any particular
person, by reason of his former in advertency and miscarriage herein, it is an
unworthy and inbecoming action, and sure I am, no sober mind would do it;
inasmuch as there is an act of indemnity passed by King, Lords and Commons to
have all these things buried in the embers of Oblivion and forgetfulness, and
that they would have no distinction of Persons now used, save only what
consists with the Longitude and Latitude of a good Christian, a good Subject,
and a good Citizen; and in the Country, a good Commonwealths man, that is such
a one as does study the common good and benefit of his Neighbors, and of all
the parts adjacent where he shall or may survive. And because many of these Men
(who otherwise very intelligent) may be now heartily sorry for their mistakes,
and if in case they were in the same capacity, they would never run again the
same extremes, and I could wish(with all my heart) that these books that are
now in print, and suffered to be sold (which do so much reflect upon these men's
Credit and Reputation) were not tolerated, inasmuch as it is (in my slender
apprehension) a direct breach of the said Statute and act of Grace which does
so strictly prohibit and forbid the same.

But all this is as yet besides the matter in hand, and not directly to the
point (although I hope they may be of some use and benefit in some cases), for
the strength of the Objection lies herein; viz. That you have laid out so much
money already upon the rebuilding of your Royal Exchange, and that in reason
you ought to have so much interest for the same by way of improvement, or else
you might as well have thrown away your Money into the Streets, or have sent it
into the Island of terra incognita for a venture, and it would have turned to
the same account, so that now I must proceed in a rational order and method
whereby to convince your Reasons and understandings in this case, or else all
that I have hitherto labored in, will turn to no Account, as to my present
design. Wherefore in answer thereunto I will lay down this position for a
general maxim (for you will find it universally true) viz.

That all Cities, Corporations, Bodies politic, Market Towns and the like,
have all of them (more or less) their public Places, and Publick-Houses built
(such as Halls) Courts of Judicature, Market Houses, Storehouses, Exchanges
and the like) for the Honor, State, Benefit, convenience, Profit, Advantage
and Accommodation of the same, and all these public places built upon the
public charges, have as certain (and though to outward appearance somewhat
insensible) and constant revenue and allowance (especially in great Cities)
belonging unto them in order to their defraying the said public and necessary
charges, as any Landlord whatsoever, that has laid out 500 l. in Building of
an house and thereupon does receive some 30 40 or 50 pounds per annum as a
yearly rent for the same.

This being premised, I shall now bring it to the matter in hand, by a
particular instance, viz. That this famous and most Magnificent structure of
the Royal Exchange, is one of the most necessary and most public places that
is built within your Metrapolitane City of London, although there are several
others, as Guild Hall, The Chamber of London, The Court of Aldermen, your
Market-Houses, your Storehouses, your Courts of Judicature, the two Counters,
your Prison for Felons, and the like which are of the same import, and pray
where is your visible and apparent revenue (whereby to re-imburse you) that you
do receive for them? and yet notwithstanding you have so ordered the matter as
that all these places (and that not without very good reason, as being
essentially necessary and requisite as to the flourishing Estate of your City
for the future) are already built. And that you shall be as certainly and as
surely reimbursed, and that with a most considerable advantage for all your
cost and charges so expended; I shall make it clearly appear in manner and form
as follows, viz.

That it is as requisite and necessary (but more especially in so famous and so
renowned a City as the City of London) that all such public places should be
built, and kept constantly in repair at the public charges, in expectation of
the future benefit and advantage which the whole body should receive thereby,
as it is requisite and necessary, that a Shop keeper should lay out 500 l. in
staple commodities, whereby to furnish his shop in expectation of a future
trade, or for a Merchant to freight out a ship to Sea with the Manufactures of
England, upon his own account, in expectation to receive a considerable
advantage thereby, at his safe, speedy, and happy return. And now whereas you
have built this place for the honor of His Majesty, so you have likewise made
it more especially, and in particular, for the accommodation of the Merchants,
and all others who have converse, commerce and traffic with them, for the
advance of your Trade, for the enriching of your members, and still as they do
thrive, flourish and grow rich, it is ten to one but you do find them out, and
call upon them for Aldermen, and for Sheriffs, and where one holds there is
many goes off by the way of fines; and here is that secret mystery and
insensible revenue before intimated, brought to light (besides many other ways
and means you have to bring yearly great Sums into your Public Treasury) and
although you do not, nor should not receive so much quarterly, by the way of
Rent, yet you do constantly and surely receive as much, if not more than the
interest of your moneys so laid out, by the way of Fines. And pray what are all
these Fines leavyed upon the Inhabitants and rich members of your City (and in
other Corporations and Bodies Politic) but to defray all the Public and
necessary charges, upon this very account; and this will still hold and
continue, so long as your City remains and continues in the like good and
flourishing condition, which the Lord of his infinite mercy grant may be until
time shall be no more, Amen.

Come now let us reason together (pray pardon this familiar though modest
expression, in regard I must confess I have that high value and respect for
that which we call Reason, that I am unwilling to move forward one step farther
in any concern whatsoever, than I am guided and directed by the light thereof)
I will now take it for granted, that upon the precedent considerations, you
would have rebuilt the Royal Exchange, if you had not had one Tenant to have
inhabited within the walls thereof. And if so, I would only beg the favor to
ask you these questions, Viz. would you not have built it with Pillars? would
you not have covered it with Lead? would you not have paved it with Marble?
would you not have built it with stone? would you not have erected their
Majesty's Effigies in the front, as also the Effigies of the first Founder?
would you not have made such a stately Tower as is now Erected? and the like;
and these are the things which make such a noise in your building, and in the
report of the people, and which do arise unto so vast a Sum in your books of
Account. Now I say, put all these things (here mentioned) together, and
calculate the charge thereof as near as possibly you can, and charge all these
unto the Public Account, and when this is done, then compute the remaining
charge which you have built for the accommodation of shopkeepers within the
said place, and then leavy their proportions to re-imburse you for the interest
of your money so laid out, and for the principal also in due time.

And now as to those walls of Brick, wherein your Tenants are enclosed by some
men's computation (I must acknowledge my self no competent Judge therein; as
being neither Bricklayer, Stone-cutter, Mason, nor Carpenter) with all the
incident charges appertaining thereunto, and which you have made for the
accommodation of your said Tenants, could not cost you above 10000 pounds; and
as these stately and magnificent adjuncts beforementioned, and wherewith your
Tenants are environed and surrounded, is no part of the building, at least no
part thereof so far as to be charged to the Inhabitants accounts, but to the
account current, viz. the Public Account.

And here by the way, had one hundred of the present inhabitants, during the
time they were in Gresham College, but made application to Alderman Backwell,
and have taken that piece of ground just before your Royal Exchange, although
they had given 500 l. per Annum only for the ground Rent, which would have been
5 l. a piece, and after that had laid down fifty pounds a piece, to be laid out
in building, which would have amounted to 5000 pounds, what a stately place
might they have built therewith the said money for their own accommodations; I
will assure you far beyond the Accommodation they have at present within your
Territories, and you have charged the place with at least 50000 pounds, for the
inhabitants to work out, and to pay you the Interest of your money. And you
have not rested here neither, (I do not speak here to any of you personally,
and in particular, but only as you are now assembled in Court) but it is said
that you have made your Tenants pay by way of overplus, for their Windows, for
their Stalls, and for the backs and footpaces of your said Shops; and whoever
heard, that houses and shops were ever let by Lease or yearly Rent, without the
essential properties and necessary adjuncts and qualifications of Doors and
Windows, thereunto appertaining and belonging; but they were not put upon any
such stratagem, by reason that they did build and rely so much upon your
Clemency, Moderation and Indulgence toward them.

But I hope these precedent arguments before mentioned, as to this insensible
Revenue, and as to the flourishing estate of your Royal City, will for the
future take some impression upon all the hearts of this honorable Court,
whereby they may answer the desires and expectations of all their immediate
Tenants (who are concerned herein) to all intents and purposes.

And now as to the flourishing and thriving estate of your Metropolitan City, I
may very well compare it unto a large, pleasant and fertile Park (and for
methods and illustrations sake, we will call it the Park of Englands Nonsuch)
out of which, in seven years time, is rouzed out of the brakes, and hunted out
of the woodsthereof, many an overgrown Deer into the Chamber of London, and
when he comes there, if he bleeds freely, before the Lord keepers of the said
Park (either in spring or fall, or about or near the time the Sun enters the
Equinoctial) it is a very great sign that he is fat within, and of a sanguine
and healthful Constitution, and the several ounces there taken from him, are
preserved in public store, not only as a worthy relic, to preserve his
future remembrance, but also of sovereign use and benefit, to be expended upon
all occasions (here is your public revenue and public charges within a very
small compass, very happily and opportunely met and joined together; and by my
consent they should never again be parted or divorced, but for some
extraordinary and special occasion given for the same) toward the continual
repair and keeping up of the enclosures, the Pales and the Walls of the said
Park, in order to the greater security and preservation, for the future, of the
rest of the Herd.

But if this will not do, and if you are still resolved to charge upon your
Tenants the whole stress and weight of the building (which I am afraid is so
heavy as that they will never be able long to support themselves under it) then
I will adventure to make one step farther with you, (whereby to alleviate the
present charge of your said Tenants) and that is, by an humble proposal unto
this honorable Court, viz. That you would be pleased to procure an act of
Common Council (which your several Charters and Privileges for your Liberties,
for all necessary charges will bear you out in) whereby to levy 20 or 40 s. per
annum (which will be but a very inconsiderable charge unto them, though in the
whole will amount unto a very considerable sum) upon every eminent Merchant
and Broker (who do daily frequent your Royal Exchange, and there deal for
thousands and ten thousands in a week, and pay nothing for their Station)
rather than levy the whole charge upon the present (and God knows many of them
very poor) inhabitants. But if in case an act of Common Council will not reach
them, then to be sure an Act of Parliament will do it (and that effectually) to
all intents and purposes.

But you will now object and say, (especially on the Companies side) That
according to these maxims, reasons and considerations the City of London,
receives more benefit and advantage by far, as to this insensible revenue here
discussed and described, by the rebuilding of the City of London and in
particular the Royal Exchange within the said place, and by the constant,
flourishing and thriving estate thereof, then the Mercers do, and yet they are
both equally concerned as to the charge of the rebuilding thereof.

In answer hereunto I must acknowledge (and ingeniously confess) the truth
hereof in the affirmative, and the truth of it is, by all the Rhetoric in my
budget and by all the arguments and reasons that I can rally up, and muster
together, I am not able to solve this objection, with satisfaction to any
rational man whatsoever. Wherefore if the City and Company would agree (and it
is great pity that such an Ancient Society, and such copartners who have lived
so long together in Amity and Unity should now fall out) to put it to the Vote,
in the next Common Hall holden for the City of London, they should have both my
hands (as an unworthy member thereof) that the City should contribute two
thirds, and the Right Worshipful Company of Mercers one third toward the charge
of the Building, and when this is done, that they should both (as copartners
still) be equally concerned as to the rents, incomes, revenues, and profits of
the same.

And here by the way although neither of you do receive a proportionable
revenue and income in your way and method (and by the measures as you have
taken for the same) according to your primary expectations, yet behold here is
Honor, Credit and reputation enough in the case to supply that defect, for now
since the rebuilding of your most stately and most Magnificent structure (for
as to the whole these are proper and deserving Epithites, and as to the
accommodation for Traders, I could wish it were so in every part and parcel
thereof) you my Lord Mayor the representative Body of the City of London, and
you the worthy members of this grand Committee, the representative Body of the
right Worshipful Company of Mercers, are now esteemed and reputed as famous for
your zeal and care and for your expedition in order to the accomplishment of
the said building, as the worthy Sir Thomas Gresham was formerly (and ever will
be as long as your City stands) who was the first Founder thereof; and truly
this is a very great honor indeed, for how many persons has there been in the
World, who have done many Worthy and most Noble acts in order to perpetuate
their names unto posterity, and to leave a good example behind them, that
others might be induced and encouraged to follow and tread in their steps, and
as I have been informed a very worthy Person of this Nation, who did formerly
proffer (which would have cost him many thousand pounds) to finish upon his own
cost and charges, the Quadrangle of Christ Church College in Oxford, upon
condition that he might be made (...) but Co-founder, which it seems was such
an high punctillio of Honor, Credit and Reputation esteemed by the Heads of
the said College (and of which they were so tender and careful) as that they
would by no means admit thereof, inasmuch as by such an act and by such an
enrollment upon record, would mount him upon the Wings of Everlasting fame unto
posterity, to be coequal with Cardinal Woolsey who was the first Founder
thereof.

And now if some Worthy and Wealthy Person (especially some rich Bachelor of
the City of London) would lay out (...) much money as to make those alterations
in the Royal Exchange (and the charges would not amount unto a very great
sum) in the same manner and form as is before de^^ribed, I am very certainly
assured he would be esteemed and reputed as famous and as worthy unto Posterity
among all persons that should see the same, but more especially among the
Merchants of London, and the Inhabitants that should hereafter survive and
flourish therein, as any public spirited Person has been formerly upon any
Account whatsoever. And here I will not divine, but I have a strong persuasion
within my Breast, that some worthy Person or other will please (either sooner
or later) to take the Premises into his private and most serious consideration:
But if not, I say still for the City of London (like a strong Noun Substantive,
such as Rex or Regnum, which stands by it self) to lay out twenty or thirty
thousand pounds, as a strong, solid and substantial Foundation, in order for an
Accommodation for the future thriving and flourishing Estate and Condition of
their said City, which after must be laid for the Superstructure and Top-stone
of such a Noble and Magnificent Building, is no more with them, than for some
of their Royal Exchange Tenants, when they have sold a rich point of Venice to
some persons of quality, of a hundred pound price, and after that to give a
little Paper and Packthread to bind it up into their bargain.

So that now should you at length by rational means be persuaded (which is not
as yet too late) to make upon your own Cost and Charges (without standing in
competition with any other most worthy Person) such convenient Alterations as
are here mentioned, viz.

1. To build out the four Corners of your Royal Exchange (which now stands in
Nooks) that so there may be a perfect Quadrangle both below and above stairs
within the said place, which said Alterations will be altogether as graceful
to the two Fronts as they are now: But if a Workman should endeavor to
persuade you to the contrary, (although perhaps he could give but a slender
Reason for the same) yet one would think in reason that Gracefulness in this
place should not come in competition with the convenience of a Trade: And I
dare swear, that these Graceful works, not of Uniformity but Deformity, has
so marred the Interest of your Outward Pawns above stairs, as to an Equality of
Rents, so as that you had better have given two or three thousand Pounds out of
your Public Stock, than to have permitted them to be built after the same
manner as they are at this day.

2. To take down the Middle walls above stairs, and not the Roof (which
peradventure you would think too great a charge) and build it upon Pillars,
with deep Shops on both sides, as formerly described, and also to take down the
walls below stairs, and there erect Pillars in lieu thereof, with Shops only
of one side, as before mentioned, where the Bricks you take down, would go near
to countervail your said Charge; which being done, would bring you in a most
certain Revenue of at least 4000 l. per annum, and every person also contented
and well satisfied, and would think himself also most reasonably used. And if
you should object, That you could not afford the Place at such a Rent, (and
will have no respect, nor give any grains of Allowance unto the precedent
Arguments) the next seven years Leases, if Trading should flow in upon them,
they would as willingly then (when they are all settled and established in the
said place) pay you 6000 l. per annum, as they will now pay you Four.

And upon such Alterations it will be objected, that the present stairs of the
Royal Exchange, will be such a break in the Quadrangle below stairs, as will
much impair the Gracefulness of the said place: Unto the which I answer, I have
a very convenient and commodious Salvo for that also; but that is too tender a
part at present to be here discussed, by reason there must be a particular
Demonstration upon the very place, to satisfy any rational man of the
convenience thereof.

But if no Alterations in the least Measure should ensue hereupon, then as to
the quantum merun or your present Shops, as to matter of Rents: I answer in
Manner and Form as follows, viz.

That in consideration of the many preceding Inconveniences, and the many
unavoidable Circumstances that do and will always attend the said place. Your
Shops re vera and bona fide, cannot possibly be valued (especially were an
honest Jury upon their Oaths to give in their Verdict in the Case) at more than
10 l. per annum, and whoever has formerly given, or shall hereafter give more,
I will not say, it is not for want of Ignorance, (for that would be a little
too gross) but I will say, it is either out of Inadvertency, as not considering
what they undertake, or else out of Necessity, as being bred up as Apprentices
in your Royal Exchange, and know not (poor Souls) how to provide for themselves
elsewhere for a future livelihood.

And now as to this insensible (and not so much perceived and taken notice of)
Revenue for your discharge of all these public places, and does so much depend
upon the future thriving and flourishing Condition of your Metropolitan City; I
say in answer thereunto, I will still stand my ground, and will not move one
step from the point in hand by way of Retreat, (unless I am overcome by might,
or rather by better Arguments to the contrary) but will still hold it out as a
strong City of Refuge, and as an advantageous Post, or a strong Tower of
Defense, against all opposition whatsoever. And now in the close of all, and to
wind it up in a small bottom, I will make such a clear demonstration thereof
unto you all, by two most famous Instances and Similitudes, taken from those
two grand Luminaries of Heaven, and which are there fixed by the God of Nature,
(the Supreme and Superintendent Being of all created Beings whatsoever) for the
use, benefit, service and advantage of his little (...), or this (...), his
Creature Man; the one to rule the Day, and the other to govern the Night: And
first for the Sun, this vast fiery and Elementary Body, this all-glorious Lamp
of Heaven (which as the Scripture phrases it, comes forth of his Chamber like
a Bridegroom, and rejoices as a strong Man to run his race,) which consists
in Light, Life, Heat and Motion, and by its most wonderful secret Power, and
insensible Faculties, it does produce the same most admirable Effects, unto all
Creatures both Animal and Inanimal whatsoever, upon the face of the whole
Earth; and the nearer and nearer it does approach unto us, (within our Horizon)
the more vigor, strength and power it does still retain, in order to the
accomplishment of all those Noble Ends and Purposes for the which it was first
created, and by reason of his powerful Influence over the whole Earth, he does
never rest Day nor Night, until such time as he has enriched the same with a
plentiful Crop, and all things therein contained with a Green, thriving and
flourishing Condition; so that from hence (by the wise Disposer of all things
under the Sun) we have the Spring and the Fall, we have Summer and Winter,
Seed-time and Harvest, and all things that may conduce unto our present and
future Happiness whatsoever: And this is a true Representation and Similitude
of Life and Death, as to things Temporal, Mortality, Resurrection, and
Immortality, as to things Spiritual and Eternal: And so in like manner, in
respect of the other most glorious and Nocturnal Light, this vast, Elementary,
moist and liquid Body of the Moon (which as Astrologers do say, is above three
hundred times bigger than the whole Terrestrial Universe) and has so powerful
an Influence upon the vast Ocean, so that as we see by daily Experience, as she
increases in Grandeur, Neptune himself is also constrained to move forward, and
to give way, and to increase also, and so gradually till she comes to her full
strength, then the Surges and Billows of the Sea do arise to that height, as
many times it overflowes the banks of the main Ocean, and this is that which we
call our Spring-tides. So that we see this vast and liquid Body (like as Fire
does produce Fire, and Water by the help of an Engine does draw up Water) by
its secret and attractive virtue (infused thereinto by an Almighty power)
commands the very Ocean it self, and likewise sets bounds and limits to the
proud waves and surges thereof, (which many times are much higher than the
Land) by its most powerful strength, influence and operation.

And this is a more than probable Argument to be given for the Ebbing and
Flowing of the Sea, which has startled and stumbled so many Persons, who have
been upon the Quest to find out the true Cause and Reason thereof. And these
two Instances alone, together with the Rainbow being taken in, which will make
up a Trinity of Celestial Attestators, are enough to confute (those purblind
and blear-eyed Masters of Reason, who can see no further than their dimsighted
corporeal Eyes will permit them) the proudest and stoutest Atheist in the world.

And they may as well say, that they made themselves, and were the primary
Cause of their own Beings, as to say, all these things and many more (which
would be too tedious here to insert) were first produced by the power,
strength and vigor only of Natures Operation: For how can these men tell,
that if Nature alone did produce them, Nature might not some time or other
reduce them again unto their first Principles, or else into some other Form and
Fashion? (for Nature sometimes has its prodigious and monstrous Births;) And
how could they tell that the Rainbow (Gods established Covenant with Mankind)
should continue and appear in the Heavens for so many Generations? But all
these things are so fixed and determined by the most High, that they cannot do
otherwise than they are appointed, and if the Sun stand still or go backwards
at any time, it is in Obedience to the Command of the Supreme Creator.

I pray pardon this small digression of mine, in regard as I was entering
thereupon some of the Atheistical notions did so boldly accost me, that I could
do no less then give them a broad side, on purpose to send them back again into
the Land of forgetfulness; that so they might no more rise up in pride,
vainglory, and presumption in denying the good Providence and Wisdom of
Almighty God in these and the like cases, but to proceed as by way of
similitude in these two instances, as to those ends and purposes now mentioned,
so I say in like manner, as to this most Famous and most renowned City of
London, so long as you have peace within your Walls, Prosperity within your
Borders, Plenty within your Streets, Health within your Palaces; no Foreign
nor Domestique jarrs to obstruct your Trade at home, nor your Negotiations
abroad (especially among your Merchants which are the great wheels or springs
in a Watch that sets all the little wheels in their orderly motions) Mercy and
Truth meeting together, Righteousness and Peace embracing each other, I say by
the powerful influence of all these precedent circumstances being met and
joined together, it is almost impossible but that your City of London, (unless
our heaven provoking sins from time to time interveneing shall forbid the
banes) should continue in a thriving and flourishing condition and thereupon
how many thousand pounds come flowing yearly (like the overflowing of the River
Nilus) into the Chamber of London, and at this insensible vast and most Noble
revenue, the Citizens of London and the Inhabitants thereof are not in the
least measure offended, but do rather rejoice and wish you much joy thereof,
and much good may you do with it, and they would be glad with all their hearts
every Mothers child of them, to arrive at the same pitch of honor as to come
to be Lord Major, Mr. Alderman, Mr. Sheriff, Mr. Common-Councel-Man and the
like. And now and then to open a vein in the body Politic, for the
preservation of the whole is as requisite and necessary as sometimes to open a
vein in the body natural, whereby to remove some impediment and obstruction in
the circulation of the blood, that so afterward in its perambulation it may
run with more strength and vigor, and return again unto its former and regular
proceedings. And I may truly say of this ancient and Renowned City of London
(and it reaches all cases, persons and places whatsoever) according to the Poet.

Donec eris foelix multos numerabis amicos,
Tempora si fuerint nubila solus eris.
Ovid And thus have I done with my main and principal design which were my
primary intentions and resolutions in the publication hereof.

And although this small piece is not adorned with all those goodly and
excellent properties as might be expected from a person of more than ordinary
and Scholastic improvement, upon any matter or Subject whatsoever as he should
undertake which are these, viz.

1. To speak modestly, and in the words of truth and Sobriety. 2. To speak
pertinent to the matter in hand (without too many circumlocutions and florid
expressions before he comes to the point) and therein also to be very succinct.
3. To back all his positions, and assertions with the prevailing and powerful
arguments of solid and substantial reason, that so all persons may be
constrained to acquiesce in her determinations, as not being able to resist the
strength and power thereof.
As to the first of these I am conscious to my self that I have not swerved
therefrom, and as for the two latter wherein I have been short, you must impute
it to my mean education and slender abilities and not to my well wishes in the
performance of the same, and yet herein I have endeavored as much as in me
lies, and as the matter would bear, to make them as succinct as I could, and I
am sure I have represented things so plain, so obvious and profpicuous (and
upon the square) to any intelligent person, so as that he that runs may read:
If at least he dare but make use of his reason, in these Temporal and humane
affairs, as well as those most Heroic, Universal and Public spirited men of
this age (to their Everlasting praise, Honor and perpetual remembrance and
Renown be it spoken) have done (although by some persons they are also (the
more is the pity) most bitterly inveighed and railed against for their so
doing) in matters of Religion.

And were it not besides the matter in hand (and likewise more proper to
another function than my own,) I could here willingly give these Gentlemen of
the black and russet guard, half a dozen good smart blows (which should stick
close to their sides) for their Satirical invectives and railings, both in
Press and Pulpit; against these most Noble and Christian like Beroeans who have
universal Love, Charity and good will for all persons and of all persuasions
whatsoever (I am afraid they do much fall short, of this ancient Catholic and
Apostolic Temper,) and who do see more with one of their reason (having the
eyes of their understandings thereby enlightened) than ten thousand of them,
who, although they have (sicut homines) their discerning and intellectual
faculties (and both their Ocular senses as to their corporeal parts) yet do at
this day so much stumble (in Charity I must, and am obliged to pity them
notwithstanding) and grope in the dark.

But I hope when this thick vail of ignorance (more than Etigypan darkness) is
taken off from the minds and understandings of men (by these Worthy persons
even now hinted, and which are in present Communion with the Church of England)
and that they may once be brought to that pass, as to see with their own and
not other men's eyes, then those watery Clouds of error, superstition and
Idolatry, and all those aerie notions and most strange, horrid and irrational
speculations, whose natural tendency is more to make men vicious than virtuous,
and which have so long pestered the true Church, and (which to enumerate would
make a large volumn of it self) will by degrees evaporate, and like mists and
foggs before the rising Sun will in a short time vanish and fall to the ground:
and that it may be in some good measure accomplished in our days, let all
Sober and Rational Christians (who are enjoined at all times to stand upon
their guard, and to be ready to give a reason of their Faith, and of that good
hope that is in them with meekness and fear) to insert this into their Litany
and daily prayers, viz.

Exurgat Deus et veritatis dissipentur inimici. And now, what will become of
this small piece, and how this innocent Dove will be treated now it is out my
hands, (I having no such prospect in my thoughts, nor yet in the least measure
pretending thereunto) I am not able here to predict, although I presume this I
may safely say (secundum hominis rationem) that it will meet with many a
blustering storm and cruel Tempests before it finds any rest or harbor for the
sole of its foot, and before it return again (by a fair brisk and prosperous
gale) with an Olive branch in its mouth.

But this one thing I can certainly assure you, (and I presume it is an
auspicious Omen, and I hope it does amount almost unto a sure and certain
presage) viz. That although your present Author, is a person naturally of very
mean and slender abilities, (and not set of with these blandishments and grand
auxilliaries, and Artificial helps of Scholastic endowments and
accomplishments, which do usually raise men to something in the world) and
thereupon altogether unable to expose himself to public view, wherein he must
undergo the various censures of all Critical persons whatsoever: Yet when these
present notions did first enter, and cast Anchor within his private
cogitations, and afterward having seriously and soberly weighed, examined,
pondered and considered all circumstances whatsoever relating thereunto, and
casting up the sum total, he found upon the whole matter, That they being of
such universal benefit and advantage, (if they were once put in Execution) and
of such public tendency, as well for the Honor of the King, for the Honor of
Great Britain, the Honor of your Royal City, (as being the chief Residence of
Sacred Majesty) as also for the Relief of those many honest and good Persons,
who are at present under great Pressures, and are not able to extricate
themselves out of the same, but by the interposition of your Power and
Authority, and of your Clemency and Indulgence toward them: I say, for these
and the like considerations, he found such a Consternation in his mind, such a
confusion in his thoughts, such a perplexity within his breast, as that he
could not receive any real satisfaction or quiet within himself, until he had
put his hand to the Plough, viz. his Pen to paper, whereby to bring them into
such a decent and orderly Method, fitting to be published and presented unto
this Honorable Court: And when I said for the Honor of Great Britain,
methinks I find such an Emphasis in the words, as that I am not able to pass
any further without making an Halt, or some small Retreat, (and that by way of
Paraphrase upon the words,) whereby to leave unto Posterity, viz. to the
Inhabitants of this Island, (but more especially to all those who shall have
the perusal hereof) something of Remembrance, whereby to excite them all unto a
most real, and a most unfeigned Gratitude and Thankfulness unto the Supreme
Monarch of Heaven and Earth, that their Lots are fallen in so good an
Inheritance, as to be born within the Limits, Confines, Territories and
Dominions thereof.

For as to this Island of Great Britain, (this sure I am) I may safely and
truly say, That it may properly be called The Phoenix of the World, upon these
and the like subsequent Considerations, viz.

1. For the Constitution of its Government, (pray observe, this is the
Foundation-stone) for the Situation of the Place, for Convenience of Trade,
and for the Commodities therein produced, for the Encouragement of all
Merchants for Exportation and Importation, for its strength against all
Foreign Invasions, as being environed with the Sea like the City of Venice,
whose Motto is, Thus free from all Alarms,
I rest in Neptunes Arms.
(Many Princes and People, who live upon the main Continent, how glad would
they be of such an Accommodation, who are in perpetual Fear and Jeopardy every
day, by incursions from their Neighbors;) As also for the Temper of the
Climate, for the Valor of its Subjects, for the Disposition of the People, Cum
multis aliis quae nunc, etc. and (which is the Top-stone of this most stately
Structure,) for the most pure, and most spiritual Worship of God, that is here
exhibited and enjoyed, of any Nation at this day under the Sun. And when I
said, for the Constitution of its Government, there is again such an Emphasis
in those words, that I must make a double Retreat, viz. under a Mild and
Gentle, and not a Tyrannical Prince: Whereas in many other Countries, their
Monarchs do say, Sic volo, sic jubeo, stat pro ratione voluntas, etc. But
blessed be God, in this Island we are not in the same Condition, but we can
say, according to that generally received and known Maxim in the Law, Our
Gracious King by the Constitution of the Government it self can do no Wrong,
(it being beneath the State and Majesty of a Prince to execute any of his Laws
in his own Person) but if any wrong be done, in matters of State, the Council,
and if in Matters of Law, the Judges, the subordinate Magistrates, the
Justices, and all other inferior Officers, (whose Power is only derivative
from this Fountain,) are to give an Account for Maladministration, and by
this ancient and most famous Triple League of King, Lords and Commons (God
grant that it may never be broken nor dissolved) this Trinity of words, and
their Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity (which with Reverence be it
spoken) is a fair Representation and Illustration of the Trinity and Unity of
the three sacred Persons in the highest Heavens: And although they are not one
in Nature and Essence (as is alleged and acknowledged by some, and is also an
Article of their Faith, as to those three Divine Persons,) which is altogether
impossible, as having their distinct Beings, their distinct Offices, their
distinct Names, and although in so near a Conjunction, consist of many distinct
Persons; yet they are one in mutual Consent and Agreement, (and here the
Socinians will tell you, that three distinct Persons, either Divine, Angelical,
or Humane, to be made one in Nature and Essence, is altogether impossible, and
will never be made out to any rational Man while the world stands;) and for any
Person to infer from hence, that because they are one in mutual Consent and
Agreement, therefore they are coordinate in Power and Authority, I presume is
a very great Mistake, and to say, that the Kings most Excellent Majesty is,
Major singulis, sed Minor Vniversis, is an Expression of the same validity and
import; for then it would unavoidably follow, that we have at this day in our
Nation three Supreams; whereas in Reason there cannot possible be (unless we
should root out, eradicate and subvert the common and inbred Notion of
Mankind,) but one Supreme. But suppose it had some color of Truth in it,
(which we will admit for Arguments sake) that they are coordinate in Power by
virtue of this Unity, yet it is only in the Legislative Power; and here also
for matter of advice and council only, for they are called the great Council
of the Nation, and they are summoned by the Kings Writ, and do sit, not as long
as they please, but durante Regis beneplacito; and for the Executive power, all
the Laws of England run in his Majesty's Name, and a breach of them are deemed
and reputed a breach of his Majesty's Laws: And although you may say also
concerning his Vice-royes, Ambassadors, and Deputy-Lievtenants, that in some
sense they are coordinate in Power (by reason they do many things in as
uncontrollable a manner, as if the King himself were personally present,) and
an affront offered to them, is an affront offered to the King himself, for it
terminates in him, inasmuch as they do represent the Kings Person and
Authority: But since these rational Demonstrations border too much upon the
Socinian Tenants (which in this and other precedent Ages have been by most men
esteemed and reputed heterodox) I must forbear. But yet this I say, by virtue
of this Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity, viz. this mutual Oneness and
Agreement in Consent one with another, this Constitution and Foundation has
continued steadfast and immovable for so many hundred years, (save only of
late years, by a most strange and unheard of Catastrophe, and by a most dismal
and prodigious Interval;) and God grant that it may still continue to run in
the same Channel, rather than in a worse, until Shiloh come, etc.

And now my ever Honored, most Noble, and my much esteemed good Lord, and you
the worthy Knights, Gentlemen and Citizens, Members of this Grand Committee,
although this newborn and tender Infant (for some Reasons inducing me
thereunto) comes to wait on you, in this naked and unexpected Dress, viz.
incognito, and thereupon not attended with that formal and accustomed Ceremony,
(too often used in this and the like Cases, the more is the pity) of Espousing
parties to second his honest and plain-hearted design, yet if this tender Babe
(by all the Circumstances and Arguments herein contained) be not able to speak
for it self, and to plead its own Cause, then let all the Concerns thereof,
henceforward and for ever fall to the ground; but if it shall so far prevail,
as to contribute any thing toward the Relief of those Persons for whom it was
first designed, (and of whom you have here a particular Catalogue,) I have my
desire. For, as according to our common and proverbial saying, viz. We are not
all born to be Rich, so on the other hand, which is of a far more saving and
universal tendency, Non nobis solum nati sumus.

And inasmuch as I can expect no Consideration or Gratuity from any particular
Man, or from any number or Society of men, for my pains in Writing, or Expense
in Printing this present Address to you of this Honorable Court, so shall I be
willing to rest satisfied and contented in this, viz. That it was for a general
and public Good; and therefore I shall place it (as you ought, de jure, in my
slender apprehensions, according to the precedent Reasons, but with a Reserve
always to your more accurate and discerning Judgments, the Charge of your
Royal Exchange) viz. to the public Account, and that in sure and certain hopes
also (for I will still run parallel with you) that in process of time, it may
pay both Principal and Interest, (only yours is certain, and mine uncertain,
but dum spiro spero,) and in the Conclusion may with an Overplus turn
something of Advantage unto your Authors account.

In the mean while, if it do not at present answer the Expectations and Desires
of those poor Persons, who do still wait, and expect with patience some Relief
from your Clemency and Indulgence, yet notwithstanding I shall always heartily
pray for the continual peace, Prosperity, and flourishing Estate of your
Metropolitan City, and in particular for all your Tenants and present
Inhabitants (many whereof are my worthy Friends and Acquaintance) of your Royal
Exchange; but I will assure you, (if you will please to pardon my present
presumption, in so much tiring your patience in perusal of this Memorial) I
shall never trouble you nor my self, nor any succeding Committee, upon this or
the like Account. So committing you all to the constant and continual Care,
Conduct and Protection of the most High, wishing that all your Debates and
Consultations henceforward, may be agreeable and consonant unto that which is a
Spark and Ray of that Divine Beauty and Luster, who is the Sourse and Fountain
of all Rectitude and Perfection, viz. Reason, and that all your future
Proceedings and Transactions, here in this lower and Terrestrial Sphere, may be
according to the orderly, constant, and regular Motions of the Celestial
Bodies in the Superior Orb: And that all your Edicts henceforward may be (like
the Laws and Statutes of Heaven it self, to all the Sons and Daughters of Men,)
of most sovereign and saving Use, and of universal Benefit and Advantage, unto
all those who shall or may be concerned in them, but more especially and in
particular at this present conjuncture, unto all the present Inhabitants ( and
de futuro, for all those who shall there actually succeed,) within the walls of
your Royal Exchange, (for these, and these only are the Men, which must
repair, sustain, uphold, defend and keep up the future Credit, Reputation and
Honor of the said place.)

And now to conclude all in a short Parable, (for Parables many times, and in
some Cases, have taken as deep an Impression, if not more, than a plainer
Demonstration) to be perused by you at your leisures, (I fear I have already
too much entrenched upon your Patience in the perusal of this present
Memorial.) And we will call it, The Parable of the Leasees Leaguer, and a
Description of the Sub and Outward Pawn Tenants Camp: So that, Whereas I do
perceive, that these Civil and Intestine Divisions, Wars, Animosities and
Contentions among the contesting Parties, the Domestic Inhabitants of your
Palace Royal, are still like to continue many Summers Campaign; for the Drums
do yet daily sound in my ears, and ad arma, ad arma, insonuit buccina, for new
Volunteers, whereby to reinforce their Armies, unless you Right Honorable,
and you Right Worshipful, who are the proper and only Mediators in this Case,
(by reason you can turn the scales at any time) do interpose by your Power,
Grandeur and Authority, and to declare who have been and are still the
Aggressors: For it seems they have all referred themselves, and will acquiesce
in your Determinations, as appears by their several humble Petitions unto you
in that behalf: So that London, this famous City of London, (being the most
convenient and commodious) is the place assigned for the Congress of all the
Plenipotentiaries from their several Principals, upon that Account: And if
wishes would avail, or turn any thing to Account, I could here make it my
cordial Option, that this were the place also assigned for the Congress of the
Deputies, Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries of all those contesting Parties,
which are at present at so great a variance among the Princes of Christendom,
and that his Majesty of Great Britain, (Heavens prosper and preserve him) were
the sole Moderator and Umpire in all their Cases, and because I did perceive,
that by reason of the remote distance that is at present between the Moderators
and these Persons before mentioned: And here for Illustrations sake, we will
now draw our Scene Colen, and all the Sub-Tenants, and Outward Pawn-Tenants,
encamped and entrenched about the said City, Suburbs and parts adjacent
thereof; and that inasmuch as they had already extremely suffered, and might do
much more in their so honest and just Design, and for want of giving their
Ambassadors, and by them their Moderators, the true State and Information of
their Case: And although at present they have a very numerous Army, and a large
Train of Artillery, and a most Noble, Valiant, Courageous and well disciplined
Army, and have their Outworks, their deep Trenches, their Sconces, their
Pallizadoes, their Pioneers, their Counterscarps, their Engineers, their Scouts
abroad, their strong Sentinels upon their Frontiers, their advantageous Posts;
and are also expert in the terms of Art when they are drawn up into Battalia,
as their Wheelings, their Serings, their Facings, their Flankings, their
Doublings, and their Front and Rear Division, and their Center, in such an
excellent Order, and the like, whereby they do render themselves worthy the
Appellation of what they truly are, viz. The legitimate Sons of Mars: But yet
notwithstanding, for all this, they are in Quotidian Jeopardy, and in great
danger of being besieged and sterved out by their Enemies, in their present
Intrenchments; and should they draw forth, and come to a pitched Battle, by
reason of their most potent Assailants, which lie also entrenched round about
them, that they have so many and such powerful Confederates, and having such
great store of Ammunition, and in a Country where they have great store of
Forage for their Cavalry, and plenty of Provision for their Infantry, (in the
which they are at present but at a very low ebb) they dare not run the hazard
of a total Engagement, (unless they were certain that their Guardian Angels,
which are the worthy Members of the Grand Committee, would appear and fight for
them,) for fear they should be totally routed, and should be constrained to
quit the Field, and to yield upon dishonorable terms: Whereupon during this
present conjuncture, being unwilling to stand Neuter, (though peradventure I
might have made some considerable advantage thereby) at length, upon serious
consultation, I betook my self unto the weakest (as having the best Cause, and
so I hope I shall do the same, dum spiritus hos reget Artus,) and the most
innocent side; And thereupon being oftentimes in their Leaguer, and fearing
that their Enemies might be too hard for them as to matter of Intelligence, I
did at last resolve to imbarque my self, (whereby to give you the best
Information I could of their present state and condition) in the good Ship
called the Happy Adventure and Bon Resolution, and having weighed my Anchors,
and hoised up my Sails, I committed my self to the mercy of the Ocean, and
although I met with many a blustering storm, many cross Winds, many dark nights
(and here and there at Sea a Ship upon the wrack) yet having a good cause, a
tight Vessel, a Stout, Valiant, Sober, and well experienced Captain, a skilful
Pilot, a rough hewn Boatswain, a few stout and courageous Seamen, we did
though through much difficulty and hard labor (and many times were constrained
to pump hard for our own preservation) work our Vessel through them all.

And although in our Voyage, we did many times Sail by the Ports and strong
Forts of our Enemies, and under their Castle-Walls, and within the reach of
their Mortar pieces and their whole and demi Canons, yet still when we did
apprehend any real danger, clapping immediately up and bearing in our Topmast
head the ancient Leasees colors, (viz. Leasees for 21 years) we passed them
all along undiscovered. Neither did we make a Noverint universi, or put up any
Bills before our departure whereby to procure any lading (for we took in none
save only ballast, and some good provision for our intended Voyage) just as the
Masters of Ships do upon the Royal Exchange, viz. That such a Ship now riding
at Anchor in such a Bay, within the River Rhine, and within such a time is
ready to depart, and bound (God willing) for the Port of London, the danger of
the Seas only excepted, as having business of grand importance with the grand
and Sub-Committee for Gresham affairs, sitting at Mercers Chapel within the
said City, now this might have marred all, for then they would have sent their
privateers and issued out Letters of Mart against us, and had they taken us in
our expedition, they had seized upon our Cargo and all our concerns, which
would have been as bad as if we had been all blown up into the air by some
unexpected accident of fire falling into our Powder room, but our Men being all
obliged to secrecy. We came all clear along (...) making the Lands end, we took
in a skilful Pilot from the Trinity-House (for the better security of our
vessel through the Channel) till at length, by a brisk and prosperous gale,
with all our Sails spread, our Standard at stern, and our Streamers abroad, we
made our joyful and so long wished for Port of London; and thus having brought
our good Ship into her desired harbor, we will now cast out our Anchors (only
my Anchora spei I will still keep within my own breast) and take some
refreshments and will now freely (with most humble service) present the said
good Ship with all her Masts Sails, Rigging, Guns, Mortar-Peices, Cables and
Anchors, her whole Cargo, and all things whatsoever thereunto appertaining
(unless your Noble and Generous minds will please to defray the charge of the
ballast within her, and of some of the ordinary Seamen, that were employed and
entertained upon this expedition) to your most Worthy Selves, and Remain (Right
Honorable and Right Worshipful)

Your most Obedient, most Obliged and most Faithful Servant to be Commanded,
(...).

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
Ad Candidum Lectorem.
Authoris scripti si vis Cognoscere Nomen,
Quaerito in his literis, Lector amande scias.
DEHNKRVY, etc.


