A Brief of the Case of the Officers belonging to the Court of Wards and
Liveries not yet recompensed for the loss of their Offices, by taking away the
said Court.
4. March 1645.
THe Lords and Commons ordered satisfaction to be given to all the said Officers.

24. Novem. 1646.
The Commons appointed a Committee to consider of their losses and damages, and
to report a fit recompense for them.

The said Committee conceived and voted six years purchase for their Offices
according to the true value, and one years damage to be a fit recompense.

9. January 1646.
Master Thorpe (now one of the Barons of the Exchequer) being Chairman to the
said Committee, makes the Report for some of the Grand Officers, namely the
Master, the Surveyor, the Attorney, and the Receiver of the said Court, and the
Clerk for ingrosling Licenses and pardons of alienation, who were ordered
satisfaction according to six years value and one years damage, to be paid out
of the arrears of the said Court, and out of Fines of Delinquents.

18. June 1649.
That Report was revived, and thereupon it was ordered by the Commons to be
referred to the said Committee to consider how, and what satisfaction should be
made to the rest of the said Officers unsatisfyed in the former report.

14. July 1649.
Diverse members were added to the said Committee, who the 21. of August 1649.
prepared their report, and reduced the said Officers recompense from the
proportion of six years purchase, and one years damage (formerly voted a fit
recompense for the loss of their Offices) to three years purchase and a half
without consideration of any damages, according to which proportion, one half
being abated after three years attendance, there was only voted to the said
Officers these sums following, viz. To Mr. Wilson 1300 l. To Auditor Took 3000
l. To Mr. Shadwell 1300 l. To Mr. Hanchett 3500 l. To Mr. Wilkinson 1200 l. and
to Mr. Thompson 1000 l. And Mr. Blagrave the then Chairman, was ordered by the
said Committee to report the same forthwith.

12. Septem. 1649.
Mr. Blagrave offered to make his Report to the Parliament from the said
Committee, but they not being then at leisure to hear the same, ordered that
Mr. Blagrave should make the said Report that day fortnight the first business.

Since which time no Report could be made by reason of the emergent occasions
of the Parliament, notwithstanding much diligence used, and Mr. Blagraves
endeavors to Report the same.


