A Brief, but most True RELATION Of the late Barbarous and Bloody PLOT Of the
Negro's in the Island of BARBADO'S On Friday the 21. of October, 1692. To Kill
the Governor and all the Planters, and to destroy the Government there
Established, and to set up a New Governor and Government of their own.
In a LETTER to a Friend.
SIR,
THis day I arrive'd, -- But I had like to come short of the Governor. For the
Negro's in this Island had made a PLOT to have distroy'd all the Christians
therein: And it was to have been done that very day that we came hither. But as
it happened, the Night before it was found out very providentially, by Two of
them that were a talking of this their wicked Design; who being fully overheard
to discourse thereof, they were taken up, and Examined, and so frankly
confessed (when it could not be helped) what their Design was. Upon which
discovery, the Government has taken up between two and three hundred Negro's:
And Tried and Condemed many of them. Of which Number of the Condemned persons,
Many were Hanged, and a great many Burned. And, (for a Terror to others,) there
are now seven Hanging in Chains, alive, and so Starving to Death. It is
reported, they designed to have taken up the Sirnames and Offices of the
Principal Planters and men in the Island, to have Enslaved all the Black men
and Women tothem, and to have taken the White Women for their Wives. This PLOT
was formed by the Negro's that were born in the Island, and no imported Negro
was to have been Admitted to partake of the Freedom they intended to gain, till
he had been made Free by them, who should have been their Masters. The old
Women (both Black and White) were to have been their Cooks, and Servants, in
other Capacities. And they had chosen a Governor among themselves, and every
thing was prepared and settled in Readiness for giving the Fatal Stroke. They
have been contriving of this Wicked and Bloody design this three years, and had
so long kept it very secret until the very day before it was to have been done.
But we hope in a little time to see a Stop fully put to their Contrivance, and
the Villains themselves speedily discovered and detected.

Adieu.
January 18th.
This may be Printed

Edmund Bohun.

LONDON, Printed for George Croom, in Thames Street. 1693.


