A BRIEF ANSWER TO A BOOK CALLED THE DECLARATION OF THE KINGDOMS of ENGLAND
and SCOTLAND.

Sent in a Letter from a Member of the House of COMMONS.

OXFORD, Printed by H. Hall. An.Dom. 1644.

A Brief Answer to a Book called [The Declaration of the Kingdoms of England
and Scotland.]
Sent in a Letter from a Member of the House of COMMONS.
SIR,
I Have looked over the Book you sent me, entitled, [The Declaration of the
Kingdoms of England and Scotland, etc.] And send you what occurred into my
mind upon reading the orders of these new States, who give loyalty and
allegiance the reward of villainy and treason, and evidence their seeking of
truth and peace by condemning the Kingdom to Anarchy, the Church to Schism,
giving the lives of the Subjects for victims, their estates for a prey to
lawless rage and rapine: an unlikely way to stop or dry up these streams of
blood, that have covered this nation with a prodigious inundation, but a means
to feed that unnatural fountain, that the children unborne may be bathed in
blood, and inherit the misery of their parents; for it is not imaginable, that
the oppressing of a lawful King, disherison of a royal Progeny, to whom the
right of a crown has been transmitted through a race of so many victorious
Princes, the cheating and dispossessing of a glorious nation of their Religion,
Laws and Liberty, can produce other, then perpetual divisions, between the
just demands of right by an injured King and people, and the continual fears
and plots of guilty usurpers to secure themselves, and confirm their stolen
Sovereignty.

If any man doubted heretofore of the intentions of these men, this book leaves
no place to any, but the wilful: have any in a blind confidence persuaded
themselves that these men meant not to take away the King's Rights? the Title
of this book is a Declaration of the Kingdoms, against the will of the King.
And surly whoever undertake to bind the whole Kingdom without him, exclude
him from being the Head of the Kingdom, that is, a King; and they that exclude
him for an hour, may by the same reason exclude him for ever: and they have by
their practice and former Declarations told us a King consenting not to what
they think necessary for the Kingdom is to be reputed as a minor, or
incapable, and that they may assume the royal power and allow the King no more
liberty but submission to their decrees. They claim a power under the name of
States, without limitation of time or power, no appeal permitted from them, no
possibility of addresses for the greatest injury or injustice done by them, and
you may now see they set themselves in the Throne, and admit the King to no
other, then a private condition. Englishmen have been accustomed to other
language, their style being the King's Kingdom, People, Laws, Peace, Arms;
And I doubt not but they abhor this Title, as an impudent forgery, which
would involve them in a disloyalty to their King, and expose them to the scorn
of foreign nations, and subject themselves to usurpers, to whom they owe not
allegiance; and from whom they must not expect protection, but the dissolution
of their Laws, and an absolute Tyranny and arbitrary government by them, who
have broken their trust and faith with their King and Country.

Surely the Commons of England gave no power to their Knights and Burgesses to
depose their King, or destroy their Laws; they chose them for the Kings
Counsel, not for Kings over him and them; to advise him, not to treat or
advise with foreign nations, much less to invite strangers to the blood and
desolation of the whole Kingdom, which is herein avowed and whereby all men
may see as themselves phrase it, our Religion, Liberty and Laws, which have
stood against the greatest assaults of foreign power envying our happiness,
are oppressed and trodden under foot by the craft and cruelty of our own
neighbors and Countrymen.

I wonder our brethren the Scots are so soon weary of that amiable title and
their own peace, and not only as Ameleck, whose name God threatened to blot
out from under heaven, that sell upon his weary brethren, and cut off the
hindmost of them, but rake in the wounds of their languishing brethren, and
add smart and death to their hurts: and they would persuade us that their
oppressions of us are out of affection to us, and for our liberty, their
distressing the King, for his honor and safety; and we may believe them in
that, as well as the lawfullnesse to unite themselves in this war without
their King, in whom they are united with this nation, without consent of their
own Parliament, without which it is treason and a breach of the Act of
Pacification, so solemnly vowed by them to be kept, as if they would tell the
world no laws, loyalty, oaths, or duty can hold them longer, then it stands
with their advantage.

And for their taking up arms, for which they bring neither law, Sovereign
command, nor former practice of any but Traitors, never were any borne more
opposite to our duty to God, Scandalous to our Christian Profession, more
unnatural to our native Country, more dishonorable to His Majesty, more
offensive to God, more injurious to men. Then these that fight against all whom
the King commands to come to His defense, or that assist him, under the name of
a Popish, Prelaticall, and malignant party: it is treason without contradiction
to assault the King in any pretense; and can. He be killed by His Subjects
through the sides of others, or assaulted in the head of an Army? surely
vastantia peccata, sins that lay wast the conscience, corrupt the judgment,
and deface all shame and modesty, and where men have cast off loyalty and
falsified their oaths, they grow bold with God, and pretend fears and dangers
they never believed, Honor to His Majesty's Person they pursue and reproach,
preservation of His Rights they take Arms to destroy.

The success of their many Petitions, Declarations, and Remonstrances, has
been suitable to the merits of them, and have very well served to inform the
people how much they were deceived, if they expected peace and unity from them,
that would sever the Body from the head in the state, set up Schismatikes to
alter the doctrine and discipline of the Church, confederate themselves with
Strangers, impose Religion and Law upon King and People, and authorize murder,
theft, as warranted by law and conscience, as those barbarous nations that
enacted the most odious oppressions for Heroicke virtues.

This pressing and patheticke Declaration, which they say they are put to,
wanting truth and right, cannot with adulterate language, legitimate such
horrid crimes, win credit to such incredible untruths, nor consent to such
unnatural courses, which would rather have the Subjects of England drench
themselves in each others blood, that the worst of miseries a civil war, be
perpetuated upon the Kingdom to it is final destruction, which must inevitably
follow; then that their positions be not received, the Church destroyed, the
Laws subverted, and all men enter into a new Covenant, against Religion, Law,
and Loyalty; and this they call truth, without which they defy peace till
there be no man left to enjoy it.

The sum of this Declaration is a denunciation of war against all that
enter not into this new Covenant, and which they say God would never have put
into their hearts, if he had meant to destroy them. It seems they shake hands
with their brethren the Anabaptists, in relying on their fanaticke
enthusiasmes. True Christian humility is far from these presumptions, and
guides it is ways by the light of Holy Scripture, trying the spirits whether
they be of God, or no, and trusting not these injections, which the Prince of
darkness casts into unstable minds; it were strange presumption to pretend
particular divine inspirations to any Politic though just Constitutions, but
to those that are against duty to God and his Vicegerent, can have no other
estimation then of grand imposture, sacrilegious usurpation and profanation of
the name of God, who is thereby endeavored to be made patron of such works of
darkness. The ends of Lopez, Faux, and other assassinats might strike men with
horror when they go about to entitle God with auspications so opposite to his
truth and holiness, and their Covenant being no better then the Vow of the
Jews, not to eat or drink, till they have killed Paul, their prayers and
fastings for the success of it, are no other in Gods account, then Jezebells
fast, and Absolon's sacrifice, the one the disguise of an horrid murder, the
other of unnatural rebellion.

They declare the taking of their Covenant is the only way to their favor,
and do not tell where it is expressed or employed in the word of God, or
enjoined by the Laws of the Land; and yet the not taking of it, draws the
loss of Life, Liberty, Propriety, and Privilege of Parliament, which the
authors persuade men they fight for, and which they have solemnly protested to
defend; and how can they satisfy any man, or themselves, that they observe
their oaths, while they destroy that which they swore to preserve?

And as God put it into their hearts to enter into their Covenant, so they tell
us he has displayed their banner. The cursing Assyrian told Gods people he was
come up in the name of the Lord against Jerusalem; and this presumption of
these authors of our troubles, truly entitles them to be successors of these
unhappy troublers of Kingdoms and States, who fighting the Devill's quarrel
under Gods colors, and seducing the credulous multitude into the lewdest
opinions, and most execrable actions under the false pretenses of divine
revelations, have subverted the foundations of peace and government in most
flourishing nations.

And they hope to affright all men from their conscience by these new edicts,
whereby the King has neither right nor forfeiture, nor power of pardon; and
they that fight for law, judge crimes and inflict punishment against law, and
allow no man life, liberty, or estate but at pleasure.

They proclaim some favors so they be taken in time, but it is upon the
condition of future good behavior, that they may possibly obtain mercy for
their lives, that have no estates to loose by adventuring their lives and
souls in defense of this Covenant. But Estates they are loath to part with,
lest their own occasions, whereunto all their proffers and promises are
subservient, should need them, or such as have been most eminent in this
Rebellion loose the reward of their Countries ruin, and therefore these are
reserved to discretion: neutrality is odious to them, and they may perhaps be
instruments to punish the coldness of some that prefer their private ease
before their loyalty and love to their Country, and a good conscience; though
they want not guilt, who having no Commission from God or his Vicegerent
inflict it on them.

Papists are not to have mercy for any loyalty to their King, their Religion is
not the object of the hatred of these Legislators, but a crime more
unpardonable, their abstinence from Treason. Such as have misguided the Kings
counsels are joined in the same list with Papists, and these must be taken
into consideration by these States or their Committees: surely where Rebels
judge their Princes Counselors, fidelity must be a crime, and no man that
has had courage enough to preserve his conscience, but may come within this
pale, and become an example of this arbitrary power; and where only a false
finger must guide the Counsels they approve, it is apparent what misguiders
they intend.

Hereby you may rightly state the question, touching the present differences;
which is not, whether these men fight for Religion and Laws; but whether their
taking Arms against the command of the King to alter Religion, and Laws, be
Treason or not: they never yet afford Petitions of right, but Propositions
against Right; and their present edicts against Law, Loyalty, and Liberty of
the Subject, is a convincing evidence of this truth.

If the truth they so much desire be divine, they would not malign our Church
which rejects none, and has had the concurrent Testimonies of the best
Reformed Churches for the truth of her Doctrines, which were never denied by
any but Atheists, Papists, or Sectaries; Some truths may safely be unknown,
wherein the best Reformed Churches and Orthodox professors have not been of
one judgment, yet have kept the unity of the spirit in the band of peace, and
were never the creed of the Church of God in any age, but that the sword might
be taken up by Subjects against their King to impose such opinions, as
necessary to be believed, had never less censure amongst sober Christians,
then of Tyranny upon the conscience, disturbance of the Churches peace,
scandal to Religion, and Rebellion against the Lords Anointed: but it seems
that which they call their Religion is a heap raked together our of the
inconsistent dictates of disagreeing Sectaries, which conspire in the Churches
ruins to establish their tumultuary license, and though their Babell laid in
Rebellion against God and his Vicegerent, and built in such divisions of
languages, cannot possibly preserve truth and peace, yet these men that have
thus taken up the sword, will either finish the desolation of their native
Country, or erect this monument of confusion. Surely Sir, if these men regarded
the tears of age, or blood of innocents, the penury, exile and distress of
men of all estates, the decay of the beauty, honor and strength of this
nation, the fainting of all arts, learning and industry, the loss of trade,
increase of Widows, Orphans and maimed poor, if they had any feeling of the
miseries of sickness, sword and famine, if any tenderness of their brethren
or Country, if any respect of honor to their King, reverence to the Church of
God, or glory of his name, they would not prefer uncertain opinions of
unnecessary truths before the certain ruin of Church and State.

The worst days we formerly saw were a golden age to the present, and we may
rather desire then expect a restitution of our former happiness, which these
men are not affected to, that will not admit it without the satisfaction of
their own inordinate passions; and as if they were afraid of their own
affections, they fetter their consciences to shut out all considerations that
may incline them to peace.

I hope if you were not you are satisfied, that the same men that caused the
war are enemies to peace, and that the Authors of this Declaration are the
Authors and Maintainers of our troubles; for if they meant to have conditions,
which they give as Conquerors, accepted, they would at least spare the
conscience, though they devoured the State: I commit it to your judgment.

FINIS.

