LICENSED.

Nov. 26. 1686. To. L'Estrange.

A BRIEF DISCOURSE OF THE Most assured Ways and Means to ruin and pull down
the vast Monarchy OF THE OTTOMAN PRINCES. WRITTEN By a Judicious Gentleman, who
for above twenty years resided at the Turkish Port, being there Employed by a
great Prince, as his Ambassador.

ALSO An Historical and Political Discourse OF THE War in HUNGARY. TOGETHER
With the Battles of Kermain and Saint Gottard between the Turks and the
Christians who there Defeated them. With the Articles of the last Peace,
between Leopold the most August Emperor of the Romans, and Mahomet the present
Sultan of the Turks. Anno 1664.

LONDON, Printed by J. H. for B. Aylmer at the Three Pigeons in Cornhill. 1687.

A BRIEF DISCOURSE OF The most assured means and methods to ruin and pull down
the vast Monarchy of the Ottoman Princes.
Written by a judicious Person, who for above twenty years resided at
Constantinople, being there employed by a great Prince as his Ambassador.

THE Turkish Empire is vulgarly called, the Empire of the Ottomans, from Or
Othoman the first Emperor of the Turks.
Ottoman the first Princ^ of the Family now reigning, most of whose Successors
did severally enlarge their Dominions, and by their Conquests added thereto,
some of them entire Kingdoms, and the rest, great and rich Provinces. Whereby
they have made themselves Sovereign Lords of part of Europe, of Asia, and many
great portions of Africa.

The Grand Seignior's Empire borders upon the Republic of Venice toward
Sclavonia, and that of Raguza, situate upon the shore of the Adriatic Sea.
This latter Republic is their Tributary, and can preserve it self no longer
than it shall please the Grand Seignior; for besides that the City is not
strong of it self, its situation is very disadvantageous, being built at the
foot of a great Mountain, from whose top they may by rolling down of huge
stones overwhelm them, and soon become their absolute Lords and Masters. Within
a quarter of a league of Raguza, there is a Port, or Harbor, named Santa Cruz,
of a wonderful capacity, wherein a numerous fleet may winter with much safety.

If the prudence and policy of this Prince were as great as his power and
strength, he might long sin^e have overcome this Republic, and have made use
of the said Harbor for forty or fifty of his Galleys to lie always in a
readiness there, by which means scarce a Ship could go out or into the
Adriatic Sea without being taken.

The whole Coast of Puglia might very easily be ruined by the descents they
might make, the distance from Raguza to Puglia being so little, that one may
easily see from one shore to the other.

Also the Republic of Venice, though great by Sea, and who get most of their
riches by Trade and Navigation, must soon have declined, and could not but
under the favor and protection of a powerful Fleet have sent any forces to
defend several of their Islands and places of importance; as Corfu, Zant and
Cephalonia.

They are Neighbors to Zara, a City lying in Dalmatia: Zara is on the
Adriatic Seacoast very far up within the Gulf toward Sclavonia, near to
Friuli and a Fort called Palma, which the Venetians erected several years
since, to hinder their frequent incursions.

They are likewise Neighbors to the Archduke of Grats, a Prince of the House
of Austria, and to the Kingdom of Bohemia. They are Sovereigns of the greatest
part of the Upper and Lower Hungary, and of many Cities not far from Vienna,
gained by force of Arms.

The Princes of Valachia, Bogdania and Transylvania are their Tributaries, whom
they change whenever they please: Bogdania joins to Poland on one part.

If we take our survey along the coast of the Black Sea on the European side
nigh Caffa, they confine upon the Prince of Tartary. This Nation they make use
of as the French Kings do of the Swiss.

On the other side of the Black Sea which washes Asia, they border upon the
Country of the Prince of Maingrelia, and are also Neighbors to the Prince of
Georgia, both the one and the other are their Tributaries. Georgia lies near
the Kingdom of Persia, with whom he confines; as likewise does the Grand
Seignior in many places.

The Turk and Persian are frequently in debate, and at war, as well by reason
of their Vicinity which creates frequent occasions of quarrel, as out of the
emulation and jealousy each Prince has of his own grandeur; besides the
contrariety in Religion, the Turks calling the Persians Heretics, and the
Persians esteeming them so too, and yet both of them hold Mahomet for a Prophet
and the Messenger of God, not differing in their Belief, but in Ceremonies, and
the washings they are to observe when they prepare themselves for their
Devotions.

In Egypt along the Nile the Turk confines with Prester-John, and is Lord also
of Arabia Felix, of Meccha and Medina, places of their greatest Devotions;
Mahomet being born at Meccha, and buried at Medina; these Cities are near the
Red Sea: he likewise possesses a great deal on the Mediterranean Sea.

Along the coast of Africa, he has the Kingdoms of Tripoly, Barbary, Tunis and
Algier, and joins upon the countries of Fez and Marocco, who pay him homage and
subsist in their dominions only because they are of the same belief with him. I
shall not speak here of the great number of Viceroys which are under his
command, nor of the innumerable Provinces he holds, my design being only to
represent in few words the grandeur of this Empire, and the ways to overthrow
it.

If we survey what he holds in Europe, and also compute from Raguza or
Belgrade, a City upon the Danube, to Arabia Felix, hardly can a horseman
traveling ten or twelve leagues a day, ride from one end to the other in three
months time, and in all that vast extent of Land, there is no other Prince that
has any territory or command, he being the absolute Lord of all.

The Ottoman Princes are wont so soon as they make themselves Masters of any
Kingdom or Province to observe one method, which is to seize on all the Demesns
of the Vanquished Prince, all that belongs to the Church, or to those that die
in battle, or those who by flight make a shift to escape the storm.

As for those People who are content to remain in subjection to their Laws and
Customs they leave to all such the possession of their Estates, and the
exercise of their Religion, establishing according to the extent and riches or
strength of the Country so conquered, either Viceroys, or Governors of such
Provinces, together with Judges to administer Justice. These Estates thus taken
are shared amongst a certain number of Soldiers sufficient to guard and
preserve their Conquests; they likewise bestow fomewhat upon their
Ecclesiastics, but no more than is necessary for their feeding and clothing.

We must observe that the Grand Seignior has three sorts of Treasuries; First.
The first is managed by the Treasurers of his Port, who are three in number,
to whom all others within the Dominions of his Empire ought to give an account
of their administration; the expenses of those Provinces where they are
employed being deducted, they send the surplus of the revenue to the said
Treasurers of the Port, who pay off the Soldiery every three months, as well
as all other the expenses of the Grand Seignior's household, or whatever else
belongs to the State or Governmont; Second.
the overplus (which makes another Treasury) is left under the keeping of an
Eunuch whom they call Asenadar Baschy, and is one of the three principal
Eunuchs who are near the person of the Grand Seignior, and who never stir out
of the Seraglio, or Palace, unless to attend and follow their Master. The sums
of Moneys which are put into the custody of this Eunuch, remain in Cash still
and are never employed unless the most urgent affairs require it, and then
oftentimes the Treasurers of the Port are fain to oblige themselves to make it
up again with moneys from abroad.

The third Treasury, is that of the Church, Third.
which is very great for the following reasons: The Turkish Empire, as I have
said before, is wonderfully large; the devotion of that people is great; it is
true they have not amongst them either Bishoprics or Abbeys, they have only
very sumptuous Temples which serve them for Parishes. The Ottoman Emperors,
their Pashaws, their principal Officers, and an infinite number of other devout
people, have founded and given much of their wealth to these Temples, (which we
will from henceforward call Parishes) which are worth an hundred or six score
thousand Crowns yearly revenue; those that serve in them are few in number, and
their allowance so moderate, that they must make hard shift to live thereon, so
that there is much money remaining, which is put into the treasury of the
Church, whereof the Grand Seignior is the principal Guardian: yet cannot he
make use of it, but when urgent occasions of State, and the maintenance of
their Faith makes it necessary, unless he will offend his Conscience, and
violate the Laws of the Empire.

The Revenues of the Grand Seignior are very vast, arising as well from the
ordinary duties paid by the common people, as those contingent sums that are
brought into his Coffers: he is heir to all his Soldiers and to every one that
receives pay from him, if they die without Children; but if they leave
Daughters he takes but two thirds of the inheritance and succession of the
deceased, holding the place of Son.

As there comes frequent complaints against such as are in eminent Offices and
employments of trust, that they may have pretense to fleece them and get their
Estates, they soon conclude them guilty, and seize upon all they have to apply
it to the use and benefit of the Grand Seignior. This injustice and cruelty is
of dangerous consequence; as is that likewise of appropriating the revenues of
their Temples to their own private advantage.

To resume what I was saying of the methods they pursue when they have
conquered any Kingdom or Province; after they have given to their Temples, and
to those that serve in them what they think to be necessary, and also to such
numbers of Soldiers designed for the guard of their new Conquests, they apply
one part of it to the maintenance of the Viceroy or Governor: they do the same
for Salaries to the Judges, and other Officers, all which is distributed by the
Treasurer of the Province, who is accountable for the same, and who ought every
three months to bring the remainder into the Grand Seignior's Coffers, upon
pein of corporal punishment and confiscation of his Goods.

Speaking of the Kingdom of Thunis, I had forgot to mention with what facility
the Grand Seignior might infest, yea ruin the Kingdom of Sicilia, and by the
frequent cruisings of his Galleys molest the coasts of Calabria, since hard by
Thunis there is a Gulf which beats at the feet of the ruins of Goletta and the
Cape of Carthage, able at all seasons to contain a naval force: Near the said
Gulf there is a very safe and a very capacious Harbor, named Porto Farino,
distant from the said Kingdom of Sicilia not above fourscore miles, and
therefore may be sailed over in a very short time. Should the Turk, powerful
as he is, keep always a good number of Galleys in readiness in the aforesaid
Gulf of Thunis, or the abovenamed Porto Farino, they might soon be upon the
Sicilian shore, keep them in perpetual alarms, which would ruin the trade of
all such as sail upon the coast; hinder the Sardinians in their traffic,
whilst the Islands of Malta, Corsica, Majorca, and Minorca, would be liable to
the same trouble and inconveniences.

But the ambition of the Ottoman Princes, and the inveterate hatred they bear
against the Persians, having cut them out so much work on that side, they have
neglected the opportunities they had to do these and other mischiefs to the
European Princes; besides that their Religion obliges them to believe that
there is more merit in killing one Persian Heretic in war, than if they slew
threescore and ten Christians, so that their great zeal and rage carries them
more that way. And this is that which has in some measure secured the Peace of
Europe, which nevertheless has but too many times felt the weight and force of
this too potent Monarchy.

In the year 1593. the Treaties of Peace made between the Emperor Rodulphus
and the Grand Seignior Amurath, about the interest of the Kingdom of Hungary,
(wherein both of them had shares) were broken, and they fell out, and that
Agreement was converted into a dangerous and bloody war; the event proved
prejudicial to Christendom, and shameful to the said Emperor, by the signal
loss of a Battle, the City, Castle and Province of Agria; it was terrible and
bloody for the vast numbers of Christians slain upon the place, or taken and
carried away captive by the common enemies of our Faith: It was in Anno 1596
that this disaster happened.

We must observe that this War commenced during the reign of Amurath, and ended
in the reign of Mahomet his Son, who had the reputation and honor of being at
the head of his Army when this Victory was gained; but he did not make use of
all that advantage which fortune had put into his hands; for instead of
wintering and putting part of his Army into the Cities under his command, which
are numerous on that frontier, he returned to Constantinople, and lost the
opportunity of making himself assuredly Lord and Master of Vienna, and of all
Hungary; which gave the Emperor leisure and means to prevent his utter ruin.

In those times the interest of the Polanders made them begin to bestir
themselves, and they were making ready to join their forces with the
Emperor's, foreseeing and apprehending that after the loss and ruin of
Hungary, they must needs fall too; yet, notwithstanding this their fears of the
power of the Prince of Tartary their neighbor, and some other obstacles
mentioned elsewhere then obstructed their design.

Before I propose the certain means whereby the Christian Princes may ruin
this great Monarchy, I shall speak somewhat of its dreadful force and
strength, that so such as shall take the pains to read this brief Discourse
may know, what great power they have, and what forces they can bring together
to trouble and molest Europe, and by consequence what care ought to be taken to
hinder the dismal effects. Now we ought not to let them know their own
advantages any longer, but prevent and attaque them betimes, which cannot be
without a General union of the Christian forces: but before I discover the
methods they ought to take, it will be necessary, (as I said above) to
represent what the power of the Turk is, as well by Sea as by Land, that it may
be apparent they are not easy to be beaten, or overcome, but by the way
prescribed.

This Empire has under its command five and forty Viceroys, as well in
Europe, as Asia and Africa, the names and titles of them in the Turkish tongue
are not understood by the European Christians, (unless by such as live under
their subjection) which is the reason why I shall not particularly nominate
them, but refer my self to the capitulations between our Kings and the Grand
Seignior, (which were not long since translated and amplified) under the reigns
of Amurath, Mahomet, etc. who had so much vanity, that in order to make known
their grandeur and power they caused them all to be named and inserted in those
agreements.

There are in this number of five and forty Viceroys two of them that have
each his five and twenty Provinces under his command, and in every Province
they have a Governor whom they entitle Sanjacbey, as much as to say Lord of
the Standard, or Banner, nay some of them, whom I shall only name, as the
Viceroy of Greece, has seven and twenty Provinces; the Viceroy of Buda
eighteen, the Viceroy of Natolia seventeen, the Viceroy of Arzeron seventeen,
the Viceroy of Babylon twenty four, the Viceroy of Baseras twenty one, the
Viceroy of Diarbekir nineteen, the Viceroy of Grand Cairo in Egypt more than
the above named; but not to be too tedious, I shall omit to mention the rest.

The Forces of all these Provinces as well of Foot as Horsemen, without
including those that ought to serve at Sea, are very formidable: the number of
them is above eight hundred thousand men, it is true they are not so brave and
generous as they have formerly been, by reason of the Venality that has crept
in amongst them.

During the reign of Sultan Amurath, (a covetous Prince) he began to receive
great Presents from those to whom he gave considerable Commands; this
authorized the Bassa's to do the like on their parts, which disorder does
still continue if not increase amongst them, so that every thing is sold to any
person that bids highest, even to the meanest and most servile employments. Now
we must consider that those that have them may not hold them above a year or
two, and having dearly bought the short lived purchase, they lay most
intolerable burdens upon the people to re-imburse themselves.

The beginning of this disorder is attributed to Sultan Solomon, who tenderly
loving his Sisters and Daughters, instead of marrying them, according to the
custom of other Emperors his Predecessors, to the Governors of Provinces far
distant from his Port, would needs bestow them on his Bassa's residing near
him, that he might the oftener and more conveniently see them. The expenses of
these Pricesses being very great, being entertained within the Court of the
Emperor their own Father or Brother, and their Husbands not having sufficient
Estates to defray the charges, they began underhand to take bribes either in
Money or Jewels of such whom they recommended or helped to Offices and
Commands, being well assured the interest of their Wives would save their Heads
in case they should happen to be discovered and accused: these failures have
been followed by many others of no less importance.

I said, in the beginning of this Discourse, that as the Ottoman Emperors went
on with their Conquests, they settled in every Province a certain number of
Soldiers, as well foot as horse to guard and defend the Country; as also to
make use of elsewhere upon any case of necessity that might happen to the
Empire. As for their Horsemen, whom they call Timars Espahi, excepting only
five and twenty, or thirty thousand who attend constantly at the Grand
Seignior's Port, and some others who are quartered at Grand Cairo in Egypt, and
at Damascus, who are paid every three months in ready money at so much a day,
some more, some less than the others, their pay being increased according to
the merit of their Service: all the rest are Timariots, whom we shall
henceforward call Or Estates settled upon condition of furnishing certain
numbers of armed Men and Horses for Service.
Commandry's, and accordingly as their Commandry's are in value, those that
enjoy them are obliged to appear in the Field, with a certain number of men
well armed and mounted, or else to remain at home to guard and defend the
Country, as they shall be appointed.

When these Commandry's were first established, the revenues of them were not
so great as they are at present, for as their Empire has increased, so these
are likewise augmented so much, that there are some of them worth ten or twelve
thousand Crowns a year: the Bassas, the Eunuchs, the Mutes, the Dwarfs, and
even those Women the Grand Seignior makes use of, have an exact account of the
names of all the best of them in each Province, (as we have of Churches and
Parishes in this Kingdom) and when ever any vacancy falls, they beg them, and
put in some Domestic Servant or Slave of their own, that they may receive the
advantage of those revenue^ From hence arises two very great an^ notorious
evils to the infinite prejudice (...) that State; The first is, that where^
formerly such as were provided wit^ these Commandry's resided in the Provinc^
where they had Commission, and were commonly attending on the Governor (...)
the Province; which residence enable them to take care of their people, an^
hindered passengers and strangers from abusing them, and kept them ever in (...)
readiness with their Arms and Horses t^ march where they should be commande^
Now since they are bestowed upon some domestic servants or slaves belongin^ to
some Grandee, they do not only, no^ reside upon the place, but when the
G^vernours of Provinces receive a comman^ to appear according to order, they
cannot bring those numbers of men, as the^ were formerly wont to do, before
the disorder happened amongst them, becau^ those that now beg them for their
Se^vants, will needs take the benefit of the revenues, and not be obliged to
do the service enjoined them. This is the reason why such Governor of a
Province wh^ was in times past wont to bring in five o^ six thousand men to any
place appointe^ hardly at present is able to produce half that number, and even
these are but of the meanest and slightest sort of people. This disorder is not
only in the Command^y's, but amongst the Soldiery who are paid monthly, for
the Grandees of this Empire, to exempt themselves from pay^ng their servants
any wages, make them pass muster amongst the rest; and the great mischief of it
is, that when any ^ervice is to be done, then are they not ^o be found to do
their duty.

The sale of Offices and Governments in ^he Turkish Empire has diminished the
^ffections of those that possess them, they owing no thanks or obligation but
to their own purses, and minding only, when ^hey are once settled, how to
reimburse themselves of the moneys so laid out, which they are often forced to
take up at great interest, and not content to recover ^nly their purchase
money, they also ^rovide a fund for some new bargain ^hen they must leave the
employment ^hey are possessed of: wherefore if there ^e any rich Merchant
within the limits ^f their Government, they cause him to ^e accused (falsely
most times) of treason against the person of the Prince, or against the State,
under which pretense they put him to death, and then sieze upon all his goods.
But often times Go^ suffers them to be most severely chastised for their
impiety and injustice, upon the complaint of the people for their mal^
administration, or rather by such as env^ them and desire to be in their places
who hire witnesses to depose or exclaim against them; whereby they are
displaced, if not worse handled, and their whole estate confiscate to the use
of the Grand Seignior. Some of them are put t^ death, others escape with the
loss o^ goods only, and perhaps are a while after restored again to their
commands, an^ then they are doubly diligent to feathe^ their nests anew. Thus
are the people of this Monarchy oppressed on all hand^ above measure.

The Pashaws or Bassas have no bette^ fortune than the Viceroys and Governour^
of Provinces, the higher they are raised and in credit, the nearer do they
approach to their ruin. During the tim^ that I served the King as his
Ambassado^ at the Grand Seignior's Port, I have observed such great and
frequent changes that I cannot imagine where his Highnes^ could find even
amongst his slaves an^ one that would accept of, or adventur^ to be raised to
the highest dignity of his Empire; that Prince observing no other rule of
Justice to put a Bassa to death, or any other Officer, but an ill opinion or
suspicion of their infidelity, and some disorder he fansied in his affairs;
which jealousies are most commonly suggested to him by the whisperings of some
private enemy.

All the form of Justice observed in putting such persons to death, as have
been raised to the supremest dignities of the Empire, is, that the Grand
Seignior makes a demand in writing of the High Priest of their Law, whom they
call Mufty, what punishment that slave or subject deserves who commits felony
against his Prince and his Empire, enumerating all the reasons of his
suspicions and discontents, which he puts down for truths. Now as the question
presupposes the certainty of the fact, the Mufty ever concludes it to be death,
and thus without any form of process the Grand Seignior sends them away to be
strangled, they having only a very short time allowed them to say their
prayers. Immediately after the Justice appears, who takes an Inventory of the
dead man's goods, as guilty of high Treason, and all the silver and
household-stuff, horses or jewels, are applied to the benefit of the Imperial
Treasury; as are likewise the remainders of his Estate, excepting only what the
party should have enjoyed during his life, by his Princes consent, which goes
to his Children, and afterward to his Childrens Children, and in default of
such to the Church: and this is all the remedy they can find to secure somewhat
to their posterity. In my time the late Sultan Amurath satisfied himself with
their spoils, and did not put them to death: his Son Sultan Mahomet was more
cruel; for he never deprived any one of his dignity, without taking away his
life at the same time. This tyrannical custom pleases the common people, who
delight in blood, and applaud the Prince for such his proceedings; however the
consequence is dangerous; for those that have the great and eminent Commands,
and find themselves ever in danger of their lives, would easily be tempted to
take part with others, if occasion presented, besides that most of those who
are raised to the supremest dignity are tribute children.

Since I have begun to make mention of the disorders that are in their
Government, I shall here take notice of one no less considerable than the above
named. Most part of their Soldiery, and especially the body of the Janissaries,
who are about the number of forty thousand men, his Light Horse called
Spahis-Oglan-ler, ^re likewise composed of five and twenty thousand, whom they
call Legionaries; these ought to be, according to ancient custom,
Tribute-children, and are de^igned to serve the Prince in war. The Gentlemen of
his Chamber, who are named Montaferagas, the Servants whom they call
Chechenigirler, those that have the keeping and care of all their Arms, whom
^hey name Gebegiler, the Gunners called Toupchiler, and a world of other
Officers of his household, who exceed the number of forty thousand, ought
likewise to be of ^he same sort. But since the corruption of money and the
custom of bribery, and buying and selling of places is grown ^o rise in this
Empire, and particular persons have rather studied their own inte^est than the
service of their Sovereign, ^he State is sick and in danger of falling: These
levies are made every fifth year, ^s the tribute of the people, and that
through all the Provinces of Greece, and generally in every Country under
their ^ommand, by Commissaries deputed for that purpose out of the Body of the
aforesaid Janissaries. Now, whereas in a Village containing a hundred or six
score Fires, or more or a less number of Christians, there may be found,
perhaps eight or ten Turks inhabiting amongst them, whose Children being bred
and conversing daily with the others of the like Age do learn their Language
and Customs, the Fathers willing their Children should be chosen and taken by
the Commissaries, instead of those of the Christians which are to be raised as
tribute, give them up gladly, in hopes they may hereafter attain to honor and
greatness: (for by these ways it is they come to be made Bassas, to command
Armies, and to marry the Sisters or Daughters of their Prince) and therefore
often give a good piece of Money to those Commissaries, and give their Infant
Turk, some Christian name to make it pass the better; and thus are they often
admitted and brought to the Grand Seignior's Port, as Tribute Children, where
they are carefully bred in certain places allotted for that purpose, whence
they cannon go forth, being guarded by Eunuchs (as their Wives also are) they
have Tutors who teach them their Belief, their Laws* their Customs, and
especially the Obedience they ought to pay to their Superiors, with other
exercises according to their several inclinations. They abide here seven years
thus shut up, that they may be thoroughly instructed; such as are found to be
judicious, and have a soul inclined to virtue and goodness, the chief Overseer,
(who is always an Eunuch) gives an account of them to the Ca^tain of the Grand
Seignior's Palace, who (...) n^med Capi Aga, to make his report; and thus they
are brought nearer to his person, and educated with more care. The Turkish
Children who are admitted, and pass for the Sons of Christians, although very
young when they leave their Parents, yet when they grow up to be Men, and are
entered into the Grand Seignior's Militia, or placed in some other condition,
remembering their Fathers and Mothers, their blood and the place of their
nativity invites them to return thither to see them. By whose complaints they
come to the knowledge of all the disorders in the Government, and the
tyrannical oppressions they groan under, and are thereby prompted to design a
revenge, and when afterward they meet in a Body, upon the first occasion that
offers, they murmur, they complain, and call to have the State reformed.

I may truly say, that in my time during the War in Hungary, I have seen the
Janissaries and Spahies in a body, march into the Grand Seignior's Palace, force
him to give them audience in public, and after they had made known their
complaints concerning the ill Governmen^ and mismanagement of affairs, have
obliged him in their presence to take off the Heads of his most intimate
Favorites, a^ the Authors of all their Grievances.

Had not the Children of natural Turk^ been received amongst other of their
tribute Youths, such disorders would never have happened; for those of the
Christian race when once bred and educated in the Mohammedan Faith, abhor their
Relation^ have no value or respect for them, an^ own no other Protector or
Father but the Grand Seignior alone, know no passion but his, and call
themselves the Slaves (...) God, being commonly strict observers o^ the
Mohammedan Faith, and utter Enemie^ of the Christian. This very thing is a mo^
certain token of the decay of the Mona^chy, it is true we must lend a helping
han^ toward the pulling of it quite down, the we may reap both the advantage
an^ glory of so brave an enterprise.

This Empire will be able for a long time without a miracle to resist both by
Sea and Land the forces that shall conspire its ruin, unless they be such as I
have computed they ought to be in the following part of this Discourse.

For besides the great numbers of the Militia, who live under their command,
and who are in pay, as well in times of Peace as War, all others able to bear
Arms are obliged to oppose the enemies of their Faith to the last drop of their
blood; but when it is upon account only of an offensive war, or design of
farther conquest, then only those are obliged to march that are under pay, they
call that general obligation, Nefirham. There is no Prince in Europe, nor in
any other part of the world within our knowledge, that has better
conveniences to make himself strong at Sea, than this same; he is Lord of the
Black-Sea beyond Trebizond, the Country thereabouts being wonderfully
populous, and wealthy, and infinite Forests, the Villages and Parishes being
obliged some to cut down the Woods for the building of Galleys, others to saw
and hew it, besides people appointed to make Nails, Ropes, Sails; then have
they Ship-wrights that complete them, together with all other the several
workmen requisite, and in numbers sufficient, and all this without disbursing
one penny. These people are bound to perform the said duties whenever it is
required, upon which consideration they are exempted from the payment of any
taxes or imposts, and their Children from being taken up as Tribute by the
Commissaries, delegated for that purpose; thus a Galley, which amongst us would
cost to build eight or ten thousand Crowns, does not stand the Grand Seignior
in above one or two thousand: as for the Cannon such Galley is to be furnished
with, there are infinite numbers made at Constantinople, there being several
spacious places filled with them, they having all the necessary materials in
their own Country for the completing of them. As for the men that sail and
row these Galleys, the natural Turks pay no taxes, but only when they are to
send out Fleets to Sea, then they are to contribute as much as the Christians;
this duty is called Avaris, or Avania, and is raised, as I said, indifferently
upon all that are under the power of the Grand Seignior, in the same manner as
they do the Pioneers in France; that is, that every Parish (according to the
quantity of Fires there are in each of them) ought to furnish one, two or three
men, and the Judges are bound, at the discretion of the Grand Seignior, to
bring him the quantity of men to which their circuit is liable, or else five
and thirty Crowns, in lieu of each man, as he pleases, who according to the
number he intends to set forth, either calls for the men, or sends for the
money: To this end he makes use of Turks, not of Christians, for his greater
security. By this method in less than two months time, he can have enough to
Man out two or three hundred Galleys; their Mariners are not of the best,
although there be great numbers in constant pay for that use and service, but
to help them in case of necessity they take the Seamen out of their other
Ships, though they have no great skill in managing of Galleys, their navigation
being very different. That which makes them the more secure is, that they
seldom go to Sea but in the Summer time, whilst the season is calm, and little
subject to storms and the misfortunes of winds and waves, otherwise they would
often run the hazard of being lost, for want of sufficient knowledge in
maritime affairs.

As for the Soldiers they put on board their Galleys, there are some that have
Commandries along the Mediterranean Shore, chiefly toward the Morea; who send
out one Captain of the Janissaries, one Lieutenant and other Officers, with
fifty, threescore, or an hundred Janissaries for each Galley, according to the
undertaking they have in hand: the Mariners are named Azabistan; they are well
furnished with Cannon and want not for Ammunitions, but generally their Gunners
are unskilful; and indeed that Art is very difficult, unless they have been
used to Navigation, there being a great deal of skill in pointing of Guns upon
the Sea, because of the motion of the Vessels and Galleys, which are ever in
agitation more or less. As for their Provisions they have them in great
quantities, their Countries abounding much in Wheat, Rice, Flesh, Butter, Oil,
Cheese, and other provisions necessary for Navigation: they can endure a great
deal, and that without any trouble, for from their infancy are they accustomed
to live soberly. Their Galleys are not pestered nor encumbred like ours: for
first they have not the use of Wine, they carry no great store of Salt-meats,
as we do, besides many other things; wherefore their Galleys are much lighter
than ours, cleaner, and the Rowers put to less labor and pains in their work,
by reason the very Soldiers take a pleasure in helping of them; thus are they
more fit and nimble either to follow or to fly away from an enemy if they be
over-matched.

In the Harbor or Port of Constantinople, a great number of Galleys are
ordinarily to be seen riding in the Arsenal, as we see our Horses tied in rows
within our Stables. Whenever the Grand Seignior resolves to have a force at
Sea, he can in less than two years time set out three hundred Galleys.

As for round Vessels, or as we call them, tall Ships, they have but few fit to
make men of war: they have only five or six great Gallions which serve to carry
Wood into Egypt proper for building, which they fetch from the Black-Sea, and
from Egypt they bring back provisions to Constantinople, as well for the use of
the Grand Seignior's Kitchen as for the inhabitants: viz. great quantities of
Rice, Sugars, Spices and other Victuals and Merchandise: of these Gallions they
make some use in case of need. There may be found also about some forty or
fifty sail of Merchant Ships, which being well fitted may serve as a Convoy to
the rest of the Fleet. They can likewise equip five or six Mahones (which are a
sort of Galeasses) but they have but few men fit to manage them; they have some
Christian Subjects whom they keep in the Island of Rhodes in a great Town named
Lindo, who have large and good Vessels, they can bring about twenty of these
into service: and this is all the strength they can make at Sea, which is not
very considerable, if the power of Christendom would join together to attack
them: And indeed, it is by Sea, that they may with most ease and certainty be
destroyed, and not by Land, where they march with millions of men into the
field: it being most true, that the Grand Seignior can make up two or three
Armies, that shall each consist of at least two hundred and fifty thousand men,
as well foot as horse, but much stronger in horse than foot. Did they
understand the art of War so well as we do, they would be invincible, since
they have so much strength and courage. They carry along with their Armies a
great number of small brass Fieldpieces, which require not above two horses to
draw each of them; of these they have many, and so soon as they encamp they
chain them to one another, and make a large ring, wherein they place a part of
their Infantry, and there secure the Tents of their Chiefs.

That which makes them so valiant is their opinion and belief of
Predestination, and their holding that all those that die in battle for the
defense of their Religion and Country die Martyrs and go into Paradise,
without any obligation of giving farther account or satisfaction for their
former transgressions: on the contrary, such as die with their backs toward
the enemy, flying from the shock, are all damned, and if they do escape the
danger they lose their honor and the Grand Seignior's pay, and oftentimes
their Commanders put them to death, at least their goods and estates are sure
to be confiscate. They are ill armed, the foot who are quite naked carrying
only a small Musket, and a very short Sword, which the greater part seldom
know how to use, so that although they are very numerous, if they be roundly
charged, they are easily overcome, whatever resistance they strive to make.
Their Cavalry are better, being advantageously mounted upon very good horses;
they go on to fight with much heat and fury, but will not stand any long
engagement, unless they gain some apparent advantage; and if they make a
retreat, it is by turning now and then back, and making a slight charge at
every facing upon the enemy, which is their way.

And although I have in this Discourse made known the power of this great
Adversary, yet I dare warrant, would God permit an union of the forces
belonging to the Christian Princes and Potentates, that they would be more than
sufficient to destroy them in a few years. But, as I have already hinted, they
must first be attacked by Sea, and the Land forces ought by all means to avoid
giving battle till they have the news of a naval victory, which will be
inevitable, if God for our sins should not hinder and obstruct the effect of
our joint endeavors.

The Catholic King might arm an hundred Galleys, as well such as he keeps upon
the coast of Spain, as those of the Kingdoms of Naples and Sicilia,
comprehending that Squadron he maintains at Genoa.

The Republic of Venice (assisted by France with Men and Provisions) might
very well furnish two hundred Galleys with all the equipage necessary for their
navigation; they may likewise furnish six Galeasses, which may well be called
Mountains of the Sea, for they are wonderful great Vessels, and yet are rowed
like Galleys, and carry a great number of Guns, some of them fit for battery.
It is observed, that when the battle of Lepanto was fought against the Turks,
the Galeasses belonging to the Republic of Venice, which were there, and had
their Army on board them, procured that Victory.

Besides these numbers of Galleys, the Pope can send eight or ten; France has
commonly twelve or fifteen, and could upon such an occasion set out fifty at
least, if not more; Savoy five or six; Tuscany ten or a dozen; Genoa eight or
ten; and Malta six. All these together would make up three hundred and
fourscore Galleys, and six Galeasses.

I would afterward join to this force, which is very great, and might easily
master and command the whole Mediterranean-Sea, a hundred or two hundred of the
largest and stoutest Ships that sail upon the Ocean. The King of England, the
most powerful of any at Sea, might if he pleased, wonderfully help toward
this enterprise; the Lords of the Low Countries might give a great addition,
being so renowned through all the world; the King of France in his Countries
and coast of Bretagne, Guienne, Normandy and Provence might forward this
design, there being no Prince in all Europe that has more Pilots and Mariners
than his Majesty, who alone is able to furnish more Seamen than any of the
Princes in Europe; their number is so great, that for want of employment in
their own Country, they go abroad and serve in foreign Galleys and Ships of
War: so that his Majesty may greatly contribute to this pious War. The King of
Spain has likewise some very good and brave men of War; each of these great
Monarchs setting a helping hand to this work, they are able together to put out
a Fleet of above two hundred stout Ships, and Gallions.

This Fleet would be much more useful and considerable than that of the
Galleys, and serve to many more purposes, that is, to fight, to carry recruits,
and whatever refreshments shall be necessary where they are wanting, either to
the Galleys or elsewhere: they might also have great numbers of Soldiers that
might be landed on the enemies Country in convenient places, and also trains
of Artillery wherewith to besiege Forts and Castles that ought to be attacked:
they can carry Arms to furnish such poor Christians (slaves to the Grand
Seignior) who would be willing to revolt in favor of our Army.

If this Union and force at Sea thus projected could be brought to pass, it
could never be destroyed but by the anger of the divine power in some most
prodigious storms at Sea. There ought to be a place appointed where all the
Galleys and Ships might have their general rendezvous to meet in a Body. At
Malta there are very capacious and safe Harbors, but that is a barren Island,
where they have not Corn enough to feed their Knights and their own
Inhabitants, their provisions being brought thither from Sicilia.

In Sicilia is the City of Messina, where ^hey have a Harbor both large and
good, ^he rendezvous might be there, where Corn is in great abundance, together
with Wines, Flesh, Oil, Cheese, and ^ll other things most necessary for
Navi^ators: it is nigh enough to the Albanian ^oast, there being but three or
four hun^red miles distance between it and Cape Saint Mary, neighbor to
Castel-novo, the first Maritime City belonging to the Turks and from
Castel-novo to the Morea the Galleys may creep all the way within sight of
Land, getting refreshments from the shore upon every occasion, for all that
coast is peopled with a sort of Albanians who are Christians, and utter enemies
to the Turks, and who upon the first sight of our Christian Army would take
measures to revolt, and therefore the better to invite and encourage them they
ought to be furnished with Arms, and some good Officers to conduct and head
them.

Passing along the Morea, they ought to do the like, the Christians of that
Country being natural Greeks, and although they allow not of our Creed, and
may justly fear if we had the power over them, we should oblige them to conform
to another Church, yet nevertheless being so hardly used as they are, by the
tyrannies of the Turkish Government, they would infallibly revolt and take up
Arms against the Sultan: My opinion is, tha^ in passing along, they should
seize upon two Forts named the one This is already done by the Venetians.
Coron, and the other Modon, which are on the Seaside, near the mouth of the
Archipelago, as likewise upon the City and Castle of Scio, the Islands of
Metelin and Tenedos, which are nigh the Dardanello's, and full of good Harbors
for the security of the Fleets; as also to oblige them to come to their relief.
This would prove a thing of no great difficulty, forasmuch as the pride of the
Turk is come to that height, that he believes the power of all Christendom is
not sufficient to do him any prejudice, and upon that score, they have
neglected the care ought to be taken in furnishing and repairing their Forts,
and keeping good garrisons and stores for their defense, of which they are
generally destitute, or but slightly provided, for the reasons aforesaid.

There must, at the same time, be a powerful Land Army likewise, which should
march by Bulgaria, and go on toward Adrianople; and as I have said, all the
common people of Greece, who inhabit that Country, being Christians, and there
being very few Turks amongst them, they would most willingly rise: As to the
number that Army should consist of, that of the Turks upon such an occasion
would be very numerous and strong, and therefore ours ought in some measure, if
possible, to equal them to prevent any terror or dismay at the appearance of
the enemies vast numbers.

Monsieur de la Noue in a Treatise of hi^ speaks of the way to attack and beat
the Turks, and after what methods the Christian Army ought to be disposed and
conducted, also the numbers of horse and foot he judges to be necessary for
that purpose. I shall add nothing to it bu^ only this, that if the numbers he
mentions could be doubled it would be more effectual and secure; but I should
be o^ opinion, that the Land Army should no^ advance so far as to be forced to
come to blows with the Turks till our Fleet had done their work; for, as I told
you, being composed of a huge number o^ Galleys, Galeasses, Galions, and Ships
of War, the Victory would be certain, and after the taking of those places
beforenamed, they ought forthwith to proceed directly to the Dardanello's,
which are two Castles distant two hundred miles from Constantinople, the one in
Europe and the other in Asia, within Cannon shot of each other, both situate on
the Seaside, which in that place is so narrow, that it seems as if Heaven had
designed it for the security of Constantinople, and for the greater Majesty of
him that ^s the possessor of it, that it should be so; ^or not a Ship that
sails to Constantinople ^an pass or repass that Strait without ^eave of the
Commanders of those Castles, which are not so strong but they may be ^asily
taken, and ought to be.

I believe, indeed, that the Turks Fleet would not stay till the Christians
came up ^hither to them, but that they would ^ome out and meet them, so great
is their ^resumption. There are diverse good Ports near the said Castles capable
of hol^ing any the greatest Navies; the Coun^rey thereabout abounds in Wheat,
Wines, and Flesh, and even the greater part of ^he Provisions that go to
Constantinople ^ome from a place named the Volle, a ^ttle beyond Mount Santo,
and much ^earer than Valona, and should the Fleets ^emain in that station, the
City of Constan^inople must be in great want of food; ^or no Vessel would dare
adventure to ^arry them Rice, Beans, Pease, Sugars, and other great and
necessary Provisions which are sent from Egypt by that passage, which would be
interdicted and shut up, and that vast and populous City could ^ot but suffer
very much in a short time: ^is true they may be relieved by the Black-Sea, and
principally from the Countries of Bogdania and Valachia, they being fruitful
Provinces, and from whenc^ they get great store of Provisions by way of the
Danube which falls into the sai^ Sea: there are likewise Caffa, Trebizon^ and
many other Cities upon that Sea tha^ may help them in time of distress; where
by one may judge of the happiness of i^ situation, as being seated betwixt tw^
great Seas; but we need not doubt, if the King of Poland come into the Union,
a^ indeed it will be most necessary h^ should, the Princes of Bogdania,
Valachi^ and Transylvania will soon revolt to sha^ off that yoke of slavery and
tyranny und^^ which they daily groan, as being Trib^taries to the Turk: upon
which accou^^ they would all of them sieze on the D^nube, and hinder all manner
of relief (...) assistance that might otherwise be eas^ conveyed along the
Danube: the Cossa^ (who are Christians, and by their bi^ Russians) would
disturb them also the sa^ way, their Country bordering upon t^ same Sea.

The Christian people of Greece revo^ing, (as it is rationally to be suppo^^
they would do when they found b^ Land and Sea filled with armed Men^ their own
belief, marching to destroy the ^kish Power) it would greatly contri^e toward
the Victory, because the ^ks who reside in those open Countries (...) Villages,
would be much allarmed (...) frighted. It would be necessary to ^ke no
difference betwixt those of the ^ek Church and the Roman; but indis^ntly to
hear their Mass, respect their ^gy, make the sign of the Cross after ^r manner,
approve their Fasts, and ^ate them as much as possible; to per^e their
Churchmen to appear at the ^d of our Armies, treating the Christi^ of those
Countries with all the gen^ess and humanity imaginable, and ^ving great
severity toward any that ^^^ld wrong them.

^he other point is, that a great part ^e Turkish Militia are Tribute-children,
(...) by consequence the Sons of Christian ^ents who have been snatched and
(...) out of the arms and bosoms of their ^ents: when therefore Prisoners are
^n, and any of this sort can be disco^^^d amongst them, they ought to be (...)
kindly treated, giving them to un^^^tand that it is well known they were ^ed
away very young and compelled ^ke up a Religion contrary to the Faith of their
Fathers, and that it is impossi^^^ but they must have some good inclina^^ons
left toward their first Belief; th^^ learn in what condition they served (...)
Turk, and provide as well for them, not better, than what they had un^^ him.
This would produce two v^^^ excellent effects, the one that our adve^^ry would
be daily weakened, the othe^^ more importance yet, that this wo^^ breed so great
a distrust and jealousie^ the natural Turks, that they and the ^^nizaries would
soon divide from ea^^ other, and, as I said before, the Ma^^ forces having
first done their work, (G^^ granting them the Victory) the ene^^ would be in
such a consternation, t^^ their Land Army might be overco^^ without any great
hazard or difficulty.

When I was in Constantinople, I (...) told that after the Victory the
Christi^^ gained at Lepanto, their fears and app^^hensions were so great, that
had (...) victorious Fleet gone directly to the D^^danello's (those Castles I
have already m^^tioned) they might have taken them wi^^ out opposition, and
afterward have (...) come Masters of that famous City.

To embarass and distract them, a^^ make it the more easy to defeat them,
would be necessary upon such an occasion, ^o prevail with the King of Persia
not to ^ose the opportunity to recover the Coun^ries wrested from him in Asia,
which ^re very large and considerable: so that ^he Turks being assaulted in
diverse places ^t once, would soon be ruined, and laid ^n the dust: and truly, I
am of opinion ^and not without good grounds, as well ^s hopes) that they might
be ruined even ^he second or third year of the expedition and confederacy,
which indeed ought to ^e resolved on, since it is scarce possible so ^reat a
force, and composed of so many ^everal Nations, could act long together,
without falling into some controversies and quarrels amongst themselves, which
might proceed to blows.

Egypt is inhabited by Moors, and a vast Number of Christians called Coftes,
who ^ive under subjection of the Turk, the Moors are their most mortal Enemies,
so soon as they should see them assaulted by a good Force, they would be the
first that would revolt, and make War upon them. Mount Libanus is likewise
stocked with a sort of Christians called Maronites, who are under obedience of
the Church of Rome, there are amongst them twenty thousand Fighting-men at
least, these have enured themselves to all the hardships toils of War with the
Druses who i^ bit with them in the same Moun^ and are generally at handy-blows
(...) the Turks. Albeit these Druses are ^^hometans, they believe their Fathers
(...) the Offspring of the French, who in times conquered the Holy Land, (...)
the City of Jerusalem under the con^ of Godfrey of Bovillon, and Baldwi^
Brother; that they were defeated a^ the Death of those two generous P^ces, when
such as could make their cape out of the conflict, retired into inaccessible
and rough parts of M^ Libanus, where they have from Father Son preserved and
maintained themse^ ever since: They are Enemies to (...) Turks, and obey them
but by compul^ upon a good occasion both they and (...) Maronites would
undoubtedly rise.

All Asia is inhabited by Christian Gr^ and Armenians, (these latter are in
g^ter numbers and more affectionate to (...) Latins than Greeks) upon due
notice (...) our Union and Design, I question (...) but they would think of
redeeming the^ selves, and take revenge for the oppr^sion they have so long
endured, and f^ live under.

The Prince of the Georgians, who is of the Greek Church, is able enough to do
them much mischief, upon such an occasion. There is also another Nation
neighbor to the former, who although Mahometans, yet does by no means desire
to live under the Turkish Empire, they would be glad to find a happy
opportunity to throw off their yoke and break their bonds: these are the
Parthians, who at this very time are in continual feud with them.

I shall therefore conclude by this Discourse, That the Turk ought not to be
attacked with a small force, but I am well assured that if the Christian
Princes would resolve upon a general union, The Author says in one years time,
but that is somewhat too Rhomantick since Miracles are ceased.
That even in a few years time they might overthrow him both by Sea and Land,
and make themselves Masters of all his Empire; the German Emperor, the King of
Poland and the Princes of the Empire ought to have the command of the Land
Forces. The Execution of this Proposition must be the work of God, unless he
put forth his omnipotent hand, and inspire our Princes as well of the one as
the other Church, it is impossible for mankin^ to bring it about. On the other
part all doubts and jealousies and disput^ concerning differences in Religion
must b^ waved, as well as punctillios for prec^dence, and private interest, and
nothin^ aimed at, but to pluck down this potent^ this monstrous Enemy, who by
his Victories, and force of Arms, has debase^ the Glory and Grandeur of
Christendom I speak with the more assurance of these ways and means to attain
the said ends as having lived for two and twenty years amongst these People, by
order o^ my Sovereign, for the Service of his Majesty and my native Country,
in quality of Ambassador.

It would likewise be very necessary, i^ this Design were agreed on by the
before named Princes, (who might promis^ themselves this Conquest by the Effort
o^ their Strength and Courage) that a project were drawn of the partage to b^
shared to each; that so, if Heaven did give them Victory, all contests and
after debates might be avoided betwixt them a^ the conclusion and crowning of
the Enterprise.

I have not adventured in this brie^ Discourse to mention the methods tha^
ought to be made use of to unite all these Potentates, I shall leave that to
such as are more knowing in the Politics to procure it, than my self, who
should be ever ready in such a cause, and upon so pious an undertaking to serve
as a Soldier, a Guide, and an Interpreter, having, during my long abode amongst
them, learned their Language, and the chief Roads that lead through their
Countries.

AN HISTORICAL AND Political Discourse ON The Causes of the War IN HUNGARY.
THE Spaniards, whose Words and Speeches are commonly of great weight, have a
saying to this purpose, That there is no good but what is ^ure, nor no evil but
has an end. And I, on the contrary find, that the pleasures and good we enjoy
in this life are ever mixed with pain, and that the end of one ^rouble is but
the beginning of another. The happiest of people have oftener reason to complain
than to rejoice; and the unhappy, who are by much the greater number, do most
commonly fall from a little misfortune into a bigger. I do remember that George
Ragotsky Prince of Transylvania entered into Poland victorious, but he came out
again flagging his wings; and that thereupon you did read me a Lecture of the
inconstancy of Fortune, and showed me, that it was no new thing to see such
revolutions and changes; since oftentimes those have been led about captives to
make a triumphant show, who but a short time before had been themselves
triumphant Conquerours.

G. Whatever I may have told you heretofore, I always believed, and still hold
it for a certain truth, that the greater part of mankind have much more reason
to praise and thank God for the benefits they do receive of him, than to
implore to be delivered from the evils that afflict them: and yet we hear of
more that do complain than give thanks; because we are more sensible of pain
than of pleasure. A Prince feels not so much pleasure in conquering all his
lifetime, as affliction to find Fortune turn her back upon him but in one
single Battle. A great Man, who had scarce found any thing impossible to be
attained to by him, till the age of fifty years, and who had seen the most
formidable enemies stoop to his power, tells us after all that Fortune is a
Woman, that she loves the young better than the aged, and therefore retired
into solitude, when he found the power of the greatest Emperor that ever was,
could be so easily baffled. We find some persons who will needs have the
liberty of undertaking whatever their capricious fancies suggest, and then
loudly complain when their attempts (begun without consideration and judgment)
end in misfortune and disgrace. It is certain, that Divine providence (which by
the vulgar is called Fortune) does often pull down the pride of the most
successful and haughty, that they may know the good they had received
proceeded more from his bounty than their deserts. We find some Politicians
whose Eagle eyes can see every thing abroad, are yet stark blind to what does
threaten both the ruin of their Country and themselves at home. I might
confirm this truth by infinite examples, but I shall pass them by in silence to
listen to your questions, and to answer to them as exactly as I am able.


P. Let us then speak of the War that is now in Hungary: And forasmuch as a
discourse you made to me about three years since, brought us within sight of a
black cloud that was gathering in Transylvania, and which has since produced
such a tempest, as has born down George Ragotsky and Jona Kemin, to raise
Abafti to the Throne: entertain me with the cause and sequel of that change,
that I may the better know whence it happened that the Grand Seignior, who had
been only an idle Spectator in the Tragedy, (which Europe was acting for thirty
years together) should now attack his Neighbors without provocation, and give
us occasion to take up Arms, while we are in a capacity to unite in such a
manner as may give him cause to repent his undertaking. I am confident that
this rupture was preceded, accompanied and followed with so many notable
circumstances, that I might to good use and purpose, spend many days in
canvasing and weighing them; and such as shall consider them duly afterward
may reap both pleasure and profit by it.


G. Although your will has ever been a law to me, yet is it not without some
kind of regret that I now undertake to satisfy you in this point, as being
afraid to speak more than I should: but since you must needs know whence they
fetch those remedies they will, or do intend to, apply, I shall do my best
endeavor to satisfy and entertain you on that subject. And that you may have
the more reason to acquiesce in what I shall tell you, I will take my rise from
the very first source, and represent in Epitome, all what the Turks have done
in Hungary since the time that Bajazet came thither to support their rebellion,
and foment their discord. I know the ignorant will say, that the Turk has
little or no regard to justice when he undertakes a War; and that the advantage
he thinks to meet with in his enterprises is ever the principal motive of his
designs. For my own part, I own there is little faith to be hoped for or
expected from an Infidel, and that many times the Turk has no other aim in his
attempts but his own interest: But withal it is not impossible for him to
cloak those designs his ambition prompts him to act in the world, with some
fair and specious pretense. And for this reason I will let you plainly see, why
the Ottomans think and believe they have just cause to preserve Transylvania,
and by the same means you will come to understand and know the ground we have
to defend it against him, and how it comes to pass we are obliged to raise
great forces, and to demand the assistance of strangers. After this I shall
proceed to the resolutions were taken at Ratisbon, and satisfy such as would
know in what manner our Princes do contribute toward the preservation of
Germany, and to the War we have undertaken for our own defense.


P. I must confess I should not have had all that satisfaction I do promise my
self from your discourse, had you but only barely told me what is acted on our
frontiers, the forces we have here, and the merit and worth of such as command
them. Those that meet with any novelty of moment desire to be informed of the
true cause thereof; and our War having taken its rise from the little respect
that Ragotsky showed to the Turkish Sultan, and the protection Kemin Jonas
sought for and obtained of the Emperor. I cannot but be very desirous to learn
the reasons, why the Turks do undertake to chastize the Princes of
Transylvania, for beginning a War without their consent, and the obligations
our Emperors have to protect them. Begin therefore, if you please, and relate
it all as distinctly and briefly as you possibly can.


G. You ask and desire two things together, which seem incompatible; however, I
shall endeavor to join them in one, and despair not to perform the task,
provided you will be very attentive. In the year 1350, or, according to others,
1383, Lewis the first of that name reigned peaceably over the people of
Transylvania, Moldavia, Valachia, Mysia, Dalmatia and Sclavonia, which were of
the appurtenances of his Kingdom: but his quiet was disturbed by a misfortune
as little dreamt on as foreseen. Jane Queen of Naples, a most dissol^te
Princess, preferring some young Neapolitans before King Andrew her Husband, she
cruelly put him to death. The news whereof, and the Letters from such as were
struck with horror at this Paricide, did easily prompt the Soul of Lewis to a
just revenge. This generous Prince, believing that both honor and justice
obliged him to take up Arms to revenge the death of his Brother, raised a great
Army, and went to Naples to bring the guilty to condign punishment. His
expedition was prosperous, and having put Jane to flight, and routed her
Confederates, he brought the Rebels to reason, and punished the chief abettors
of that detestable Paricide. Which being done, and all things appeased, he
thought his own ancient Kingdom might require his presence, and therefore was
contriving to return again, not neglecting at the same time any means to
preserve his new one. He had diverse great person^ in his Army, and amongst
others Stephen the Vaivode of Transylvania, whom h^ held in great esteem,
although he was a^ yet but young. With this Man he left a force sufficient to
keep that Kingdom i^ its duty, which was far distant from Hungary; and having
recommended the care thereof to him, he returned home The King's departure gave
encouragement to Jane and Lewis Prince of Tare^tum, her new Husband, to make
their effort to regain the Throne. But the prudence, the courage and the
fidelity o^ the Transilvanian put by the thrusts, an^ prevented the designs,
till Pope Clement V^ put an end to that War. These signa^ services, performed
by the Vaivode, an^ those he rendered Francis Carcarius, Princ^ of Padua, (a
friend and Ally of the King his Master's) merited great rewards* wherewith his
hopes did justly flatter him But these were not only forgotten, and Lewis did
not only not recompense the Vaivode, but even recalled him from Naples, fearing
so eminent a person, and one so worthy to reign.


P. Other great Monarchs have done the like, both before and since that King:
Narses and Gonzales have given occasion to Historians to blame the Emperor
Justinian, and Ferdinand King of Arragon: But how did Stephen behave himself
under this disgrace?


G. The Transilvanian as able a Courtier, as a Captain, concealed his
resentment, while he thought it would be useless to discover (...); and Lewis
being dead, he then believed that Fortune presented a favorable opportunity
for his revenge. The King had left no other Successor but only a Daughter named
Mary who was betroathed to Sigismund of Luxemburg, King of Bohemia. The tender
Age of that Princess, the inconstant humor of the Hungarians, and the
practices of our Vaivode, caused the said Mary to be so much despised, that
many openly declared they would never obey a Girl. Then this Cabal knowing the
craft and dexterity of the Bishop of Zagabria, who was an Italian by birth and
inclination, they sent him to Charles II. King of Naples, the Son of Andrew,
and Cousin German of Mary. The Bishop exactly performed what they ordained,
offered the Kingdom of Hungary to the King of Naples, and desired him to come
and take possession, as an Estate that belonged of right to him. Charles
listened to the Bishop favorably, and being agitated with different passions,
demanded some time to resolve upon a business of so great importance. He spoke
of it to the Queen his Wife, who omitted neither Arguments, nor tears to
dissuade him from undertaking a thing so dangerous by reason of the inconstancy
of those People, and shameful for the injustice he must commit by
dispossessing one so nearly related to him, without any cause. But Ambition
overcame reason and equity. Charles equipped a great Fleet and attended with an
Army worthy of such a Prince, he took harbor in Dalmatia, and went in few days
to Zagabria, where he met part of those Grandees that favored his design. From
thence he passed on to Buda, and although he found resistance by the resolution
of Nicholas Gara, and some other faithful Servants of Queen Mary; yet did he
make a shift to settle himself by the interest and favor of the Transilvanian.
Then Sigismund King of Bohemia the Husband of the said Queen, perceiving the
loss of Hungary to be inevitable, retired into his own Kingdom, and Charles
imagined he had fixed the Wheel of Fortune. His joy notwithstanding was but
short-lived, and his Usurpation of no longer duration, than other violent
things are wont to be. Sigismund was again invited back by the new King's
Enemies, and having vanquished Charles, slain or drove away every one that
opposed him, he recovered all that rightly belonged to Mary his Wife.


P. These were wonderful revolutions, and which were undoubtedly of very hard
digestion to the Transilvanian.


G. The loss and defeat of the King of Naples, put that Vaivode into despair,
and made him forget all that should be most precious amongst men, Viz. their
Religion, and their Native Country. He laid under foot all considerations both
divine and humane: He had recourse to Bajazet Emperor of the Turks, to whom he
promised his Daughter, upon condition he would help him to turn Sigismund and
Mary out of their Kingdom of Hungary. This was the beginning of the misfortunes
of that Kingdom, (till that time most flourishing) and of the hopes those
Infidels conceived of subjecting it to their Empire. Bajazet took this
opportunity by the Fore-top, got a great Army together, advanced toward
Hungary, fought a bloody Battle with King Sigismund, near to Nicopolis; where
it is held that twenty thousand Christians and threescore thousand Turks were
laid in the dust, the 28th. of September, 1396.


P. I think it was there that John of Burgundy was made Prisoner with the loss
of a thousand Gentlemen he had brought thither: But, if I am not mistaken the
Turk made no great progress during the Reign of Sigismund.


G. Those Burgundians kept company, and stood and fell with the Hungarians,
that died in the said Battle. But this was only the beginning of the
unhappiness of those People. Yet under the Reign of Sigismund, and during that
of Albertus of Austria his Successor, the Turk gained little in Hungary: He
would needs proceed step by step, and seized upon Constantinople, e're he set
his mind seriously upon other matters. However, this had taught him the way to
come and visit us. Mahomet the First beat the Hungarians near Taubemberg Anno,
1400. And thus the Infidels advanced by little and little, till after the Death
of Albert of Austria. That Prince left no Children; but his Wife was big when
he deceased. Her being with Child caused the division that was then bred
amongst the Grandees of the Kingdom. Some would needs have them wait till the
delivery of the Queen, before they thought of the Election of a King. Others
making objections against their becoming subject to a Child, in case the Queen
should be safely brought to bed of a Prince, they resolved to choose a King able
to govern them. Hungary being thus divided, one part of the Grandees sent to
offer the Kingdom to Uladislaus, the Son of Casimir, King of Poland: The other
party preferred Ladislaus Son of Albertus before him, though he were yet in his
Cradle; where notwithstanding they set the Crown of Hungary upon his Head.


P. Truth it self, nay the God of Truth has told us, the danger of a Kingdom
divided within it self: and Hungary no doubt has felt the smarting Effects of
it.


G. This division of minds and interests brought Amurath the II. into the
Field, who taking advantage of the discords he observed in Hungary, marched
into the very heart of the Country, and besieged Alba-Regalis. He could not
however obtain what he desired, on the contrary he lost most of his Army, and
was forced to raise the Siege. This affront enraged the Tyrant, who to be
revenged, raised new forces, and entered again into Hungary, where he was
defeated by John Huniades Corvinus. This action gave not more reputation to
Huniades, than desire in the Turk to be revenged. To this purpose, he sent two
of the bravest Generals he had to oppose Huniades, who always commanded the
Armies of King Uladislaus. These were Isaac and Mezets, who falling upon
Hungary and Transylvania, filled them with all the miseries of a cruel War.
Huniades ran in to their Assistance, and overtook the Enemy laden with Spoil
and Plunder. He charged them stoutly, but unfortunately, since he was repulsed,
and put to flight. Amurath encouraged with this Victory, thought now of nothing
but ravaging the Christian Countries. Mezets returned into Hungary, put all to
Fire and Sword, and having ruined it, and cut the throats of infinite numbers
of People, intended a retreat. Then was it that Huniades believed he might find
an opportunity to repair the former loss he had sustained. And in effect, he
encountered Mezets, attacked and defeated him so entirely, that hardly was there
any one left to carry the News of it to the Turkish Sultan.


P. This good Success ought to have raised the Spirits of the Hungarians, to
fall upon him in their turn.


G. They did so, and had great advantage; and without doubt the Affairs of the
Hungarians, and the Turks had changed its face, if particular interest had not
prevailed above the general good. King Uladislaus had in his Court one Julian a
Legate from his Holiness, and George the Despote of Mysia, who ever talking of
the good fortune of Uladislaus, the generosity of Huniades, and the facility of
recovering what was lost, inclined that King to a great undertaking.
Preparations were made; and the forces being drawn together, Uladislaus sent
Huniades before with the Vanguard. His Expedition was so prosperous, that he
regained diverse places; and had he not been put to a stop by the severity of
Winter, it is believed he had penetrated and overrun a^^ even to Thrace, and
ruined the Turkis^ Empire in Europe. In this Campaign H^niades gave eight
several Battles to C^rambo, a great General of the Turks, where in he ever came
off with advantage then the Winter forcing him to retire t^ Buda, he carried
Carambo along wit^ him, who falling into a very dee^ Snow, was become his
Prisoner. These things having thus succeeded to the honor and advantage of the
Hungaria^ King, and the immortal renown of Joh^ Huniades, the Ambassadors from
dive^^ Princes, from the Emperor of Constantinople, the Venetians, and
Genoese, went t^ congratulate Uladislaus, entreating him t^ continue and
prosecute a War he had s^ fortunately begun. They promised and assured him that
all the forces of Christendom should be his seconds, that a Flee^ should be
sent to obstruct the passage o^ the Hellespont, and hinder the Turk from coming
over there; and that the Greek^ seeing such hopes and probabilities o^ their
deliverance, would resume their ancient Courage, to break their bands (...)
slavery in pieces. The Despote of Mysi^ to these arguments, did add all the
reasons and persuasives, that his earnes^ desire for the recovery of a Kingdom,
and his Children, (who were in the hands of the Turk) could possibly suggest,
so that all things were tending, and disposing toward a War, no less
beneficial than honorable to Christendom.


P. They might well hope for good Success, from so powerful a League.


G. And yet it proved unfortunate; and to the ruin of Hungary; which happened
thus. Amurath II. of that Name, the Turkish Sultan, finding Europe combined
against him, and fearing the Forces of Asia, consulted his own prudence, and
with admirable Craft and Wisdom, obtained that Peace of Uladislaus he
extremely desired. He sent Ambassadors under pretense of treating concerning
the liberty of Carambo; but in effect it was to disperse that storm that
threatened him. These Agents well knowing what influence the Despote had in the
King's Counsel, and in the heart of John Huniades Corvinus, believed that if
they could but gain him, they should gain all their ends. They planted
therefore two Batteries against him, which nothing can resist, I mean Affection
and Interest. They offered the restitution of his Children, and his Estate, if
he could but obtain of Uladislaus what they reasonably desired of him. This
proposition pleasing the Despote, he soon brought Huniades Corvinus to approve
of it; and these two being thus agreed, they found no great difficulty in
persuading the King to an accommodation. The Peace was made, the Turk withdrew
all the Garrisons he had in Mysia, restored them effectually, and exactly
performed all he had promised. But whilst the parties were thu^ employed in the
executing of this Teeaty; Letters arrived from Greece, which assured them that
those People, who knew nothing of the conclusion of this Peace, expected every
moment when the game would be begun; for that they were fully resolved not to
stand with Arms accross like idle Spectators, the absence of the Sultan who
was in Asia, giving them a very favorable opportunity to push on their
designs. The Italian Fleet, which advanced toward the Hellespont, desired the
same thing with great eagerness. These Letters having been read in the Senate,
even those that had been most forward and zealous for the Peace, were now sorry
it was concluded: But none durst mention the breaking of an agreement, which
had been confirmed by a solemn Oath. Then Julian, the Cardinal Legate,
powerful in persuasion, of great credit and eloquence, prompted by an
indiscreet Zeal, and an impious piety, undertook by a discourse as learned as
it was vehement, to prove that they ought to break that Treaty made with an
Infidel. He chid the scrupulous, encouraged the timorous, comforted the
afflicted, and wholly inclined both the King and the Grandees of Hungary to a
rupture. He said, he well foresaw the disadvantages of that Peace; but had not
opposed it, lest he should have seemed to accuse Huniades of imprudence, and
have appeared cruel toward the Despote of Mysia, who could not have redeemed
his Children from the Tyranny of the Turk, but by the said Peace. He assured
them they might safely do it, since they might justly and reasonably break
their Faith with the Turk, who by his finess and craft had broken the bonds of
a Christian alliance: He represented how that, indeed, the Hungarians could not
grant a Peace to the Sultan, without first having the consent of their
Brethren: and that an Oath unjustly made, could not oblige without injustice.
He endeavored to make out that the Oath, they had made to Amurath, was null;
that it did not bind their Consciences; and that they might rely upon him in
this particular as being most knowing in Affairs of that Nature; and concluded
that they ought to assemble their Forces, march toward Thrace, and join with
the other Christians, before the oversight they had committed should be
conveyed farther into Europe. These and the like arguments and reasons, uttered
with Authority, and by a most eloquent tongue, inspired the Hungarians to
declare unanimously, that they would rather lose their lives, than forsake
their Brethren at this juncture. To this purpose, the Army was drawn forth, and
John Huniades, marching in the Van, the King followed with the rest of the
Army. This Prince being on his way, Dracula the Vaivode of Valachia went to
wait upon him, and told him, he admired at the boldness of his attempt, in
going to attack the Turk with so inconsiderable an Army; that his Enemy went
a-hunting with as many men as he had then about him; that he advised him to
return again. This Counsel was rejected, and the Vaivode having left four
thousand Horse with the King under the Conduct of his own Son, he retired.
Amurath being informed that Hungary was arming against him, quitted Asia, and
returned into Europe, got his Forces a-foot, and the soonest he could possibly,
attacked Uladislaus at Varnes, a City of Bulgaria, and defeated him entirely.
The event of which Battle, so fatal to the Christians, and fortunate to those
Infidels, made it apparent by the Death of the King of Hungary, Julian the
Pope's Legate, and an infinite number of brave men besides, that we ought to
keep our promised Faith; and that God will punish the perfidious, let them
cloak the Crime with what pretense soever they please. It Is said that Amurath,
observing his men had the worst at the beginning of the Fight, drew out of his
Bosom the Treaty that had been signed between him and the Hungarians, and
lifting his Eyes to Heaven, said more than once with great earnestness and
affection, Jesus Christ, behold the Agreement here the Christians had made with
me; to which they have sworn by thy Divinity, and which they now break in
Derision of thee: Now, if thou, O Christ, art God, as they do say, revenge I
beseech thee, an injury done to thy self, and to me; and let even those that do
not yet truly know thy Name be witness, that thou can punish such as violate
the sanctity of those promises which they had sealed with thy sacred Name.
Which Prayer was followed, or answered, with the total defeat of the
Christians. The King's head was fixed upon the point of a Lance, and carried
into many parts of Greece and Asia, as a token of an entire Victory. The Body
of the Cardinal Julian, who persuaded them to this breach of Faith, was found
naked and pierced with many Wounds. The Epitaph of this King who proved both
valiant and happy, so long as he was careful to make good his promises, is
worthy of your notice. Thus it is, Romulidae Cannas, Ego Varnam Clade notavi,
Discite mortales, non temerari fidem.
Me nisi Pontifices, non temerare fidem:
Non ferret Scythicum Pannonis ora jugum.


This misfortune befell Hungary, the Eleventh of November, upon St. Martin's
day, in the Year, 1444.


P. You have often told me, that an honest Man's word, ought to be inviolable.
I have ever been of the same opinion, and this Example confirms me wonderfully.
But did this Hungarian's unhappiness involve the whole Army?


G. God intending to punish this unhappy Kingdom, yet not wholly destroy it,
reserved John Huniades, who finding things were in a most desperate condition
after the death of the King, saved himself by flight. The following year, the
Hungarians, who till then had rejected Ladislaus, the posthumus Son of the
Emperor Albertus of Austria, did unanimously acknowledge him their King, being
but five years old. And forasmuch as he could not sway the Scepter, because of
his Childhood, they gave the management of all Affairs to John Huniades
Corvinus, who two years afterward augmented the Triumphs of Amurath, by the
loss of two and twenty thousand men, that were sent to oppose him. Some time
after Amurath the Turk died at Adrianople, and for Successor left Mahomet II.
his Son, who surpassed all his Ancestors in Greatness of Courage, and Subtilty
of Mind. This undertaking Prince, besieged Constantinople, in the third Year of
his Reign, and took it in fifty Days, by the 29th. of May, 1453. This loss
abated the Courage of the Christians, raised that of Mahomet, and gave him
hopes of adding Hungary to the acquisition he had made of Greece. To this
purpose he ravaged Mysia, and with two hundred and fifty thousand Men besieged
the City of Belgrade; called by the Ancients Alba Greca: but the place being
well defended by Huniades, he lost almost all his Army, and an hundred great
pieces of Cannon: Huniades did not long survive this brave Action, for he died
the 8th. of September, 1456. And the Turk turning his thoughts toward Persia,
and against Italy, left Hungary in quiet: hoping the ambition of the Grandees,
and the Youth of the King would create some troubles, during the peace, and
that those troubles would give him an opportunity to subject that Kingdom by
pretending to spare it.


P. It was no small Happiness, however, for King Ladislaus, that the Tyrant
ceased to disturb him, during his Minority, after the death of John Huniades.
Now tell me what he did when he came to Age.


G. History will inform you that Ladislaus, being 19 years old, made choice of
Magdalen of France, Daughter of Charles VII. for his Wife: And that he died of
Poison at Prague, during the Solemnity of the Marriage: So that he had but
little time to make either his Virtues or his Vices to appear. However some
considerable passages did happen between the Death of Huniades, and that of the
King. The former having left two Sons, who being Imitators of the Virtues of
their Father, gave some kind of jealousy to Ladislaus, and to his Favorites
an extreme desire to be rid of them. These being envious of the Glory of
Huniades, prevailed with the King to cut off the Head of Ladislaus, his Eldest
Son, for killing the Count of Cilie in a duel, who had challenged him thereto.
At the same ^ime they clapped Mathias the younger Bro^her into a Prison; and not
able to en^ure the Children of that man, who had ^aved the Kingdom, they would
have ^ade his process, if the death of the King, and the Divine Providence who
designed ^im for the Crown, had not prevented it. ^his death, which happened in
the Year ^457, caused a mavelous change. Ma^^ias Corvinus, the Son of John
Huniades, ^^me from the Prison to the Throne, and ^^l the Enemies of his
Father's Honor, and his own merit, could not hinder this man of but a mean
condition, from being preferred before the whole House of Austria, Anno, 1458.


P. These effects of the Divine Providence are most admirable. But did he Reign
Gloriously?


G. Hungary has had few Kings comparable to Mathias Corvinus: He was ignorant
in nothing that befits a great Prince to know, and his Reign wa^ glorious both
in the times of Peace and of War. Diverse great Hungarian Lords, opposed his
Election, and after he wa^ chosen, they solicited the Emperor Frederick III.
to come and be Crowned, sinc^ he had the Crown of Hungary in his own power.
Some write that he did do so; and it is certain, he did not give up the Crown of
Hungary till six years afterward and that in exchange for threescore thousand
Ducats, which were carried him t^ Newstadt in Austria A while before thi^
restitution, some factious Heads offer'^ the Crown of Hungary, to Casimir, Son
o^ another Casimir King of Poland, who sen^ him with a numerous Army, upon the
Frontiers of Hungary. Mathias hastne^ to prevent the danger, and forced the
Polander to retire. These factions gav^ the Turk encouragement to undertake,
and the opportunity to make himself Master of Bosnia, Rascia, and a part of
Servia. But Mathias being Crowned, regained what had been lost, and reduced
Valachia and Transylvania to their obedience. This Success, and the example of
his Father, made Mathias prosecute the War against the Turk without
intermission; and doubtless he would have cut him out work enough, had he not
been diverted by the Emperor, and the Pope. This is apparently seen in the
Letters he wrote upon this Subject to the Electors of the Empire, and the
Cardinal of Arragon. In these Letters, he remonstrates to the first, that
whilst he was posted upon the River of Save, with intention to fight the
Infidels; he understood there was an Assembly held at Vienna, wherein they had
concluded to fall upon them. To the other he writes, that the Pope favored the
Venetians, who without any just cause had taken the Island of Valga from him;
and that to discredit him amongst his own, he would needs deprive him of the
power of conferring any Ecclesiastical Benefices in his own Kingdom.


P. There is small reason that either of those two Princes, whom it most nearly
concerns to have the Turk beaten out of Europe, should hinder those that are
drawing their Swords against him.


G. I am of the same mind with your self. But Peter de Reva, says that he
transcribed those papers out of the Originals, and adds some other particulars
far more incredible. He tells us in his fifth Century of his Hungarian
Monarchy, that the Emperor made a seizure of the moneys which the Nobility and
Clergy had raised to supply Mathias in the War he had undertaken against the
Turk, and that the Pope helped to drain his Country of Treasure, ordering
Collections to be there made for the Knights of Rhodes. All this did not hinder
Stephen Battory, and Paul Canisius, fighting under his auspicious Banner, from
defeating Halibek, leaving threescore thousand of his men dead upon the spot.
Nor himself from regaining Jaitza, and reducing Bosnia to his obedience,
fighting with his own hand. Notwithstanding he was forced to make a Truce with
Mahomet; and that Tyrant being dead, Anno 1481. he did his utmost to renew the
War to advantage. To which purpose he desired pass-ports for some Ambassadors
he intended to send to him, but could not obtain any. He also entreated the
Pope to let him have Zemini, the Son of Mahomet, that he might make use of him
against his Brother Bajazet, who was newly seated in the Turkish Throne, and he
refused it. This refusal was the more sensible, as being only upon the
consideration of a little Sum of money he must have lost, which Bajazet had
promised to pay him annually; whilst he obliged himself to confirm the same
Truce with Bajazet, as had been made with Mahomet his Father. Some time after,
these ssightings of the Emperor becoming insupportable to a man of his
generous Spirit, brought it to an open War. Which War proved so favorable to
Mathias, that having subdued the greatest part of Austria, and at length taken
Vienna and Newstadt, which are the chiefest Bulwarks; He likewise carried his
Arms against Bohemia, and made himself Master of the Provinces of Silesia and
Moravia. Then Casimir King of Poland, willing to have his share of the quarry,
came into Silesia with a powerful Army, and by the intercession of the Princes
of the Empire, these two Kings were brought to an agreement: So that, Mathias,
and Uladislaus the Son of King Casimir, might both bear the quality of King of
Bohemia: But Uladislaus was to enjoy the Electoral dignity solely, and as to
the Kingdom, Mathias to possess the Provinces of Moravia, Silesia and Lusatia,
redeemable after his death for four hundred thousand Crowns. Whilst Mathias was
thus employed in these Wars, the Turk brake the Truce and seized upon Killen,
and Nestar-Alba, which were then considerable Forts upon the River Danube. In
fine, Mathias, having reigned five years at Vienna, whilst they were treating
about the surrender of it, died there the Tuesday before Easter, in the Month
of March, 1450 His Body was conveyed to Alba-Regalis, where he was interred
amongst the rest of the Kings of Hungary.


P. It was but reasonable, that so Martial a Prince should dye in the Month of
March: But it was pity he did not employ his Valor against the common Enemy:
and I am sorry that such as should have pushed him on, did divert and hinder
him; But, who succeeded?


G. After the decause of Mathias Corvinus, who having no lawful Child, had
wished, they would choose for his Successor, John Huniades his Natural Son, the
Spirit of Division came amongst the Hungarians. Four Princes pretended to the
Kingdom, and the Grandees of Hungary, divided into four Cabals, did each of
them favor most that person, whom they esteemed most worthy of that honor.
John, the Son of the late King Mathias had the Suffrages of such, as revered in
him the eminent Virtues both of his Father and Grandfather; and who were more
desirous to obey a Native, than a Stranger. The others were of different
opinions: Some desired Albert Jagelon, youngest Son of the King of Poland, on
whom the Pope bestowed Arms, to fight against Uladislaus his other Son, who was
likewise one of the Competitors; the Father believing that Uladislaus ought to
be contented and fully satisfied with the Crown of Bohemia. In fine, some
inclined to Maximilian, Son of the Emperor Frederick, who was excluded from
the Kingdom of Hungary, because the faction that sided with Uladislaus Jagelon,
prevailed above his. During this interregnum, the Emperor recovered all that
Mathias Corvinus had taken from him in Austria; and at length Uladislaus
ascended the Throne. The beginning of this Reign was troublesome: Albert the
Brother of Uladislaus, assisted by the Brothers of Casimir King of Poland,
their Father, besieged Cassovia, the Capital of the upper Hungary, and gave him
much perplexity on that side. Blaisius Magger, Servant to John Corvinus, angry
his Master had been rejected, refused to give the Crown to the New King, which
he had in keeping at Vice-grade, endured a Siege, and did not surrender it,
till commanded so to do by Corvinus. Maximilian having regained his places in
Austria, advanced toward Hungary; and being assisted by those that had
favored him, during the interregnum, he made a considerable progress there. In
fine; Uladislaus, growing weary of so many disturbances, came to an agreement
with Maximilian, the Articles whereof were so odious to the Hungarians, that
Emericus Prini, Palatin of Hungary, caused it to be proclaimed thorough all the
Suburbs of the City of Presburg, that he did not consent to them, nor ever
would give his consent thereto. This generosity, however lasted not long: For
Prini; gained by Bribes, subscribed those Articles of Peace, which gave the
Crown of Hungary, to the House of Austria, in case Uladislaus should happen to
dye without Children. Thus was their distemper cured by a remedy odious to the
whole Kingdom, and this storm was followed by another. Albertus the Brother of
Uladislaus, seeing him seated on the Throne against his Will, did for the
second time besiege Cassovia: but thinking to take, himself was taken, and
forced to promise his Brother, that he would let him live in quiet. Shortly
after Ulad slaus married, and in three or four Years, he had Anne and Lewis who
are so famous in History. Anne was married to Ferdinand of Austria Grandson to
the Emperor Maximilian, who had diverse Children by her whose posterity Reigns
to this day in Germany and Hungary. The accidents of the birth, the life and
death of Lewis were extraordinary. He was born without a Skin: which made his
people believe he would be stripped of his Kingdom; He wore a beard at fifteen
years of age, and became gray at eighteen, which made every one guess his life
would be but short. He died in a Morass at M^^^at^, not being above twenty
years old; and his Kingdom fell most part of it under the power of the
Mahometans; which demonstrates, that those prodigies were but too true, as you
shall now hear. Uladislaus having no intention to make good what he had
promised to Maximilian of Austria, caused his Son Lewis to be Crowned at
Alba-Regalis, by Thomas Cardinal of Strigonia, Anno 1508. and the following
year caused him to be Crowned King of Bohemia at Prague, being as yet but three
years of Age. These things could not be done, without an extreme
dissatisfaction and disgust to the Emperor, but Uladislaus maintaining a Peace
with the Turk, and having a support from Poland, his Majesty was forced to
defer his resentment.


P. The greatest Calms are ordinarily followed by the greatest Tempests; and if
it were not so here, Uladislaus was more happy than he deserved.


G. Toward the latter end of Uladislaus his Life, and after the death of
Bajazet, Hungary begun to fall into a Civil War, which had like to have
destroyed it utterly. That King having a mind to attack Selim the Great Turk,
who had some disturbance at home, his Brother Achmet contending with him for
the Crown. He communicated his project to Pope Julius I.

The Pope approved of it, and promised to contribute to it; but prevented by
death, he left the care thereof to his Successors. In the mean while Uladislaus
bethought himself, and renewed the Truce with Selim which he had formerly made
with his Father Bajazet. This Truce distasted those that longed for a War: and
soon after, the Cardinal Thomas, Legate of the Roman See, joined the people of
Hungary, with the Nobility in a Crusado, desiring to attaque the Turk with the
utmost vigor. Then the meaner sort of people, who till that instant had been
treated with severity enough, imagining the Season to recover their liberty was
now come, turned their weapons against the Nobility. This multitude grown
insolent by their numbers, elected George Sekel for their King, who was
General. And this man having done much mischief, went and laid Siege to
Themiswar, where his Army was defeated, and both he, and his Brother taken
Prisoners, by John Zapoliha, Vaivode of Transylvania. This action of Zopoliha's
gave him so much reputation; that King Uladislaus was despised, and they talked
of setting him up in his stead. But Uladislaus prevented them by his death,
which happened Anno 1516.


P. That which you tell me of the Hungarians makes me find, that they have a
great deal of affection and respect for their King, if he be valiant, and that
they would willingly change him for another when he is not so.


G. A Warlike People do gladly see their Kings on Horseback, when any occasion
requires it for the defense of their Country: And although experience teaches
us, that the safety and life of a King, is the preservation of the Kingdom, yet
they love to see them at the Head of their Armies. The Hungarians have reason
notwithstanding to be of another mind, for History will discover, what an
addition of misfortune it is to lose their King, when they lose a Battle. Lewis
I. having succeeded to Uladislaus his Father in his tender youth, was despised
by Sultan Solomon, who knowing his weakness, and the divisions that were then
on foot betwixt the great ones in Christendom, thought it was then the only
time to subdue Hungary. To this purpose, he made Peace with the Persian, and
attacked Lewis with all his Forces. This young King, finding himself alone
incapable to resist so potent an Enemy, desired the other Christian Princes to
send him aid; and not suffer the Bullwark of Chistendom to fall into the hands
of the common Enemies of their Faith. His prayers were in vain, while
Christendom was tearing it self in pieces; and Lewis was obliged to take the
Field in his own defense, before he had gotten all his own Forces together. The
Turk had already past the Save, and the Drove, when meeting the Hungarians in
small numbers, and ill provided of a General, he easily defeated them; and so
entirely, that the King, and the greater part of those that followed him,
perished in the Battle, or in their Flight.


P. I have heard say, that two and twenty thousand Christians died in that
Battle, and that besides the Horses for service, five thousand Wagons,
fourscore pieces of great Cannon, and six hundred lesser ones, with all their
equipage, fell into the Victor's hands.


G. The loss of the Battle was but a small matter, in comparison of what did
follow. The Turk took, and slew in Hungary, above two hundred thousand persons:
He set his foot so far within the Country, that they could never drive him out
thence; and at this time, we find how difficult a matter it is to wrest any
considerable post out of his hands. So that we may well set a mark upon the 29.
day of August in 1526, as one of the most fatal, that ever afflicted
Christendom. This King died without Children, and his want of issue strenghtned
the right and pretensions the House of Austria had to possess the Crown of
Hungary. However they found the Hungarians but little inclined to favor them.
John Zapoliha Count of Sebusa, Vayvode of Transylvania, who came too late to
defend the Crown, thought he was come time enough to put it upon his own head.
He had for a long while employed his money, and used all his industry to gain
the affections of the whole Kingdom; and by the defeat of George Sekel, and of
the populace who had made him their King, a little before, he had made some
steps, and opened his way toward the Throne. Finding himself therefore in a
condition that might justly make him hope for it, he prayed, and exhorted the
Grandees, each in particular, not to suffer the Right of Election they had to
fall, but to take generous resolutions in the following Diet. He represents to
them that Hungary was never very fortunate under the command of a Stranger.
That Sigismund the Bohemian, and Uladislaus the Polander, had made it most
apparent, by their defeats, at Nicopolis, at Colembat and at Varna, that
Strangers rule but very unsuccesfully in this Kingdom. He endeavored to make
them believe, that if possible a Stranger could reign gloriously in Hungary,
yet it were better much to have a King of their own Nation. That diverse people,
and the best governed in Europe, exclude the Women from the Crown, for fear
lest it should pass into the hands of Strangers. That the Hungarian Nobility
were not so degenerated, but that they might find some heads amongst them
worthy to wear a Crown; and although he were none of the most deserving, yet he
presumed himself was not incapable either to Govern a great Kingdom, or to
defend this with his Sword.


P. There are few Nations but do abhor the Dominion of a Stranger. But what did
the Hungarians resolve?


G. The advice, and the merits of Zapoliha, touched the greater part of the
Hungarian Nobles so home, that they put the reins of the Government into his
hands, and caused him to be Crowned by Paul de Verda Archbishop of Strigonia,
upon St. Martin's day in 1526. But as that miserable Kingdom was running to its
own ruin; Stephen Battory, and some other Grandees, who with an envious Eye
beheld the fortune of Zapoliha, sided with Ferdinand of Austria, and supported
his interest. That Prince strengthened by hi^ new Kingdom of Bohemia, by the
victorious Army of the Emperor Charles V. hi^ Brother, by his Marriage with
Anne, the Sister-German of the late King; by the pretensions which Ladislaus,
Son of the Emperor Albertus I. had left his House, an^ the Hungarian Lords who
followed hi^ party, believed that Hungary could no^ escape him. In effect,
Ferdinand assiste^ by his Friends, and by his Right, wa^ declared King, took
the Field, and knowing there is no better way to destroy an^ living Creature,
than by striking it t^ the heart, he marched directly to B^^^ the Capital City
of the Kingdom. Kin^ John, amazed at this attempt, quitte^ that place,
Ferdinand seized on it, an^ soon after beat his Adversarie's Arm^ and drove him
quite out of the Kingdom These fortunate proceedings were inte^rupted by the
Turk, who regained J^^itza, the Capital of Bosnia, which ha^ been taken by
Mathias Corvinus, wi^^ extraordinary Valor. This loss, a^^ the retreat of King
John, made Ferdinand guess, he was not yet at the end of his race; but that
John, and Solomon would cut him out a great deal of Work


P. I would fain know, whither that dethroned King retired, and what he did to
recover his Kingdom?


G. The poor King, finding he was defeated by the revolting of his own men, and
the Emperor's Forces, betook himself to his last shifts and refuge; He
withdrew into Poland, to Jeremy Lascus, the Palatine of Siradia, a Person
illustrious both for his birth and virtue. Lascus over^oy'd to have such a
guest, offered him ^ll that was in his power, and having ^ften considered of
the most probable ways to restore him, he advised him to ^ave his recourse to
Solomon the Grand ^eignior. And forasmuch as those that ^ive the Council, ought
to be the most ^orward to put it in execution; he under^ook to go to
Constantinople, with a Letter ^^om Sigismund King of Poland. This ^^eat man,
who had formerly been an ^mbassador at the Port, soon made it ^^ident he knew
how to negotiate. He ^uickly by his presents gained Ibrahim ^^e Prime Vizier,
Lustibey and Lewis ^^itti, who were in favor with the Turkish Sultan. These
being instructed by the prudent directions of Lascus, easily persuaded the
Grand Seignior, that it would be both honorable and advantageous to him, to
take a wronged King into his protection, and to restore him to his Throne. In
the mean time Ferdinand, who apprehended the practices that Lascus was managing
at the Port, sent thither John Oberdans, a Hungarian Lord, to desire the Amity
of Solomon, and to demand the restitution of all that he had taken in Hungary,
since the death of Lewis II. This demand offended Solomon, who replied, that
the Ottomans did never allow of any amity to those who had offended them: That
Ferdinand was mistaken in asking it, after his having invaded a Kingdom to
which he had no pretense; that he thought him unworthy of what he desired, and
that he would revenge the injury he had newly done him. Upon this, he commanded
Oberdans forthwith to leave Constantinople, and tell his Master, that he
declared War against him, and that he would come to meet him in Hungary,
bringing himself the Keys of those City he demanded.


P. The Turk talked big, and if the effects were answerable, he must needs have
made King Ferdinand repent his having disturbed the repose of Zapoliha.


G. Solomon could not do all he would, but desiring to make good his promise,
he took the Field with a dreadful Army, and marched toward Hungary in the
Spring. King John being advertised of his approach, went to receive him at
Belgrade, accompanied by Lascus, and the bravest Troops of the Hungarian
Nobility, he could possibly draw together, and in the presence of them all,
acknowledged him for his Lord. There it was, that the Sultan rising a little
from his Seat, gave him his hand, assured him, that nothing could be more
delightful to him than to relieve the afflicted, who were unjustly persecuted
by their Enemies; commanded him to be of good courage, and said, he would
restore to him all that he could recover from his adversary. These promises
were confirmed by a most solemn oath, with a great deal of pomp, after the
manner of those Infidels, who ever do appear in all their actions more than in
reality they are. In fine, all things being thus in readiness, Solomon advanced
to Buda, and easily took it, the German Garrison having abandoned it, and
compelled Thomas Nadasdy, to surrender the Castle, whereof he was Governor.
This Victory gave the Sultan an opportunity to restore King John to his Crown;
and he did so. Then overrunning all that durst oppose him, he went and laid
Siege to Vienna. There it was, that Solyman's fortune Shipwrack'd. He battered
and assaulted the place, with all the fury, and all the skill imaginable: But
if the one bravely attaqued, the other as stoutly defended. Philip, the
victorious Prince Palatine of the Rheine, and Nicholas Count of Salines, forced
him to retire with shame, and to confess, that to take Vienna, a Man must be
very well provided, and have a good headpiece on.


P. That place is the mark the Ottomans have aimed at for above a whole Age:
they believe that by taking the Imperial Seat of the Western Empire, they
should cut off that head of the Roman Eagle yet remaining. But since he fled,
rather than retreated, and was shaded with Cypress, not Crowned with Laurel,
let us follow him, and know what he did upon his going off.


G. All that he did, being nothing to our purpose, I shall omit his cruelties,
and the horrible tokens of his indignation, which he left behind him. It is
sufficient you should know, that being arrived at Buda, he caused all the Regal
Ornaments to be brought forth, and said to King John in the presence of a
multitude of Hungarian and Turkish Lords. Brother, and Friend, since after God,
thou have had recourse to me, in thy time of Calamity; I have been gladly
willing to favor and assist thee; and have so contrived it, that thou art
Master of thy Kingdom; now I resign into thy hands, the City and Castle of
Buda, together with all the rest of Hungary, whereof I declare thee King. Then
turning toward the Grandees of Hungary, he said to them: I command you to be
faithful, and obedient to your King, here present. If you do this, I shall be
your Friend, and if not, my Cymiter shall destroy you. And thou, O King, my
Friend, remember the good thou have now received from God, and my self. Thou
have the Crown, which thy self, and thy Successors may happily enjoy, if you
persevere in my amity, and the respect you owe me. Having said thus, he left
Lewis Gritti with him, (...) whom Andreas, since Duke of Venice, had ^egotten
on a Greek Concubine) with some Cavalry, and retired toward Constantino^le.


P. It Is a wonder, that Solomon, who came off so scurvily in Austria, did not,
to repair his loss, retain Hungary for himself. For I have heard it affirmed,
that the Turk takes little heed to keep his promise.


G. Solomon did like those that break young Horses, he made use of this
mildness to allure the Hungarians, and gave up to John that which he believed
he was not able to hold. Then King John, having good reason to fear the Turk
would be weary of assisting him, and finding his affairs in an ill posture,
sent the same Lascus to Vienna whom he had employed at the Port. This great Man
obtained a truce for a year; during which the two Kings came to an agreement,
which somewhat took off the edge of the former bitterness betwixt them. By this
agreement John was to enjoy the Kingdom of Hungary till his death; and
Ferdinand, or one of his Sons was to succeed him. And because it was not
impossible but John might leave some Children, it was said, that if he had a
Son, that Son should possess all the Lands, Cities and Castles, that belonged
to John, before he was King of Hungary. And moreover, besides the things
abovementioned, he should be Prince of Transylvania. This Treaty was ill
observed. Ferdinand caused Transylvania to be attaqued by Balthazar Banfy;
Sclavonia, by John Coeranerus, and the Province of Sebusa, by Leonard Baron of
Veltz. All these attempts proved vain, by the prudence of King John, and the
valor of the Monk George Martinusias his Favorite. And for this cause, they
came to another agreement. The Calm which this King enjoyed after that Tempest
was blown over, gave him leisure to think of his marriage. To this and he sent
unto Sigismond King of Poland, to demand Isabella, or Elizabeth, his Daughter;
and having obtained her, his Nuptials, and the Coronation of the Queen were
made with great Solemnities.


P. I believe Ferdinand did not willingly see this Marriage, whence might
proceed the continuation of his troubles, and a new opposition to his Right;
nor that Solomon approved of the accord, which John made with Ferdinand,
unknown to him, or at least without his assent. And I think he had reason, for
the Vassal cannot innovate any thing in what he acknowledges to be in Fief,
without the consent of his Sovereign.


G. In this affair, King John was like unto him that holds a Wolf by the Ears:
He found there was as much cause of fear on the behalf of Solomon, as from his
competitor to the Kingdom; and he thought he might have better hopes in a
Christian Prince, than from an Infidel. Yet so it fell out, that in the end,
his Successors submitted to the Turk, to preserve part of their Dignity: as we
are going to see. Some while after the Marriage of King John, Stephen Maillats,
and some others, took up Arms against him, in behalf of Ferdinand. Then John
willing to extinguish the Fire, before it grew to a greater head, left the
Queen at Buda, and went into Transylvania; where he freely pardoned those that
confessed and were sorry for their faults; which Clemency caused many to return
to their Duty. But Mailats retired to the strong Castle of Pogaras, to wait for
the assistance that Ferdinand was sending to him, under the conduct of Nadasdy.
The King besieged him there, and took it after a long Siege. In the mean time a
Couriere comes, who brings him News of the Birth of a Son, whom God had sent
him. Such News being very pleasing to those that have no Children, and
especially to people advanced in years, we may imagine that King John received
it with great joy. This invited him to drink to some excess, after the
Hungarian fashion. And that excess increasing some distemper he had, he died at
Sassebes, a few days after the Birth of his Son, in the 53. year of his Age.
His death was concealed, as much as it was possible; but at length it was made
public with the tenor of his Will and Testament. By it, the King declared his
Son the universal Heir of all his Estate: and George Martinisius Tutor to the
said Prince. Some days before he died, the King had exhorted the Hungarian
Nobility to have a regard to the honor of the Nation, and to prefer his Son
before any other when they came to elect a King: assuring them that the Turk
would take care to protect him, if they had recourse to his Arms. The prayers
and request of a dying King, and the fear and aversion the Hungarians had of
submitting to a stranger, obliged some to set the Crown upon the Infants Head
on the day he was Baptized, and to send to the Port, to demand assistance of
Solomon.


P. The Kingdom of Hungary is very unhappy, yet has suffered no more than it
have deserved. It is a most shameful thing, that a Christian King upon his
deathbed, should exhort his Subjects to apply themselves to the Turk, to free
his posterity from the obligation himself had imposed upon them by a Sacred
Oath. It is great want of prudence and policy to Crown an Infant, when it must
make him become the object of the anger and envy of a potent Prince his next
neighbor. It is an unsufferable impiety, to call upon an Infidel for aid,
before it is known, whether the person we suspect and fear, will exceed the
bounds of reason in his demands. The Hungarians had lived more at ease, would
they but have made good those promises their Kings had engaged them to perform,
and the Turk had been confined within much narrower bounds; if the house of
Austria had not been obstructed in their just pretensions.


G. When a Country is to be lost, every thing contributes toward its ruin.
Those Kingdoms that have changed their Masters have been the chief contrivers
of their own misfortunes. Hungary was become so depraved, that every one
gloried in his inconstancy and treachery: But let us resume the third of our
discourse, and draw nearer to our own times. King Ferdinand, being informed of
the death of his adversary, sent Nicholas Count of Salmes to the Widow, to
desire she would make good the treaty agreed upon betwixt her Husband, and him:
to submit to that by reason, which otherwise she would be compelled to do by
force: that she and her Son, would find more advantage in acquiescing to what
had been promised by the late King, with mature deliberation, than by drawing
the miseries of an obstinate and bloody War upon the Kingdom of Hungary. That
he was ready to make good his engagements, and use her with a more than
ordinary clemency and kindness. The Queen answered the Count, that her Sex, her
Age, and her Grief, rendered her incapable of resolving on an affair of so great
importance, without taking the advice of her Father the King of Poland; that
she desired that Ferdinand would allow her some months for these reasons; that
the Emperor Charles, or himself could not in honor attaque a Woman drowned in
Tears, and an Infant rocked in his Cradle. This answer displeased Ferdinand,
who sent Leonard Baron of Velts with an Army, to compel her to obey. The Queen
finding her self in this extremity, dispatched some Ambassadors to the Port.
These were very well received by Solomon, and brought thence a Scarlet Robe
embroidered; an iron Scepter with a handle and pomel of Gold, and a Cymiter,
whose Scabberd was set with precious Stones, as tokens of his amity, and
protection. At the same time, the Sultan commanded the Governors of all the
neighboring places to take the Field without delay to assist that Queen.
Lascus, who was gone over to serve Ferdinand, and who at that instant was his
Ambassador at Constantinople, demanded the Kingdom of Hungary of the Turk, upon
the conditions he had formerly given it to John Zapoliha. This demand distasted
the Tyrant, who put the Ambassador into Prison; saying he deserved to die, for
daring to scoff and affront his Highness in that manner. Solomon therefore
denying Ferdinand's request, and sending succors to Queen Elizabeth, Hungary
became the Theater of many and most horrible confusions. The Germans, the
Turks, and the Hungarians spilt much blood there: Rogendorf, the new General of
Ferdinand's forces, besieged Buda. This Siege put Solomon into a rage, and on
his march to relieve it. However he might have spared his labor, for his
forces had raised the Siege before his arrival. And Rogendorf having lost
twenty thousand men there, saved himself by flight. Solomon notwithstanding
pursued his Voyage, and being come near the City, sent some presents to the
young King; But soon after desiring to make him pay for his visit and charges,
he sent to entreat the Queen to let him see her Son, assuring her it was only
to oblige his Children to love him the better. At the same time, the Deputies
had order to tell her, that if he did not visit her, it was for fear lest it
might stain her Reputation. The Queen thanked the Grand Seignior for his
civility and care, and doubting whether she were best to send her Son, or not
send him, George Martinisius told her, she could not refuse it. Overcome
therefore by necessity, she laid him in a Cradle worthy of such a Child; and
having commanded the Nurse, and some other Matrons, together with diverse
Hungarian Lords to attend him, she sent him to the Camp; Solomon to show the
greater respect and honor, caused them to be received by a party of Horse, saw
the Infant, and caused it to be caressed by his Children. And at the same time,
seized upon one of the Gates of Buda, whence his Troops got into all the
streets and places of the Town. That done, he commanded the Burghers to
surrender their Arms, if they would save their lives; which was performed
without any disturbance Then Solomon sent back the young Prince to his Mother,
and detained those Grandees who came with him. The Queen finding her City and
her Officers under the power of the Turk, she weeps, and entreats; But neither
her prayers, nor her tears could hinder Solomon from consulting whether he
should detain the Kingdom of Hungary, or restore it to the young King.


P. The Turk is so absolute and so formidable to his own Subjects, that I dare
assure my self, that in his Council every one speaks according to the humor
and inclinations of the Prince.


G. It was not so here, for their opinions were debated: and the Grand Seignior
did not follow the most unreasonable. Mahomet and Ustrephy were of opinion,
that Solomon should carry the young King, and the chief Hungarians to
Constantinople, and place a Governor at Buda, who using moderation, might by
insensible degrees accustom those Libertines to bear the Ottoman yoke; and in
the mean time suffer them to enjoy their estates and liberty. Rostan Son-in-law
to Solomon, gave him more honorable advice, persuading him to keep the Faith
he was engaged to; it being impossible to do otherwise without staining his
Reputation and Credit. Jahaoglis, Bassa of Belgrade, laying aside all that is
humane or decent, endeavored to persuade Solomon to reduce Hungary into a
Province, and free himself from the necessity of coming thither so often, to
the relief of a Woman, and an Infant. He represented to him, that they could
never be able to resist the German Forces, but by his Highnesses help; and by
consequence his trouble would be eternal. He said, it ought to be remembered,
that within twenty years space, Solomon had been forced to come five times into
Hungaria Panonia, at vast expenses, and not without great danger to his Person;
The first, to reduce the City of Belgrade, which in those days was a mere nest
of Thieves. The second to revenge an affront upon his Ambassadors, to whom he
sacrificed King Lewis; and then by a prodigality beyond all example, he
bestowed the Kingdom of Hungary upon a Person, no way considerable, but for the
mischief he had done to the Ottoman Forces. The third, to succor the same King
against Ferdinand of Austria, who molested him, when at the same time he
disturbed all Germany, by the Siege of Vienna, and those incursions, which
brought sixty thousand Christians into slavery. The fourth, because that
retreat of Solyman's, having given the same Ferdinand the confidence and
assurance to attaque King John, and the hopes of subduing his Kingdom, he was
forced to come and help him: and the fifth for the affairs now before them, and
which we have above related. This Bassa, who had been present in all those
expeditions, exaggerated the inconveniences Solomon had undergone; the great
Men he had lost, and the necessity that would oblige him to neglect his other
affairs, to look after this only. Whence he concluded, that since War ought not
to be made, but to procure peace and quiet, the Sultan, his Master, ought to
reduce that Kingdom into a Province, which he had so often gained, and
defended; send back the Queen, to Sigismund her Father King of Poland; take the
Infant Prince along with him to Constantinople, to be brought up in the
Mohammedan Law: slay all the Grandees of the Kingdom; demolish their forts and
strong holds; transport part of their Families into Asia: and keep the rest in
awe and subjection by sufficient Garrisons.


P. This last spoke like a true Turk, for that race are very cruel, and sworn
Enemies to those of the Christian Faith.


G. Jahaoglis said nothing, but what Solomon was well able to do, and which
many of his Predecessors would have done upon the like occasion. He resolved
however to use greater moderation. He left a Garrison in Buda, entreating the
Queen to allow of what he did, and to retire with her Son to Lippa, where she
should Reign in Transylvania bordering upon the King of Poland, her Fathers
Territories. And having assured her of the affection he would still have
toward her Son, he caused her to be conveyed by some of his own Guards, and
gave her Wagons, and Beasts of burden; that she might conveniently, and
without further danger, carry such goods along with her, as were her own. The
Queen finding the necessity for her departure, endeavored to make them
believe, she willingly quitted that place, she could not hold. Some of her
Grandees followed her with much joy, as being delivered out of Prison. And the
Transilvanians swore fealty to the young Prince, by the consent of the Turk.
And remembering how King John had mildly governed them near upon thirty years,
they promised to be obedient to his Son without compulsion. The affairs of the
Hungarians being in this posture, as we have told you, King Ferdinand, who
stood in fear of Solomon, would needs endeavor to appease him; and to that
purpose sent him some presents, worthy both of him that gave them, and he who
was to receive them. Amongst other rarities there was, a Gold Gobblet enriched
with precious Stones, and a Silver Clock of a wonderful fabric and artifice:
The Body of it was a Globe, which had adorned the Closet of his Grandfather
Maximilian, and showed not only the hours of the day but the motions of the
Planets, the distances of the Sun and Moon, imitating the great Machine of the
World, as much as art could make it; and all these would go on for a whole year
together, with once winding up.


P. Did these presents work any good effect? Did they obtain that tranquillity
which Ferdinand desired?


G. The Globe did please the Sultan extremely, he being well skilled in
Astronomy; yet did not oblige him to any civility. Ferdinand's Amhassadors
demanded the Kingdom of Hungary of the Turk, upon the same conditions he had
formerly granted it to John Zapoliha; which was honorable to Solomon, and
beneficial to the State. There was all the probability imaginable he would
condescend to it. Yet this was the answer they received by the mouth of Rostan,
That his Highness would grant a Peace to their Master, if he would surrender
all the places that had belonged to King Lewis I. If he would not approach near
the Frontiers of Hungary: If he would oblige the House of Austria to pay him
such Tribute, as he would impose, to preserve the honor of his Ottoman Majesty;
that the said Tribute should be but small in ^omparison of the great trouble he
had been at, and the immense charges in his War; And ^f these conditions
appeared harsh to Ferdi^and, he would employ all his Forces to com^ell him to
this very thing. Upon this an^wer Solomon retired to Constantinople, after he
had ransacked some Provinces. This haughty comportment of Solyman's, was at
Vienna interpreted as a Declarati^n of War; wherefore King Ferdinand ^ade
choice of three Generals to oppose his dreadful Enemy, and solicited George
Martinisius, who refused not to ^erve him. This Monk, whom King John ^ad made
choice of to be Tutor to his Son, Principal Minister of State, and controller
of his Treasury, desiring to tyrannize over his Master, and the Queen his
Mother, had always several strings to his bow. And whatever he promised either
to the Queen, the Sultan, or the King of the Romans, it was but to make use of
the one against the other for his own ends; and himself to reign absolutely by
such policies. The ambition of this little Gentleman, who from a mean and
despicable domestic Servan^ of John Zapoliha's Mother was become a Monk; and
from an ignorant Monk, a Servant to King John, Bishop of Varadin, and Prime
Minister of State; who could endure no rival, which made the Queen
apprehensive, that he would make her unfortunate, and dethrone her Son. These
fears of the Queens, made her represen^ to Solomon, how that Martinisius had
demanded aid of Ferdinand King of the Romans, to compass the designs he ha^ to
reign himself, by the oppression, an^ perhaps by the death of her Son.
Martinisius, on the contrary represents to Fe^dinand, how he being infinitely
oblige^ to the late King, could do no less tha^ endeavor to procure the Son
all the advantages, all the honor, and all the happiness he was able. But that
his qu^lity of Prelate, did yet much more engage and bind him, to the
preservation of Christianity; that he had to do with a timorous Woman, who upon
the least cause of suspicion, implored help of the Turk; and that Transylvania
must infallibly fall into the hands of the Infidels, if they did not take away
the Government from her. To this purpose he besought King-Ferdinand to force
her to give up her right for some compensation, and judged it necessary, that
they should offer to the Son, the same advantages that had been promised to the
Father. Ferdinand who well knew Martinisius, did not doubt but that he would
deceive him, however he resolved to reap some profit by the Monk's artifice. He
applauded his Zeal, and having conjured him to persist in his worthy
undertakings; he sends him some pieces of Cannon, and a thousand Horse, with
their whole pay for four Months service. Things being therefore in a posture of
change, every one endeavored to make his best of this juncture. Ferdinand
informs the Emperor his Brother of all that happened, and of the hopes he had of
making some considerable advantage, if he pleased but to assist him with his
Counsel, and his Forces. The Emperor relished the proposition King Ferdinand
made, and sent John Baptista Castaldo, a Spaniard, to him, a Person both wise
and valiant; to whom was committed the management of their design. Queen
Isabella of Jagelon, who knew and feared the practices of Martinisius, called
together the States of the Country, to gain the good Will of the Grandees,
believing by this means both her Son and her self might be preserved in their
right and power. Martinisius apprehending lest the Assembly should take some
resolutions against him, went to Agnabet, where the Diet was assembled,
dissolved it, and forced the Queen to retire to Alba-Julia, and began a War
against his Master. During these occurrences Castaldo arrived at Claudiopolis,
called by the Hungarians Colesvar, and the Germans Clausemburgh; whence
following his instructions, he desired Martinisius to make good what he had
promised to the King of the Romans. Then that Prelate, knowing the Queen stood
in fear of him, went to her, told her her faults, and exhorted her to make some
agreement with Ferdinand, to which she consented. To this purpose the Estates
were convocated at Claudiopolis: Where Castaldo produced the Commission he had
to treat with the Queen; he showed them how the Queen and her Son, were unable
to defend Transylvania against the Turk, and that for the greater benefit of
Christendom, it would be very necessary they should make it over to Ferdinand.
And that both she and her Son might be compensated. He promised to John
Sigismund the Dutchies of Opelen, and Ratibor, which yielded five and twenty
thousand Ducats yearly; that he should have in Marriage with the Princess Jane,
the Daughter of Ferdinand, a hundred thousand Crowns for a portion; and the
Queen his Mother should receive for her own use fifty thousand Crowns, together
with the payment of all her debts.


P. Methinks, that in consideration of all Transylvania, this compensation is
but small. Yet when we weigh the advantage, of being delivered from the
necessity of maintaining a War against the Turk, or against the House of
Austria, then it appears great. And besides the Queens Sex, and the Infancy of
her Son made them incapable thereof: But did the Queen accept of these proffers?


G. This courageous and prudent Princess, desiring to throw off the yoke which
Martinisius was putting on her Neck, acquiesc'd in the King's desires, and
immediately deposited the Regal Ornaments into the hands of Castaldo. That
done, she entreated the Spanish Don, to prevail so far with his Master that
what had been promised her, might be forthwith accomplished; and retired to
Cassovia, which was allotted for her retreat, until the whole treaty were fully
executed. Castaldo, having the Crown of Hungary, believed they ought to own his
Master for King: And for that reason, he desired the Grandees of Transylvania
to take the Oaths of Fidelity to King Ferdinand. They did so without any more
dispute, after George Martinisius had led the way, who by this Treaty had
gotten the Archbishopric of Strigonia, and a Cardinals Cap, which were
procured him by the said King of the Romans. Things being in this posture, each
prepared themselves for War: The Hungarians knew full well, the Turk would
never without a resentment suffer a Province which owned him for Sovereign, to
pass into other hand^ without his leave. In effect he entre^ Transylvania, but
succeeded little in hi^ affairs so long as Martinisius lived, or that the Queen
had hopes they would make good the agreement that had been made with her. As to
what concerns Martinisius, you must observe, that desiring to serve the
Christians, without too much exasperating the Turk against him, he saved
Ulambey whom they could have cut in pieces upon the surrender of Lippa: and
received into his Castle of Vivaria the person that gathered the Tribute which
the Transilvanians paid to Solomon. These actions cost him his life; For
Castaldo mistrusting him, caused him to be stabbed by Mark Antonio Ferrero his
Secretary, who by reason of his employment had constant access to him. Solomon
being informed of the death of Martinisius, and the Oath the Transilvanians had
made to King Ferdinand, commanded Stephen Prince of Moldavia, Governor of
Buda, and the neighboring Countries thereabouts, to take up Arms and attack
them. This command was no sooner given by the Port, but they felt the effects.
And Transylvania had reason to say, that the death of a Tyrant had not
delivered them from slavery. In the mean while Queen Elizabeth, not being able
to obtain the effect of what had been promised her, did again beseech the
Sultan to have pity on her Son. Solomon moved either with the tears of the poor
Queen, or his own interest, assisted her powerfully, and reduced the
Transilvanians to the necessity of importuning Ferdinand to permit them to
treat with the Turk in the behalf and favor of John Sigismund. Ferdinand
consented, though somewhat against his will; and they obtained the same
kindness that had been granted to John Zapoliha, his Father; upon the
submission, acknowledgment and tribute Solomon should impose. This happened in
the year 1551. The Queen having re-entred upon her Estate, Sigismund Augustus
King of Poland her Brother, was the Mediator in another Treaty between King
Ferdinand and her. By this Treaty, the Queen obtained more advantageous
conditions than before. Her Son was to marry Jane the Daughter of Ferdinand,
and hold in Sovereignty to him and his heirs to perpetuity all Transylvania,
the Countries of Abavivar, Murant, Huszth, Marmet, and part of the revenue of
the Lands of Beregh and Ugacha.


P. I do not think one can name many Countries, that have so often changed
Masters as Transylvania, nor do I know whether I ought presently to believe
that a King of the Romans, brother of the greatest Emperor that ever reigned
in Germany, and Father of many Children, could resolve to lay down that
Sovereignty he had gained, partly by consent, partly by force.


G. I know great Princes do very unwillingly resign what they have once
acquired, nevertheless it is certain that Ferdinand did make the surrender I
have told you of, and allowed John Sigismund to do whatever he pleased in
Transylvania, excepting the assuming the title of a King: They went farther
yet, and that Transilvanian supported by the Turkish Forces, demanded that the
Danube might divide the Estate of Hungary from that of Transylvania; and that
upon default of Males in the House of Austria, his descendents might succeed in
the Kingdom of Hungary. This demand vexed Ferdinand, who took up Arms, and
forced the Transilvanian to let the Tibiscus limit his Territory. This
agreement displeased John Sigismund, (or the Turk, who made him stickle, as not
being able to do it himself, by reason of a truce he had made for eight years.)
Wherefore the Transilvanian declared War against the Emperor Maximilian I. who
lately succeeded Ferdinand his Father: took from him Zachwar, Hudad and Corazo;
and had taken Cassovia, had not the severity of the season hindered him. However
these Voctories lasted not long, for Maximilian finding himself wronged, caused
him to be assaulted briskly, recovered what he had gained, and forced him to a
Peace. But Solomon being returned from Malta, where he miscarried in his
affairs, renewed the War in Hungary, where he died, having besieged Zigeth,
which surrendered to the Bassa Mustapha, his Lieutenant General, the 7th. of
September 1566. Selim, who succeeded his Father, agreed upon a truce for eight
years with the Hungarians, and included the Transilvanian, who upon the
recommendation of Sigismund Augustus King of Poland his Uncle, added to his
demeasn some Lands which the Emperor yielded to him, and the City of Guyla,
which he bought of the Turk, Anno 1568. The Transilvanian then finding that the
War was advantageous to him, endeavored to corrupt diverse Hungarians, that he
might carry his Arms into Hungary with success. This design however had not its
effect, for he died in the year 1570. being not yet three and thirty years of
Age, and in him was extinguished the race of Zapoliha. He had taken care to
make choice of Gasper Bekez, for his Successor: But he was rejected by the
Grandees of the Country, who put Stephen Battory into his place the 24th. of
May 1571. This Prince owned the Turk, as his Predecessor had done; and having
been elected King of Poland, after the retreat of Henry of Valois, he made it
appear that Fortune and Virtue are not incompatible. This man in a short
compass of time was first a Baron, then a Prince, and now a King, and most of
all these degrees: Stephen being thus elected King of Poland, gave up
Transylvania to Christopher Battory his Brother, who not having the favor of
the House of Austria, because his Brother had been preferred before Maximilian
II. he was constrained to seek for support at Constantinople. This Prince was
very virtuous, and having quelled the bold Bekez, who oft-times endeavored to
supplant him; he reigned gloriously to his death, which laid him in the grave,
Anno 1581. Sigismund his Son, succeeded him, being yet a Child. And King
Stephen Battory, his Uncle, having allotted him three Tutors, it bred such a
jealousy betwixt them, that he was forced to set them all aside, and put both
the Person and Affairs of his Nephew into the hands and trust of John Geczy
Governor of Varadin. This was a man of great worth, who soon gave sufficient
proof that he had as much courage, as conduct: Scarce had he taken in hand the
management of his Pupil's affairs, when King Stephen died, Anno 1586. Then the
factions that arose in Poland about the election of a King, gave him
opportunity to make his worth appear. He joined his forces with those of
Samoisky, who favored Sigismund of Sweden against Maximilian of Austria his
Competitor; who was beaten, taken, and compelled to quit his pretensions to the
Swede. At the same time, the Turk made a rude War in Hungary, against the
Emperor Rodolphus II. And though his Majesty had brave Officers, who made the
Sultan purchase the Victories he obtained very dearly: yet in Anno 1595. Sinan
Lieutenant General for Selim, reduced the admirable fortress of Javarin to
obedience, which had till then been esteemed impregnable.


P. It Is said, that Sinan bragged he had reduced the Emperor Rodolphus to the
necessity of demanding a Peace, by the loss of that wonderful and important
place. Yet Sansovinus affirms, he lost fifty thousand men there, and that the
War soon after began with more heat than ever.


G. The Emperor had too much courage to ask for Peace, upon such a loss. He
knew that could not but be very disadvantageous, and for that very reason, he
was resolved to carry on the War. To this end, he desired assistance of every
one that was able to afford it; and drew Sigismund Battory, Prince of
Transylvania, to his party. This Lord suffered himself easily to be engaged in
this noble design, because he had courage, and because he thought it scandalous
in a Christian to favor those that aimed only at the utter destruction of
Christianity. He made an agreement, therefore with the Emperor, the chief
Articles whereof were; That Sigismund taking up Arms against the Turk, the
Emperor should be obliged not to make any peace, but by the joint consent of
the Transilvanian; and if it came to that, the Principalities of Valachia,
Moldavia and Transylvania, should be comprehended; that he should enjoy the
title, the honor and the prerogative of a Prince of the Empire; that they
should assign him an honorable rank amongst them; that the Emperor should
bestow a Princess of the House and Blood of Austria upon him; so long as the
present War should last, he should annually furnish him with an hundred
thousand Florins of the Rhine, which are worth four hundred thousand French
Livers, and should maintain a good body of German Horse and Foot for him; that
all such places as he could gain by the Sword should remain in propriety to him
and his Heirs of both Sexes: That if by misfortune the Turk should happen to
drive him out of Transylvania, The Emperor should give him Lands in the
Empire, sufficient to maintain him like a Prince; That there should be a
general Amnesty for himself, and for all those that had served him in favor of
the Turk against his imperial Majesty; That he should re-enter upon all those
Lands he had before in Illyria and in Hungary; that the Emperor should provide
him with Artillery, Powder and Ammunitions for War: And that on his part, he
should take the field with fourscore thousand Combatants, Transilvanians,
Valachians and Moldavians. This agreement was sealed, by the Marriage of
Sigismund, with Maria Christina, the Daughter of Charles Archduke of Gretz; by
the Order of the Golden Fleece, sent him from Philip II. King of Spain; by the
consecrated Hat and Sword, presented him by Pope Clement VIII. and by huge
Sums of Money granted and raised for him in several parts of Christendom. This
League was pleasing to many great Potentates, and so distasteful to Sultan
Amurath, the Princes of the House of Sigismund, and to the greater part of the
inhabitants of Transylvania, that it was soon followed with invasions,
commotions and bloodshed. Then the Transilvanian took near his person the
Siculae, who were very affectionate toward him; and studying a most horrible
revenge against his Kindred, and the Grandees of Transylvania, convocated the
Estates at Claudiopolis. There it was that Sigismund put to death Balthazar
Battory his Uncle, and diverse other Lords of the Country, whom he declared
guilty of Treason, and amongst the rest, Stephen and Andreas Battory, his
Cousins, the Sons of Balthazar. At the same time Sigismund believing he had
suppressed and stifled the rebellion, caused his League with the Emperor,
against the Ottomans to be proclaimed thorough all his Territories; and
exhorted his Subjects to take up Arms to free themselves from the tyranny they
had so long endured. In few days afterward, he had fifty thousand men on foot,
and having put them under good Officers, caused them to advance toward the
Danube to begin the Dance. And now, indeed, being in the Field, fortune sided
with him, and kindly gave him opportunity to take seven Ships, laden with
money, and other rich goods, which Sinan would have employed for the corrupting
of the Officers of Vienna, that he might betray it to his Master. This prize
and victory made Sigismund hope he should be able to besiege and take
Themisvar: but scarce had he attacked it, when news came the Tartars ravaged
his Country; so that he was forced to go back and defend it: The Siege being
raised, he marches toward those Barbarians, and finding them in a place that
was inaccessible, where valor would have proved but useless, he betook himself
to craft; and having set fire to their quarters, he forced them to come out,
and utterly defeated them without much trouble or loss.


P. Hitherto Prince Sigismund Battory has been happy, and unless, upon account
of the death of his Uncle, and some other Transilvanian Lords, he be stained or
convicted of cruelty, I cannot find, that his conduct ought to be blamed. Now I
would fain know, whether fortune did attend him to his Grave, and whether he
left any Children heirs to his Virtues and Estate?


G. I am fair and softly drawing on toward what you desire to know. The
Valachians and Moldavians admiring the Victories of the Transilvanians, would
needs have their share, and therefore joined with them. Sultan Amurath, finding
his losses caused this revolt, desired to prevent the like; and to that
purpose, commanded the Bassa of Themisvar, to attack those Rebels, and to make
them feel the severity of fire and sword. The Bassa willing to obey this order,
went into the field: but was defeated about the latter end of the year 1564.
This Victory of Sigismund's, was soon followed by another over above twenty
thousand Tartars, who returning homewards, laden with booty, were set upon, and
defeated by the said Sigismund: About the same time died Amurath II. and had
for Successor Mahomet the third his Son, who was then aged about thirty years.
Mahomet being come to the Crown, bestowed great largesses upon his Janissaries,
and made great preparations for a War against the Christians. Having therefore
had information, that the Cosacks, and the Podolians were entered into the
League with the Transilvanians, he sent an Army of an hundred thousand men,
under the conduct of Sinan, whom he commanded to chastize these rebels
exemplarily. Sinan prepared himself to execute the commands he had from his
Master; and whilst he was endeavoring to gain some Friends in Moldavia, he
likewise raised a formidable Army to complete his design. For all this, he was
but roughly handled by Sigismund, who followed him so close at his heels, when
he thought to repass the Danube, that the Bridge being overcharged with the
numerous Crowds of such as fled, broke down; and Sinan falling into the River,
was in great danger of keeping company with an infinite number of his Men, who
were then drowned. This action, added to diverse others, wherein the good
fortune, prudence, and valor of Sigismund had been manifested with great
splendor, gained him the name of Invincible, and forced Mahomet to take the
conduct of the Army upon himself. Now does he take the field with two hundred
thousand fighting men; and these dreadful forces gave him the confidence to
advance as far as Agria. There it was that the Archduke Maximilian, and Prince
Sigismund despising his great numbers, out of a custom of beating them, gave
him a Battle, which might have restored the whole affairs of Christendom, had
not the infamous, and insatiable desire of booty, put a stop to their farther
victory and pursuit. Ours lost about twenty thousand men, and the Turks many
more. But, from that time, it seemed, Fortune who till then had been favorable
to the Transilvanian, now turned her back. That Prince forgetting his former
Valor, resolved to exchange Transylvania for some Lands in Silesia: and to
attain those ends, he raised all the force he could, to make his utmost effort.
He besieged Themisvar, and was constrained to raise the same, as at the first
time. Some while after, the Bassa Ibrahim besieged Varadin: And Basta having
entreated our Sigismund to join his forces with those he commanded, to relieve
the place, he promised it, but broke his word. Since that time, nothing
appeared in him but irresolution, and inconstancy. He caused his Cousin, the
Cardinal Battory, to be proclaimed Prince of Transylvania: and not being able
to maintain it; he resigned his Estate to the Emperor Rodolphus II. who gave
him Ratibor, and Opelen, to hold for his life, with a pension of fifty thousand
Crowns, and a Cardinals Cap, which the Emperor was to procure for him.


P. It appears to me, that he was married, and you say, he desired to have a
Cardinals Hat.


G. I told you before, that Sigismund Battory, Prince of Transylvania, had
married Maria Christina of Austria: But being as sluggish in the War of Venus,
as he was brave and active in the field of Mars, he owned his impotence; and
his marriage was declared Null. But I have not yet told you, that after several
mischiefs which his departure brought upon the Estates of Transylvania,
Moldavia and Valachia, which he had yielded up to the Emperor; and after he
had repented it, and showed many tokens of an extreme inconstancy, he died at
Prague the 17th. of March 1603. This death did not confirm the possession of
Transylvania to the Emperor: For the Turk, having still some partisans in the
Country, and the people believing their liberty infringed by the agreement made
between the Emperor, and the Transilvanian, no body was satisfied with the
present condition of things. George Basta the Emperor's Lieutenant General in
Transylvania, tyrannized over the people. The Turks, the Tartars, the
Polanders, and others their neighbors had made it the Theater of a long and
bloody Tragedy: insomuch as the Transilvanians breathed after nothing but their
former condition. In effect, Stephen Boskay, having driven away the Decemviry
the Emperor had sent into that Country, established himself with the good
liking of the people, rather by reason of the failures committed by the
Generals for the Emperor Rodolphus, than by any other interest or power he
could make use of: The Commonalty complained of the Inquisition, the insolence
of strangers, and the extinction of their privileges and immunities Boskay
fomented these grievances, and improving his credit amongst the people,
mightily confirmed himself in the possession of his Principality. From thence
it was, that Gabriel Bethlem, (to whom the Turk had given some hopes of having
Transylvania,) believing it was not yet a fit time to think of that, submitted
willingly to Boskay. In the mean while, the same Bethlem, being joined with
Bechtes Bassa of Themisvar, endeavored to surprise Lippa, and was surprised
himself: So that he was forced to fly in his Shirt, his fear making him forget
and leave behind him in his pocket the Treaty of his Conspiracy. This writing
falling into the hands of the Count de Beljoyoso, Governor of the Country,
mightily perplexed him, and consulting how to find out some remedy, it was
judged to be incurable. In effect, Boskay, lost no time, vanquished Beljoyoso,
reduced him to extremity, and seized upon several places. Then having the
Grandees, the Cities, and the people on his side, he put himself into such a
condition, that he could talk magisterially to them; but fortune, who takes
delight to make her self admired, turned to Basta's side, who having gained
some Victories, exhorted Boskay to quit his sword, and bow down his Neck to the
Imperial Yoke. Boskay who pretended to the Principality, replied, That if they
did not leave him Transylvania; if they did not put Hungarian Officers into the
Provinces, and in the Cities to Govern them; if they did not remove the foreign
Militia to some other places and if they did not allow him the exercise of his
Religion, he would rather choose to prefer War, than Peace. Fortune, which many
times favors the bold, took Boskay's part, and made him triumph over all the
difficulties he met with in this War. Basta, who pressed most upon him, saw all
his Victories turned to an entire and utter disobedience: His Soldiers mutined,
telling him, he paid them only with words. They fell upon him in his own House,
and those very men that were appointed to guard nine and twenty Wagons, laden
with Silver, with Cloth and other Stores, plundered them, and escaped some into
Poland, and others to the Enemies. Thus Transylvania being delivered from
Basta's Army, part of the hundred Cities were taken by Boskay's Friends, and
the remainder surrendered without the trouble of a Summons. This progress of
Boskay's, forced the Emperor to send Demetrius Nabradi, Bishop of Vesprin, and
Sigismund Forgas to treat with him. These deputies soon found, that his
prosperity had made him insolent. They received no other Answer, but only, If
they came from the Grandees of Hungary, they were welcome; but if they were
sent by the Emperor, they might go back again, he being now at that pass, that
he could not retreat, nor change his condition. This language made the Deputies
understand, that there was nothing for them to do there; and that Transylvania
had changed its Master. In effect, the States of the Province, being assembled
at Kerene, Boskay was confirmed in his Usurpation of that Principality: Upon
condition, he would allow the Roman Religion, the Lutheran and the Swiss to be
practiced amongst them. Then Sigismund Ragotsky obtained the Government of
Transylvania, and Valentine Homonay was made General of the forces of that
Country. The Grand Seignior, who had his Eyes open upon all these changes,
sent a Chiaux to Boskay, who on his behalf presented him a Mace, a Cymitar, and
a Flag, to confirm him in the possession of his new Principality. In
acknowledgement of which favor, Boskay dispatched Stephen Corlat, and George
Kikedy to the Port, to assure the Turk of his Fidelity, and to offer him some
token of his obedience.


P. It Is said that Embassy was infamous, upon account of a present of some
German Children, which those Envoys made him.


G. Such as dare invade another right, and sacrifice an infinite number of
people to their ambition, think it no burden to their own Conscience, to
plunge a few innocents into slavery. Boskay would needs give Machiavel the lie,
who tells us, that men can hardly become entirely or completely wicked. For
having endeavored to debauch those places from their duty, who legally obeyed
the Emperor, his treachery went farther; and although both he and his, took
Religion for pretense of their disobedience, they accompanied the Turk in the
incursions he made into Moravia; where having de^troy'd a vast number of
Christians, he ^ut four thousand into Fetters. And nothing was ever so full of
zeal, as his Godly Army. They sold diverse of their ^rethren to the Turk, and as
their Crime ^as beyond all example, so by an un^eard-of prodigy, there issued
drops of blood ^ut of the gold they received in payment for those poor Souls
they thus condemned to captivity. These marks of friendship showed to ^ur
common Enemy, were seconded with ^n agreement between Boskay and the Sul^an;
who would needs bestow the Title of King of Hungary upon the first, but he
^earing a change of Fortune, refused that ^avour saying, that indeed the
Emperor ^ad been lawfully Crowned. By this ^greement Transylvania was left to
Boskay ^ree, for ten years tribute, which they ^ere to advance. And that time
being expired, they were to send ten thousand ducats yearly to the Grand
Seignior, as a token of their Vassalage. These things passing thus in Europe,
the Bassa's of Aleppo and Caramania were cutting out work for the Sultan. For
which reason he would needs be excused from the obligation of assisting Boskay;
and permitted him to make an agreement with the Emperor. On the other hand,
his Majesty being tired with so long a War, and persuading himself that Boskay
having no Children, there would quickly be some new Revolution in that State,
he soon consented to whatever was propounded. The chief Articles of this Peace
were, That there should be an Amnesty on both sides; that the Roman Religion,
the Ausburgh, and the Swiss should be tolerated through all Hungary; that the
Palatine should be elected by votes; that the Governments of all places should
be given to Hungarians, excepting Comora and Javarin, which might be given to
Germans. All Transylvania, with that part of Hungary that had belonged to
Sigismund Battory, should be resigned to Boskay, and that there should be added
to them Zatmar, Vgoe, Tockai and Bereg; that they should endeavor to make a
Peace with the Turk; and if they could not obtain it, Boskay should join his
Forces with the Emperor's. This Treaty was approved and sworn, by the
principal Lords of Hungary, Bohemia, Austria, Silesia, Moravia and Lusatia.
Many of them signed it, and there was only Melchior Clesel, then Bishop of
Neustadt, and since Cardinal, who made some difficulty, because, said he, they
ought not to assist Heretics: but at length he consented. This Peace was
succeeded by a Truce of twenty years, which the Emperor made with the Turk. By
this agreement, the Sultan obliged himself to call the Emperor Father, and the
Emperor was to give the Sultan the Title of Son. They were both to bear the
name of Emperor; the Controversies that might possibly arise between them,
were to be determined by the Governors of Javarin, and Buda. The Forts were to
remain in the same condition they were in at that time, and neither was to
erect any new one. The Emperor gave the Turk two hundred thousand Crowns for
once, and after that, they were every three years to bestow mutual presents on
each other by their Ambassadors; that their amity might remain the more firm.
These Transactions were made, 1606. and followed with the sickness and death of
Boskay, who for his Successor in the Principality of Transylvania, declared
Valentine Homonay; but the States of the Country preferred Sigismund Ragotsky
before him. This man, loving his ease and quiet, more than the noble toils of
honor, refused their offer; but finding himself forced to accept thereof, he
did it with as much repugnance, as if it were only an honorable slavery.


P. Although it be said, that Crowns are extremely heavy, yet they rarely are
refused. And if I am not deceived, this moderation of Ragotsky's showed he was
the more worthy to Reign.


G. There is no less honor in refusing a Crown, than in striving to deserve
one. And I must confess, did I not know that he rejected it really out of
contempt, I should have believed it had been out of fear. The Emperor
Rodolphus II. had some repugnance, for the Liberty of Conscience he had
granted. And the promises of the Persian Ambassadors, together with the
Rebellion of Gambolah, who had drawn over to his party Aleppo, Damascus and
Tripoly, fomented his irresolutions. This was it that gave occasion to the
Heyducks to continue their violences, and the Archduke Matthias to take up Arms
to repress their audacious attempts. That Prince having his Sword in hand,
pursued his point, and obliged the Emperor Rodolphus his Brother, to give him
Hungary and Austria. Then did Matthias, less scrupulous than the Emperor, sign
the Articles of the Transaction of Vienna, adding there the expulsion of the
Jesuits; and received the Homage Ragotsky did him for his Principality. Soon
after it was clearly seen, that Ragotsky despised worldly greatness; For being
peaceable possessor of Transylvania, equally cherished by Matthias and the
Turk, he transferred his dignity to Gabriel Battory, having not Reigned above
one year. Achmet, the Emperor of the Turks, confirmed this choice, and the
King Matthias opposed it not. Battory was not so moderate as Ragotsky had
thought him to be. He became insupportable for his Letchery, and the honor of
the most virtuous Matrons being no way secure under the Dominion of a Prince so
horribly debauched, they conspired against his life, and he was assassinated at
Valeneza Anno 1616. Bethlem Gabor, who had greatly contributed to this Murder,
seized on the Estate of the defunct. And to appease Matthias, who was then
become Emperor, and the Turk Achmet who were equally offended, to the first he
promised all reasonable obedience; and gave up some good places into the hands
of the second.


P. I think Gabor is renowned in History, and that he gave some trouble to the
Emperor Ferdinand the II.


G. This Transilvanian endeavored all his lifetime to fish in troubled
Waters. But the fortune of Ferdinand the Emperor, having the ascendent over
his, he was forced in the end to buckle. Let us now see what happened in those
parts, during the Reign of Ferdinand II. This Archduke was the most zealous
Catholic in the World, and one that could the least of any man suffer the
Religions, which his Predecessors had connived at in their Countries. This
zeal, and his good fortune, made the Emperor Matthias, his Cousin, prefer him,
before all the other Princes of his House; and who designing he should be
Emperor, after his death, caused him to be owned King of Hungary and Bohemia,
before his decease. Ferdinand began his Reign, with the oppression of the
Protestants: He commanded some of their Churches to be shut up, and demolished
some others in Bohemia. He recalled the Jesuits into Hungary, and rejected
those Articles that favored the Religionaries, in the Treaties made between
the Emperors and the Hungarians and Bohemians. This proceeding having
displeased a Body, which at that time was formidable, gave the Bohemians
occasion to prefer Frederick Elector Palatine, before Ferdinand: And
immediately he beheld the Protestants of Bohemia, and Hungary before the walls
of his Capital City. At the same time, Gabor, armed with the pretense of his
Religion, entered into the League, and raised an Army of eighteen thousand men,
strengthened with eighteen pieces of Cannon, wherewith he entered into Hungary;
and finding their spirits inclined to a Rebellion, he made so great a progress,
as gave him the confidence to be proclaimed King. During these transactions,
Ferdinand was at Francfort, where he was elected Emperor. And this election
having given him both authority and forces, he now thought only how to recover
the Kingdoms he had newly lost, and to humble those that had dared to attaque
him. He loudly complained of the injustice of his adversaries, and having
remonstrated to the Electors of the Empire, to the French, and English, the
just reasons he had to regain his own, he drew into his party all the
Catholics of Germany, and even the Duke of Saxony, who had been one of the
main Pillars of the Protestants, and held the swords of Foreigners within their
Scabberds. Soon after, the Elector Palatine, who had taken the Field with very
considerable Forces, was put to flight. Gabor, made a stouter resistance, and
had brought the Emperors affairs to an ill condition, had his associates played
their part as well at Prague. Count Dampier, General of the Imperial Forces,
lost his life in going to view the Castle of Presburg, where Gabor had a
Garrison. And Charles de Longveval, Count Bucquoy, who after his subduing of
Moravia, had made great progress in Hungary, died there being pierced with
sixteen wounds. The death of this great man, gave opportunity to Gabor to
recover many places, to vanquish those that opposed his designs, and range over
the whole Country. But in fine, seeing his confederates put to flight, and his
own Army much weakened, he demanded a Peace, and obtained it, Anno 1622. upon
these following conditions. That he should keep all Transylvania, Tokay,
Cassovia, and seven other Lordships in Hungary; That resigning with the Crown
the other Cities which he held in Hungary, he should quit the name of King,
contenting himself with that of Prince of the Empire, and the Principalities of
Opelen and Ratibor, and that he should restore the Jesuits, where they had been
settled before the War. This Peace lasted not long. Gabor gave up Vaccia to the
Turk, who sent him fourscore thousand men, which the Count de la Tour, had
procured for him. With these Troops he invaded Hungary, alleging they had not
made good to him what was promised by the Treaty of Odimburg; that they
oppressed his Religion, and did not deliver the money to him, that was his due.
The Emperor to prevent this growing mischief, informed the Grand Seignior,
that Gabor abused his Forces, whilst he attaqued him without cause or reason;
and adding his Sword to his words, forced his Enemy to an accommodation less
advantageous than the former. By this Treaty made in the year 1624. Gabor lost
the Title of Prince of the Empire, and some part of what had been granted him
of Hungary. A while after this restless spirit joined his Forces with those of
Charles Count Mansfield. But forty thousand Tartars having been defeated by the
Polanders, he was forced to quit that design, to go and take a care of his
Countries. And having enjoyed the Company of Catharine, the Daughter of John
Sigismund Elector of Brandenburg, but four years, he died in Anno 1628. having
endured incredible torment in his Feet. And his death made it evident he
equally respected the Emperor and the Turk. To each of them he left a Horse,
the harness set with Jewels, and richly embroidered, besides forty thousand
Ducats in specie. His Wife had of him an hundred thousand pieces of Gold, of
six pound value each, a hundred thousand Crowns of Silver, and a hundred
thousand Florins, with three Lordships, which she was to enjoy during life.


P. That Princess, having so much ready money, and Jewels suitable to a Person
of her Quality, had enough to raise some younger Brother of a good Family: And
I believe it was for that reason, that Charles Duke of Saxe-Lauwemburg married
her, some years after the death of her Husband. But, I would fain know who
succeeded to Bethlem Gabor, and what happened to those Countries after his
decease.


G. When the Heirs to Principalities are uncertain, the death of the Prince is
ever attended with trouble. Catharine, the Widow of Gabor not being capable to
Reign, named Stephen Czac, to succeed her Husband, and desired the Turk to
confirm him: This Election displeased the Transilvanians, who divided their
affections, and some of them made choice of Stephen Bethlem, Brother of the
late Prince; while others would rather have George Ragotsky. The first was so
unfortunate, that his own Children rose up against him; and the second having
overcome his adversaries, complied with the Emperor, gained the Sultan's
favor, and possessed Transylvania singly. Yet, was not his good fortune
constant, Stephen Bethlem, who had surrendered all his pretensions to him,
killed one of his Relations; and fearing the just punishment which he deserved,
endeavored to avoid it by a bigger Crime. He craved assistance of the Port,
who sent him an Army of Turks and Tartars, with whom he besieged Gyula.
Ragotsky abhorring the infidelity of the Turk, submitted himself to the House
of Austria, and received from thence three Regiments of Foot, and one of Horse,
to reinforce his Army, with the which he destroyed five and twenty thousand
Turks near Szabuta. In fine, Bethlem, returning to his duty, was received into
favor, and the Sultan confirmed Ragotsky in his Principality: During these
occurrences, the Emperor Ferdinand II. died, leaving for Successor to the
Kingdom of Hungary, and all his Estates, Ferdinand III. his Son. This Prince,
who had a very dangerous War cut out for him in Germany, desired to preserve
the Peace in Hungary; It was, notwithstanding broken, by the advice of such, as
persuaded him that he ought to forbid the Lutherans to frequent a Church, they
had at Presburgh; and to revoke whatever had been promised in their favor.
This policy appeared but very ill to such as know, that even good acts do loose
of their value, when done out of season. There is nothing that shocks men so
much, as a violence against their Consciences, and there are few things wherein
we ought to have a greater circumspection, than when we go about to reform
Religion. The Lutherans of Presburgh, not being able to suffer the loss of
their Church, nor to preserve it without the assistance of Strangers, called
Ragotsky to their Aid. This man fearing to put to Sea without Bisquit, and
enter upon a War, wherein he should have but little succor from the Turk, who
was employed in Asia; desired the Emperor and his Council, that they would
vouchsafe to make good their promise to the Hungarians. The Emperor despising
both the intercession and the Forces of Ragotsky, would give him no
satisfaction. That Prince then believing himself to be more obliged to his
Sect, than to his Friend and Benefactor, suffered himself to be over-persuaded
by the Confederates Ambassadors, who sought his Alliance; and having declared
War against the Emperor, he entered Hungary with an Army of seventy thousand
fighting men. And that it might appear he did not begin the War without good
reason; he by a Manifesto set forth, that since the year 1619. they placed
Hungary amongst the Hereditary Provinces belonging to the House of Austria,
that they bestowed upon the Clergy, those employments that appertained to the
Laity, that they kept the Protestants out of all Offices; that they would not
hear their complaints and grievances, and that against their Wills, and without
any thing of their consent or allowance, they had introduced the Jesuits into
that Country. The first expedition of Ragotsky, was to ravage the Lands of
George Homonay; after which he subdued all that opposed him even to Cassovia.
The Emperor to put some stop to this torrent, opposed him with eight and
twenty thousand men, under the conduct of the Count de Bouchaim, and the
Palatine of Hungary; but not having been able to regain Cassovia, he most
readily hearkened to a proposition for Peace. By the agreement they yielded to
Ragotsky seven Lordships in Hungary; in his favor they set open ninety
Churches, wherein the Protestants might publicly teach their Doctrine; and the
Hungarians were restored to their privileges. This Treaty, seemed
disadvantageous to the Catholics; but the Suedes felt the much greater
inconvenience; for the Emperor having plucked this Thorn out of his Foot,
relieved Brin, and forced Torstenson to raise the Siege he had formed there.
Then Lewis Count de Souches, a French Gentleman, who had been the chief cause
of its preservation, had the Government thereof bestowed upon him, as a reward
for his signal service.


P. I do not believe, we can any where else, meet with such notable and
frequent changes, as these in Hungary and Transylvania; and I admire, that a
people that cannot stir, without drawing in upon their Country the Turks, and
Germans, will not, for all that, forbear taking up Arms so often.


G. The people of that Country are so Warlike, they scarce know how to live in
peace. And the Princes hoping to improve their condition do most commonly
impair it. Ragotsky made us see it clearly, when he espoused the King of
Suedens quarrel, and equally disobliged both the Emperor, and the Sultan. This
Transilvanian, desiring to have a share in the glory, and conquests of King
Charles Gustavus, went and joined him in Poland, with considerable Forces. And
being able to do no great wonders, was constrained to retire, either with a
great deal of shame, or with very little reputation. His misfortune did not
however end with the loss of his Army; he was persecuted yet more, his ill fate
armed the Turk against him, and slew him in a Battle, wherein he lost his life,
together with that Country he might have left to his Son. Some have written
that the Christians excited the Turk against him, and that was one of the
chiefest causes of this present War; Kemin Janos, his Lieutenant General,
endeavored to get into his place, and to attain his ends, he did submit to his
Imperial Majesty, sought for and obtained his protection. But he could not
preserve that Estate, which he had seized on. It was then, that the Court of
Vienna, desiring to maintain Janos, without exasperating the Ottomans, could
effect neither the one, nor the other. Janos was lost in a Battle, and the Turk
was dissatisfied with the Emperor, who, (as he said) had infringed the Truce,
which was between them. This misunderstanding heated both parties, and
occasioned several Embassies, and Negociations on either side. The Sultan
declared that he intended nothing but to maintain the Peace; and his Subjects
modestly complained of us, saying that we desired a War, and they would make
none, unless they were compelled to it by necessity. During these wranglings,
Nicholas Count Serini believed the War was already at our Doors, and imagining
it would be some advantage to him, to build a Fort upon the Banks of the River
Mur: he did so, and began some Hostilities. This Fort gave the Turk greater
cause of complaint, who demanded it should be demolished by a Chiaux, and by an
Aga, whom I saw at Vienna, in the month of January one thousand six hundred
sixty two. These demands had no favorable answers; but it seemed as if they
had talked to deaf man. And, to tell the truth, observing that haughtiness, and
resolution to give the Turk no satisfaction, I concluded that they would have a
War; and that the Fort of Serini, was a place, would make work enough for
several Ottoman Armies. Yet experience has showed us, that the said Fort was
worth nothing, and that we had no need to undertake a War of such importance
for it. I shall not lay down the reasons, because any one may easily guess
them. It shall suffice I tell you, that the Court of Vienna seeing the Turkish
Forces in Transylvania, and fearing to be taken unprovided; they sent the
Counts de Montecuculi, and Souches, into the Field with two small Bodies of
men: But a good part of them were destroyed without giving a blow, or
preventing the loss of Kemin Janos, or the establishment of Abaffi. The Sultan,
therefore seeing that Transylvania was in his power, and that Abaffi was fast
in the Saddle, and obliged to serve him, demanded again with greater instance,
that the Fort Serini should be demolished, and reparation made for the
injuries, he said, they had done him. For all this, could they not resolve to
grant him what he asked: so that without more ado, he resolved to take his own
satisfaction, and try whether his first Warlike enterprise, would prove as
happy, as he thought it just. He therefore began that War, which he prosecutes
to this day, with much heat, and in which all Christendom seems to have a
share. I conjure you to consider seriously, what I have told you till this
present, and I am confident you may rightly judge of the justice of both
parties in this controversy. We must now see, after what manner the Turk
attaqued us in the year 1661. with what Forces we opposed him, and what either
of them has acted since the beginning of this War; that so you may the better
apprehend what we are to fear; and what we may reasonably hope.


P. It seems to me, that the interest of his Imperial Majesty obliged him to
choose rather to demolish the Fort Serini, and give satisfaction as the Grand
Seignior demanded, than to enter into a War against him. For Hungary and the
Empire stood in need of Peace, and there was but little probability of wresting
Transylvania out of the Turkish hands, which he had so lately seized upon, with
some appearance of Justice.


G. If it were reasonable to measure Counsels, by the Events, we should have
just cause to blame that which was given at Vienna. But I guess, they did not
believe, that those who had stood so long with their Arms across, when they
might have attaqu'd the Empire with advantage during the War, had a mind to
measure their Cymitars with our Swords, when we were all in peace. We have
notwithstanding seen the contrary; and Mahomet IV. resolved to begin the War by
the rupture he made, after he had dallied with us a while: For to tell you the
truth, I do not think but all his Embassies, and that great show of moderation,
were only to amuse us. The quick sighted judged rightly, that it was necessary
to levy men; and the more stupid said, that there was no trusting of such, as
have no faith in them. The Emperor finding he should have need of assistance,
desired some; and the very formalities of giving, and of receiving it, was the
cause they were not in a readiness when the business began. The Confederates
offered considerable forces, which they had already on foot; but they would
have the command over them; and his Majesty thought, that it would be an
affront to his dignity to receive them upon those terms. The Empire making the
same offers, and the same demands, met with the same difficulties; and from
thence it came to pass, that the Grand Vizier being advanced as far as upper
Hungary, attacked Neuheusel, by the Hungarians called Vivar; defeated three
thousand men, who made a sally to surprise him, sent some prisoners to
Constantinople as tokens of his Victory, and at last, forced the garrison to
surrender upon composition, and triumphed over that considerable place, which
gave him opportunity to make inroads to the very gates of Vienna, and harass
the Frontiers of Germany.


P. I knew before of the taking of Neuheusel, and the incursions the Tartars
made into Moravia: But I do not apprehend what you mean by the Confederates,
nor what distinction you make between them and the Empire. Do me the favor to
discourse of it, and then you may be pleased to give me an account of our
forces, and the exploits our men performed, after the retreat of the Grand
Vizier.


G. The Treaty that was concluded at Munster upon the 24. of October 1648,
having yielded up some Lands to the French, and to the Suedes, as likewise to
some Princes of Germany, they all feared that the House of Austria would repent
the having bought such a Peace: that they would endeavor to recover what had
been dismembered from the Empire; and that some others would demand what they
had lost. To obviate these inconveniences, the Cardinal Mazarin, persuaded
those that had any cause of fear, and such as desired the peace of the Empire,
that it were fit they should unite more closely, and engage to defend each
other mutually, in case they should happen to be molested in the possessions of
what the Treaty had adjudged to them. Ten or twelve Princes, as well
Ecclesiastics as Seculars, and of all Religions allowed in the Empire, entered
into this League. And every one having taxed himself proportionably to his
forces, they to this purpose designed to have about five and twenty thousand
men, under the conduct of the Prince of Salmes, and of Count Holach. The
Emperor, to whom this thing was highly distasteful, endeavored to dissolve
them, and not being able to compass the same, he endeavored to turn it to his
own advantage. To this effect, finding he was now threatened with a War by the
Turk, he remonstrated the approaching danger, and desired those Troops might be
employed for the defense of the Empire. The Confederates consented thereto,
upon condition they should be sworn to none but themselves, nor should be
employed against any but the common enemy. On the contrary, his Majesty
desiring they should obey him absolutely, and that they should let him have
them without any conditions; the business lingered so long, that they arrived
very late in Hungary. They were then under the command of Wolfang Julius Count
of Hollac, and made a separate body from the Emperor's, and those belonging to
the Empire. Whence you may judge, that although the greater part of those that
composed this League were German Princes, they were however censed as somewhat
differing from the body of the Germans; because several Strangers signed to it,
and contributed to their maintenance; or because the two Kings, who were
parties concerned, had more power than all the rest of the Confederates
together.


P. Now speak of the forces the Vizier employed against us at that time, and
how it came to pass that storm was not diverted by a conclusion of the Treaty
that was then on foot?


G. That I may answer your question in one entire discourse, you must know,
That the Turk having resolved to cut us out work, he sent his Grand Vizier into
Hungary, who arrived at Belgrade the 8th of June. The Baron de Gois Ambassador
from his Imperial Majesty, came thither the day after; and the eighteenth he
was conducted into the presence of the Vizier. He had then on his left hand two
of his Brothers, on his right the Mufti, and about his Person near two hundred
Officers. In this first audience, the Baron having made his Complement to the
Vizier, he told him, he was come thither to conclude the Treaty that had been
begun betwixt him and Aly Bassa. They let him know that it was too late, and
that they would think further on it when they were upon our Frontiers. The
Baron replied, they were then to blame to make him come thither, that he could
not understand why they refused to conclude it, that they should meet with
greater difficulties when the War was begun: And that God would punish those
who should be the cause of shedding innocent blood. The Grand Vizier answered,
that he had weighed those reasons very maturely being at Constantinople; and
that in case they would then have consented, to what they now offered, he
should not have undertaken that journey. Neither would he hear any thing of the
Treaty of Themisvar, and made great complaints against those that had broken
the peace. Upon which the Baron said, those things had been urged before, and
that they were fully answered. This is what passed at the first audience. To
which the Vizier added, that the Baron might yet send an Express to Vienna, and
assure the Emperor, that if he would lay down that sum of money he would
demand, evacuate all the places he yet held in Transylvania, that of Zekelheid
in Hungary, and raze the Fort Serini, there might be some means of making a
Peace.


P. I fancy that by this proposition the Vizier intended to amuse the
Imperialists, and that the Turk was not advanced into Hungary, with an Army of
seventy thousand Men, and an hundred and thirty pieces of Cannon, to go back
again without striking one blow.


G. I believe so too, and do not think that an Officer, how great soever in
merit and reputation, durst have taken any resolutions contrary to those his
Master had prescribed him. The Army therefore began to file away upon the 11th
of June in the year 1663. And this was done with so much pomp, that one would
have judged it to consist of two hundred thousand fighting men. The noise of
the Camels, the Horses, and the Mules, the rattling of the Drums and Timbals,
and the sound of their Trumpets, lasted both day and night till the eighteenth
of the same month. The Officers moved slowly, and although some or other
marched every day, they were most of them Bassa's with their equipage, which
being magnificent, made a stately show, and appeared great to admiration. In
fine, the Aga of the Janissaries parted the fifteenth with four thousand of his
companions, and was followed by the rest of the Army till the eighteenth, at
which time the Grand Vizier went on his way, with a most royal magnificence. He
sent a thousand foot before him, with each a led horse or two in their hands.
After these marched the Spahi-Alagarsi, who is General of those Gentlemen that
serve on horseback, preceded by his great Standard, and followed by six hundred
Spahi-Edeli, who are the most valiant of all Turkey, having their Cornets very
prettily adorned. These were followed by a long Staff, at the top whereof was a
large brass button, from whence hung down a Horse-tail. Soon after were seeen
two great Guidons, which they carried before the Vizier's Brothers, and other
Persons of Quality and command, who were accompanied by seven hundred
Hasvadars, or Valets, most of them covered with Coats of Mail, from the crown
of the head, down to the knees. At last the Grand Vizier's Ensigns and Guidons
marched, and were immediately followed by sixteen led Horses, with Saddles and
Housins embroidered with Gold, and Precious Stones. The Grooms that led them,
had Cloth of Gold Vests, and Breeches of Crimson Velvet. Eight of the Vizier's
Footmen had the like clothing, and he went in the midst of these, accompanied
by two Janissaries, wearing upon his head a Turban of great price. After the
Vizier came the Rosevendy, or great Chancellor; the Tesdatir, or Commissary
General, and some other of the principal Officers of the Army: The Gentlemen of
the Chamber, all young Fellows of twenty or thirty years, covered with
Jacquets: Six hundred Hasvadars, forty Cimbalists and Trumpeters; two hundred
ordinary Horsemen, and threescore Horses, that carried the Grand Vizier's
Tents and Pavillions. With this magnificent and dreadful train, he arrived at
Bukovar the four and twentieth; and there he was informed by the Aga whom he
had sent to the Cham of Tartary, that instead of fourscore thousand men he had
promised, he would send ten thousand, under the conduct of his Son. The excuse
he made for not keeping his word was, that the white Tartars and the
Muscovites, had made some incursions into his Country, which obliged him to
keep his men for the defense of his Frontiers. Two days after he got to Eseck,
where he sojourned eight or ten days, waiting for such as were to join him. At
last he passed the Bridge, which is above twelve thousand paces in length, and
arrived at Buda the fifteenth of July. There it was, that after they had held
diverse Councils, the Siege of Neuhusel was resolved, and the seventh of August
the place was invested. Three thousand men whom the Counts Forgats, Palfi, and
the Marquis Pio, commanded to surprise the Enemy, fell into their Nets, and
were massacred, and taken Prisoners. And the place was so closely begirt, that
they were forced to capitulate, and surrender upon composition the 18. of
September, in the same year.


P. The defeating of that great sally, did without doubt, so much weaken the
Garrison, as caused the loss of the place.


G. It is probable they might have held out longer: but there being no relief
to be expected, they must in fine, have been compelled to submit to their
Enemies. They endured three assaults, wherein the Turks were vigorously
repulsed. However the Count Forgats their Governor was confined, and accused
for not having done his duty in that Siege. But I believe it was more his
unhappiness, than his Crime, that lost it: It was reported here, when this
strong Fortress was taken, that the Officers were young, and without
experience. And on the contrary the Vizier was a Person about the Age of five
and thirty, active, and diligent in his expeditions, skillful in the
Mathematics, of an heroic courage; and who was day and night in the Trenches,
both to encourage his Soldiers, and to show them a brave example. This place
being taken, he caused seven pieces of Cannon to be fired in token of Victory.
And having sent one of his Brothers to the Port, to carry the news of it to the
Grand Seignior, he began to repair the Breaches; and then retired, to prepare
himself for the next Campaign. This loss awakened the Empire, which seemed to
have lain asleep, and the Diet having been called at Ratisbon, some of the
Princes appeared there in Person, the rest by their Ambassadors. There was the
magnificence of our Germany to be seen: For although the Emperor had desired
the Potentates to come without any pomp, yet nothing appeared but what was
brave and stately. Diverse old Officers came to offer their Swords to the
Emperor. And those Princes who were no strangers to the smell of Gunpowder
presented themselves to command the other. The Number and merit of the
pretenders did as much puzzle his Majesty in the liberty of his choice, as the
great variety of Flowers in Summer does the Ladies in a curious Garden. He must
however resolve, and choose Commanders for the new Bodies they were going to
raise. The Emperor who had already three Armies under the conduct of the
Counts de Serini, Montecuculi and Souches, desired to make them more capable to
undertake somewhat extraordinary. To this end, without changing the inferior
Officers, and leaving the Sovereign command to these Counts, he joined with
them Philip Prince Palatine of the branch of Sultzbac, and Count Spar, persons
of merit and great reputation. The first commanded his Majesty's Horse, in
quality of Captain General, and the other led the Foot, and the Cannon. Leopold
William, Marquess of Baden, was General in Chief of the Army belonging to the
Empire. Count Fugger, Governor of Ingolstad, commanded the Infantry under him,
and Ulric Duke of Wirtemberg was General of the Cavalry. John Adolphus Duke of
Holstein, and Gustavus Adolphus Marquis of Baden served in the same Army in
quality of Mareshals de Camp, the one of the Horse, the other of the Foot. The
Army of the Confederates having lost the Prince of Salmes, a little before the
beginning of this War, they ever afterward were under Wolfang Julius Count
Holoch, who had Officers and Soldiers of great importance. Count Serini
commanded the Hungarian^ and Croats, who were numerous, and the Count de
Souches had a flying Army, wherewith he scowred the Enemie^ Countries, and
covering our Frontiers, often obtained Victories. He it was who regained
Neutra, and Levens in the beginning of the Campaign, then forced the Enemies
Camp who would have recovered them, that they might with the les^ trouble march
into Germany. This acti^n laid six thousand of the Enemies in ^he dust, put
five and twenty thousand (...) ffight, took their Baggage and Cannon, and gave
great encouragement to our People.


P. I would gladly know the number ^f Soldiers, that made up all these Armies,
by whom they were raised, by whom maintained, and who furnished them with the
provisions, and Ammuni^ion they stood in need of.


G. Armies are ever more numerous upon paper, than in the Field. So that (...)
cannot precisely tell you the numbers of ^ur men It is said, that the
Emperor's con^isted of twenty four thousand men, and that of the Confederates
of twenty thou^^nd. That the Emperor was to have in Montecuculi's Army, twelve
thousand ^^ght horse, seven thousand Cuirassiers, and eighteen thousand Foot.
In the Count Serini's five and twenty or thirty ^housand Hungarians and Croats.
And under Souches ten or twelve thousand of ^ll Nations. If to all these, you
add the Volunteers, and French Auxiliaries, who ^mounted at the least to four
thousand Horse, and as many Foot; This number ^s one of the greatest the
Christians have for a long time had in the Field, and were sufficient to have
driven the Turk out of Hungary. And truly it might have been done, had they all
acted by one consent, or had there been a General of such a quality, that all
the rest of the Generals had been obliged to respect him for his birth, and to
obey him for his absolute power, and Command. If therefore our misfortune would
have it so, that we suffered some places to be taken; we must lay the blame on
the little good Order, and the great Animosities betwixt the several Nations,
that made up our Armies. But to proceed, the Princes being at Ratisbon, when
the resolution was taken to assist his Majesty, each of them promised to do
what he could, in proportion to his incomes and strength. And each of them made
levies and sent in Soldiers, who were maintained by those that raised them.
However it was necessary, the Emperor should provide Magazines, whence the
Armies might draw their Ammunitions and Provisions, when they had need of it,
for their subsistence; and if his Majesty's Orders, had been duly observed, the
Forces had wanted nothing. For every Prince, Lord, and Republique, taking care
to provide their Quota, it may be imagined the Soldiers were well maintained:
and that nothing was wanting but the Spirit of Unity, to have obtained good
Success. It Is true, that as this vast body of the Empire moves but slowly, the
Troops were not at their rendezvous till it was late, and Canisia was relieved
by the Enemy, before our Soldiers were come together.


P. The Gazets assure us, that the Forts Serini, little Comorra, Vesprin and
Papa were taken under the very Noses of our Armies: and the most confident
believed the Vizier might go on farther.


G. Victories, and defeats, do commonly follow each other; because the one
increases Courage, and the other diminishes it. The Vizier retiring to
Constantinople, after the taking of Neuheusel, caused the Counts Serini, and
Holach to be attacked. And these having repulsed the Enemy with considerable
loss, they breathed nothing but Battles, and Victories. And indeed, these brave
men, taking advantage of the Turk's retreat, overrun a part of Hungary, took
and plundered Raboscha, Segues, and the five Churches; burnt the Bridge of
Eseck, which is above twelve thousand paces long, carried a terror thorough
all the Country, burnt to ashes all the Corn, Hay and Straw, the Enemy had on
the Banks of the River Drove. The noise of these Victories spread over the
whole Empire, and giving a reputation to those Generals, raised the Courage of
their Soldiers, filled their Pockets with money, and furnished them plentifully
with those provisions they wanted. These Noblemen therefore seeing things were
disposed toward a Victory, considered by what means to effect it, went to
Ratisbon, propounded some Military exploits, made them understand the Bridge of
Eseck could not be repaired, till the season was very much advanced, and that
in the mean time, they might besiege and take Canisia, which they held blocked
up by the taking of Buzats, Zigeth, and the Garrison they kept at Serinvar.
They demanded things necessary for the Siege of so important a place; and
believing undoubtedly they would send them, it was begun with great application
and eagerness in the Spring. This Siege was bloody, and having weakened the
Besiegers, and lasted longer than was expected, the Enemy approached, and made
them raise the Siege. And before the Christian Forces could be drawn together,
they took Serinvar, and little Comorra. These advantages were followed by
greater. For although our Armies were now gotten together, they continued their
Victories, by the taking of Vesprin. But good Fortune, being at last weary of
waiting on the wrong party, turned to us, and from that time the Vizier and his
men were less succesfull. Lewis Count Souches; Governor of Comorra, defeated
the Infidels at Sernevits, and pursued them so vigorously, that he made them
quit Barcan, and ruined a Bridge of Boats, they had upon the Danube. Remond
Count de Montecuculi, made them repent the design they had to pass the River of
Raab, and the Counts de Coligny, and dela Fueillade, cut in pieces every man of
them that had passed the said River, near Saint Godards.


P. It is affirmed indeed, that Coligny, and la Fueillade did wonders;
wherefore I should be huge glad, before this discourse be ended, to hear
somewhat more at large of the Succors the Emperor demanded of Foreign
Princes; for I verily believe they were one of the main Strength of our Armies,
and the chief motive that obliged the Grand Vizier to incline toward and
desire a Peace so soon.


G. There is no doubt of it: For the Emperor taking care to fortify himself
against that potent Enemy, dispatched Ambassadors to implore the assistance of
all such as could afford him any. These Ambassadors met with good words every
where; and in some places with good effects. All Germany roused themselves,
Italy, Sweden, Spain, Lorrain and France, took the business to heart, for the
preserving of Hungary. Spain and Italy promised to furnish great Sums of
Money; Sweden, Lorrain and France offered to send them men to be maintained at
their own charges. I cannot precisely tell wha^ the others did: But, it may be
truly affirmed that the zeal of the French, did upon this occasion surpass that
of all the other Christians. The King heard with regret, that the Turk had
begun the War, and with joy that the Emperou^ desired he would assist him. The
destruction and havoc the Tartars had mad^ upon our Frontiers, and the
Christians that were daily carried away in chains bred so much compassion, that
when Count Strozzi limited to four thousan^ Foot, and two thousand Horse, the
Succors he demanded in the Name of hi^ Imperial Majesty, he was sorry he had
se^ such narrow bounds to his liberality. He therefore exhorted his Nobility to
this glorious Enterprise; and said, even to those whom he best loved, that they
might make their Court with as much advantage to themselves in Hungary, as in
the Louvre: He protested in presence of the Princes, and Lords of his Court,
that if the Daufin his Son were but ten years old, he would send him upon that
expedition. And which is most worthy to be observed, he assured them, that if
God should be pleased to afflict Christendom so much, as to suffer the Emperor
to be worsted that Campaign, he would himself go the next and endeavor to
repair the loss, and repulse his Enemy. These discourses did so stir up the
French Nobility, that several hundreds who preferred the satisfaction of their
Consciences, and the motions of their generosity to all the pleasures and
delights of the Court, made preparation to go against the common Enemy. Prince
Philip, Chevalier de Lorrain, knowing his Predecessors had reigned in
Jerusalem, after they had driven out the Mahometans, and that his Father, the
Count de Harcour, was grieved his old Age would not admit him to buckle on his
Armor, nobly supplied his place, and upon this occasion showed so many proofs
of his courage, that it may justly be said, he made those Lorrain Princes live
again, who other-while conquered the East, as also the Duke of Mercoeur, who in
the beginning of this Age was admired for his actions at the retreat of
Canisia, and the taking of Alba-Regalis. The Princes of Rohan and Soubize,
having a thousand Predecessors to imitate, made it appear in this service, that
if the Dukes whose names they bear, knew how to defend the Protestants whilst
they lived, they were no less forward to expose their lives for the defense of
Christianity against the Infidels. The Duke of Brisac, remembering the
reputation of the Mareschals de Casse and Brisac his Ancestors, spared neither
his body or heart to pursue their race, and gain the Crown of Honor. The Count
de Sault, and the Marquisses de Ragny and Canaples demonstrated the ardent
desire they had to equal the merit of the Constable Duke de Lesdiguieres, the
Mareshals de Crequy, the Lords de Pontdormy, and an infinite more of their
illustrious Predecessors, which pushed and spurred them on in the way of
Military Virtue. The Duke of Bouillon, and the Count d' Auvergne his Brother,
attracted by the examples of their Brother and their Uncle, as well as of the
famous Godfrey, who filled all Europe with admiration in the year 1096. did so
signalize themselves, that if they do not Reign in Jerusalem, as their
Ancestors, they shall at least Reign in the hearts of those that were
Spectators of their prowess, and know the laudable ambition they have, to equal
the ancient Counts of Bologna, Nassaw, Berg, and the Princes of Orange. The
Count de Selle, the Chevalier de St. Aignan, the Marquis de Casteinau, together
with all the other French Noblemen, who made up about two thousand Horse,
remembering they had for their King, and for their Patron Lewis the victorious,
made it fully appear, some by their noble deaths, the rest by their Heroic
exploits they were resolved to tear the wreaths of Laurel out of the Vizier's
hands, or fall in the gallant attempt. In fine, those Auxiliaries that Monarch
sent us, under the conduct of the Count de Coligny, and the Leiutenant Generals
Bodevis and Gassion, contributed highly to those Victories we have obtained:
and one may affirm there was not that private Soldier amongst them, that had
not been a Commander; nor one Captain that had not a great deal of experience;
Insomuch, that this small body, who might have furnished Officers for an Army
of fifty thousand men, had a great share in the advantages we gained upon the
Turks in that Campaign, and the renowned actions of the Count de Coligny, have
acquired him a reputation sufficient to make him famous in History, as well as
an Andelot, an Admiral, a Francis, and a Gaspard his Ancestors.


P. I do not doubt but all these valiant persons did sufficiently exercise the
courage of the Grand Vizier.


G. The havoc they made amongst all the Ottoman troops, having covered the
earth with their bravest Spahi, and passed the Raab upon the carcasses of the
stoutest Janissaries, brought such a consternation amongst them, and did so
quell the heat of the Grand Vizier's courage, that fearing a mutiny, which
might have cost him his head, he then sought for nothing but how to obtain a
Peace that might be honorable for him, and useful to his Master. The
Emperor, on whom fortune had looked favorably, fearing her wheel might turn,
and she might frown again, consented to the Grand Vizier's request; and
contrary to the sentiments of the Swordmen, agreed to his propositions.


P. Sir, I am thus far pretty well informed how things went in this succesfull
Campaign, but as you have related it in gross, I shall lose a great deal of the
pleasure it would be to me, unless you would now relate the great action,
wherein the Turk was defeated, more minute and particularly.


G. If you can have so much patience, I will do it punctually, in the
following Relation.


A Relation of the Campaign in Hungary: And the Battles of Kermain, and Saint
Gottard, between the German and Confederate Forces, and the Turk's Army. Also
the Articles of Agreement, made betwixt the Emperor and the Grand Seignior.
THE French King having promised to Count Strozzi that number of Men he had
desired in the name of the Emperor, to assist at this Campaign against the
Turk, some of his Infantry, who were marched into Provence, upon another
design, and some Cavalry at that time in Modena and Parma, under the conduct of
Monsieur de la Fueillade, had orders to march into Germany forthwith. The
Emperor had the preceding year lost the City of Neuheusel in upper Hungary,
and had seen that Province plundered, and destroyed by Fire and the Ottoman
Sword, whilst himself was not able to defend it. So that judging he should not
be in a capacity to make good this Campaign against such numerous forces, nor
avoid the fatal consequences of the storm that threatened him, he went
personally to the Diet of Ratisbon, to resolve with the Electors, what means
they might best take to preserve the Empire from the approaching danger: soon
after this Diet, there were levies made all over Germany, and the French King,
as Count of Alsatia, obliged himself to furnish eight Companies, and forty
Cornets of Horse, which were to make up a body of six thousand Men, to be
defraid during the whole Campaign at the expense of his Majesty. The Count de
Coligny had the command of them, and under him de la Fueillade, and Bodvis
Mareshals de Camp.

All the young Gentlemen about the Court strove to be taken into this service,
some to please the King, others out of their inclination, and a third sort from
the example of the former, which was now become such a kind of necessity, the
younger sort could hardly decline it.

Coligny arrived at Metz the 25th of April, where the Horse, and those that
went Volunteers in this expedition, waited for him.

All these were divided into ten Squadrons, and the Squadrons into four
Brigades, under de Gassion, Desfourneaux, and de Beauveze.

They received Orders to march toward Colmar, a City in Alsatia, which refused
to submit to the conditions propounded to them by the Duke of Mazarin,
Governor of that Province.

Now to pass over the particulars of their March, which is not very material,
the French came at length near the famous City of Vienna, and encamped within a
League of that place, where the six Regiments of Piedmont, Espernon, Grance,
and the rest were joined, and after two days respite, they went forwards. The
Emperor being come thither to Hunt, and lodge near their Quarters, saw the
said six Regiments in Battalia, and the next day came again accompanied by
diverse persons of quality, and his ordinary Guards.

The Emperor then pressed Monsieur de Coligny to go and join the German Army,
which lay encamped behind the Fort Serin. The Turks did afterward attack it,
and raised also the siege of Canisia, and about the beginning of July, news
came it was taken by assault, though assisted by the Imperial Army. Seven or
eight hundred of the Men that were to maintain it perished, and the greatest
part of those that endeavored to retire toward the Bridge, which made the
communication between the Fort and the Army were cut off. This unwelcome news
retarded their March, and it was certainly dangerous to go to Markburg, as had
been intended, to wait for the Horse that were coming from Italy, and those
other that parted from us at Donavert when the Foot embarked.

Being in the French Army my self, I shall, and cannot forbear, to call it our
Army, for which you must excuse me, and therefore to go on, I must let you
know, that after consultation, they changed their former measures, and took
their road by the Mountains of Styria toward Rakelsburg. We began this march
upon the seventh of July by the Plain near Neustadt, and the same day passed
the River Leytha, which parts Austria from Hungary. From thence we went on by
Odemburg, which is a pretty large Town, and so toward Furstenfelt; a City
fortified with six Bastions, but ill situated.

From thence our march was very troublesome through the Mountains to
Rakelsburgh, where we arrived on the nine and twentieth. It is situate in an
Island, encompassed by the River Muer, toward the Plain it is fortified with
some Bastions, and half Moons, the Ditches are large, deep, and full of Water.
The left arm of the River passes within a little distance of the Outworks, the
right is nearer yet: but the Fortifications on this side are not so good as the
other; and they were then at work with great diligence: and besides, this place
is commanded by a high piece of ground, within Musket Shot, upon which stands
a Castle, guarded by some Out-forts, built at the point of the hill which faces
the Town.

After the Turks had taken, and razed the great Fort of Serini, the Imperial
Army repassed the Muer, to draw the nearer to Rakelsburg, and cover the
Country the most exposed to the incursions of the enemies.

This Movement gave Coligny the greater facility to join them, which he did
upon the 22d day of July, so soon as he was informed of the news, by Monsieur
de Bodvis, whom he had sent purposely for intelligence.

When we joined the Army, they were encamped in one Line; the Emperor's forces
had the right; those of the Empire were in the midst, commanded by the Prince
of Baden; and such as belonged to the Allies had the left, commanded by Count
Hollach; ours posted themselves upon the left of these last.

On the three and twentieth word was brought to the General Montecuculi, that
the Turks marched along the River Raab to find an easy passage, with design to
enter the Country. He took a resolution to march with all the Horse toward
Kermain, a little Town situate upon the River, and leave the Foot and Baggage,
with orders to follow him in haste.

The seven and twentieth, Spork, General of the German Foot, who conducted
them, sent to la Fueillade to march immediately, because he had notice that the
Enemy approached: and to confirm the Message, he ordered some Volleys of Cannon
to be fired from their Camp at St. Gottard, where they arrived that morning.
This advice obliged us to leave the Baggage with a slender guard, and hasten
the march, to join the rest of the forces at St. Gottard.

They encamped very close to avoid some hills which reigned all along the face
of the Camp, and were of too large extent to be possessed by the Infantry of
three Armies.

Our Troops had the left of the Camp, which was on the Enemies side. The night
was spent in making an intrenchment, and by morning it was pretty well finished.

In the mean time the City Bridges were repairing, the place being but small
and much ruined. Its situation is at the confluence of the Raab, and the
Laufsnitz: but whatever diligence they used in making up the Bridges, the same
could not be completed till the morning of the eight and twentieth.

Then the Baggage began to go forward, and took up the passage for a whole day.
The following night two thousand Foot were commanded to go and join the Horse
at Kermain. But scarce had they began their march, when news came, that the
Enemy, after they had been repulsed at Kermain, marched directly along the
River to St. Gottard.

This action was honorable to the French Horse, the Turks attempting their
passage in two several places directly before them: the one being toward the
Bridge they were repairing, and which was guarded by some Hungarians; the other
at a Ford below it; and to favor the Tartars in this passage, who had
undertaken it, they had caused a considerable body of Janissaries to advance to
the brink of the River, who by their fire, thought to have made themselves
Masters. They were repulsed every where with great vigor, and for want of
Infantry to oppose them, there were some Horse commanded to serve on Foot with
Musquetoons, the better to maintain this attack, where the Sieur de la Chau, a
Captain who had the guard of the Ford, with fourscore Maistres, bravely
repulsed all that endeavored to pass.

In this combat the Enemies lost a Pashaw, named Ismael, and some considerable
persons on our side were slain: the Chevalier de Saint Aignan, and Monsieur de
Chasteau-neuf Aid de Camp, de Sault and de Treville were wounded.

The Turks after they had in vain attempted the passages, continued their march
along the River, to find one more convenient nearer the Springhead; the season
was very unfit for their design, because that River running at the foot of the
Styrian Mountains, swells upon the least Rains: and was now so full by the
showers that had fallen some days before, that it was fordable in few places.
Montecuculi sent us notice of their march, which was confirmed by the burning
of such Villages as they met with in their way, which gave us the alarm, and
obliged all the Army to make ready for the defense of our Camp, which was in a
place of great disadvantage, by reason of those high grounds which commanded
it. All the rest of the day and night the Soldiers stood to their Arms,
although the Enemies made no attempt upon us.

The Horse, who had taken their way by land, and were separated from the Foot
at Donavert, did this day join the Army, having left part of their Baggage
behind, to march with the greater speed. In the mean time the Baggage belonging
to the Army was gotten over the Bridges, and upon the nine and twentieth the
troops began in the morning to march toward the Camp, which had been marked
out on the other side of the River, and hardly were the first of them gotten
over, but the Vanguard of the Enemies began to appear upon those higher
grounds before mentioned.

General Spork, who had staid in the Camp with the German Foot, caused some
volleys of Cannon to be fired upon the most advanced, and afterward retired to
follow the rest of the Army, the Turks not offering to molest them.

About ten of the clock, our Horse, who observed their march, encamped in such
a manner, that they took up the ground which was opposite to the Enemies Camp.

At the same time, they made themselves Masters of the River by placing strong
guards at convenient distances, which took up the whole extent of the Front;
and we passed the rest of all that day in firing our Guns at them, without any
great effect.

The Turks Camp appeared to be disposed in two lines; but the distances were
not equal and regular like ours; some parts were better furnished than others,
in gross, and without order, most of the Soldiers have Tents, painted green,
or some other color.

The Grand Vizier was encamped in the center, and the Janissaries near him. His
principal Tent, which glittered in the Sun, appeared to be of Crimson Silk, it
was accompanied with many others of different colored stuffs, joined by
Galleries shut up with an enclosure of green stuff, like a Wall of seven or
eight foot in height; and round about this Park were an infinite number of
Tents, which formed a kind of a large City in the midst of that numerous Army,
composed of well nigh an hundred thousand men.

All this might easily be discerned, because the Camps, though separated by the
River, were not far asunder, and that of the Turks was raised in form of an
Amphitheatre upon the hills side which they had possessed. But, that which is
wonderful, is, that all these vast Buildings are set up, or taken down in a
very short time.

They march ordinarily in great Bodies, without observing any regular distance:
each body has its Drum, which is very large, and because they beat but two
strokes at a certain long distance of time, the noise of them is accompanied
with A small shrill brass Trumpet.
Clarions.

At the head of their greater Troops, they carry a world of red and white
Ensigns, where for the most part they have a Body of Tartars, of whom they make
use to overrun and spoil an Enemies Country, and to march on the wings of
their Army.

They are a people fit for those expeditions, for besides that they are used to
Fatigues, they are mounted upon very swift Horses, and well winded, on whose
backs they swim over most Rivers. Few of them have any Firearms, and for
offensive weapons, most of them use only Arrows, besides which they carry a
Cymitar by their side, and another fastened to their horses Gyrths, to use upon
occasion: Some of them have Javelins also, or Half-pikes, which they dart with
great force and skill. Their manner of fighting is not to stand their ground;
so soon as they are charged, they scatter in an ^nstant, and rally again with
the same faci^ity, to take their advantage, and fight as they see occasion.

The Janissaries are certainly their best men, they fight on foot, and march in
great battalions, but without observing, as I told you before, any order, or
regu^arity.

They are stout Soldiers, and make admirable use of their Cymitars, and their
Muskets, which are short: they have always a good number of Cartrages, to
charge with the greater speed, yet does not their firing come near that of our
Infantry; but for handy blows they are dreadful and hardly can any thing
withstand the shock of their great Battalions, when they are in the heat of
Fight, and can come to make use of their whole force for they march in a very
close order, and go onward, whatever opposition they meet with.

For their Cavalry, they are doubtles^ not so much to be feared by such as kee^
their ranks, and hold firm and close together, they can break our Troops no way
but by their great numbers; their habil^ments of War are Vests, which com^ down
to the Knees, of several colour^ and that diversity makes a very agreeabl^
object; they have Bottines, and Bonne^ of Stuff, the inside quilted with Cotton
finger thick, like a hat without an^ brim.

So they wear them in the Campagn^ but in times of peace, or some day o^
Ceremony, they wrap it over with a larg^ Skarf of Silk, red, or white,
wherewit^ they make up their Turban.

Their Artillery is as well, and as nim^ly served as ours; their small pieces
are ^^rried upon Carts, and supported in the ^idst by an Iron fork, which turns
upon ^spindle, so that without moving the ^art, they can fire them any way.

Their baggage is for the most carried upon Camels, and their great Artillery
upon carriages much like unto ours, and ^awn by Buffaloes This is what is ^ost
remarkable and considerable, and (...) return to what happened between the ^^o
Armies; that of the Turks finding ^o many difficulties to pass the River in
^^esence of ours, because in that place (...) Raab and the Laufnitz joined, and
^re Swollen by the rains, or else be^^use they had discovered, within half a
^^gue of Saint Gottard, a passage much ^^re easy over the Raab, they decam^^d
upon the one and thirtieth in the ^^rning, to post themselves before a little
^^age, where the Ford was: Our Army ^^ow'd them, always taking up the same ^^nt
as theirs.

That day they planted eleven pieces (...) battery near the entrance of the
^^^d, where they intended to pass, and ^^m that place down to the River, they
^^^w a long retrenchment to lodge their Musketeers, which was defended by fou^
more Cannon.

The River of Raab is about a ston^ cast from shore to shore, and runs in (...)
Valley, shut up on either hand with gre^ Hills about the distance of a Cannon
sho^ and for the most part covered with thi^ Woods.

The Ottoman Army not having roo^ enough to encamp in the lower groun^ had
taken in part of the hills, when there was least wood: Ours was at t^ foot of a
hill, where the Raab flows in^^ the Valley (on that part where the E^mies lay
encamped) and forming a gre^ elbow, left toward us a Plain able (...) contain
seven or eight thousand men, t^ Trees and Houses belonging to the V^^lage
covered it, though it extended a lit^ beyond on the right, where it is bound^
by a Wood, joining to the Gardens, a^ the River, which after it has taken t^
compass, runs along by the Village i^ low Field, very boggy, and at that the
over-flowed in part.

The first of August, which was o^ Friday, a day of enterprise with t^ Turks,
because they think it fortuna^ they began in the morning to draw so^ of their
Forces into a bottom, which (...) toward that part of the River, where ^hey
designed to pass, and as we could ^asily see from our Camp, what passed (...)
theirs, we soon discovered their design; ^ut did not perceive that it made our
^rmy take any precaution to defend the ^assage, so that the new troops
belong^ng to the Empire, commanded by Count Holach, who were behind the
Village, ^resented themselves first to oppose the Enemy.

The attaque began about nine in the ^orning, and upon the noise of the Cannon,
and Muskets, the rest of the Army stood to their Arms.

These new German Companies, could not long withstand the great efforts the
Turks then made to become Masters of the passage, two Regiments of Infantry
were cut in pieces, and the Count of Nassau, who commanded one of them, was
killed upon the place: the Cavalry retired in disorder, and the Enemies having
secured the Ford, passed into the Plain, where the better part of them drew up
in Battalia, whilst the others pushed forwards even to the first Houses in the
Village.

The Prince of Baden, seeing them passed, sent immediately to give notice to
Monsieur de Coligny of the ill state of affairs, and that no time was to be
lost* Coligny was obliged in so pressing a necessity to send the nearest
Regiments to his aid; Espagny, Grance and Thurenne marched thither with all
diligence, and at first coming restored the face of affairs, and even drove the
Enemy out of the enclosures of the Village; but after they had withstood their
efforts for a time, they were constrained to retire toward the Houses: So that
in the last charge, the Regiments of Espagny and Grance, were so roughly
handled, that being not in a condition to maintain their post, Monsieur de
Guitry, had orders to cause the Regiment of la Ferte to advance, whom they had
posted lower toward the banks of the River. Upon his arrival; he seized on the
Gardens which had been disputed and began to fire very smartly at the Enemy,
who during these several attacks, had filled the Plain with the best forces
that had gotten over, and they had in diverse parts been casting up several
retrenchments pretty nigh to one another, and laying a Bridge below the Ford:
Notice being given to the Generals, by the Marquis de la Ferte, it was resolved
to go and attack them in the Plain, since it was impossible otherwise to drive
them out of that post, where they had so well secured themselves. Monsieur de
la Fueillade, whose turn it was that day, brought the Order, which was executed
with so little reflection, and after so precipitate a manner, that they exposed
those foot Companies as a prey to the Turkish horse, had not the French
Squadrons, commanded by Beauveze, followed by two of the German Squadrons,
advanced immediately before that Infantry, as soon as they saw them past the
Hedges and Defiles, although their Orders were only to second them. The
Regiment of Thurenne had the right hand of the attack toward the Wood, and was
sustained by another of Germans. The passage was not very open, Grance and
Espagny had the midst, and La Ferte had the left toward the River, where they
were to pass by a way which would not admit of above five or six men in front.
Part of this last Regiment marched directly to an entrenchment of the Enemies,
where they fired very thick, whilst the rest of their men drew up in Battalia
behind them: but because they could not get to them without dividing, by reason
of the inconveniency of the place, this disadvantage added to the novelty of a
dreadful and fierce Enemy, put the Officers to a great deal of trouble to get
the Soldiers on, who beheld the two German Regiments under their feet that had
been defeated in the first attack: the dead having all their heads cut off,
were laid in order of Battle upon the same ground they were to pass over, to
march to the Enemy.

Our Horse, in the mean time, who were advanced (as I said) before the Foot,
charged the Turks with so much vigor, that notwithstanding their great
numbers, they were shattered. The movement they made by giving ground a little,
gave the Soldiers much courage, and then the Foot made such continual
discharges as put them wholly into disorder: For being used to come to handy
blows they could not endure to stand against such firing: And upon the second
charge of our Horse their whole body began to give way, and turn their Heads
toward the River, and the retrenchments they had made upon the left within
forty paces of each other.

When they were driven into that corner, they had no other choice, but either
to make good their retrenchments, or fling themselves into the Water. This was
the cause of that obstinate resistance they made, besides that they were helped
by their shot from the great retrenchment, which raked all along from the other
side of the River, whereby the Regiment of La Ferte, was much incommoded,
however they gained the retrenchments on this side, though the last of them was
defended for a long time by the Enemies, and that was the last effort they made
in this Battle. For after that they were totally disordered in all parts, and
cast themselves in great crowds into the River, whose stream is very rapid, it
was wholly covered with them for above an hour; the greatest part were drowned,
the remainders perished by our Soldiers, who fired incessantly upon such as
endeavored to gain the farther shore, the ground being pretty steep on either
side.

The terror and consternation grew so universal, at last, in their whole Army,
that without considering whether it were easy for our Troops to pass the River
and follow them, they abandoned their great retrenchment on the other side, and
the two Batteries, they had made there, not daring to return the night
following, during which, by reason of the obscurity and the continual rains,
they might have carried off their Cannon, without the least knowledge of any
one.

The Combat lasted about four hours, and concluded with a considerable loss on
either hand, above six thousand of the best of the Turks, and the greater part
of the youth who were near the grand Vizier, and had passed the River, fell in
this Battle: and we had twelve, or fifteen hundred wounded or slain; amongst
others the Count de Mouchy a Colonel, and the Count of Nassau, the Marquis
Villeroy was wounded with an Arrow: The Counts de Serry and Beauveze were hurt,
Messieurs de Bouillon made themselves famous by their valiant performances.

The better part of the Success of this illustrious Action is owing to the
French Nation, who though but few in Number, and without any very considerable
assistance of the Imperialists, were able to overcome an Enemy entrenched, and
who had the advantages of the place. Who by their taking of the Fort Serini,
had struck all the German Provinces with terror, as well as the Emperor's
Army. The new raised German Regiments ran away above two leagues from the Camp,
during the fight, though they were not attacked. The Generals with the rest of
the troops expected the event. Their baggage was laden, and every one was
rather considering how to make their escape, than any ways to assist those that
fought, and although such a retreat must have been difficult to be put in
execution before an Enemy puffed up with good Success, and who do ordinarily
fight with impetuosity; nevertheless the Imperialists had a design of throwing
up a work before them in haste, from those woods which lay near them, to the
River side; and our French to secure a passage for themselves upon the River of
Laufnitz, had left the Regiment of Piedmont, to guard the head of the Bridge,
near St. Godthard, where the baggage and the rest of the troops, were to pass,
to get to Furstenfelt.

The defeat and rout of the Enemies, which they had scarce faith to believe at
first, delivered all of us from those troubles and cares, and every one was so
satisfied with this good fortune, that they did not so much as consider,
whether it were fit to make use of this advantage, and pass over some Forces at
this Ford which the Enemies had abandoned, and likewise at St. Godthard, to
attack the Turkish Camp, where the terror was so great, that the Vizier caused
several principal Officers to be put to death in his own presence, who
notwithstanding all he could urge, were preparing to fly. It is most certain,
that if they had made use of this consternation, as it was easy to have done,
we might that very day have gained the greatest Victory, that any Christian
Army has obtained for a long time, against the Infidels: But they were
satisfied with guarding only those passes they had won with their Infantry,
which they did all the night in great quietness, the Turks not making the least
attempt to recover their Cannon they had left behind, in their great
retrenchment. During the above mentioned fight, the Turks had sent some troops
directly over against the Imperial Camp, who were charged and defeated by
Spork, General of the Horse, who compelled them to repass the River.

The next day, being the second of August, the Enemy removed their Camp out of
the Valley, and posted themselves upon the higher ground, where they planted
their Guns, which they fired the whole day upon those works we had made to
secure the troops who guarded the passage.

The day after they continued the same thing, though the Cannon had but the
same effect, and at midnight they began to decamp, and marched the same way, as
they came.

Our Army did on this side the River, make the same movements as they, and thus
they marched in sight of each other till the seventh, when the Enemies retired
toward Canisia: and there being great scarcity amongst our men, they were
ordered to march along the Raab, that they might get provisions and forage,
they remained till the twentieth in the Villages neighboring to Oedemburg.

About the end of the Month, they marched toward Presburg, along the shore of
the Lake Neusidlesee, which is seven leagues in compass, and derives its name
from the abundance of Fish taken there. And in the beginning of September the
Armies being encamped near Virtemburg, there came News that the Enemies were to
pass the Danube at Gran, to enter upon Hungary; this made them change the
design they had concluded on to march along that River to the Cities of Raab,
and Comorra, and to pass afterward over a Bridge of Boats at Presburg, and
oppose their designs.

They marched therefore near Huesen and Tirnaw, toward the River Vagh, which
runs near Neuheusel, and falls into the Danube above Comorra. Then did there
come intelligence that the Turks had passed, but none could precisely tell what
their resolutions were; it was at first believed they would besiege Levens,
situate between Neuheusel and Gran, which had been taken at the beginning of
the Campaign by Count Souches, but in the end we understood that it was but a
party which they had detached to reinforce Neuheusel, and post themselves
behind it to hinder the besieging it.

A great train of Artillery which the Emperor sent to his Army, had given them
this jealousy: They were then posted at the Mouth of the Vagh, behind was a
Bridge on the Danube to pass into the Island of Schut, where the Forces under
Count Souches were encamped. This re-inforcement made them deliberate to go and
attack the Turks in their post, and several days were vainly spent in these
deliberations, there being always some obstacle or other that hindered the
execution, and as if there had been some contests between Count Montecuculi,
and the Commanders of the French Forces, who suffered very much after the
Battle, and demanded provisions with great earnestness: It was perceived that
this Italian General, subtle no doubt, but of that sort of subtilty ordinary
in those of his Nation, and fitter for the Cabinet Council, than at the head of
an Army, intended nothing less, than to march against the Enemy, and who
affected that pretense so much, only because he saw the Army so harassed and
weather-beaten, that thereby he might in some sort diminish the honor they had
acquired at St. Godthard, by the reproaches he made, that we were the cause of
hindering that design; he indeed nobly proposed it the first, though he had no
mind to put it in practice, as being assured that a Treaty of Peace was then on
foot, which had for some time been secretly managed for his Master: But the
better to conceal his intentions he had marched toward the head of the Vagh,
making a show as if he would draw nearer the Enemy, for that purpose. The
French Troops being ill guided in this march, found themselves upon the two and
twentieth within five little leagues of Neuheusel, and distant from the rest of
the Army above two, in danger of being surprised, because the River that lay
before them was fordable in many places, and the mistake was not found out till
toward noon. Monsieur de Coligny being fallen sick, and carried to Tirnau:
Monsieur de la Fueillade in his abscence caused them forthwith to march off,
and rejoyn the gross of the Army, the Turks not having attempted any thing upon
us: They had some few days before, defeated a party of German Horse, and by the
return of some of those Prisoners we first heard the News of the Peace in the
Camp, and the Cessation of Arms was proclaimed upon the thirtieth of September,
the conditions thereof were as follows.

Articles of the Treaty of Peace between Leopold I. Emperor of the Romans, and
Mahomet V. Emperor of the Turks, made and concluded the 17th. of September,
1664.
I.
THat the present Peace shall last for twenty Years.

II.
All the Prisoners shall be exchanged, and surrendered on either side, as at
present five hundred are exchanged.

III.
The City and Fort of Varadin shall be left to the Grand Seignior, who shall
evacuate all the Places of Transylvania by withdrawing his Garrisons, not
leaving any in what manner soever hereafter: And the Emperor of the Romans, on
his part, shall evacuate, and draw forth his Garrisons from the Forts of
Samovisvo, Keyovart, Retelut and Hust, and restore them into the hands of
Michel Abaffy.

IV.
The said Abaffy shall be continued by the two Emperors, and they shall deal
with him, as they have done with his Ancestors.

V.
The two Jurisdictions and Lordships of Zatmar and Sabotz, wherein are the
Fortresses of Zatmar, Magisbania and Etrecht, Kalo and Tockay, shall remain to
the Roman Emperor in full possession and right.

VI.
The City of Neuheusel shall remain in the hands of the Emperor of the Turks,
who in exchange, shall remit to the Emperor of the Romans the Fortress of
Sekelheist, and in case he will demolish the said place, the former shall be
likewise razed; if not, the Emperor of the Romans may fortify some other, as
he shall think fit, to be opposed to Neuheusel.

VII.
The Roman Emperor shall send as considerable an Embassy, as ever was sent to
Constantinople, and the like shall be done by the Emperor of the Turks to
Vienna. And the said Ambassadors shall meet near Komora. And furthermore all
the points agreed upon in the preceding Peace shall be punctually observed.

FINIS.
Some Books Printed for B. Aylmer.
THE Works of the Learned Dr. Isaac Barrow, late Master of Trinity College in
Cambridge: Published by the Reverend Dr. Tillotson, Dean of Canterbury: In
three Volumes in Folio. Sermons and Discourses upon several Occasions: in three
Volumes in 8o. By Dr. Tillotson Dean of Canterbury. A Discourse of the
Communion in one Kind: in Answer to a Treatise of the Bishop of Meaux's of
Communion under both Species lately Translated into English: in Quarto.
Meditations Miscellaneous, Holy and Humane. By I. H. Master of Arts. To which
is added a third Part by another Hand: in Twelves.

