A BRIEF Relation of the Siege of VIENNA, And the Victory of the CHRISTIANS
against the TVRKS at BARKAN.
THe Turks falling with their formidable Forces like a Torrent into Hungary,
the Duke of Lorrain was forced to repass the River Raab, and first to bring his
Army under the Walls of Altenbourg, and afterward to cause his Infantry to
pass one of the Arms of the Danube, and to post themselves in the Island
Schutz, while his Highness remained with his Cavalry on this side the River,
but he was quickly obliged to retire, upon the advice he had, that the
Hungarians, who were appointed to guard the passage of the River Raab, had
betrayed the same to the Enemy. His Highness marched with all the speed he
could, but the Enemy followed him so close; that their foremost Troops fell
upon his Rear; the skirmish was very hot, and the Imperialists suffered a
^onsiderable loss: but in conclusion the Enemy were forced to retire; In this
action the Prince of Savoy was mortally wounded. On the 8th of July the Duke of
Lorrain arrived near this place with the Imperial Cavalry; and about nine a
clock that night, their Imperial Majesty's, with the Archdukes, and
Arch-dutchesses parted from hence in great haste for Lintz. The next day and
the following great numbers of people left this place, some one way, some
another; and the confusion and consternation we were here in, cannot be
expressed. The Enemy in the mean time advanced into Austria, the Tartars making a
most terrible ravage wherever they came; Our Governor the Count de Staremberg,
who arrived here from the Army on the Eighth, being assisted by the Count de
Caplieres, in quality of the Emperors Commissary General, was not wanting all
this while, as well as thetime would permit, to put the place into a posture of
defense, and particularly to plant Palisadoes on the Counterscharp. The 11th
and 12th the Imperial Infantry making Six Regiments, entered the place, and then
our Garrison, with the Regiment of Staremberg of 1500 Men which was here before
consisted of 14500 Foot and 1000 horse, and besides these, we counted between
12 and 15000 Burghers, Students and Servants, capable to bear Arms. The 13th we
set fire to the Suburbs, in which were above 5000 Houses, and 15 or 16 stately
Palaces which were all burnt with their ric^ and costly Furniture. The 14th the
Imperial Cavalry in E^even Regiments, Seven Regiments of Dragoons, Three of
Croats, and Sixteen Troops of Polish Horse, who the day before had had some
skirmishes with the Enemies Vanguard, marched trough this City, and having
passed the Danube over Six or Seven Bridges, marched to Corne-Neubourg; the
same day, arrived here Four large Boats with Ammunition, and several
Incendiaries, who intended to fire the Magazing, and in effect, had already
burnt several Houses very nea^^^ were discovered, and being dragged about the
Streets by (...) People, were Fleed alive; and the Turks began to inv^^^ the
place. The 15th we were formally besieged by 150 thousand fighting Men; The
Grand Vizier taking his Quarters in the Empress Dowagers Palace, called La
Favorite. The Enemy began that very day to fire upon the place, and o^ened
their Trenches the 16th the Enemy fired upon us from Three Batteries, and shot
a great many Bombs in to the Town; they possessed themselves in the night, of
Leopolstadt, and another small Isle in the Danube, by which means they likewise
shut us upon that side. This day our Governor received a small wound in the
Hood with a stone, raised by a Cannon shot. The 17, 18, and 19 were spent by
the Enemy in advancing their approaches to gain the Counterscarp; and on our
side we made several Sallies to hinder them in their Works, the Cannon playing
on both sides almost without intermission. In a Sally we made on the 19th we
took two or three prisoners, who told us the Turks were above 100000 fighting
Men, besides 20000 which still kept Raab blocked up, under the Command of two
Bassa's. The 20th the Enemy had finished a Battery in Leopolstadt, from whence
they likewise attacked us with their Cannon and Bombs. The 21 our Governor
received letters from the Duke of Lorrain promising a speedy Relief. The 23 the
Enemy did not make so much use of their Batteries, as they had hitherto done;
but about 7 at night they sprang a Mine on each side of their chief Attack,
which was against the Lebi Ballion, between those of Melcke and the Court, and
followed them with three several Assaults in both places, but were so bravely
received that they did not advance a hands breadth without very great less. The
25th they again sprang a Mine, and stormed three times, but were repulsed,
though with great loss on our side. The 26th in the Evening we sprang a Mine,
but it had not the effect we desired. The Enemy shot into the Town a Letter,
being tied to an Arrow, which our Governor had some days before writ to the
Duke of Lorrain, and this they accompanied with another Paper, persuading us to
save our selve^ by yielding in time, and not to irritate the Grand Si^ The 27th
the Enemy again attacked the Counterscar^ same places where they sprang their
Mine the 23 which they renewed four several times, and were as often beaten
off; and thus there did not pass a day without springing of Mines on their side
or ours, or without the Enemies making an Assault in one place or another. The
third of August about 10 at night, they stormed the Counterscarp before the
Ravelin of Burgshor, and after having been repulsed four several times, they
lodged themselves there; that day the Enemy raised a Battery against the right
face of the Burg Bastioh. The 6th the Enemy sprang several Mines, and made a
descent into the Ditch, which caused a great alarm among us. The 7th we made a
Sally, and killed a great many of the Enemy. On the 9th they sprang again a
Mine which buried many of our Men; in the Evening we made a Sally and ruined
their Works in the Ditch, but with great loss on our side. The 11th, 12th, and
13th, several Mines were sprung on both sides; The Enemy raised several new
Batteries, and again lodged themselves in the Ditch, and we made several
Sallies. The 14th they advanced their Works in the Ditch before the Ravelin;
and the night following lodged themselves on the point of the Ravelin. The 17th
we Sallied out with 200 Men, and ruined their Works in the Ditch; and the next
day we beat them from the point of the Ravelin; The days following we were in
continual action with the Enemy, who had now secured their Lodgments in the
Ditch: And we made several Retrenchments within the Bastions; out Garrison begun
to be very much weakened, we had lost a Colonel, five Lieutenant-Colonels,
about 30 Captains, and 38 Lieutenants, and many were sick. The 2 of September
the Enemy sprang a Mine-under the Bastion of Lebl, and blew up the point of it;
and thereupon made an Assault with great numbers of men, but were repulsed. The
4th they sprang another Mine, which made a breach in the flank of the said
Bastion, and they endeavored to lodge themselves there, but were beaten off.
The same day we made sign from St. Stephens Tower of the great distress we
began to be in. The 5th, 6th, and 7th the Enemy made great Efforts to lodge
themselves on the Lebl Bastion. The 8th we discovered a great Mine of the
Enemies, and took the Powder out of it; and again made signs from St. Stephens
Tower, for our danger began to be very great. The 9th we saw great part of the
Enemies Troops decamp, and march toward Kalemberg and the Forest, and we
understood by a Prisoner, that they were in great consternation upon the advice
they had of the approach of the Christian Army; however they continued to
attack us with their Connon and Bombs as furiously as ever, and went on with
their Mines under the Lebl Bastion. The 10th at night they sprang a Mine, but
without any great effect. The 11th in the afternoon the whole Turkish Army
marched out of their Camp toward Kalemberg; but at the same time the Enemy not
only kept their Trenches, but continued to fire upon us from their Batteries,
and to work in their Mines. The 12th they made use of their Cannon and Bombs as
formerly, and we expected every minute they would spring their Mines; but about
four in the Afternoon, we perceived the Enemy were in great confusion, and that
they began to flee, and that the Margrave of Baden advanced with several
Batallions to our relief; upon which our Governor Sallied out, and fell upon
the Turks, who were still in their Trenches, and cut them all (...) pieces; and
about five the Marquess de Baden entered the (...); the joy of the Inhabitants
being equal to the trouble (...) ^traction they were in before. Our Garrison was
redu^^^ (...) ^^o Men, and the Enemy had made so great a breach in the Lebl
Bastion, that we had reason to fear we could not have resisted their nixt
Assault: It Is impossible to discribe the Enemies Works, they are incredible, in
their Trenches they were covered as well from the weather as our shot; nor can
we pretend to give you here an account of all remarkable passages during this
famous Siege, from which it pleased the Divine Goodness, after Sixty days to
deliver us. This invasion of the Turks has cost the Lives of 100000 Christians,
besides the great Numbers carried into Captivity, and the desolation of this
once flourishing Country of Austria, is so great, that its Ruins cannot be
repaired without many Millions, and many years.

The letters from the Imperial Camp near Gran, confirm the account we gave you
in our last, brought hither by the Count de Lamberg, of the Victory which the
Christians obtained against the Turk at Barkan, whereof they give us the
following Relation. On the 9th Instant the Imperial and Polish Armies advanced
in order of Battle, the Imperialists having the Vanguard, toward Barkan, near
which place was encamped a Body of between 13 and 14000 Turks, being the best
troops of their remaining Army, they, encouraged with the advantage they had
upon the Poles on the 7th, no sooner saw the Christian Army appear, but
advanced with full speed, and most hideous Cries, charged the imperialists, and
endeavored to break in upon them; the Christians kept themselves very close
and firm, and repulsed the Enemy, who then turned toward the Poles, and made a
very fierce charge upon them; The Poles received them likewise with great
Bravery, and being very well seconded by the Imperialists, made a great
slaughter of the Enemy; who seeing one of their chief Bassa's slain, and an
other taken Prisoner, fled toward Barkan; the Christians pursued them very
close, and fired upon them with their Cannon, which the King and the Duke of
Lorrain caused to advance for that purpose. Of the Enemy some got over the
Bridge (...), which happily for us broke, others threw themselves into Barkan,
some were drowned, and others taken Prisoners, so that of this whole Body, not
above 4000 escaped. The Imperial Foot and Dragoons advanced, and the Regiment
of Castelli, and some other commanded Troops attacked the Counterscarp of
Barkan, being led on by the Count de Staremberg, and took it with their Swords
in their hands, and putt all the Turks that were there to the Sword, but gave
quarter to 500 Janisaries that were in the place, and who surrendered on
discretion. The Christians, after having pillaged Barkan, set fire to it, and
as well there as in the Enemies Camp, which covered the said Fort, as likewise
the City of Gran, they had a great deal of Plunder; 20 Pieces of Cannon, with
great quantities of Provisions and Ammunition, and many fine Horses, with very
rich Furniture, were taken; and the Prisoners declare, that after this second
defeat, the Christians will not meet with any considerable resistance any
where, there being a very great consternation among the Turks. They in Gran
continued to fire upon the Christian Troops that were in sight of them, till
night, and renewed the same the next morning; but their Cannon was but small,
and did us little harm. The Christians quite ruined the Bridge of Gran, and
when thee Letters came away, they were passing the Danube over a Bridge of
Boats (which was brought from Comorra) in order to their attacking that place,
the principal Fortifications whereof have it is said been very much damnified by
Thunder; and their best Cannon, and greatest part of their Ammunition sent to
the Siege of Vienna.


