A Brief Relation OF THE PLAGUE AT NAPLES, In the Year M.DC.LVI.

Where died 10, some days 15, and one day 20000 at least, (some say 25000) and
the next day but 500.

With Observations, Preservatives, and Cures.

Translated out of Italian into English.

LONDON, Printed by J. Grismond, 1665.

A Brief Relation OF The PLAGVE at NAPLES, In the Year M.DC.LVI. etc.
A Consultation made for the Sickness then raging and reigning, by the
subscribed Physicians of this most Faithful City, by order of the most
Illustrious Magistrates deputed for the Office of Health.
As for the distinction of the Spotted Fever and Purples, and that which is
called the Tokens, thus much is observed, That upon the incision of the Spots
of the first two, there will arise a little Blood or Gleeting; but if the
Tokens be cut, there will nothing of either arise, the whole Blood or Juice
being supposed to have some touch of a Gangrene or Sphacelation.

And as to the Bubo's Venereal and Pestilential, they are supposed to be thus
distinguished, that the Pestilential Tumors lie lower in the Groin.


IN the Opening and Dissecting at that time of two dead bodies, one of a Man,
the other of a Woman, on the first of June in the year 1656, by order from His
Excellence, and the most Illustrious Magistrates deputed by this most faithful
City, about the Sickness then rise, it was observed by the most expert
Anatomists Marco Aurelio Severino, and Felice Martorella, (with the assistance
of the chief Physician and other Doctors) that all the Bowels were infected
with black spots, that is to say, the Heart, Lungs, Liver, Stomach, and the
Intestines; besides, that the Bladder of Gall was plainly found to be full of
black, viscid, and very thick choler, which pertinaciously stook to its
Membrane; but above all, the vessels of the Heart were full of a grumous and
black blood. And this was the summary of the Observation.

This being related by the same Signor Felice in an Assembly of the
abovementioned most Illust^ious Magistrates, it was by them decreed, that
together with the Signori Domenico Coccia, Onofrio Riccia, Carolo P^gnataro,
Francesco Cafaro, Giovanni Giacomo Carbonello, Carolo Joveue, Andrea di Mauro,
and Salvator Borrello, assembled in one place, they should determine and order
what ought to be done, as well for the preservation as for the cure of this
Sickness: wherefore these being met in the house of the said Signor Felice,
they ordered for Preventives, (as to remedies most easy and at hand) that it
was greatly helpful, First, to make in the houses Fires with fumes of Rosemary,
Bay Berries, Juniper, Frankincense, and the like. Secondly, Treakle-water,
Treakle, Mithridate, Pills of Ruffus against the Plague. The composition of dry
Figs, Rue, Walnuts, and Salt, which was King Mithridates Preservative, and
found in his Desk or Cabinet written with his own hand. The Magistral Bezoar
Vinegar made with Brimstone, Rue, Garlic, Cloves, Saffron, and Walnuts: the
use of which is to dip in a piece or slice of bread, and take it fasting. Good
too are the powders of Bole-Armonick, Terra sigillata, Terra di Malta, Citron
seeds pounded, seeds of Basil, powder of Scordium, or Water-germander of
Contrayerva (or instead of it, Virginia Snake-weed;) Bezoar-stone East and
West: all which, or any, may be taken in the pulp of Citron, sharp O^enges, or
with juice of Limons. In the mouth they may hold crude Sulphur, Zedoary,
Aristolochia or Birth-wort, Gentian, Carline, white Dittany, Master-wort,
Angelica, Vervain, Vince-toxicum or Swallow-wort, Goats-rue, Juniper Berries,
Bay Berries, Ivy berries, any one of these. To smell to (besides the usual
Balls) they commended a Sponge well wet in Vinegar and Treackle, or else to
make little hollow boxes of Cyprus-wood, Juniper, or of the Bay tree, and
therein to put Treackle, Vinegar, and Rue: good also he ein are the Oils of
yellow Amber and of Camphir. Let them anoint their Heart, Temples, Nostrils,
and the Wrists with the Oil of Mat^hiolus, or Treackle-water, or make a
liniment of Treakle, juice of Limons, Saffron, Dittany, Carline, boiled
together, wherewith anoint. There may be made also a compound Vinegar to put
into a Basin, wherewith to bathe or wet the Hands, Wrists, and Nostrils, by
taking a quantity of Schaenanthus, roots of Carline, Nutmeg, Cloves, Benjoin,
Calamus aromaticus, and boil all with a quantity of the best Vinegar.

Of the same virtues to preserve are other Magistral Remedies endowed; such are
the Antipestilential Elixir of Crollius, the great Electuary of Matthiolus, and
his Oil of Scorpions, the Bezoartick Vinegar of Ernestus, the Diascordium of
Fracastorius, and above all is commended the powder of Padre Gio. Baptista
Eremitano, which was experimented in the Plague at Naples the age past, and now
observed with most happy success by many Physicians. The Composition of it is
thus:

And you may take this in the water of Scorzonera, Cardilli, or juice of
Limons. Also for a preservative they may take one drop of the Great Dukes Oil
Duke of Fl^rence.
, with some water of Goats-rue; and this too may do well in the Cure,
increasing only the quantity of the Oil.

Last of all, leaving a world of Remedies which here might be set down, the
most potent preservative is the Elixir following:

Now for the Cure, it is necessary first to cleanse the body, either upward by
Vomits, or downward by Stools; and this ought to be done suddenly with all
speed, before that the strength fails. The Vomit may be provoked with Antimony,
or with its Infusion, or by Vinegar of Squills distilled with Scordium,
Tormentil, Scabious, Citron-seeds,roots of Asrabacca and of Gentian; or else
rather with Diasarum Fernelii The Scamm^niates are dangerou^ and disap^^^ved
here.
. Downwards they may purge with syrup of Roses solutive, Confectio Hamech,
Trifera Persiea, or Rhubarb with decoction of Tormentil, Scordium, ^amarinds,
Contrayerva: and if this cannot be done or made ready timely enough, give four
ounces of conserve of Damask-roses, with powder of Rhubarb, or with the
Electuary of juice of Roses, with a little of Contrayerva, or the like.

As for letting blood, it ought to be determined from a great Fever, from the
strength of the fick party, ebullition of the blood, and inclination of Nature;
limiting the place of bleeding conformable to the motion which shall be
observed either in the upper, or lower, or cutaneous parts; still remembering
the advice of Oribasius, to scarifie the calves of the legs in case of great
Fevers or Fermentations.

After purging let them use all possible means to provoke sweat by
Diaphoreticks; for the which the berries of tree-Ivy (powdered and taken in the
best wine, Carduus water, or other) are much praised: so flowers of Brimstone
the weight of two scruples; Treakle also, or the abovementioned great Antidote
of Matthiolus, taking the weight of three or four drams, with adding thereto a
dram and half of the forenamed Magistral Powder of Padre Gio. Baptista
Eremitano, in two ounces of Aqua-vitae. Good too is the salt of Ash, the most
cried-up remedy of Frederick vander Mye, in the Contagion of Breda, (which was
most like ours) to take thereof the weight of twelve Grape-kernels in
Carduus-water. It Is moreover an easy sweat, pure Sulphur with Salt, boiled in
Wine in balneo Mariae, or else that of Crollius.

Let them insist continually in the use of the abovenamed Anti-dotes,
increasing the dose; not neglecting also to try the use of China Chinae, ^^e
Jesuits ^^wder.
the which for many reasons may happen not to be a little helpful; and the more,
that it is in many places the appropriate remedy for these distempers.

Lastly, as to what pertains to the symptoms, that is, Bubo's or Botches,
Pustules, and Spots, you must note that if they come out kindly and with
levamen, ease and relief, in such case leave the work to Nature, helping their
coming forth with Medicines emollient, relaxing, and attractive or drawing;
such as are Frictions, dry Cuppings, or Scarifyings, Vesicatoirs or
Blisterings; the which, if the swellings are below, then apply them a few
fingers beneath; if they be above, then apply them in like manner so far above
on the arms: noting that the said remedy of Vesicatoirs may be changed in
boiling Oil with Lime, applying them to the same parts; marking also, that if
the said Evil or Plague comes with a Coma, that is, a sleeping, or other
symptom in the Animal part, then the Bli^^erers shall be placed both on the
upper and lower parts.

Concerning the Bubo's or swellings in the Groin, if they bunch out kindly, you
may cure them with gentle means, such as Oil of sweet Almonds, Oil of Lilies,
Butter, Hens grease, or else with the simple Oil of Scorpions, or Ointment of
Marshmallows, with the roots of Lilies beaten in a Mortar.

But if the Bubo's come not out well, then look out more efficacious Remedies,
applying on the part Cupping-glasses with scarification, Leeches, Blisters, as
before; this done, apply thereon a Poultess of Onions, Treackle, and Saffron,
roasted in embers; after putting to some Hens-grease, or the like. If they be to
be cut, open them half ripe with a cold Iron, passing through a Stuppe or Lint:
and cure them with a compound Ointment of Gum Elemi, Ammoniacum, and
Turpentine, of each a like quantity, with a little Saffron, Wax, and Oil of
Roses as much as will suffice.

The Carbuncles, vulgarly by the Neapolitans called Ampolle, that is, Blains,
are cured by cutting the part affected, scarifying it, Good here t^ seer and
bur^ with hot Irons.
and clapping thereto the same attractive or drawing Plaster, or Treakle with
Onion, or else the Poultess of Scabious, Hens-grease, and Treakle, hindering
expressly by all means the Ustion or burning in the beginning, as well of the
Carbuncles as of the Bubo's, that so the part may not be strengthened: you must
leave these Sores open by the Missaries or Voiders, and Emunctories of the
body, for a long time.

This is what in brief and privately could be collected (for the haste allotted
us) concerning the Sickness now reigning: hereafter there shall a Discourse be
of the nature and of the occasions of the same, and other Medicines shall be
proposed, according to the Observations that daily are made.

NAPLES, 2 June 1656.
FINIS.

