A brief and true RELATION OF THE Seige and Surrendering of Kings Lyn To the
Earl of MANCHESTER.
KIngs Lyn is seated upon an arm of the sea which washes one side of its, it
has surrounding the other side, one small part excepted, a large water fed
from the aforesaid arm; its of an indifferent height, the parts about being
commanded by it, being rich Marshes, through which passes at the tides the
salt water: It had been for a good while cunningly Fortifying it self under
pretense of Neutrality, and when at any time the Parliament upon their
miscariages questioned them, or required any thing to be done by them, they
still refused, and by degrees appeared more and more for the other party
against the Parliament: The Earl of Manchester being made Major General of
the Associated Counties, thought it most necessary to secure that back-doore,
which being so convenient an inlet to the enemy, might divert him when he
should advance with his powers toward the North, for the freeing of
Lincolneshire and other parts from the miseries they suffer by the enemy: it
was much disputed whether it were not better to proceed by blocking up, rather
then to take it by force; the Town being of that strength that no ordinary
power could take it, had they that which was fit for defense, but it was at
last resolved to attempt it by force, and for that purpose it was thought good
to seize the Town of old Lyn, which is in Marshland, which by a party of my
Lords Forces was accordingly done, and Ordnance planted, which kept the Town
in continual Alarmes, and did so terrify the people with their shot and
Grenades, that they durst hardly abide in any of their houses that were
toward that side, the shot flying daily into the houses in the Tuesday market
place, and other places, the Town was approached in several other places, two
of which were on the side next to the mote, the one by the Causey that leads
to the South, the other to the East gate: The enemy at the first sallied out
with much courage, especially from the East gate and at once fired two houses
in Gauwood, intending to have done so to the whole Town, that our forces might
not Quarter in there, but the party that sallied out was well beaten, and the
rest of the town preserved, though the inhabitants were not worthy of such a
favor, who fled all away up on the approach of our Forces; all things being
put in order we called in pioneers from all parts round, and fell to breaking
ground, and by degrees bad brought our approaches within half Musket shot, yet
were we little the nearer the gaining the town thereby, only the better
enabled to batter their walls, gates and Forts; a little before the town was
yielded we discovered a hill of firm ground that was near to that end of the
town next the sea, which we had begun to form into a battery, which would
have so annoyed them, that they would not have known where to have been
secure, and by which a breach might have been made; but this also gave us no
great hopes of entrance, they making up as fast, as we should have beaten
down, therefore we recalled in many Boats, with which we intended to attache
it by water, and many cart loads of Ladders, which we intended for the land
side: during this hot service we lost about four men, one a Canoneer, who was
shot through the side with a drake bullet, he was not dead when the Town was
taken, but it was no likelihood but he would, he was a good Canoneer, and a man
right to his party, we had one shot with a buller through the shoulder, near
the neck: and one Lieutenant had his arm shot off, on which he died suddenly
after, it was with a Cannon shot through a Port-hole, so skillful were they,
that they would shoot three times together into one Port-hole: In this violent
playing with Cannon and small shot we believe above eighty lost their lives on
both sides, which is the rather added, because people enquire usually how many
were killed, as if they loved to hear of killing of men; and also to rectify
the Judgments of men, who will be apt to credit a story of three, four or five
thousand men slain at such a Siege, and such a Siege; its true, storming and
entering breaches usually wast men, but we were not come to this; when it was
resolved and declared on Saturday morning to storm, we hapily received a
letter the Friday morning, importing a villingnesse in the Town to capitulate,
which they said, and its like truly, they did not send as fearing the taking
the Town, but to avoid the effusion of blood: My Lord having before advised
them to send their women and children out of the Town; which he did for the
same reason: This Treaty was accepted, and eight persons for the Town, and
eight for my Lord appoined to Treat at Ganwood at the Quarter of that valiant
and pious Scot Sergeant Major Hoames, and to begin at five of the clock on
Friday night, which being done, order was given upon pain of death, that none
should shoot a shot, or work upon their Works during the time of the Treaty;
which was inviolably kept on my Lords part.

The Commissioners for my Lord Manchester, were Sir John Pagrave, Colonel
Russell, Colonel Walton, Master Philip Calthrop, Master John Pickering, Master
Gregory Gosset, Master John Spilman, and Master William Good.

Those for the Town, were Sir Hammon le Strange, Sir Richard Hovill, Master
Clinch, Master Dearham, Master Pallet Recorder, Master Hudson, he Mayor elect,
Master Leeke, and Master kerbie; when they were come they had no power to
treat, nor to determine, which being demanded the reason of, they answered,
that they intended only to draw things to a head, and to have them ratified by
the Mayor at a Common Hall; as for a Commission from his Majesty, inabling any
to be Governor, or to fortify the Town, there was none produced, it was
believed one of the Commissioners had one, but he did not show it; there was
therefore a dispatch made to the Mayor, who gave it them.

The Demands of these Gentlemen was to this effect; That in regard the Town of
Kings Lyn had a government by Charter, from the Kings of England, and was not
an offender in any thing, they therefore desired to be left in their former
state, only fortifications demolished, and to have free egresse and regresse
as formerly: They desired also, that all houses, lands and estates, be left to
pay taxes by distress, only where it was to be had, and persons of men to be
free, that the ships, goods, and personal lestates taken to be restored, or
satisfaction that all strangers come into the town, be set at liberty, that
the aspersion of Delinquencie or Malignancie be abolished, and that the Earl
of Manchester grant Protections to them that desire them. My Lord Manchesters
Commissioners replied, That they had offended, for they had not paid in the
second part of the 400000. pounds, they have made no assessement of the fifth,
and twentieth part, not sent in horse; and on the contrary, refused to send up
Delinquents sent for by the Parliament, pretended to hold the town for King
and Parliament, and yet refuse to deliver the town, or give entrance to the
Earl, who demands it for King and Parliament; and have received the
disaffected into the town, and dis-armed the well affected; imprisoned
Members of the House of Commons, and some of the Committee, they have employed
arms incrusted with them for the Association, against them; money gathered for
these vice of the Parliament, they have made use of to defend the town against
the Parliament and Association, and many of the goods of the well-affected they
have taken and employed for the defense of the town; therefore they appeared
to be great offenders: Yet to prevent effusion of blood, if they will deliver
the town by Saturday nine in the morning, they shall have privilege and
freedom; as for freedom from Ordinances of Parliament, they must expect no
such thing; as for satisfaction, their defection has been the cause of allo
their sufferings, and so cannot be satisfied, but the contrary is expected and
required, not only for the former, but also for the time spent in reducing to
obedience the town, and a months pay to the soldiers; for their persons and
estates they shall not be molested for any thing done since the Earls coming;
but for Horse and Arms that were in the town they must be delivered to the Earl
at his entrance.

After much debate upon the Particulars, which held from seven at night until
eight the next night, a dinner time only excepted, it was agreed in substance
as follows:

First, That Kings Lyn, with the Ordnance, Arms and Ammunition in the Town,
be delivered to the Earl, and the Earl to enter the Town.

Secondly, That the Gentlemen strangers in the Town should have liberty to
depart with every man a Horse, Sword, and Pistols.

Thirdly, That the Townsmen shull enjoy all undoubted Rites and Privileges
appertaining to them, with free trading to their advantage, so far as may
consist with Law.

Fourthly, That all Prisoners on both sides be restored and sot at liberty.

Fifthly, That the Earls Commissioners shall signify to the Parliament, and to
the Earl of Warwick, the desire of the town of Lyn, concerning the ships
taken by the Parliaments ships, and to that they can give no other answer.

Sixthly, That neither the person nor estates of any Inhabitants, Gentry, or
Strangers, now residing in Lyn, shall be hereafter noblested for any thing
past, or done by them, since the Earl of Manchesters coming into these parts.

Seventhly, That for preventing of plundering, ten stillings a man heraised for
all foot soldiers under the Earls Command, and a fort night pay for all
Officers under the degree of a Captain, and this is to be levied upon the
Town.

Eighthly, That Sir Hammon le Strange, Sir Richard Hovill, Captain Clinch,
Master Recorder, Master Dearing, and Master William Leeke, be left as Hostages
until Condiitons be performed agreed upon.

That which is observable duting this Treaty, is, that the Town, or rather the
unrulie soldiers shot at our men, contrary to accord, and fell to work upon
their works, and as it is conceived, with intent to cut ditches at the
spring-tides, to drown our works, which we discovering, made use of, to hold
them up to our terms, otherwise they were all prisoners, if we stood upon it.
This agreement being carried to the Mayor and Aldermen, etc. there were some
explainary exceptions, as that it was not expressed in the preamble, that the
Town be delivered for King and Parliament; that somewhat was not expressed
infavour or vindication of the Mayor, that any should be exempt from bearing
part of that raised to content the soldiers, or to that effect, which my Lord
by a Letter, or short Declaration satisfied them in, and then one of their
Commissioners returned with the last and full resolution, that the Gates should
be opened, and we enter: During this latter business, we mist usting they
would faulter, we drew all our horse and foot into meadows, which we put into
such a posture as might be most terrible to the enemy, making a large front,
when God knows what deptha they stood, then beating the Drums, and founding
the Trumpets, as if we had been prefently to march into the Town: Col.
Russell, that noble and valiant Gentleman had the Van, and Col. Walton the
Reete: Colonel Russell marched on foot toward the Eastgate, when he came
within Musket shot, the Commissioner that was employed to make way came back,
and told the Colonel, that the season of the night would not permit to open
the great Gate, they must therefore be content to march one by one at the
Wicket, if any shall question our discretion in entering in at a Wicket, and at
twelve a clock at night, let them know, that we did not know what alterations
might be by morning, nor how the ruder part might take courage and deny us
entrance; we thought it best the refore to take the present time, besides out
men were the next morning to have stormed it, otherway the spring ride would
have spoiled us; but when the Wicket was open, and we going to enter, the
Commissioner again returned, and told us there was a rude multitude of about
forty or fifty, that swore none should enter there, and if any did, they would
be the death of them, which they might have made good to five hundred, if we
had stood to it: they had there a parley of near two hours, some saying
Articles must be performed: others, that they would not condescend nor obey,
nor should the Mayor and Commissioners acts bind them, Crying shoot, shoot,
and one Canoneere they turned out, because he would not give fire upon us, as
himself said: at last one of them cried, give fire, which being in the dead of
the night, made some of the forward Country men and others on horse back, who
rid by the side of the foot that marched, to fall off their horses, and some
into the ditch, so terrible was the word, Give fire: but at last this multitude
was pacified and departed, which to speak truth was from heaven, for had they
continued obstinate, we could not have gained the town: they dispersed, the
Colonel entered, and his soldiers, who marched to their quarters at the
South-gate according to order; in our assage through the town, not one man
appeared, only the women, who for the general cried, God bless us, whether
for fear or love, you may guess. Thus being possessed of the Town, and having
drawn a party into the Tuesday market place both of horse and foot, and set
strong watches at every place, the Mayor came to the Colonel, of whom we
demanded why the Arms of the Town, according to the agreement was not brought
into the market place, he replied, that the season of the night would not
permit, but in the morning it should be done, which satisfied the Colonel, for
we saw they were perfectly subdued; and their spirits as to opposition quite
gone. If it shall be further enquired, why, or what should be the reason this
town of so great strength should yield to so small a power; it is answred,
first the inhabitants were such as had not been asccustomed to war, and were
much frighted by the Grenades, though to speak truth, there was some defect
in them, so that they did little, only falling among a timorous people.
Secondly, they had no soldiers, but inhabitants, and of them not many
fighters; but chiefly for this reason, they knew my Lord was noble, made up of
love and meekness, that conditions would be performed, their trade and
markets open, a garrison would spend money among them, and if they held out,
they should it was like lose many of their lives, and be blockt up by sea and
land, if not taken, and their estates at last become a prey to the conqueror:
there is one other question, or rather an exception to be answered, which as
we understood in the Army, was that the Londoners took exceptions that my
Lord sat down before the Town; For answer to this, though it be a sad thing
that accounts must be given to those that understand not the affairs of War,
nor whom it so much concerned as the associated Counties, yet thus much may be
said, my Lord thought action would have pleased them, because they complain
so for want of action, and besides to reduce a town to obedience that they
traded with, and the holding out of it so much prejudice to them, should
rather have put them upon his encouragement, then finding fault: Besides, he
hopes shortly to be in Lincolnshire, and to drive the enemy out thence, which
he could not have done, that town not secured, and if God prosper his honor
as well there, as in this late action, he shall clear the Countries, make way
for the Londoners increase of trade and accommodation with provisions for the
City, Lincolnshire being one of their best magazines for the belly.

We thus possessed of the Town the next morning about nine of the clock his
Lordship marched from his head quarter, with his life guard, a brave Troop
commanded by that valiant Gentleman Captain Rich, and diverse Knights and
Gentlemen being come into the Town, be repaired to the Sermon, where one of
his Chaplains preached, to give God thanks for his happy and peaceable entry,
the Ministers both in fore and afternoon bonding their discourses that way,
and indeed God was seen exceedingly in the business, and so much the more as
the arm of flesh was weak, they labored also to possess the people of a
blessing to them, and to that purpose gave many clear instances, too large to
be here inserted, whether the people thought so or not did not appear, but they
will suddenly find it so; my Lord has his Quarter at Alderman Tolls a Member
of the House of Commons, who was so roughly dealt with, in the time of the
Siege, that he was constrained to make an escape out at a window into the arm
of the sea, his house being guarded in all parts else by Musketeers; many
others returned that had fled out of the Town, who were hapily again possessed
of their dwellings, though with great diminution of their estates, which to
repair, it were good some course were taken, for there is nothing more
reasonable, then that those that forsake all for the Cause, should be satisfied
in point of damage; Colonel Waltor has for the present the Government of the
town; thus we see how providence orders, he that was lately locked up for three
days and three nights at Oxford in a poor chamber without food, is now Govern
our of as great and strong a town as Oxford; in which service he will
doubtless behave himself so well that the town shall not have cause to
complain, and will be able to say that at the delivery of his charge, which
was said by Master Ash at the evening Sermon after the entering the town, that
he was confident notwithstanding the entrance was in the dead of the night, yet
a half penny worth of wrong had not been done to any in the town. The first
resolution taken for the better and more orderly government of the Soldiers,
and content of the people was to have every morning at eight a clock a Sermon,
which was to be performed by the Ministers of the Town, and my Lords
Chaplains, which will undoubtedly keep a good Harmony between them: And thus
briefly you have the most material passages past in the Service; the next
thing to be done is the dismissing the Gentlemen Strangers, seizing of Arms,
and what by Articles was to be delivered, settling the Garrison, that so the
place being secured his Lordship may advance,

Take one observation more, the Town of Lyn may be made as strong a place as
any in the world with a little charge, and so there is a retiring place, for
the fearful that have thoughts of departing the Kingdom; it were not amiss
to call all that are gone thither; and let them pay excise there toward our
war rather then the wars of others.

Let all who apprehend the gaining this Town a good piece of service to the
State, give the noble Earl of Manchester his due praise, and God the glory.

This is Licenced, and Entered into the Hall Book according to Order.

Printed by G. Bishop, and R. White.


