(...) EXHORTATION With the means to promote PIETY Especially Directed to the
(...) OF LONDON.

By a lover thereof, a^ o^ all sincere Christians.

Ezra. 9.13, 14. And after all that is come upon us for our evil deeds, and
for our great trespass, seeing that thou our God have punished us less than our
iniquities deserve, and have given us such deliverance as this;

Should we again break thy Commandments, and join in affinity with the people
of these abominations? would not thou be angry with us, till thou had
consumed us, so that there should be no remnant nor escaping?

LONDON, Printed and are to be sold by J. C. under St. Katherine Cree-Church.
1669.

A Brief EXHORTATION With the means to promote PIETY, etc.
WHatsoever might be the instrumental, yet there is not (I presume) any among
us so void of reason, or Religion but will acknowledge, that the Great God of
Heaven and Earth, the judge of the whole World being provoked by the multitude
and greatness of our iniquities, was the principal efficient cause, both of the
beginning and continuance of that dreadful Fire, (...) the greatest (...) that
possibly could be (...) resist, or assuage, till it (...) the chiefest, and
greatest (...) famous, and flourishing Ci^^^^ (...) we still break the Com^^^
(...) God? would he not (as (...) said to the Jews, at the (...) their Temple,
and Jerusalem then (...)) be angry with us, till he had (...) us, (and or
City;) so that there should be no remnant, nor escaping? yea, shall we not
deserve, and may we not justly expect, that as the punishment of the iniquity
of Jerusalem was greater, than the punishment of the sin of Sodom: So the
punishment of the wickedness, of our rebuilt London should be greater, than the
punishment of the iniquity not only of the former, but also of the latter
Jerusalem, which was utterly demol shed, so that there was no remnant, nor
escaping? and if so, than what person, that has but the least spark of Reason,
does not plainly see, that for our future security, we ought to be far more
concerned in the new modelling of our lives, than our City? and that we should
be far more careful, that this ^^tter City should exceed the former, in pious
and Religious Inhabitants, than (...) secure, and sumptuous (...) (...) that
person acquainted (...) Reason, or common ^^petience, does not manifestly see
an impossibility of promoting Piety in our City or elsewhere, ^^less the whole
worship of God (which consists not only in Prayers, but al^^ (...) he^^ing and
reading the holy Scriptures, and in receiving the holy Sacraments) (...) and
constantly observed by us?

Wherefore in the name of (...) as all, that in the least desire the future
welfare, and prosperity of our New London, and the Inhabitants thereof, and
that have any hopes after this life, to be made free Denizens of the New
Jerusalem which is from above: be exhorted and persuaded with all constancy,
for the future, seriously, and solemnly to perform all those holy duties, which
God requires of us, either in Public or Private.

And in the first place, Let us begin with the Duty of Prayer. Twice every day
at least, with all decent humility and reverence, making our addresses to the
Throne of Grace, either in our own Parish-Churches, or else in our private
Families, or Closets, wherein (as well as in our Churches,) without doubt,
forms are far more convenient and necessary for us, than Extempory Prayers,
and for our ordinary (...) can be more suitable, (...) our Public ^^yers.

As for those that are against the admitting of Forms in general, or our
Public (...) in particular into Families or Closets, I shall desire them to
consider; That if they be against the admitting of Forms in general, it must
(...) either by reason of the good conceit th^^ have of their own, and all
other Peop^^s ability to perform this weighty Duty ex tempore, or else by
reason of the ill opinion they have of Forms themselves;

If by reason of their own, and other Peoples ability, I shall beseech them
seriously to Consider, 1. That the Disciples may be presumed to have had as
good abilities, as they; and yet they desired to be taught to pray, (as St.
John's Disciples were before them) and our Savior thought good to reach them,
not only the manner how to pray, but also the express words, and phrases of a
Prayer; which he composed, not only for their use in Public, but also for
their Private use in their Closets, that there also they might avoid Batrology.
St. Mat. 6.6.

And our Savior himself praying alone used Thrice the same words. And as
learned and pious, both Martyts, and others, as ever the Christian World knew,
(...), ^^d used set Forms of Pray^^, and have recommended them as useful (...)
(...) ^^eir Christian Brethren, as well ^^^rned, as unlearned, in Private as
well as Public.

2ly. I shall desire them seriously to consider, what obsolete, lofty, obscure,
and sometimes ridiculous words, and phrases; What incongruous and impertinent
sense, if not nonsense, yea, and sometimes seditious and sinful petitions have
been heard even from those, that have been counted gifted extemporists; How
often they have been subject to mistakes, or non-plusses, either palpable, or
less observable; whose hiatus's have been filled up with a multitude of vain
tautologies, which (though to some either not understanding, or not observing
their se^ie^, they might seem to be the fervent ejaculations of a devout
Spirit, yet,) have been very little or nothing at all taken notice of by the
extemporists, whose thoughts have all that while been earnestly busied, either
in recovering what they have lost, or in pursuing after some new matter for the
prolongation of their Prayers; How many by reason of the multitude of disasters
which they have known to befall extemporists, have with very much unwillingness,
(...) reluctance been brought to began, and a (...) they have begun, have been
possessed with su^^^anick fears, that instead of being devout, notice ^^rious,
either with an heartless, and sensel is trembling, and much difficulty they
have approached, or with an inconsiderate, and rash precipitancy they have
posted to their much desired conclusion, scarce remembering how they began, went
on, or came thither; yea, they have professed afterward, that they were glad,
that their pain was over, and that they escaped so well; so that this holy duty
which should be performed with the greatest delight, is by this means become a
great burden, and pain.

Lastly, how many even of those, which by great diligence, and long practice,
have overcome most, or (if it be possible) all of these difficulties, either by
seeking variety of words the shadow, to avoid the suspicion of a formalist,
have been forced to take less notice of the matter, which is the substance of
Prayer; or else, by too high conceits of their own abilities, beyond the rest
of their Brethren, have rendered both themselves, and their Prayers ^dious not
only to God, but also to their auditors; when it has been discerned by them,
which has too often come to pass.

3. I shall desire them seriously to consider, what a multitude of ^^^nilies
there have been, wherein there (...) been any, which have had either the
^^^ity, or confidence to pray, ex tempore (...) how many of them, which have
ha^^ the ability, and confidence to pray before their own Families upon the
visiting of Friends, or such like small excuses have often omitted this duty
for several days together, to the great damage of their Families. And how many
Families upon the absence, sickness, or death of such persons have for want of
Forms, lived prayerless for several weeks, or months, if not the greatest part
of their life; scarce using a grace before or after meat, whereby the Lord
knows how many Families have been utterly ruined.

Moreover, I shall desire them seriously to Consider the inconveniences, which
many auditors of ex tempore Prayers, have been usually exposed to. 1. How often
very many of them, not understanding their obscure words, phrases, metaphorical
expressions, etc. have been forced (as St. Paul long since observed among the
Corinthians, boasting of their great gifts, and profound wisdom, counting St.
Paul's Preaching and Praying, mean and despicable, in comparison of theirs) to
return Barbarians, deprived of the privilege of sending (...) to Heaven their
hearty Amen to what they (...) heard. 2ly. How often very many, eit^^^ (...)
listening after, or over curiously taking (...) of their new words, phrases,
etc. or el^^^^y reason of the extemporist's apparent mistakes, inadvertencies,
fears, precipitances, etc. have been very much hindered in their devotions, to
their great damage, if not utter ruin of their immortal Souls. And after all
these things ex tempore prayers are in every respect mere Forms to their
auditors, their own fancy, and invention; yea, and the Spirit of God (which
they suppose to dwell within them) being as much limited, or stinted to the
words, phrases, method, and matter of those ex tempore Prayers, as to the
words, phrases, method, and matter of other Forms.

2ly. If by reason of the ill opinion they have of Forms themselves, I shall
desire them seriously to Consider; whether it be not a very unreasonable, and
sinful thing to Imagine that God should command the Jews to use Forms; that the
Prophet David should compose Forms for his own use, and the use of the Temple,
That the Prophet Hosea should command all Israel to take words with them, when
they confessed their sins, and asked pardon for them. That our Savior should
give such a complete Form to his ^^^isciples upon their request; that many
thousands of holy Martyrs, and devout Saints, should from age to age constantly
use our Saviors Form and make daily use of other Forms composed by themselves
or others, if they were not beneficial and necessary for us, and rather
furtherances, than hindrances to our Devotion. And more over, I shall desire
them seriously to Consider, whether we have not just cause to stand amazed at
the inconsiderate presumption of those, who with much considence endeavor to
persuade the People, that Forms do hinder the operation of Gods Spirit upon
their hearts, whereas they never did, or could allege any good reason, or
plain proof of Scripture for this their confidence; But on the other side, not
only St. James does recommend unto us in our mirth the singing of Psalms,
which certainly he never would have done, had they been any cause of quenching
the Spirit of God. But St. Paul Ephesians. 5.18, 19. does tell us, that we should
be filled with the Spirit, speaking to our selves in Psalms, and Hymns, and
Spiritual Songs, singing and making melody in our hearts to the Lord; And
moreover, St. John in his Revelations (Chap. 14.3. and 15.3. and elsewhere)
endeavoring to Reveal unto us the Spirit^^^ (...) lights, Seraphical joys of
the Heavenly Hosts, before the Throne of the Lamb, could find no better thing
to resemble them to than those Spiritual Raptures which the Saints here enjoy,
in singing to their Heavenly Father. Now Psalms, when they are sung, are
double Forms, wherein we are bound to observe not only a just number of
Syllables in every line, but also a more accurate, and difficult form of tunes,
or soundes; and if the Spirit of God does Manifest his most powerful operations
in these, certainly it cannot be imagined, that he has less liberty to work
upon our affections, when we are confined only to a Form of Words, which is
far the easier Form of the two.

If there be any, that can harden their hearts against the force of these
Considerations.

O Blessed Jesu! by thine Agony and Bloody Sweat, which thou did suffer in
those most fervent Prayers of thine, wherein thou did Thrice use the same
words, do thou constrain them to confess, that often to use the same words in
our Prayers does rather promote, than hinder the fervency of a devout Soul, or
the operations of the Spirit of Supplication.

2ly. If they, who are against our Public Prayers, in particular, for the
daily use of Families, or private Persons would but diligently peruse them, and
impartially compare them with their own or daily extempory Prayers of any other
person, or with any other Printed Forms; I question not, but they will be soon
convinced, that whatsoever they do, or can daily say; the sense thereof is
plainly comprehended in our Publickdaily-Prayers; and consequently, that (as I
said at first) none can be more suitable for our daily use than those; Provided
only that Single or Particular Persons use the Singular for the Plural Number,
and instead of St. Chrysostom's Prayer, they may use this Prayer in the
Singular Number.

Almighty God, who have promised to hear the petitions of them, that ask in thy
Sons Name; I beseech thee mercifully to incline thine ears to me that have made
now my Prayers and supplications unto Thee! and grant that those things which I
have faithfully asked according to thy will, may effectually be obtained to the
relief of my necessity, and to the setting forth of thy Glory: through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Or any of the other Prayers after the Communion-Service.

The pronouncing of Absolutions, and Benedictions Authoratively, God has
appropriated to the Ministers of his Word, as their peculiar Prerogative; and
therefore no other persons either in Families or elsewhere ought to arrogate
that Power unto themselves; yet, I deny not, but that other persons may use
them in an Optative-way, desiring God to pardon or bless either themselves,
children, or friends, etc.

Lastly, for some extraordinary Cases any private Family, or Person may frame
or procure such set Forms as may be most suitable to their present condition,
which they may use with their daily Prayers, as long as those special
emergencies last, according to the custom of our Church in the time of Famine,
Pestilence, War, and upon the receipt of some signal mercy, etc.

But besides our constant morning and evening Sacrifices of Prayer, there be
several other times, wherein it highly concerns every particular person to make
his private addresses to the Throne of Grace; the omission of which has
certainly proved the undoing of very many, and unless we herein reform, as well
as in the other, we have as little reason to expect the safety of our Souls, as
they of their Bodies, who will stint themselves to Two meals a day, and will
not out of those times taste any thing, though their bodies stand in never so
great need.

Of these private Devotions, some may be constant, and some occasional, the
constant are those which are to be performed every Morning as soon as we awake,
and every Night immediately before we go to sleep, repeating seriously, and
intently in our minds either the Lord's Prayer, or some short ejaculation
befitting the season.

Occasional Devotions are those which are to be performed upon any sudden
accident, which befalls us, either by Night, or by Day, Viz. As soon as we
perceive any affliction ready to befall us, or when it i^ come upon us.

Or presently upon the receipt of some great, and unexpected mercy in mind,
body, or estate: Or whenever we shall perceive the Devil putting into our
minds any wicked thoughts, tempting us either directly not to fear or love God,
as we ought to do; or indirectly, by persuading us either to omit, or slightly
to run over our daily Prayers, or to omit the daily hearing, or reading of the
holy Scriptures; or either not at all, or without due preparation to receive
the holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper; or not to honor and obey the King; or
not to submit our selves to all our Governors, Teachers, Spiritual Pastors,
and Masters; or not to love, honor, and succor our natural Parents; or not to
order our selves lowly and reverently, to all our betters; or to neglect our
duty, toward our Children, Servants, etc. or to be proud, to Swear rashly,
Curse, Lie, Slander, to Covet, Cheat, Steal, to be Prodigal, Wanton, Lacivious;
to Eat, Drink, Sleep, or take our Pleasure excessively, etc.

Lastly, as soon as ever we are conscious to our selves, that we have committed
any of these, or the like Sins, in Thought, Word, or Deed.

And upon all these, or the like occasions (to the utmost of our Power, useing
all other means, or duties, which we know to be necessary or expedient for us,
without which, our devoutest Prayers, and most servent ejacularions may not
only be unprofitable, but hurtful to us, and abominable in the sight of God) we
may either retire to some private Place, or Closer, and with an audible voice
pronounce, or else (if that cannot conveniently be done) either in our Beds, or
at our Tables, or in our shops, or wheresoever we be, we may in our minds only,
devoutly, and fervently rebeat only the whole Lords Prayer (...) any one
petition of it, or any other small (...) aculation most suitable to the
occasion, and every such ejaculation (imitating our Savior in his most fervent
Prayer immediately before he was to drink the bitter Cup of his Passion) we
might repeat two or three times, or oftener, and at every repetition endeavor
more and more to kindle, and inflame our affections.

In the Second place, Let us constantly hear or read the holy Scriptures with
our Morning and Evening Prayers, as well in Private as Public; wherein
likewise we should observe the Public method, where we have the holy
Scriptures, not only most excellently interwoven with our Prayers, with which
we are to begin, and end our Spiritual meals, but also appointed to be read
after a most exact regular manner, besides several select portions thereof,
most properly befitting certain seasons of the year. Among the Apocryphal
Lessons, there be very few (if any) that can be excepted against, but if any
will not be persuaded to read them in their Families, they may instead thereof
read any other Lessons, either out of the Old Testament, or Apocrypha.

If there be any among us, who do fancy, that their worldly cares, and employme
will in the day of Judgment sufficiently ^^cuse them, for not spending daily so
much time in holy Duties, as our Public Service does require; supposing that a
little short Prayer every Morning and Evening with a Sermon or two every
Sunday, is as much as they do need, or God does require o^ them.

I shall desire them seriously to Consider. 1. Whether they do not daily spend
as much, if not more time idly, if not sinfully, than that comes to? if so,
then let them ask their own Consciences, whether they will not be inexcusable
in the last day.

2ly. If God does require some part of every day wherein we ought solemnly to
Worship him, which is consented to both by the practice and judgment of all
Nations; whether he does not at least require one hour, in twenty four, if not
one hour in seven according to the proportion of one day in seven?

3ly. Whether it be not a very unreasonable, and ungrateful thing not to allow
God and our Souls an hour or two on our workingdaies, whereas God allows us
on his holyday several hours for works of necessity and mercy for our bodies;
and whereas by too many sad experiences we plainly see, that our Souls do daily
stand in as great need of holy-duties, as on Sun-daies our bodies of works of
necessity and mercy.

4ly. Whether we can spend less than an hour daily in holy-duties, and whether
the reading of the holy Scriptures therein, be not as necessary, as Prayers,
since the Lord did strictly charge Joshua Chap. 1.8. That the book of the Law
should not depart out of his mouth, but he should meditate therein day and
night, that he might observe to do according to all that is written therein;
Which command, (though it was given to Joshua in particular, yet) may as
certainly oblige all persons in general, as that promise, I will never leave
thee nor forsake thee (which was given to him at the same time Chap. 1.5.) does
belong unto all true Christians, as it is applied, by the Apostle, Heb. 13.5.
And King David that sweet singer of Israel in the very first beginning of his
Psalms, pronounces a blessing upon him, that walks not in the counsel of
the ungodly, etc. But his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law
does meditate day and night, and he shall be like a tree planted by the rivers
of Water, that brings forth his fruit in due season, his leaf also shall not
wither, and whatsoever he does shall prosper; but on the other sid^^^ by way of
opposition he calls those (...) ly, that do not meditate in the Law of God
day and night, and shows, that they shall be not partakers of those
blessings, but are like the chaff, etc.

And certainly, nothing more or better can be expressed by the tongues of Men,
to persuade, and press us to a constant reading, hearing, and meditating in the
word of God, than what the Spirit of God has said by King Solomon the wisest
of Men, in the nine first Chapters of his Proverbs. There are several other
Scriptures of the like nature, which I shall forbear to rehearse; these already
alleged being sufficient to convince any serious understanding Christian of
the necessity of this duty. They who still persist to neglect the daily
performance thereof, stand more in need of our daily Prayers, than Arguments.
Wherefore let all good Christians pray unto God, to open their eyes, and to
give them repentance, that the noble Bercans who searched the Scriptures daily,
and those many thousands of Martyrs, and pious Christians, which have set a
part every Morning, and Evening as much, or more time for holy Duties, than our
Publick-Service does require: Rise not up in Judgment against them in that
(...) Tribunal (...) when they shall be (...) by those (...)ly Scriptures,
which they now so little (...) guard, and seldom take notice of.

They who sometimes have such extraordinary occasions, that will not permit
them to spend so much time in their wonted Devotions, may read the Prayers with
the Psalms, and one Chapter only; If they cannot do so, they may with the
Prayers read the Psalms, or one or two Psalms, and the Epistle, or Gospel
appointed for that week; but at least (without inevitable necessity) I would
have them seriously and devoutly say, the Lords Prayer, the Creed, and the Ten
Commandments, which certainly may be done in so short a time, that I cannot see
how many persons can excuse the omission thereof, except it be (as I said) in
case of inevitable necessity; but as soon as those urgent occasions are over,
questionless, it does become us to Redeem our holy-time by reading over those
Scriptures, which we then omitted.

As we ought to pray oftentimes, as well out of, as in our set seasons, so
certainly ought we at other times to read, hear, learn, teach, or meditate in
the holy Scriptures; for (as St Peter shows, in his second Epistle Chap.
(...) to know the Arti^^^^ (...) be established in (...) truth of them, it we
must add to our Faith Virtue, and to Virtue Knowledge, and to Knowledge
Temperance, and ^o Temperance Patience, and to Patience Godliness, and to
Godliness Brotherly-kindness, and to Brotherly-kindness Charity, that we should
not be barren nor fruitless in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. And for this end (as he shows verse 15.) It is necessary that we have
these things always in remembrance, and (as he further shows Chap. 3.2.) we
should often call to mind the Words, and Commandments of the Prophets and
Apostles; which may be done by often repeating in our minds, either the Creed,
or Ten Commandments, which are the sum of the Law, and the Gospel; or some
other sentences of Scripture, which we find to have most influence upon us, ^o
stir up our pure minds to perform our duty toward God, our selves, and our
neighbor. Which has been the Practice of the Saints of all ages, who almost
in all times and places would have in their minds the Lords Prayer, or Creed,
or Ten Commandments, or some other portion of Scripture, which they would get
by heart for that end, and that they might the of the (...) they would^^ get
the (...) Printed, and (...) them in those place (...) their houses, wherein
they might be most obvious to their sight. And I know no reason why we should
omit the use of these means, which they counted so beneficial and necessary, to
put them in remembrance of the Word of God. I am sure, that they are a thousand
times better, than those wanton, lascivious, and profane Pictures, and Rhyms,
which do abound not only in Taverns, and Inns, but also in many private Houses.

In the last place, let us take care, not only that the holy Sacrament of
Baptism be duly observed, but likewise that we worthily receive the holy
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, at least as often as it is appointed by Public
Authority. And in order to our due preparation for our worthy receiving, I am
persuaded that there can be no better means, than seriously and diligently to
read over the Communion Service every time before our receiving.

Those who refuse wholly to receive this Sacrament, I shall desire seriously to
consider. 1. Whether their Consciences do not oftentimes (...) their ab^^^ing
does (...) willingness to part with (...) their worldly employments to (...)
pare themselve or else from a loathness to examine, and thoroughly to kn^^ what
sinful lives they lead; and to forsake their gainful and pleasant sins, and to
live according to the strict, and holy rules of Christianity; and if these be
their reasons, (as I fear they be the only reasons even of those, who pretend
to abstain from a fear of unworthy receiving) then let them judge whether their
case be not very sad, and dangerous.

2ly. That they who for fear of unworthy receiving abstain, may as well upon
the same account altogether leave off praying, or reading, and hearing the holy
Scripture, for those duties may be performed unworthily; neither dare I free
those that pray, and hear, or read the holy Scripture unworthily, from the
punishment due to the unworthy receivers of this Sacrament; and besides, I
wonder how any dare to harbor any such fear, whereas God has plainly told us,
that he does not require of us more, than we are able to do by the due, and
constant use of the ordinary means, which he has afforded us; which is, as if
we should tell (...) nnot do, that (...) says we ^an.

3l. That our Savior does not only ^^y, expressly, (St John 6.53.) Verily,
verily, I say unto you, except you eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink
his blood, you have no life in you; From whence we may plainly gather, That all
Christians upon the peril of loosing Eternal Life, are bound to prepare
themselves so, as to be fit, or worthy to receive the things signified in the
Sacrament, which certainly we can never do, unless we be worthy to receive the
Signs. But our Savior ( St. Luke 22.19) does also charge us to receive the
Signs, adding thereunto the reason of his injunction, saying: Do this in
Remembrance of me: Showing, that the outward signs of Bread and Wine, being
things obvious to our Senses, and fit resemblances or lively Pictures of his
Body and Blood, would be very great help or means to bring to our memory, and
to give us lively apprehensions of what he had done; and suffered for us: and
how can any persons pretend to keep from this Sacrament through tenderness of
Conscience, or fear of offending God by unworthy receiving, seeing they make no
Conscience of breaking in (...) Saviors express Command, (...) are (...) the
use of those mear^ which he thought necessary for our Spiritual eating and
drinking his Body, and Blood, which he has enjoined us to do, upon peril of
loosing Eternal Salvation?

4ly. That in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, we renew our Baptismal
Covenant, which by our Actual Sins we have broken, and by refusing to renew it
in this Sacrament, we do, as it were, wholly renounce it, and so forfeit all
the Privileges of a Christian in this World, he World to come.

Finally, I shall earnestly request all English Subjects seriously to Consider,
whether they do not eat and drink Damnation to themselves, that receive this
Sacrament after any manner contrary to our Sovereign's lawful command, seeing
that in their very manner of receiving it, they commit the sin of disobedience
to their Governors, which certainly will render them unworthy Communicants.

And if so, then assuredly it must needs be the safest way, (especially, for
tender Consciences) to receive it after the manner appointed by Public
Authority, it being cer^ain, that there i^ nothing therein required Contrary
(...) of God.

Glory be to the Father, and to the S^^, and to the Holy Ghost,

As it was in the beginning; is now, and ever shall be, world without end,

AMEN.

Feb. 11. 1669.
FINIS.

