A BRIEF NARRATIVE OF THE HARBOR, Of the Ancient Town of RYE in the County of
Sussex, with the present State thereof, and Reasons for Preservation of the
same.
To be heard at the Board this present day

THe multiplicity of good Havens and Harbors for Ships to resort to in Storms,
and lie safe when arrived, being no small blessing the Great Creator has
bestowed on this Kingdom of England, and conducing so much to the benefit
thereof: it becomes a duty incumbent to all Englishmen to endeavor their
Preservation. And the care thereof, and provision for the same (when falling to
decay) has not been thought unworthy of the Prudence and Policy of His
Majesty, and His Royal Progenitors, and the Representatives of the whole Nation
in the High Court of Parliament: As may be sufficiently proved, not only by the
several Acts and Statutes there made touching the same; but by the sums of
Money sometimes furnished out of the Exchequer it self to that purpose.

And although the Harbor of the Ancient Town of Rye in the County of Sussex,
was never yet Chargeable to the public Treasure of the Nation: Yet has that
Great Council and Court of the King and Kingdom, viz. the Parliament provided
against the damage thereof, in order to its Preservation; not only in general
with other Harbors, by the Statute 34 Hen. 8. cap. 9. But in particular, by the
Statute made on purpose 2 Ed. 6. cap. 30. That no Ballast, etc. be thrown into
the Harbors of Rye, or Winchelsea, under the penalty of forty Shillings per Tun.

Whosoever knows the Harbor of Rye, and shall seriously and impartially
consider the state and condition thereof, and the benefit and advantage
thereby, continually accrewing to many thousands both Natives and Aliens: will
find several weighty and enforcing Reasons to continue the preservation
thereof, although it were to be done at the Charge of the whole Nation.

This Harbor of Rye consists principally (at this time, viz. 1677.) in one main
Channel, running in from the Sea, which lies Northwest and Southeast, or very
near thereto. On the Southwest side of the Channel lies a Bar of Sand, which
Vessels repairing to the Harbor, must leave the Larboard side as they go in. If
they come from the Eastward, they may take their soundings from the Camber
Beach, which reaches from the Ness point, to the Harbor, and so run in. If they
come from the Westward bound for the Harbor, there be two Marks which stand on
the said Camber Beach, on the East side of the Harbor, about two Miles without
the said Harbor, which must be kept one with the other. And this course will
bring the said Vessels (so making for the Harbor) clear of the tail: of the
Sand aforesaid, till they bring two other Marks (which stand one of them upon
the Cliffe of the Town, and the other on the point of the Castle Beach, at the
West side of the Harbor) to bear one with the other, and then the said Vessels
may run right into the Harbor. And giving the point last mentioned a little
distance, may Anchor in three Fathom water, at low water; or as it pleases run
ashore at the East side of the Town, if they be destitute of Anchors and
Cables, and lie very safe.

Into this Harbor four several Waters empty themselves, and so run out into the
Sea; which have served, and still are, the natural means, to cleanse, scour,
open and maintain the said Harbor Navigable. Of which, two are on the West side
of the Town and Harbor, and the other two on the East side thereof.

The first on the West side, is called Tillingham Channel, or Water taking its
rise four Miles from the Town, Sewing the Lowlands on that side, between Bread
and Beckley, and Vdimer and Peasmarch, and anciently was much wider, and the
indraught thereof more large, then now it is; because several parcells of Land
have been Inned from the same within memory. And lately, to wit, about two
years since, the present Tennant of Cadborough Farm in Rye aforesaid, has
presumed of his own authority (without any Patent, Commission of Sewers, or
Writ, ad quod damnum) to Inn about a hundred Acres of Salts, usually before
this Inning flowed by the Sea. This Tillingham Channel, is that which to
preserve, the Major, Jurats and Commonality of Rye in the eight and thirtieth
year of Q. Eliz. Reign, were at the Charge of six hundred Pounds to lay a
Sluice, in part of those very Salts now enclosed (the Channel then running
there.) About two Miles up in this Channel, have Ships of considerable burden
been remembered by some yet living, to load Timber: So good was it then, before
spoiled by the Innings aforesaid.

The second is Winchelsea Channel, running up from Rye thither, and so through
the Levells and Lowlands of Icklesham, Pet, Gestling, and on the South side of
Bread and Vdimer, and beyond Bread Bridge further into Westfield, etc. Sewing a
great quantity of Marish grounds above eight Miles from Rye up in the Country.
This Channel was within these twenty years last past so annoyed and stopped by
a Sluice laid cross, and Groines made therein, to, and cross the very bottom
thereof: That the said Levells could not Sew. So as His Majesty's Commissioners
of Sewers, for the said Levels were necessitated to order the taking up the
said Sluice last mentioned, and Groines placed in the Channels as foresaid, and
thereby, and by deepning the said Channel about the mouth of their Sewers, and
heightning their Walls, have reaped much benefit, and secured the said Lands by
the one, from lying drowned by the Fresh, and by the other, from being drowned
by the Saltwater.

The third and least considerable, is that called Wenway water, or Channel
lying to the East of the said Town of Rye, and on the land side of the Camber
Beach aforementioned, and formerly has been deep enough for several Vessels
to Anchor in, and had remained better then now it is; but that Lands have there
been Inned, and more are said to be about Inning. this yet serves to Sew a good
part of the Lands in East Guldeford Marsh, the Lands called Camber Lands, etc.

The fourth and most remarkable, is that Ancient and sometime Navigable River
of Rother, running into the Main Channel of the Harbor at the East side of the
Town, and by the West side of East Guldeford, descending from Appledore, and so
from Redding, Smalhithe, Maytam, Newenden, Bodiham, Rothersbridge, and as far
as Rotherfield in Sussex above four and twenty Miles from Rye, serving to Sew
many thousand Acres of Land on the South, North, and West sides thereof, and on
the East side between Appledore and Rye in Shurlemere about 2000 Acres of land.
In the five Watrings in Romney Marsh about 9000 Acres. And in Woolland Marsh
20000 Acres, besides a great part of East Guldeford Marsh. And on the West side
in Wittersham Level, about 3000 Acres. This River has been reported of old,
Navigable as far as Bodiham Castle, in the Walls whereof were said to be
fastened Moaring Rings for Vessels. And there are those yet living, that heard
an Ancient Shipwright of Rye say, that he helped build one of Q. Eliz. Navy
Ships at Redding aofrementioned. And until the Dam or Sluice laid about ten
years since (by order of the Comissioners of Sewers for Newenden Level) cross
this River; was it Navigable to Appledore aforesaid, which is about seven Miles
from Rye. For in the year 1661. was built at Appledore, a Ship of the burden of
one hundred Tuns, or thereabouts, for one William Bowers of Dover. And about
half a Mile from that, was another near the same burden, built for one Captain
Morecock, in the year 1656. both above the place where the said Dam or Sluice is
laid. And it is well known by many yet living, that before the laying of this
Dam, or Sluice, and within these twenty years last past, and less; more then
twenty Sail of good Ships might Ride afloat at low Water in the Harbor of Rye,
as high up as the Ferry to East-Guldeford aforesaid; where now there is so
great a Swarve, that none can lie. And beyond that, there is hardly water
enough for a small Lighter to go to the place where the Stop is. Nor can a
Vessel of much smaller Burden, then His Majesty's Ship the St. Andrew was, (who
with the Happy Return came into this Harbor in September 1666.) Ride afloat at
low water where they did.

These things considered, it is easy to see what it is which threatens the
utter ruin and decay of this Harbor, if not speedily prevented, and what
reason there is for preserving thereof; which being duly weighed with those
that follow, it would be a wonder if it should be slighted or neglected: As,

First, Among others, because this Harbor of Rye is, and time out of mind has
been, so great a succor for Merchants and Mariners in Storms, to save both
their Lives, Ships and Goods, there being no other Harbor for which Ships in
foul weather dare deal between the Downs, and Isle of Wight; (this nigh eighty
Miles to the Westward, and that about Forty Miles to the Eastward.) And this
Port so fitly situate in times of War, serves for no small shelter and refuge
to Ships chased by any Pyrate or Foreign Enemy; into which, as experience has
often testified, they put for security, who if they had further to run, would
fall as prey or prize, into the hands of their Enemies.

Secondly, The goodness of the Harbor, as for Ships to ride in three Fathom
water afloat at low water, as aforesaid; and usually there flows about five
Fathom water on the top of the Stream, which makes the Harbor capacious to
receive a great Fleet of Ships of considerable burden; whereby the said Harbor
is rendered as good a Tide-Harbor as most in England, and better then any one
the French Coast all along the Narrow. Besides, Vessels have here the
convenience of cleaning a dry, or careening afloat, or for Tallowing and
Victualling: And Boats ready, when Ships by any sign shall make for the Harbor
to pilot them in.

Thirdly, The advance of Trade, and thereby of His Majesty's Customs, seeing
the better any Port is, the more it is frequented; and the more resort thereto,
the more Victuals are spent, and Merchandise there imported and exported.

Fourthly, By keeping the Harbor good, in removing the stops on the aforesaid
River of Rother, and other Channels, the In-draughts thereby being increased:
the whole Country thereabouts will receive benefit to lade and unlade their
Goods in the said River and Channels, as anciently they have done, at far more
easy rates then by Land-carriage; And to sew their Lands better then now they
are sewed, if the Channels be but deepened, and their Walls heightened; for
thereby, as aforesaid, they will be secured against damage by the fresh and
salt Waters, and with less charge; whereas now, their Waterscots on the
Low-lands in several of the Rother Sewers aforesaid, are more then the Rents
and Profits of their Lands; so as many have let their Marish Lands lapse into
the Commissioners hands, rather then keep them to such disadvantage.

Fifthly, If the Harbor of Rye be suffered to perish, not only Rye, but
Hasting, will be ruined thereby: for they having but a stade place, are forced
to lay up their Vessels of burden in the Harbor of Rye.

To all which, others may be added, which for brevity sake are here omitted,
and the consideration of all, committed to them concerned in the premises.

FINIS.

