SOUND CONSIDERATIONS FOR TENDER CONSCIENCIES; Wherein is showed their
OBLIGATION To hold close Union and Communion with the CHURCH OF ENGLAND And
their Fellow Members in it, and not to forsake the publiek Assemblies thereof.

In several SERMONS preached, upon 1 Cor. 1.10. and Heb. 10.25.

By Joseph Briggs M. A. vic. of Kirkburton, in Yorksshire

Qui Christum fine Ecclesia quaerit, errare and fatigari potest, at invenire
non p^test. Venerabilis Beda in Can. 6.1. London, Printed for Nathaniel Brooks
and are to be sold at the Angel in Cornhil. 1675.

To the Right Worshipful Sr. John Kay of Woodsum Farnley, Baronet, one of his
Majesty's Justices of Peace of the Quorum, and Deputy Lieutenent for the
Westriding of York J. B. Wishes all Mercy and Comfort in Christ Jesus, both
now and for ever.
Right-worshipful,
YOu and all good men would think it no small happiness to the Christian World,
if true Religion might reign as a Law unthwarted, unopposed, and the Orthodox
Faith, being obscured by no Questions and Cavils were only published and not
disputed. Faith and Religion may fitly be resembled to a pure and liquid
stream, which becomes muddy being troubled; and as by an Inundation of water
the Field or Meadow adjoining is turned into an miry pit: So when Contentions,
which the wise man compares to an overflowing of water, overspreads the green
Pastures of Sacred truth, much filth of error thereby cleavs to them. Hence
have Faith and Religion themselves come into question, though of all other
things they be most certain and indubitate; And as plants often removed cannot
take root and prosper, so Faith and Piety being removed out of their ancient
standing, and bended this way and that way according to men's humors, loose
their reverence and stability, and do decay in the lives of men, and Atheism
gets ground. Hence it is that, one gainsaying another, one plucks down what
should be by a common labor and consent built up. And hence it is, that as it
is impossible for a man to follow guides whose backs are turned each of other,
and their faces a clean contrary way; so Gods people, who should be led by
their spiritual guides in one beaten path of Faith and Godliness, are with
unspeakable peril distracted (not knowing what to do) while their leaders call
them contrary ways. By this (in a word) do we Christians become a Reproach
both to Jews and Gentiles, and we Protestants to the derision of Turks and
Papists while our Church is broken in so many factions, while Aarons bells do
jangle all men are in an uproar and fall together by the Ears, and the fire of
unchristian animosities become too often like that of the Temple, never to be
extinguished. But, which is the worst of all, Religion hereby becomes (as it
were) heart eaten. I mean, the heart of it, that is, the practice of Holiness
and Righteousness, daily decays, for when some men are loath to put
themselves to the trouble of an holy life they readily list themselves under a
party, not doubting to acquire to themselves a glorious name, if they be but
zealous in the defense of a tittle or punctilio, how careless soever they be in
the essential duties of the Kingdom of God.

Indeed how this should be, how the Christian Religion should be quarreled
about, is next to a Miracle, considering what benignity and sweetness of
disposition, what candor and ingenuity of Spirit, what humility and mutual
condescension it requires! But aut hoc non est Evangelium, aut non sumus
Evangelici; Either this is not the Right practice of Christianity, or it is not
calculated for our Meridian, wherein abound so much pride and uncharitableness,
so many strifes and divisions, so much wrath and envy, confusion and every evil
work. How far different are ours to those pure primitive times wherein Religion
truly flourished; For then was the spirit of Meekness and gentleness and
peacableness accounted the indispensable duties and characteristical notes of
real Godliness. The greatest instance of piety in the first Christians was to
dye and not to fight for Christ; they had not then learnt to make way for
Doctrines or opinions by the dint of the sword. And surely no reason can be
alleged why Christians should not act by the same rule and stand upon the same
ground now as then? But that can never be, while these partition walls are
daily set up amongst us? while men are daily forsaking our Church Assemblies
and racking their brains, and purses and interests to found or defend their
private Meetings in opposition unto them. Indeed this seems to be the way to
perpetuate a schism in the midst of us, and as it were to establish it by a
Law, which we and our Posterity may have sad cause to lament, when it is past
all prevention or Cure.

To prevent the unspeakable Mischiefs (the Prologue of utter destruction) I
conceive it the duty of all men in their several places, to bestir themselves
in time, but especially of Magistrates and Ministry, and it is my ambition to
be some way instrumental to remove the causes, which has (willingly) carried
me to this hazard, first to Preach and then to Print these ensuing Sermons. How
serviceable they are to the end for which they are designed I leave it to your
Worships considerations to determine.

Indeed when I first resolved to publish them I could have no dispute with my
self to whom to dedicate them. First, upon the account of my great personal
obligations to you, for those constant respects you have been pleased to
express unto my person ever since I had the happiness to be acquainted with and
seated near you, and also for that eminent love of God and his Church and truth
the world has experienced, and must upon all occasions gratefully acknowledge
in you, to the praise of God that raises up such worthies. Besides, the very
matter of the book seems as much to concern your self and other good
Magistrates, as us the Ministers of the Church. For these two Offices are so
intimately related; Church and State, Prince and Priest, Magistrate and
Minister are so nearly and naturally conjoined in a mutual interest, that like
Hippocrates his twins they rejoice and mourn, flourish and perish together.
They have most what in all ages fared alike in the world Both are deputies
under, and instruments of, and actors for God in their several Ministrations.
And therefore, the Devil does alike malice them both, and stirs up his
instruments, either to corrupt them, or remove these sacred functions from
their purity and integrity if it be possible, or else to disquiet and destroy
them. God leads his people like a flock by the hands of Moses and Aaron Ps.
37.20.
, and therefore the enemies of the flock have an equal spite to both these two
leaders. In all Ages of the Church almost, since it was constituted and
established, and since Kings and Queens have become the nursing Fathers and
nursing Mothers thereof, if the one have prospered so have the other; and if
the times were dark and gloomy and adverse to the one so have they to the other.

As for our present distractions, However the adversary may with smooth words
softer than butter, stroke the Magistrate and flatter him into contentment and
satisfaction, as if things where as well or better in a state of indulgence and
Toleration as they were before, and how ever they may strive to reduce him into
a Gallio's temper not to be troubled or careful for any of these matters, yet
in my opinion the case seems harder to Magistrates that have care and
conscience to serve the Lord in that capacity, and to preserve his Church in
truth and peace, than to the Ministers of the Church. For whereas, our Mouths
(blessed be God) are not shut though our adversaries are opened, but we may
still freely lift up our voices as a trumpet to tell Juda of her sins and so
deliver our own souls; yet (alas) the Magistrate^ hands seems to be bound by
the suspension of the Laws, so that he cannot proceed in the discharge of his
office with courage and efficacy.

In this case what should Aaron do but lift up Moses his hands? it remains that
I and my Brethren should call upon you and yours, not to be dismayed at these
things but wait upon God in the Faithful fulfilling of your duties to your
utmost power, not doubting but that God has his time, his proper season for
all things, and while he governs the world, all things will work together for
the good of the Church in the end.

If then, in stead of speaking Placentia, pleasing things (for with Elihu in
Job, Job, 32.21
I say, Let me not, I pray you accept any man's person, neither let me give any
flattering titles to man; nay, I know you are not troubled with such itching
ears as love to be tickled with your own commendations, true Virtue is ever
humble) if then, I say, instead hereof I may presume to offer a word of
exhortation to him, whose love to Gods word is known to all men, I beseech you
to go on to approve your self more and more in all truth of heart before the
judging eye of the Almighty, a Patron of the truth, a friend of Virtue a
discountenancer of vice, a shield and defense to the Godly in all grief and
distress, a Father of your Country, a Religious Governor of your Family, a
Pattern of Piety, and a Persevering Orator at the Throne of Grace for the peace
of Jerusalem, saying ever with Holy David, we wish you good luck ye that are of
the House of the Lord.

Question not (Right-worshipful) but the Lord will ever be with you while you
be thus with him, do but learn more and more to know him, the Lord God of your
Fathers, and to serve him with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind, and it
shall be well with you and with your posterity after you, to many, many
generations. This God of all Power and Mercy multiply his Spirit and all the
blessed Fruits thereof upon your Worship, your truly Virtuous Lady, your
hopeful Offspring, your Religious Family, and Grant you that Grace which has
the promise both of this life and that which is to come. Which is the hearty
Prayer of him, who in a grateful acknowledgement of all your favors, presumes
(yet humbly) to present. This small part of his labors to your Worships
perusal and protection (as being a probable way to secure themselves of others
welcome and acceptance) and will for ever endeavor to approve himself.

Your most Obliged and Faithful Servant to his utmost power unto death. J. B.

Reader, the Authors great absence from the press has disabled him utterly
from preventing numberless mistakes in words and pointing. I pray thee amend
with thy Pen, as thou read, these gross ones; and the rest, I hope, thou will thy self easily discern and courteously pardon.
TItle page r. quaerit. Ep. Ded. p. 7. l. 11. r. ministers. p. 10. l. 15. r.
than not as. Ep. to his Parishioners p. 4. l. 27. r. seducers. p. 15. l. ult.
r. in the failure not to the praise. Book p. 5. l. 15. r. what? p. 7. l. 9. r.
urge it. By, and. p 9. l. 16. corruption in our natures; our dispositions by
reason, etc. p. 10. l. 5. super seminate. Margint l. 3. Stephan. c. 3. l. 9.
Niceph. for incepto. l. ul^. Romans 14. l. 16. disunion p. 12. l. 16. is his. l.
26 of. p. 13. l. 22. punishments of a Land. p. 20. l. 21. concordia discors. p.
19. l. 8. voice^. p. 21. l. 6. field. l. 24. decachinamur. p. 25. l. 6 liv^ry.
p. 26. l. 21. hence. p. 27. l. 1. our faith. p. 29. l. 27. now. p. 32. l. 2.
edification l. 25. dele in. p. 35. l. 22. unanimity. p. 42. l. 13.
Brittannomachia. l. 24. (...). l. 25. (...). p. 44. her. p. 45. l. 2. animos.
p. 49. inseperabiles. p. 63. l. 20. (...). l. 23. least not most. p. 64. l. 3.
communicatory, pacificatory. p. 72 l. 26. dele that. p. 74. l. 15. adversaries.
p. 75. l. 7. masus. l. 20. magne^. p. 77. l. 12. lowliness. l. 24 Scarabaean. p
78. l. 15. (...). p. 83. l. 12. Doctors. p. 87. l. 6. dele be. p. 88. l. 10.
Chemnitius. l. 17. the not theirs. p. 89. l. 14. Mel hizedeck. p. 91. l. 2.
(...). Epistle before the second Sermons p. 9. l. 5. r. determinations. p. 14.
l. 13. rakehell. l. 20. part of, etc p. 111. l. 16. forsakers. p. 122. l. 25
imployes. p. 123. l. 19. not. l 22. dele to. p. 130. l. 28. to set. p. 166 l.
10. conveniences not covenants. p. 172 l. 24. presence. p. 186. l. 18. that
was. p. 187. l. 10 divorce allowed. p. 197. l. 13 ventis. l. 20. thing not
this. p. 200. Etomology not Element. p. 202 l. 14. to go to. p. 207. l 2.
temptations. p. 216. l. 4. ever. p. 217. l. 12. comparison. p. 228. l. 5. sint.
l. 17. bred. p. 235. l. 4. sott sh. p. 236. l. ^0. descent. p. 237. l. 18
fastidisusly. l. 26. spirituality. p. 240. l. 23. dele a. l. 28, serve for
secure. p. 242. l. 16. wages for ways. p. 243. l. 16. dele and.

To his well beloved People, the members of the Parish of Kirkburton. And to
every Christian Reader, the Author wishes Grace and Peace
BELIEVE me, it is no vainglorious Desire of being in Print (it were a folly to
hope for any access of Reputation hereby in this so Critical and Censorious an
age,) nor do I think the World wants books, and those excellent ones, upon
this subject; nor do I offer any new speculations concerning it; nor do I plead
(though perhaps I might as well as others) the importunity of any Christian
friends Invitation to embolden, encourage or oblige me to this impression; nor
these nor any of these did move me effectually unto it; But as it was that
solicitous care I had of your present and everlasting Welfare that did at first
engage me to Preach upon these subjects; so the very same fire burning still in
my heart, being earnestly desirous the truths herein delivered may not be
forgotten by you, even while you have use for them, this (almost irresistibly)
urged me to enter upon the stage, to encounter the harsh Censures, I seriously
expect for it.

These Sermons you know, (together with others upon other texts relating to
this subject, which to imprint also, would swell the book to too great a bulk)
was preached both in Church and Chapel. The design of them was evidently to
deal with your Consciences and inform them aright in this present juncture of
public affairs, what your Obligation is to your own Pastors, and to prevent
your Chismatical forsaking the Public Assemblies to join to an Independent
Conventicle. (Pardon me if I mistake it, for I believe it cannot, as it is
circumstantiated, consist with the principles of the old sober Presbyterians,
nor yet with the Modern, that have any remains of settled principles concerning
Church unity and Church Assemblies in them). But having preached them I easily
perceived all my labors utterly lost and useless to many that either would not
or could not hear them, or else basely without any show of reason reflected on
them. Hence I began to desire, they might have some way of approving themselves
further to the World, and especially that they might be exposed with better
advantage to your more serious and retired consideration and perusal, and if it
were possible that they might be known unto, and narrowly examined by all under
my charge. These and other Motives (especially knowing that other books of
better worth of this or like subjects have never reached your hands, nor in
likelihood ever will do) being entertained, prevailed and wrought a trembling
resolution in me to offer them first to some Christian friends perusal, and
after to put them upon this public trial, though at first in composing them I
never purposed more than the delivering them (viva voce) to your private
audience.

It is admirable to consider how this particular national Church suffers by
Traduces and Blasphemies on all hands. Meet, as Christ was crucified betwixt
two thieves; so on the one side, the Papists Anathematize us (the Faithful
Ministers and Members of the Church of England) because we are the most
professed enemies to their usurpations, Idolatries and superstitions: and on
the other side the separating Members of our Church do hate and malign us, and
sometimes saucily and petulantly brand us with Popery and Idolatry, and so make
us limbs of Antichrist, and therefore no true or faithful Churches of Christ,
and that merely for those few innocent indifferent, and significant ceremonies,
which we retain and observe for the order and decency of the Worship of God.
Thus are Christ's sheep in the midst of Wolves. His Spouse a woman in the
Wilderness of wild Beasts of all sorts; this is Ephraim against Manasseh, and
Manasseh against Ephraim, but both against Juda; Herod and Pontius Pilate made
friends, Pharisees and Sadduces combining and agreeing against Christ.

But blessed be God so safe is our Church, and so warrantable is our standing
in it, that this Flag of Defiance we can hold out against all Sadduces and
Opponents, that we have, (in most of our adversaries confessions) those things
in the Midst of us that in the judgments of all the Reformed Churches (as may
appear by the Harmony of their confessions) are the only undoubted marks and
infallible characters of a true Visible Church, where ever they are. Such are
the pure preaching of the Word of God, and the Right Administration of the
Sacraments. And this I made good to you upon that text, Acts 2.42. which I
trust you will remember.

Now whoever is once assured that the National Church he lives in, and in which
he was baptized, is a true Visible Church of Christ. He can never have just
cause (while it remains such essentially) to separate from it, but ought to
live and rest with quietness and cheerfulness of Spirit in communion thereof.
For it is every man's duty to profess himself a Christian, and to own his
Religion publicly, and therefore publicly to partake of and frequent the
Ordinances and Sacraments of the Gospel in order thereunto, but this he cannot
do without society and communion with some Church or other. Every Christian as
such is bound to look upon himself as a member of a Body. viz. The Visible
Church of Christ; but how can he be known to be a member who is not united with
the other parts of the Body?

Hence follows, that upon all Christians there lies an Obligation to engage in
a Religious society with others for partaking of the ordinances of the Gospel.
Now a Christi an, being actually joined in Church society with other
Christians, is so long bound to maintain society with them, till his communion
with them becomes sin. The separatist must prove that every one sins that keeps
in the Communion of the Church of England, or else he himself must inevitably
lie under the guilt of sin for separation from it, there being nothing that can
justify the withdrawing from the society of that Church wherein a Christian
was baptized but the unlawfulness of continuing it.

Nor is it any corruptions that are crept into a Church, which still remains
true and and Faithful as to its constitution and Essentials, that will make it
a Christians duty to withdraw from it or to gather new Churches in and out of
it, though it be upon pretense of purer administrations. (Which by the way) is
all that is pleaded by most of our adversaries against us, viz. Some defects or
Corruptions in the exercise and administration of Church order and discipline,)
for there is no Church on earth perfectly free from these; and as it is proved
in these ensuing Sermons (especially upon the latter text.) So is it
excellently done by the famous Mr. Norton in his answer to Apollius as I find
him quoted by Dr. Edward Stillingfleet in his Irenicum p. 111. That it is
Lawful for Christians to join with Churches so defective: and if it be Lawful
to join with them it must needs be unlawful to separate from them, for how can
the God of Love and Unity endure any rents or Schisms in the Body of Christ?
and then, how dare any one forsake the Communion of that Church whereof they
are natural and immediate members, if they be not assured, that it is either no
Church or a false one, or that it is unlawful to hold communion with it.

This is evidently is the Case of our Church in her separation, from the Church
of Rome, the main ground hereof being the sin of Communicating with that Church
in her Idolatry and superstition, and the impossibility of Communicating with
her, and not partaking in her sins, the practice of her Idolatry being made a
necessary condition of her Communion. In this case it was evidently a sin to
Communicate with her, so that unless our Brethen can prove it a like sin to
Communicate with us in the Church of England, they can never justify their
separation from us merely for purer Communion. A full resolution hereof you
have in Dr. Stilling fleets Irenicum p, 112. where though ^e grants a sins less
and unchismatical nonconformity to our Church, yet does he explode any
separation from or erecting new Churches, in it merely for oppose to Mr. purer
administrations. and this I advise the Reader to. Baxters Stating the case in
his sacrilegious desertion, p. 17


I need not fear to say, that it has been made over and over apparent (for
there are a numberless number of excellent books to convince the teachable)
that there neither can be, nor is any separation from our Church, as it stands
now constituted and established Nationally, but rash and unjust; and that
those, that are carried away, are hurried with prejudice rather than with
strength of Argument, and are commanded more with the example of others, their
Masters and Rabbis, than with the authority of the Rule of Righteousness.

Now how manifold and dismal have been the mischiefs of such Schism, and
divisions, all Ages of the Church have sufficiently experienced, and we in this
Nation as much as any. (O how woeful have been the efects in our memory.) Our
adversaries do not love to hear of them, but being galled they kick, O that
they would yet declare to the world their repentance! But let them give us
leave to think thereof, and to advise you ^ur people sometimes to keep them in
mind, and not to be such fools, as whom neither others harms nor your own will
make to beware. Are not the Experiments that have been already made of these
Schisms sufficient to deter any reasonable man to take heed of any the new
mediums? will you turn with the Dog to the vomit and with the Sow to the
wallowing in the mire again, nay perhaps in time (O that I may prove a false
Prophet in this.) To wallowing in blood? But pardon me for this rough style: I
earnestly in the bowels of Christ beseech you in this word of softer
exhortation to take heed of all Dividing ways and methods. See the Anathemas
of Ancient Councils and the Sentiments of the Ancient Fathers to the confusion
of Schism, in Dr. Forbes Irenicum, and of modern Divines in that pretty piece
of Littlers Reformed Presbyterian.
Examine and try this well if our Church be not free from all defects of any
those things which are essentially requisite to make it a true and faithful
Church in point of Doctrine and administration of the sacraments; for then it
will follow, if you voluntarily separate your selves from our Assemblies from
the Lords Supper or administration of the Sacraments in them you are guilty of
the Sin of Shism, if you think it any sin at all, you show your contempt to the
Spouse of Christ and the ordinance of Christ; you encourage and animate the
Atheist and Heretic, you Provoke God to withdraw himself and remove his
Candlestick his Gospel from us; and as you rend and wound the Church which is
the Body of Christ, so do you Wilfully excommunicate your selves from the
Visible tokens of the Lords presence and Love. And if you can loudly complain
(though too often causelessly) of your Church Governors, if they deprive any
member of the Church of communion with her by Excommunication, upon light and
unnecessary occasions; how much greater sin is it in the Members to deprive
themselves of the same communion upon the like or less occasions: says that
excellent incomparable book, called The whole Duty of Man.

Now to remedy things, that a Coercive power is very lawful, nay, requisite, I
for my part declare it to be my settled judgment, and that none did write or
preach more vigorously to this purpose than those that now make themselves our
adversaries, any one that has eyes, may see in Mr. Ashdons Book of Toleration
disapproved: and why should it be an unpardonable offense to urge the same
truths now upon better grounds, and with the same and more clear and convincing
arguments?

The Magistrate is Custos vindexque utriusque Tabulae, a Guardian as well of
Divine as of humane Laws Romans 13.4. Romans 13.4.
He is ordained of God to execute wrath upon all them that do evil. And are not
false Teachers styled evil workers. Phil. 34.
And is not Heresy a fruit of the flesh? and what are separating teachers but
false teachers? and what are separating Doctrines but unsound Doctrines? and is
not unsound Doctrine resembled to a canker 2 Timothy 2.17.
that corrodes the sound Flesh? And the Abetters and Fomenters there of to
Thieves that spoil, to ravening wolves that devour, and to deceitful works that
undermine the truth 2 Cor. 11.13.
? now how the Chyrurgeon will cautorize or cut off a canker, or what penalty is
due to Thieves, Wolves, and decietful works, none is ignorant.

Nor is the practice of this coercive power against Heretics and Chismaticks,
any new thing, that it should seem strange to any Christians ears. In the time
of the Law; Asa, Jehoshaphat, Josiah, Nehemiah, punished abuses in divine
Worship. And under the Gospel God by Miracles did for a time supply the want of
Christian Magistrates; smiting Ananius and Saphyra with sudden death by S.
Peter, and Elymas the Sorcerer with blindness, by St. Paul. And the Spirit of
God condemns the Church of Thiatira, for not exercising her power to repress
such like, for suffering the woman Jezebel to teach and seduce Christ's servants
Rev. 2.20.
, and reproves the Church of Pergamus for suffering them that taught the
Doctrine of Balaam and entertaining them that held the Doctrine of the
Nicolaitans Rev. 2.14.
, And concurrent with Scriptures are the Primitive Fathers herein. Tertullian
Tert. ad verse. Gnost. cap. 2.
says, that Heretics must be compelled not prayed to do their duties.
Athanasius said that Arrius, Eudoxius, and Patrophilus, when they wrote unsound
Doctrines were worthy of all punishments. St. Augustine Aug. E. pist. 48.
tells Vincentius that it is no parodox, that men ought to be forced to
righteousness, for as much as he read that the Master said to the Servants,
compel them to come in Luke 14, 23.
. And that S. Paul was forced to receive and embrace the truth by a violent
compulsion of Christ, except you should judge Lands and Goods dearer to men
than their eyes. And this opinion that it is not lawful to deliver an
incorrigible Heretic to the secular power and to inflict corporal and
pecuniary mulcts, he sharply reproves in the Donatists, Parmenianus,
Petilianus, and Gaudentius Aug lib 1 contra Epist. Parmehiani cap. 7. and lib.
2. Contra literas petileam cap. 10. and lib. 2. contra Epistolam Gandentii cap.
17. As I find Mr. Cragg in his Royal Prerogative severally quoting them.
.

Gregory Nazianzen likewise (Homil. in dict. Evangel.) says, cut off the
Arrian impiety; cut off the errors of Sabellius: This I say (says he) to the
Magistrate. Seeing my words have not that efficacy, their edict shall; if they
will suppress such as are infected with pernicious Heresy. Constantine also
the first Christian Emperor prohibited the Exercise of all unsound Religions
either in public or private places, commanding their books to be burned, their
goods to be sold, their houses to be pulled down, and proscribed them as
Traitors and Enemies to the truth Eusebius in vita Constantin. lib. 3 cap. 36.
. In the late book of Ecclesiastical polity by Mr. Parker, it is evidently
shown, (as I remember, for I have not the book by me) that the end of
government cannot be attained, nor a Society preserved without a power in the
Magistrate to impose some things not expressed in Gods word, and a Coercive and
compulsive power to enforce it. And that this is no persecution (as it is by
many falsely so called) is as evidently proved by Mr. Ashdon in his Preface to
Toleration disapproved. Second Edition 1670 and whosoever list may read Mr.
Perkins upon the foresaid Texts in the Revelations with several other English
Authors upon this subject. All which do prove manifestly, that this power
Coercive is lawful, nay, requisite for the well being of the Church.

Now, if the Magistrate have such a power, that he ought to exercise it for the
preservation and establishment of the Church, and terror of the enemies
thereof, as her Nursing Father and as a Defender of the Faith, will easily
follow, this power being undoubtedly a talent committed to him as Gods public
Servant, and of it he must give an account for he ought not to bear the sword
in vain. Romans 13.4.


But since, through the restless Importunity of the Sects, our Gracious
Sovereign is pleased for reasons best known to himself, and to his most
Honorable Privy Council to suspend for a time this his power, and to lay his
Laws asleep, till either their Modesty and good Behavior be sufficiently
tried, or some way be found out to open a door of peace and Purity to all
moderate adversaries without dishonor to the Laws and Lawgivers in Church and
State; (which God of his infinite mercy grant if it be his blessed will): it is
not meet for any of his Loyal Subjects, much less for me that am the most
unworthy of them, soucily or malapertly to make any public judgment of, or
any unbeseeming reflections upon this his Majesty's action. Our part it is,
with quietness of Spirit in the Churches broiles, to place all our trust in him
for our own, and the Churches preservation and prosperity, who governs the
World, and is able to bring light out of darkness, good out of evil. Yet
notwithstanding, his Majesty's act being a bare permission of that which is
evil in his own judgemennt, it cannot, I hope, be interpreted a transgression
of our pastoral bounds to deal with the consciences of our people in this
affair, and soberly and yet zealously to let them see their duty out of Gods
Law, if they will see it, and if by any means they will be brought to the
acknowledgment of, and obedience to the truth.

Now who knows but the Word of God may powerfully prevail to reclaim some from
following the great Diana of Schism with which so many well meaning Christians
are unawares bewitched; or at least to preserve some in the unity of Faith and
Love, who else may be trapaned by the fair speeches of those that lay in wait
to deceive? I mean such deceivers (because deviders) as imitate the Pharisees,
as in many other perticulars, so in this, compassing Sea and Land to make
proselytes seven times worse the children of Hell than themselves. Who knows, I
say, but the naked word of God, that sword of the Spirit, may be powerful to
the praise of the Magistratical Assistance which used by Coercive power to
compel men to come into or keep within their just bounds and limits?

But whether it prove so powerful or no, we Pastors must, whether encouraged by
our superiors or no, and whether men will hear or forbear and stop their ears
to our Charms or no, we must do our utmost: necessity is laid upon us to
discharge our duty for your sound information and eternal Salvation Ezekiel. 33.7,
8.
. Nothing is more certain than that we must do our parts and leave the success
to God, knowing his Word; commit thy way unto the Lord, trust in him and he
shall bring it to pass Psalm. 36.5.
He of his infinite Mercy give a blessing to these our labors, that the
builders may not build in vain, but his word may be effectual to advance his
glory and further your Salvation, which if entertained with prejudice will
render you inexcuseable and aggravate your sin and damnation at the day of
Judgment.

THE OBLIGATION OF CONSCIENCE TO UNION AND COMMUNION WITH ELLOW-CHRISTIANS.
1 Corinthians. 1, and 10. part of it. ^t ye all speak the same thing, and that
^tre be no divisions amongst you: but that ^e perfectly joined together in the
same and, and in the same judgment.
^T is a sound and useful observation, that Mr. Baxter makes in his Cure of
Church-Divisions. There is in many stians (alas) a strange partiality in ^r
apprehensions of good and evil. ^e Duties they dare not omit, and judge all
ungodly that omit them: whilst some other duties, as great as they, are past
by and neglected, as if they were no part of Religion: and on the contrary some
sins they fear with very very great tenderness, when their Teachers can scarce
make their Consciences take any notice of others, as great and damnable. The
Papist seems so sensible of the good of unity, and the evil of divisions, that
he thinks even Tyranny and horrid bloodshed, and an Usurpation of an universal
Monarchy in the Church, to be not only lawful, but also necessary for the cure
and prevention: in the mean time to make him as sensible of the sinfulness of
these unlawful means, and the necessity of a serious, spiritual righteousness,
and Christian love and meekness, and forbearance, is a very difficult, almost
impossible thing. On the other side, many that are really desirous to be
serious and spiritual in Religion, abhorring all hypocritical formality
therein, or any usurpation of the Prerogative of Christ, or any persecuting
pride or cruelty, are yet strangely senseless; and careless of the good of
unity, and the mischiefs of divisions in the Church. Its sad that sacred fire
of zeal should be so unequally acted, and distributed, all let out upon some
Duties, and against some sins, which others as necessary are as strangely
overlookt. It brings to mind that cutting reprehension of the Pharisees by our
Savior, (a fit Looking-glass for many zealots in our Age, so partial in God's
Law) Lu. 11.42.
Woe unto you Pharisees (says Christ) for ye tithe Mint, and Rue, and all
manner of Herbs, and pass over judgment, and the love of God: these ought you
to have done, and not to leave the other undone. Well, if men will submit to
the word of God; the antidote against this strange partiality, in the matter
instanced, of Christian union and concord, is easily provided; there being
almost innumerable rules and precepts in the Scriptures to convince us of it.
Amongst which this Text is as full as any. Now I beseech you Brethren, by the
Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there
^e no divisions amongst you, but that ye be perfectly joined together in the
same mind, and in the same judgment.

Thus St. Paul wrote with his Brother Sosthenes to the Church of God, which was
at Corinth, nor wrote he so to them only: but verse 2.
with them to all that in every place call upon the name of the Lord Jesus,
both theirs and ours: The words then are spoken to us also, and all Believers
in all places to the Worlds end. Now the Apostle intending to condemn many
vices in these Corinthians, that he might not seem to do it out of malice, or
spleen, or envy, he begins first with a true commendation of their gifts and
virtues, that they were enriched in all knowledge, and in all utterance, that
they came behind others in no gift verse 7.
. But alas, as knowledge is apt to pusse us up, so these Corinthians began in
their pride to divide themselves from each other: So that verse 12.
one cried, I am for Paul, another I am for Apollo, and a third I am for
Cephas; therefore to make way for a sharp reproof hereof, the Apostle brings in
this grave obtestation in the text. Now, I beseech you (says he) though I
might be bold in Christ to enjoin and command, yet for love sake I rather
beseech you. I beseech you, Brethren, I do it in the bowels and affections of a
brother: Nay, and by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that is, by the power
and authority of Christ, and for the honor and glory of Christ. I Paul so
speak as if Christ himself did speak unto you. (For, alas, how the name of God,
and how the Doctrine of Christ is blasphemed through your divisions, he that
runs may read it) and therefore for his sake I beseech you. By the Name of our
Lord, that is by virtue of that commission and authority, I have received from
him, who is our Lord, and if he be our Lord, where is his honor: and in the
Name of our Lord Jesus, he, who is your Savior, and as you hope for Salvation
by him: Our Lord Jesus Christ, he that is the anointed of God, anointed to be
our Prophet, Priest and King; every word in the obtestation has a sufficient
weight to awaken us to attend it. What even this exhortation, I beseech you,
Brethren, by that Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same
thing, and that there be no divisions amongst you, but that ye perfectly be
joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment. It is a strange
kind of earnestness, and importunity the Apostle uses, as elsewhere, so here,
in this matter. He was deeply sensible of the evil of divisions, how they
prejudice Gods truth; for whilst they that profess it, cannot agree in it, the
Fool is ready to scoff at it, and to say in heart there is no God: and how they
endanger the Church and weaken it; no engine, that Satan and Antichrist can
use, more than this, the cutting of it into shreds, like the Levites Concubine;
the blowing of the Coals of contention in it: yea, how they endanger the Souls
of men, by separating them from the Church, and so from Christ, who is the head
thereof. The Apostle was deeply sensible of the evil of divisions, and
therefore is strangely, and more than ordinarily importunate in this
Exhortation, ushering it in with manifold obtestations. See Phil. 2.1, 2, If
there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort in love, if any fellowship
of the Spirit, if any compassion and mercy, fulfill my joy, that you be like
minded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind. Ephesians. 4.1, I
the Prisoner of the Lord beseech you that you walk worthy of that vocation
wherewith you are called, with all lowlyness and meekness, with long-suffering,
forbearing one another in love, endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in
the bond of peace. Romans 16.17, 18, Now I beseech you, Brethren, mark them that
cause divisions among you, and avoid them, for they serve not our Lord Jesus;
But to name no more, this in the Text is full enough, Now I beseech you
Brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you all speak the same
thing, etc. that there be no divisions among you.

Which words being apparently an exhortation, must be handled in such method,
as best suits with the nature thereof.

1. I must explain and propound it.

2. I must enforce and urge it by explication. I shall lay open the nature and
extent of the ( objectum quod) or duty to which we are exhorted. And then for
the enforcing of it, I shall press sundry powerful motives upon your
Consciences, to engage you to endeavor to practice it, and lay down wholesome
rules and directions, for the better performing it, if the Lord enable me, the
time permit, and your christian patience give encouragement.

1. To propound the Exhortation, I need not at all insist upon the words, they
are so plain and intelligible in themselves, that being read, they may as
easily be understood; and to offer to give any sense of them particularly, one
by one, might render them more dark and obscure. Let it suffice to tell you,
that the matter of duty in them contained is the unity of the Church, and the
concord of Christians. An universal accord amongst them is to be endeavored,
so far as is possible in judgment, affection and action, this is the sum and
substance of the Text.

1. The Exhortation is to an unity in judgment; so the Apostle expressly
prescribes it, in the latter words, that ye be perfectly joined together in the
same mind, and the same judgment. It is a thing much to be desired, and by all
good means to be endeavored, that (according to our Churches prayer) God would
give to all Nations, Unity, Peace, and Concord, but especially that all, that
do profess his holy Name, may also agree in the truth of his holy Word, at
least, in the main and most substantial truths thereof, and so that they may be
perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment. But if
this cannot be hoped for and attained in this life; yet,

2. That we must be sure of to endeavor to preserve an unanimity in heart and
affection. Desired it must be, but hoped for it cannot be, that in the Church
of God there should be no noise of Axes and Hammers, no difference in
judgments and conceits. 2 Cor. 11.19.
There must be Heresies, says the Apostle, that they that are approved may be
made manifest. There must be Heresies, even as we use to say, that that will be
must be; his meaning is, there will be Heresies, there is no help for it, the
wit of men cannot help it.

The understandings of men are not all of one size and temper, God has
distributed his gifts unto men severally as he pleases, and even they that
transcend in the same gifts, and have the largest and clearest understandings,
yet they know but in part, and see through a glass darkly and imperfectly, and
so are subject to diverse errors and misapprehensions. To which narrowness of
our faculties, add the consideration of the corruptions that is in our natures,
and disposition; by reason of that pride that naturally abounds in us, being
self-willed and turbulent; for the heart of Man is a sour piece of clay,
woundrous stubborn and churlish, so that the best man is not able to take down
his own pride sufficiently: there is more ado with this one Viper, than with
all our other corruptions besides; and all those wars and fightings without us,
what are they but the scum of this pot that boyles within us, the ebullitions
of our lusts that war in our members Jam. 4 1.
. While there is then corruptions in our natures, narrowness in our faculties,
sleepiness in our eyes, difficulty in our profession, cunning in our enemies,
(...) hard things in the Scriptures, and an envious man to super-inseminate,
there will still be (...) men that will be differently minded. No instrument
was ever so perfectly in tune, in which the next hand that touched it did not
amend something, nor is there any judgment so strong and perspicuous, from
which another will not in some thing find ground of variance. In the History of
the Ancient Churches we find the greatest lights in their several Ages at
variance amongst themselves Irenous with Victor ( Eusebius. Hist. lib. 5. cap.
26.) Cyprian with Stephen ( l. 7. c. 31.) Jerome with St: Austine ( Aug. Ep.
8.19.) Basil with Damasus ( Basil Ep. 10. and 77. Baron. Annal. 372.15.25.)
Chrysostom. with Epiphanius ( Sozomen l. 8. c 14.15.) Cyril with Theodoret (
Cyril lib. ad epoptium incepto Hist. lib. 14. cap. 55.) quoted by Dr Reynolds
upon Rom: 4.19.
. All our comfort then is that the time will come, (but we must not look for it
while the World lasts) when the Son of Man will cause to be gathered out of
his Kingdom (...) all things that offend, or that minister occasion of
stumbling or contention, Mat. 13.41. but in the mean time sinite crescere, let
both grow together unto the harvest, must have place, ver. 30. in this hard
necessity therefore, seeing for the present it cannot be hoped for, there
should be such a consonancy and unity of judgment amongst all men; no, not
among wise and godly men; but that in many things, and those sometimes of great
importance, they may and must dissent one from another unto the worlds end, I
say, in this hard necessity, that the first evil cannot be avoided, our
wisdom must be to prefer the second, that where there is not perfection, yet
there may be peace; good heed must be taken, least by the cunning of Satan,
(who is very forward and expert to work upon such advantages) dissension of
judgments break not out into dissentions of hearts: lest by different opinions
our affections be estranged, and at last quite alienated one from another. It
is one thing to dissent from, another thing to be at discord with our brethren.
It should be the great care of Christians, instead of desiring to find
occasions of cavils to separate from their brethren, saying I am holier than
thou, by all means, to preserve as much as in them lies, in their several
places and stations, the unity of Faith and Love, by which only we are known
to be Christ's Disciples. You see the Disciples of Christ, when they were
waiting for the descent of the Holy Ghost upon them, according to the promise
of Christ they were (...) with one accord in one place. Acts 2 1.
And as if they were one man, they were of one heart. Act. 4.32.
The union and accord of heart amongst Christistians, is the best disposition
that can be to prepare them, to receive the Spirit of Christ; yea, and is the
best token and sign that they have received it. Indeed this is the new
Commandment the fulfilling of the Royal Law. It is Christ's Commandment, this
is my Commandment, that you love one another: not but that the rest are his
Commandments too, but this is peculiarly, declared by his mouth, written in his
blood, Walk in love as Christ has loved you Ephesians. 5 2.
. But this love cannot consist with those divisions and separations which some
men make from their brethren, not so much out of love to truth, as out of
hatred and contempt of their persons. That Is the second thing to which the
Apostle exhorts in the Text, in this speaking the same things, and being if the
same mind and judgment, and that there be no divisions amongst us: It requires
in case of different judgments, unanimity in heart and affections.

3. There is a third thing in the Exhortation, even uniformity in actions, this
seems to be properly in the very letter of the Text, that you all speak the
same things, for that we may do so, three things seem essentially necessary
thereunto.

1. That you all submit to the same Government. For there is a necessity of
Government to prevent confusion: of one Government both in Church and State to
prevent division. Where there is an Anarchy or no Government, confusion must
needs follow among the members. As it was in Israel, When there was no King in
Israel every man did that which was right in his own eyes Judge. 17.6
: and where there are in one body diverse Governments, division must needs
follow among the members, as it was in Israel, when Jeroboam set up a faction
against the House of David 1 Kin. 12.
, for the transgressions, and consequently for the punishments thereof, many
are the Princes thereof Pro. 28.2.
. Indeed we in this Nation need not be told the miseries of no Government, or
of many Governments, or many Governors, our own experience will sure, for one
Age make us dread it, and inexcusable fools, if we desire it. We have all the
reason then in the World to obey the Apostles precepts of submitting to them,
that of right are set over us: and being subject to every Ordinance of Man, for
our own as well as for the Lords sake 1 Pet. 2.13
. And whoever speaks otherwise, inciting men to cast off this yoke from their
necks: they are properly styled children of Belial, their hellish design is
clean contrary to the Text, to cause divisions and offenses amongst you.

2. As it is necessary to prevent divisions that you submit to the same
Government so that you walk by the same rule; What is that? It is either
Principal or Subordinate. Principal, even the Law and the Testimony, the sacred
Scriptures: Subordinate, even according to the Scriptures, the rules, and
canons, and Customs of the Church, without a due respect to both these rules
in their right places, it is impossible Christians should speak all the same
things, but there will be divisions among them. I dare assert, and think it not
difficult to maintain by the Scriptures, as well as clear reason, that there is
an obligation upon the members of that Church in which they were born, baptized
and bred up, to submit unto, and obey the rules, and canons, and customs
thereof, if they be not able to prove them contrary to the Scriptures, or the
clear light of natural reason in us, or at least such conclusions as are
properly, directly, and evidently deduced from them. There is much in that
argument of the Apostle to confirm the sober-minded herein. 1 Cor. 11.
If any man be contentious, we have no such custom, neither the Churches of
God: And in that of our Savior: If the Offender will not hear the Church, let
him be to thee as an Heathen and a Publican; and again, he that hears you,
hears me, and he that despises you, despises me, and he that despises me,
despises him that sent me. Do not think I ascribe to the Church any Popish
infallibility, or call for any blind obedience unto it. O no, if any of its
rules or injunctions, appears to be contrary to the Word of God, like
Nebuchadnezzar's to the three Children, to fall down to his Image; or Darius
his to Daniel, not to pray to any other God; or the Highpriests to the
Apostles, not to speak in the name of Jesus, then must we answer with them;
whether must we obey God or man, judge ye. But then we must not deny our
obedience to such Church rules and canons, as repugnant to God's Word upon
light surmises, and slender presumptions; this were to speak evil of the things
we know not Jude 10.
. O no, As I take it, this is the excellent Bishop Sanderion in one of his
Sermons, No worse for that.
as in the Courts of Civil Justice, men are not ordinarily put to prove
themselves honest men, but the proof lies on their accusers part, and
therefore it is sufficient for the acquitting any man. in soro externo, that
there is nothing of moment proved against him; it being requisire to the
condemning a man that there be a clear and a full evidence against him: So in
these moral trials, when enquiry is made into the lawfulness or sinfulness of
our Churches rules and customs, and our Governors commands, it is sufficient
to warrant them, if there can be nothing produced from express Scriptures or
sound reason against them; and to condemn or disobey them upon remote
consequences and weak deductions, though it be from Scripture-Texts, can never
be excused of rashness and unrighteousness. Sure obedience is an unquestioned
duty, obey them that have the rule over you (says the Apostle) for they watch
for your Souls, and therefore unless it be manifest, that their Laws and
injunctions be against the Word of God, all our questions are but carpings, and
needless stumbling blocks, laid in our way by the Troublers of Israel. The
safest way is obedience, which also is absolutely necessary among Christians,
that they may speak the same things, and that there be no divisions among them.
Then,

3. More particularly still to this end, that as Christian Brethren ye may
speak the same things without divisions, it is necessary that ye all join in
the same form of prayer, praise, and manner of worshipping God. It was David's
earnest desire, O magnify the Lord with me, Psalm. 34.3.
and let us exalt his Name together: And the Holy Ghost in the Acts mentions
this Uniformity in the Churches Infancy, and time of her first love, to be one
chief cause of its prospering and enlarging, Acts 4.24. The multitude of
Believers lifted up their voice in praises with one accord. Acts 4.24,
The people with one accord gave heed to the things that Philip spoke: Acts 8.6.
And its a great part of the blessedness of the heavenly Jerusalem, Rev. 4.10.
that the Elders sing with one voice unto the Lord. So does the Apostle make it
his earnest prayer for the Romans, Romans 15.6.
that they might be like minded one toward another, that with one mind, and
with one voice, they might glorify God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ:
with one mind, and with one mouth too; while men think to glorify God in
several ways, and several forms, it is scarce intelligible, how they can do it
in this desirable manner, with one mind, and with one mouth: so many several
ways, so many several mouths; and that can never tend to the glory of God. The
Apostles expression intimates, that like-mindedness, unanimity, and uniformity,
are very subservient to the glory of God: What an honor is it to the God of
Israel, when all Israel came in as one man to do him worship; when that
admirable variety of Gifts and Administrations and Offices that are in his
Church do not jar and clash one against another, but sustain and mutually
supply out of their stores the wants each of other, and all conspire together
in their several kinds to glorify God: What else is musical harmony but
concord in discourse, variety in consort? it makes the music full and
delightful, when there is a well-ordered variety of voices and instruments in
it: but if all instruments were perfectly well tuned, yet if the men could not
agree what to play, but one would have a nimble Galliard, another a frisking
Jig, another a grave Air; and if all of them should be so wilful, as without
yielding to the rest, to scrape on his Tune as loud as he could, what a hideous
hateful noise may you imagine would such a mess of Music be? no less odious to
God, and equally grievous to every godly man it is, when such Vices as these
are heard in the Church of God, I am of Paul, and I of Cephas, 1 Cor. 1.12
and I of Apollo: When one Pamphleteer will have the Church governed after this
fashion, another after that; when one Mountebank in Religion will have this way
of Worship, and form of Prayer, another that, to the great scandal of the
Reformed Religion, and the manifest dishonor of God. Surely beloved, such an
Uniformity, as of all Christian Members of the same Church to be of one mind,
and worship God in one place, and in one way, and form, and manner, with one
accord, would be the most beautiful, and comely, and happiest thing in the
world. So is this Uniformity in actions of Worship also necessarily included in
this Apostolical Exhortation, to speak the same things, and that there be no
divisions amongst us.

Indeed this would be a perfect and blessed Unity for all these three to meet
together; unity in judgment, unanimity of loving affection, and uniformity in
action, and this perfection ought to be both in all our aims and endeavors:
but if while we faithfully endeavor it in our several places, we cannot
(through our own weakness, or others waywardness) attain to the full perfection
hereof, yet pulchrum erit in secundis tertiis ve, it will be our comfort and
commendation to labor and attain so much after it as possibly we can; and
therefore nevertheless whereunto we have attained, Phil 3.16.
let us mind the same things. Let us labor after this unity of judgment,
affection, and action. I beseech you Brethren by the Name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions
amongst you, but that ye strive perfectly to be joined together in the same
mind, and in the same judgment.

To quicken you hereunto (this being so needful a duty, and we all so dull unto
it) let me offer these following forceable Motives to your serious
consideration.

1. The seasonableness of the Exhortation: for are not these the last and worst
days, the dregs and Lees of times, of which our Savior prophesied, when
Christian Love should grow cold, which is the Bond of Peace; and Satan knowing
his time but short, should double his diligence in sowing his Tares of cursed
contentions in Gods Fold, Heb. 10.24, 25. ^ude v. 11.
the proud and malicious hearts of men being too fruitful soils thereof; and of
which the Apostle prophesies, and Saint Jude. Read the places, and see if the
men of this Age be not therein exactly described. Alas, when was the Christian
World ever more out of quiet? when was Gods Church ever more dangerously rent
and torn? when was Schisms and Separations ever more greedily and dangerously
made and prosecuted? when was Gods Church on Earth more Militant, or had more
Enemies? foreign, abroad, intestine, at home? more Satanical spirits to hate
it? more Lucians to scoff at it? more Rabshekah's to rail on it? or Balaam's to
curse it? when were there more Atheists to scoff at Religion, ( Ridemur
decathimmur, says Tert.) more Heretics to reproach, revile, and slander it?
more Schismatics studying divisions, affecting parties, carrying up-sides and
factions, (and being out of danger of the Kings Laws, and contemning the
Churches pious Edicts and Censures) like unnatural Children rending and tearing
their Mothers Bowels? (Inimici Domestici^) Behold the Churches Foes are those
of her own Family, Romans 3.17.
her Sons disturb her peace, and the way thereof they will not know. Mistake me
not, my design is not to rail, or reflect on any sort of men, but only to warn
you as a faithful Watchman to take heed of these deceitful ways: and the very
design of this Complaint and Lamentation, that there should be such Troublers
of Israel abounding amongst us, is only to show the Exhortation in the Text as
necessary; so seasonable, even that we all hearken after the things that make
for peace: to speak the same things, and to avoid (if it be possible) these
divisions amongst us. So from the seasonableness, pass we

2. To the reasonableness of the Exhortation also, and that in almost infinite
respects.

1. Listen to Gods Commands: search the Scriptures Brethren, and find any duty,
if you can, more peremptorily commanded, more highly commended by the Holy
Ghost, more frequently pressed by the Prophets and Apostles than this. How
often does the Gospel of Peace call upon us, to follow peace with all men, Ephesians.
5.16.
Heb. 12.14
if it be possible, and as much as lies in us to live peaceably with all men?
How much more with Brethren, 2 Cor. 13.11. 2 Cor. 13.14. 2 Timothy 2.23.
men of the same Nation, and Church, and Faith, and Religion with our selves?
for to such it is written, Be of one mind, live in peace, follow Righteousness,
Faith, Charity, and Peace; with them that call on the Lord out of a pure heart.
It were endless to give you all the strict Commands of the Gospel to this
purpose, without obedience to which we are not real but nominal servants of
Jesus Christ, unless we study Unity, and be careful to maintain peace and love,
and speak the same things, and avoid divisions, and those that cause them, the
World may question our Christianity; which will further appear in all the
following considerations: whilst we look upon God, whom we pretend to serve and
worship.

2. It is the Apostles Argument amongst many others: Ephesians. 4.1, 2.
I the Prisoner of the Lord beseech you, that you walk worthy of the Calling
wherewith ye are called. How? With all lowliness, and meekness, and
long-suffering, endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of
peace: For, says he, there is one Body, one Spirit, one Hope, one Lord, one
God, and Father of all. There is but one God, and great reason then we should
endeavor unity, and unanimity, and uniformity in the worship and service of
this one God. Those that have several Gods, may well have several ways, and
several forms to worship them; as the Mariners in Jonah called every one upon
his God. When several Gods are afoot, all Games must go forward; but now we all
profess but one God, unchangeably one, the Maker of Heaven and Earth, the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and he is always of one mind, he is not for
one thing sometimes, and another thing other times, like a distempered Stomach,
but God is still of one and the same mind; and therefore that which pleases
him at one time, the same words and things, if they proceed from the same
heart, must needs find the same acceptance always. No marvel if dissentions
arise amongst wicked ones, betwixt Abimelech and the men of Shechem, seeing
they serve diverse Masters, have several lusts, one reigning in this, another in
that man, all commanding contrary things; but shall not Christians speak the
same things without divisions, that all serve one Lord, and that one being so
far from commanding any thing that may occasion discord, that his very liv^^^
is the Badge and Cognizance of Love and Peace. More particularly, being we
profess to worship the Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity, let us consider
each Person in the Blessed Trinity.

1. God the Father he is one, there is one Father of all: If God be our Father,
Ephesians. 4.6.
then are we all Brethren to each other. If a man coming into his Neighbors
house by chance, should find them all together by the ears, would he not think
them disorderly and ill-governed children? how much more if they should be
observed to be ever and anon snarling and quarrelling one with another, and
beating and kicking one another. Here Joseph thought he need say no more to his
Brethren to prevent their falling out by the way, than to remind them that they
were all one man's Children, and Brethren to each other: Genesis 45.24
And Abraham to procure an everlasting Amity, and utter cessation of all
Debates, thenceforth between himself, and his Nephew Lot, and their Servants,
made use of this one Argument, the most prevalent of all others, that they were
Brethren. Genesis 13.8. Psa. 133 1.
Ecce quam bonum; Behold how good and joyful a thing it is Brethren to dwell
together in unity. Profane Esau durst not avenge himself on Jacob, lest he
should vex his Father Isaac: Genesis 27.4.
And shall not Christians then who are Brethren, not only by Generation, but by
Regeneration, much more tender the displeasing of their one Father, by
disagreements and molestations of one another? the nearer, the dearer, we use
to say, and there are few Relations nearer than that of Brotherhood, but no
Brotherhood in the world so closely and surely knit together, and with so many
and strong ties, as the Fraternity of Christians in the Communion of Saints,
which is the Brotherhood in the Text: And therefore as we are Brethren, and
tender the glory of that God who is the Father of us all, it concerns us to
speak the same things, and that there be no divisions amongst us.

2. Consider also God the Son; we are all redeemed by that one price of his
precious Blood, and methinks that calls for love and unity. It Is implied in
that of the Apostle, One Faith: Ephesians 4.5.
One Faith is fixed on one and the same object, the Mercy of God, and Merits of
Christ, or Gods Free Grace in Christ, and being ingrafted into one and the same
Vine, should we not all bear one and the same fruit? We are all Fellow-Captives
redeemed by the same Savior, Fellow-Patients cured by the same Physician, even
Jesus Christ the object of our Faith. Hence he that redeemed us did in like
manner pray for us, that we may be one, John 17.21, 23.
perfectly one, that the world might know that God sent him: but this can never
be, if we speak not the same things, but there be divisions amongst us.

3. There is also but one Spirit, and that is the Apostles Argument also: There
is one Body, one Spirit; Ephesians. 4.
and therefore endeavor the unity of the Spirit. The Spirit is a Spirit of
Unity: this Spirit is the very Essential Unity, Love and Love-knot of the two
Persons, the Father and the Son, of God with God; yea, it was the very Union
and Love-knot of the two Natures in Christ, of God and Man: he is the Spirit of
Unity, and therefore cannot delight in us, unless we keep the unity of the
Spirit: That Spirit, the Soul of man, that gives life to the natural body, yet
can it not animate and give life to members dismembered, unless they be first
united and compact together. Ezekiel. 35.7, 8, 9.
We read there of the dead and scattered bones, that to the end they might be
revived, they first came together, every bone to his bone, then the sinews came
and knit them, then the flesh and skin covered them; and then, and not before,
the Spirit came from the four Winds to give them life. So the very natural
Spirit, the Soul, does not inform the body, unless there be an accord and unity
in it: much more is this required as a proper disposition to make us meet for
the habitation of the Holy Ghost, even this quality that is like that his
Nature and Essence, Unity and Unanimity, for us to be of one mind and judgment,
and to speak the same things, and that there be no divisions amongst us:
divisions are a token we are led by diverse Spirits, and not by this one. There
is a Spirit indeed in these divisions, but it is an evil spirit, such as was
between Abimelech and the men of Shechem: Judges 9.
And such as are for a toleration of such divisions, we may write upon them as
our Savior did upon the man possessed, Legion, for they are many: pretend they
to the Spirit as they will, of walking and praying by the Spirit, we need not
believe them, unless we list, to be led by any other than a devilish spirit.
The Devil shows himself to be a Devil by his Cloven Foot: if we would receive,
and not grieve, nor quench, nor dishonor the one Spirit, by which we pretend
all to be governed, let us speak the same things, that there be no divisions
amongst us: As we tender the glory of God the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost, we must do this.

3. So while we look upon the Church of God, for that is but one body, which is
the Apostles argument also: It is but one, and only one. My Love, my Dove, Ephesians.
4. Cant. 6.
my undefiled is one, she is the only one of her Mother. So are we Christians
made all up into (...), one mystical body; Ephesians. 3.6.
and that by such a real (though mysterious) incorporation, as that we become
thereby (...), as all of us members of Christ, Romans 12.5.
so every one of us members one of another: No^ the sympathy and supply that is
between the members of the natural body, for their mutual comfort and good of
the who^e: The Apostle sets it forth elegantly, and applies it very fully
to the Mystical Body of the Church at large. 1 Cor. 12.
It were a thing prodigiously unnatural, and to every man's apprehension the
effect of a frenzy or madness at the least, to see the head plot against, the
tongue revile, the hands buffet, the teeth devour his fellow members. No, if
any one member, be it never so small and despicable, be in anguish, the rest
are sensible of it: There is a mutual sympathy and communication betwixt them;
there are no terms of bitterness stood upon in the natural members, I am better
than thou, and I than thou; no terms of disgrace heard, (I have no need of
thee, nor I of thee) but they are all ready to contribute their several
supplies according to their several measures and abilities, to give ease and
relief to the grieved part, (...). That there be no rent or schism, 1 Cor.
12.25.
says the Apostle, using the very word of the Text, no division or disunion of
parts in the body: And as we may consider the Church as one Body, so as one
Household, and our selves as fellow servants of the same Family, Gal. 6.10.
the same household of Faith: So ought we then to behave our selves in the House
of God, 1 Timothy 3.15.
which is the Church of the Living God, as becomes fellow servants that live
under the same Master: We all wear one Livery, 1 Cor. 10.3, 4.
having all put on Christ by solemn profession at our holy Baptism; and we are
all fed at one Table, eating the same spiritual meat, and drinking the same
spiritual drink in the holy Communion; and therefore all reason, that as
members of the same Body, and servants of the same Family, we speak the same
things, and there be no divisions amongst us. Mr. Baxter in his Cure of
Divisions, urges two or three things well in this Topic of the Church, as
that our union with the Church, is a sign of our proportionable union with
Christ; and our separation from the Church, is a sign of our separation from
Christ; nay, that union is not only an accident, but of the very Essence of the
Church, without which it is no Church, and without which we can be no members
of it, Unity being necessary to the very being of the Church, and of
Christianity; and that our union is necessary to our nourishment from, and
Communion with Christ and his Church: but I refer you for these to him, See it
page 66.
whom perhaps some will rather hear than us, if we should speak the same words.
I shall amongst many particulars urge only four things, with reference to the
Church, that shows the need you have to speak the same things, and that there
be no divisions amongst you.

1. This is the only way to forward the work of God for the building up of the
Church; which Faction and divisions on the other hand obstructeth, so as
nothing more. You often read in Scripture, of edifying the Body of Christ, Ephesians.
4.12. 2 Cor. 12.19.
and of doing all things to edifilcation. The expression is metaphorical, taken
from material buildings, often used by the Apostle with application to the
Church of God, and the spiritual building thereof: 1 Timothy 3.15.
for the Church is the House of the Living God; and all Christian-members of
this Church are as so many stones of this building, whereof the house is made
up: and the bringing in unbelievers into the Church, by converting them to the
Christian Faith, is as the fetching of more stones from the Quarries to be laid
in the building. Now the building in it self (and that is edification) is the
well and orderly joining together of Christian men as living stones in truth
and love, that they speak the same things, and that there be no divisions
amongst them, that they may grow together, as it were, into one entire
building, to make up a strong and comely house for the Masters use and honor.
1 Pet. 2.9.
Indeed there is nothing more conduces hereunto, than Peace, Love, and
Concord: Knowledge is very little or nothing but a puff in comparison of
Charity, in order to Edification: 1 Cor. 8.1
It may swell, and look big, and make a show, but Charity does the deed: 1 Cor.
1.10.
It lays the stones together, and makes them couch close one to another, and
binds them up with Fillings and Cement to make them hold. Hence that wise
Master Builder S. Paul, that knew well what belongs to this work, when he
speaks of compacting the Church into a building, mentions the edifying of it
self in love. Ephesians. 4.16.
Indeed when all the Workmen intend the main business, each in his place and
office performing their appointed task with cheerfulness and good agreement,
then does the work go on, and the building gets up apace and strongly; but when
one man draws one way, and another another way, one will have things done after
this fashion, another after that, one mars what another makes, pulls down what
another sets up, how is it possible while things go thus, that ever the
building should be brought to any perfection or handsomness? and therefore well
does the Apostle join these two together, (...). Romans 14.19.
Let us follow after the things that make for peace, and things wherewith we
may edisie one anot her. Where the hearts and tongues of the builders are
divided, the building will either come to nothing, or prove but a Babel of
confusion: for where envy and strife is, there is confusion, and every evil
work. James 3.16.
Strife will make ill work, it will build up nothing, unless it be Babels
walls: It is peace and concord that builds up the walls of Jerusalem, which as
it has its name from peace, so has it also its perfection from peace; and
then, and not before, shall Jerusalem be built, as a City that is at unity in
it self; Psa. 122.3
when they that build Jerusalem are first at unity amongst themselves, when
they speak the same things, and there is no divisions amongst them.

2. As this is the way to build the Church, so it is the way to preserve in
both in peace, beauty, and safety.

1. In peace. The concord of Family is their peace, so is amity and concord in
the Church; whereas the divisions and discords of Christians disturbs their
minds, and discomposeth the Church: Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, Psa. 125.
says the Psalmist; but by different forms and ways there is a breach of that
peace: such divisions in the Church are like wars and tumults in the
Commonwealth, they discompose, and set it out of order. It was Sir Henry
Wotton's excellent saying, Disputandi pruritus Scabies Ecclesiae: The Itch of
Disputing does cause the Scab of the Church. Every Sect finds some little
pleasure in scratching, by zealous wranglings and disputes for their several
Opinions, till the blood be ready to follow; and at length it proves the bain
of peace, and charity, and love, which is the very life and soul of Christian
Religion: Now is not this, or should it not be an effectual Motive to this
Unity, Unamity, and Uniformity? How dear should be the Churches peace to every
member thereof? Dulce nomen pacis, the very name of peace sounds sweetly to the
ear: there is such a mixture of pleasantness and profitableness in it, as wrapped
the Psalmist into admiration, ut prius miraretur quam ostenderet, he admires it
himself, and rouzeth others to the like admiration: Psa. 133.1.
Behold how good and pleasant a thing it is, Brethren to dwell together in
unity: some things are pleasing, not good, as Epicurism and Good-fellowship;
some things good, not pleasing, as Fasting and Martyrdom, but this both; for
pleasure, it is like the Oil poured out on Aaron's Head; for goodness, it is
like the Dew on Hermon's Hill, which made the Valleys fruitful. So good and
pleasant it is, that nothing can be pleasant without it: It is the desire of
all hearts, the rest of all Nations, the end of all Contentions, pacem te
poscimus omnes, nothing more desirable in Families, in Kingdoms, much more in
the Church: And therefore lest we violate the Churches peace, it concerns us to
speak the same things, lest there be no peace but divisions amongst us.

2. It is the way to preserve the Church in beauty and honor; the concord of
Christians is their beauty and honor, and their divisions and discord is their
deformity and shame. The Church stands upon two Staves, the Staff of Beauty,
and the Staff of Bands: if the Staff of Bands be once broken, the Staff of
Beauty cannot long stand, but by divisions our Beauty becomes deformity,
Reformation deformation: as when one hand is black, and another white, one
cheek pale, another red: so whilst we become several Churches, several Bodies,
what do we but make a Monster of the Church, the Body of Christ! Indeed nothing
more tends to the Churches dishonor, and Christ's dishonor, than this: there
is no such scandal to the Churches Enemies of all sorts, than this: the common
Enemies of the truth of Religion, are chiefly Atheism and Superstition; and
wherefore serves the home-differences of Christians, especially about
indifferent things, about Gestures, and Vestures, and other indifferent Rites
and Formalities, that for such things as these, (things in their own nature
indifferent, and never intended to be otherwise imposed, than as matters of
circumstances and order) men should desert their Ministerial Charges, fly out
of the Church as out of Babylon, stand at open Desiance against lawful
Authority, and sharpen their tongues and pens with so much petulancy and
virulency as some have done; wherefore serves this, but to the dishonor of
Christians and Christianity, and to give scandal to the Enemies thereof?

1. To the Athiest: for he, till all men be of one Religion, and agreed in
every point thereof too, (which I doubt will never be whilst the World lasts)
thinks it the best wisdom to be of none, nay, makes it his best pastime to
jeer at all: The agreement of Christians is an ocular demonstration to the
World, that they have a certainty of the Faith which they profess, and that it
is of a healing nature, and tends to the felicity of the world: so that never
was Christians observed to live in an undivided Unity and unfeigned love, but
the very Infidels and ungodly round about them did reverence both them and
their Religion for it; whereas their discords and divisions give occasion to
Atheists and Unbelievers to blaspheme, as if there were no certainty in their
belief, or as if it were of a vexatious and destructive tendency: so that never
were Christians divided, implacable, and bitter against each other, but it made
them and their profession a scorn to the unbelieving and ungodly World. Their
despising and vilifying one the other, teaches the wicked to despise and
vilify them all: as a well ordered Army, and a City of uniform; and comely
building is a pleasing and inviting sight to beholders, whereas a confused
Rabble and ruinous heap bree is abhorrence; even so the very sight of the
concordant society of Christians, is amiable to those without; whereas their
disagreements and separations makes them odious. Hence the former conduces
much to the conversion and salvation of men, and the latter hardens men in
wickedness, and hinders their coming into the Church, and their obedience to
the truth. Who loves to thrust himself into a fray? and what wise men will
join with drunken men that are fighting in the streets? A more effectual way
cannot be devised to drive men from Christ, than to represent Christians like a
company of madmen that are tearing out the threats of one another: when one
Faction slies upon, and speaks ill of one another, what wonder if the Atheist
and Infidel speak ill of, and flies further from them all? whereas contrarily,
the best means to win the World to a love of Holiness, is, if they can see that
holiness makes men fervent and unfeigned in the love one of another. 1 Pet.
1.22.
Christ's words in his prayer are notable to this purpose: John 17.20, 21, 22,
23.
I pray, says he, for them that shall believe on me through their word, that
they all may be one: As thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also
may be one in us, that the world may believe that thou have sent me, etc. It
plainly implies, that the Unity of Christians is a great means of converting
the World to the Christian Faith, and convincing Infidels of the truth of
Christ, as sent by God: and so on the contrary, their divisions must needs be a
scandal to them. Upon which account also, we have reason to take heed, to speak
the same things, and that there be no divisions amongst us.

2. Such divisions give scandal to Papists. You read how loath was Abraham to
fall out with Lot, and how desirous he was to compound the differences that
were between their Herdmen; and one reason is hinted, in that it is said, Genesis
13.7.
the Canaanites and Perizzites dwelt at that time in the Land. So have we in
our Land many Canaanites and Perizzites at this day, that take offense at these
divisions of ours, and makes it a chief occasion to alienate their hearts from
the Truth of God. There be many Papists and Romanists confirmed and made
obstinate in their Opinion of the Catholickness of the Romish Faith. Hereby,
when they hear of so many things which have been ever, and are still retained
in the Church of England in common with the Church of Rome, as they were
transmitted both to them and us in a continued Line of Succession from our
Godly and Orthodox Forefathers, who lived in the Ages next to Christ and his
Apostles, to be now inveighed against, and decryed as Popish and Superstitious.
And when they see men, pretenders to Piety, Purity, and Reformarion, more than
others, not contenting themselves with those just Exceptions that had been
formerly taken by the Church of England, and her regular children, against some
Erroneous Doctrines and Forms of Worship taught and practiced in the Church of
Rome, and endeavored to be unduly, and by her sole Authority, imposed upon
other Churches, when they see them not contenting themselves with these things,
but even so far transported with a spirit of contradiction, as that they care
not, so as they may but run far enough from Rome, whether, or how far they run,
although they should run themselves (as too often they they do) quite beyond the
bounds of Truth, Allegiance, common Reason, and even common Humanity also.
Besides, we know it has been, and is one grand objection of the Papists
against the Reformed Churches, that the Fanatical dissentions amongst our
selves are evident signs of an Heretical spirit, as Bellarmine, Stapleton,
Kellison, and others argue; and Fitz Simon, an Irish Jesuit, has written a
whole Volumn on this argument, which he ^alls Britanio-Machia. It Is true how
unhappy they have proved in this pretended Unity, which they make a note of
their true Church, any one may judge that will but read the writings of Doctor
Field, Discourse concerning the Idolatry practiced in the Church of Rome, by D.
Edw. Stillingfleet.
Bishop Jewel, and even the late Book of the Excellent Doctor Stillingfleet
upon this argument, which proves them nevertheless faulty, however we be
blameworthy: As Gregory Nazianzen did answer those in his time that used the
same argument, (...); only by this methinks we should be warned, if by no
other consideration, to let such a spirit of peace and meekness show it self in
our lives and doctrines, ut nihil de nobis male loqui sine mendacio possint,
that they may never have advantage with the same breath to speak both truly,
and reproachfully against us. And to this end, to preserve the Churches beauty
and honor, and to stop the mouth of the Adversary, and take away the occasion
of scandal, let^us speak the same things, and let there be no divisions amongst
us. I add,

3. This want of Unity, Unanimity, and Uniformity among those that keep within
the pale of the Church, gives scandal to those of the Separation, See
Toleration not to be abused.
such Schismatics and Heretics as are clean gone out, and have renounced all
kind of communion with us; for they must needs think very jollily of themselves
and their own singular way, when they shall find those very grounds whereon
they have raised their Schism to be so stoutly pleaded for, and pursued by some
that are yet content to hold a kind of communion with us: For there are many
that will hold those Principles, besides which there can be nothing colourably
pretended for inconformity in point of Ceremony and Church Government, that
will not yet admit of such conclusions naturally issuing thence, as will
necessary in^ an utter separation. The Separatists Tenants are but the
Nonconformists Principles improved, and then it is to be feared that the
Nonconformist gives the occasion of offense and boasting to the Separatist, he
lays the foundation for the others division from us, and so may happily have a
right in that of our Savior, Mat: 18.7
Offenses will be, (for the trial of the faith and patience of the Saints) but
vae homini, woe to the men (without repentance) by whom the occasion of those
offenses comes. In all these respects then, for the Churches honor, and to
avoid that scandal that is thereby given to Atheist, Papist, and Separatist,
let us speak the same things, and let there be no divisions amongst us: and as
for the Churches beauty and honor, so

3. For the safety thereof; for divisions

1. Invite and encourage the Churches Enemies.

2. They weaken them to resist them.

1. They invite and encourage the Enemy, as it is noted of the Ancient
Britains, their intestine contentions invited the Enemy to conquest. Nothing
so much hearteneth and advantageth the Enemy abroad, as the fractions and
dissentions that we have at home: Per discordias civiles externi attollunt
animas, said Livy once of old Rome. Whence our Countryman Gildas complained of
old of this Island then imbroiled in wars, fortis ad civilia bella, infirma ad
retundenda hostium tela, that by how much more her valor and strength was
spent upon her self in managing of intestine and domestic broils, by so much
the more she laid her self open to the outrages and incursions of foreign
Enemies: commune periculum concordia propulsandum, says Tacitus. The Churches
peace and concord is the Tower of David, from whence we may repel our
Adversaries, whom else we shall by our intestine differences cause to rejoice.
If all the members of the Church were but fast joined together, says Dr.
Reynolds, In his excellent Sermon of the peace of the Church.
vinculo fidei and glutine charitatis, in the bond and cement of Faith and
Love; if Governors, Teachers, and People, would but join hand in hand, the one
to rule with Authority and Meekness, the other to teach with wisdom and
compassion, the third to honor, both by humble submission to their judgment,
and willing obedience to the guidance of their Governors and Pastors, then
would they cut off all occasion from those that seek occasion, and disappoint
the expectations of those that do, captare tempora impacata and inquieta, would
be fishing in troubled waters. The Devil (as Optatus speaks) is tormented with
the peace of Brethren, but is quickened and put into hopes of success in his
attempts against the Church by the mutual ruptures and jealousies, that the
members thereof foment and cherish amongst themselves; as when by Jeroboam's
defection Judah and Israel were rent asunder, then came Shishak and troubled
Jerusalem: 2 Chro. 12.2.
and as divisions invite and encourage the Churches Enemies, so

2. They weaken her to resist them. The unity of Christians is their secondary
strength, says Mr. Baxter; their primary strength is Christ, and the Spirit of
Grace which quickneth them; and their secondary strength is their union amongst
themselves. Separation from Christ depriveth men of the first, and separation
one from another depriveth them of the second: evermore vis unita fortior; but
divisions weaken the Church, and dividers are certainly the weakners and
destroyers of the Church: even Satan is sensible that his Kingdom divided
cannot stand, and therefore he keeps an admirable unity in the members thereof;
so that a whole Legion, consisting of many thousands of them, had but one name,
one action, and one habitation in the man possessed with them: Concordia res
parvae crescunt, discordia dilabuntur; the wall is hollow and loose where the
stones stand off one from another, and couch not close: Now brotherly love and
unity is it that binds all fast, and makes of loose heaps one entire piece.
Observe the expression in the Text; I beseech you Brethren, says the Apostle,
that there be no divisions amongst you, but that ye be perfectly joined
together in the same mind, and in the same judgment. Like-mindedness, you see,
is the thing that joyneth all together, and in the well joining consists the
strength of any structure: Whence we read of the bond of peace, Ephesians. 4.3.
and the bond of perfectness: Col. 3.14
An expression of the like importance you have, Phil. 1.27
That I may hear of your affairs, says he, that ye stand fast in one spirit,
with one mind. Christians never stand so fast as when they are of one mind:
whence there is a Greek word sometimes used in the New Testament, as Bishop
Saunderson observes, Bishop Saunderson's Sermons, p. 270.
viz. (...), which is commonly translated Confusion, and sometimes Tumults;
neither of which Translations are unfit for the sense; but in the Literal
Notation it rather imports, a kind of unstableness or unsettledness, when a
thing does not stand fast, but shakes and tottereth, and is in danger of
falling. And this S. Paul opposes to peace; God is not the Author, says he,
(...) of confusion, but of peace. Intimating by the very opposition, that it is
mostly for want of peace that things do not stand fast, but are ready to fall
into discords and confusion. S. James speaks out what S. Paul but intimates,
and tells us plainly, that this (...) is the effect of discord, and that
contention is the Mother of Confusion; for where envying and strife is, says
he, there is (...) unconstancy, unsettledness, confusion, and every evil work.
The Builders do but make ill work where the building is not like to stand, but
threatens ruin, and is ready to drop down again by that time it be well up:
yet such ill work does envying and strife ever make; it is concord and union
only that makes good work, and builds strong. Let Jerusalem be built as a
City at unity in it self: Psa. 122.3
and Jerusalem is like to stand the faster and longer for it; like Seleucus his
bundle of Sticks, insuperabiles dum inseperalis, they could not be broken,
insuperable while inseparable; such is a Church, a Land, a Corporation, while
it is at unity: But O how weak is it when it is divided? like those Rods pulled
asunder out of the bundle, which the weakest C^ild could snap asunder? is not
this so in all other things? An Army is stronger than a man, a Kingdom than a
Single Person; a Flame burns more strongly than a single Spark; the Waves of
the Ocean are more forceable than a single drop; a threefold Cord is not easily
broken. Hence weak Commonwealths seek to strengthen themselves by Confederacies
with other Sates. Alas Brethren, many are our spiritual and temporal Enemies,
and strong is the League of Impiety that we are to encounter with in this
world; our most united Forces, and joint endeavors, are all little enough
against them: And can a few single straglers hope for Victory, when whole
Troops of Moab, Ammon, and Mount Seir, are to encounter them? Shall Britains
still retain that folly whereof Tacitus of old branded them, dum singuli
pugnant universi vincuntur, whilst they resisted singly, they were overcome
universally? being divided they were destroyed. Thus it was with the Kingdom,
and thus it will be with the Church, if we do not speak the same things, but
there be, and contifiue to be divisions amongst us By several ways, and several
forms, we make the Church a very Babel of Confusion, and if Babels confusion go
before, Babels destruction will follow after: Dividers are certainly Abaddons,
Destroyers, destroyers of the Church, what good soever they pretend: Mr.
Baxter's cure.
As those means which best corroborate the body, and fortify the spirits, do
best cure many particular diseases, which no means would cure while Nature is
debilitated; so are the Church Diseases best cured by uniting fortifying
remedies, which will be increased by a dividing way of Reformation: dividing is
wounding, and uniting is the closing of the wound. It Is Satan's usual way to
pretend to a good work, when he purposes to destroy it; he resists Light as
an Angel of Light; he will be a zealous Reformer, when he would hinder
Reformation; and it is Satan's mark of Reformation: he does it by dividing the
Church of Christ, and teaching Christians to avoid each other; and he
destroys their love to one another, by pretending love to themselves, as if
he would have them but to avoid sin and Church-corruptions: and in this
dividing work the Devil does as Make-bates use to do, that first goes to one
man, and tell him what such an one said against him, and what a dangerous
person he is, and then go to another, and faith as much of the first to him. So
the Devil zealously aggravates the faults of every party to others, that they
may have odious thoughts of one another, and so as they love their Souls avoid
them. So this dividing Spirit just gives such counsel to men for the
preservation of their Souls; as if a man should thus, in pretended kindness,
counsel a man for the preservation of his health, and bodily comfort. O take
heed of that Mouth, and that Belly, for it gets nothing, but devours all
that the hands do get by labor; or cast off that hand, for it has a crooked
finger; or that gouty foot, that it may not trouble the whole body; or rip up
those guts which have such filthy excrements in them; is not such kindness to
be suspected? Thus far Mr. Baxter.
Behold the Devils wiles and stratagems, be wise, and avoid them, I beseech
you; and therefore for the Churches peace, and beauty, and honor, and safety,
be exhorted to labor after unity, unanimity, and uniformity, to speak the same
things, and that there be no divisions amongst you. These are the third sort of
Motives while you look upon the Church of God: But

4. Though ye should have little regard either to God, or the Church of God,
yet look upon your selves, even in point of wisdom, and out of self-love; it
concerns Christians, every one in his place, to labor to speak the same things
with other Christians, and to avoid divisions from them.

1. For your own safeties sake; for if the whole be in danger, so is every
part. Hence the Mariners called upon Jonah, What meanest thou, O sleeper,
arise, call upon thy God; as if they had said, if the whole Ship be lost, so
will every Soul in it, and thou amongst the rest. Perhaps some may think their
own safety obliges them to be dividers, to hold up a Faction and Division, or
at least not to meddle in their Stations toward the healing them: but to such
I say as Mordecai did to Esther, Think not thou alone shall escape, if thou
hold thy peace: O no, O no, deliverance may arise another way, but thou and thy
Fathers house shall be destroyed; therefore if you have respect for your own
safety labor for peace, and unity, and unanimity, and uniformity with your
Brethren, that you speak, etc.

2. For your own peace also; for this is one way for Christians to attain a
peace with God, and man, and themselves. The Apostle speaks of some 1 These.
2.15.
that please not God, but are contrary to all men: I think it may be said of
Dividers, Authors, or Fomenters of division, they cannot please God, while they
study how to be contrary to all men. I shall not need, says Dr. Reynolds in
his Sermon of the Peace of the Church, to load them with any other guilt than
the Apostle does, that they are not the servants of Christ: Romans 16.17.
For how can he who is without peace and love, serve or please that God who is
the God of Peace, and whose Name is Love, and whose Law is Love? Non habent Dei
charitatem qui non diligunt Ecclesiae unitatem, says S. Austin: A known Place
it is lib 3. chapter 16 de Baptism
not need I to dismiss them with a more fearful Curse than that of the Apostle
too, I would they were even cut off that troubles you. The Achans, the
Troublers of Israel; must expect trouble and no peace from the God of Israel,
nor can such have any peace in themselves for being given to change, they are
but like Noah's Dove fluttering from place to place, having no rest for the
soles of their feet, They are but like Cain, as fled from the place of rest, so
dwelling in the Land of Nod i.e. of wandering Vid. Dr. Stillingfleet's Sherinah
in locum.
till they return to the Ark again: They are like children tossed to and fro
with every wind of Doctrine, and even when they think themselves fixed, they
most-what still have some jealousies remaining in their minds, that possibly
they are deceived; so that they seldom have any rest, unless they come at last
to a hardness of of heart, and a stupid and benumming in sensual security,
crying Peace where there is no Peace; for no true peace, no true rest is to be
had, till they come to this speaking the same things, without division, from
their Brethren; How often do we see them like drunken men reeling to and fro,
carried from this to that extreme, till they come at last to conclude in
Atheism and Infidelity? whereas by being united, particular Christians would be
strengthened in the truth, having nothing more to do, but to grow in Grace, and
make Progress from degrees to degrees in Holiness, which is the very design of
Christianity. Indeed

3. It concerns every one to labor after this Unity, if they do but consider
that this alone will put them in a fit posture to receive the blessing of God.
It is remarkable, the Psalmist Psa 134.
exhorts the people, Behold, bless ye the Lord, all ye servants of the Lord,
which stand in the House of the Lord. Mark, he exhorts them plurally, Ye, and
all ye, bless ye; but in the third verse he prays to God to bless the people
singularly; The Lord bless thee out of Sion: Plures hortatur ut benedicant,
i^se, uni benedicit, says S. Austin: He exhorts all to bless the Lord, but he
blesses all from the Lord as one man. It hints, that then God uses to bless
his people, when they are at unity as one man. So Christ came to his Disciples
with a blessing when they were a rowing together; M^^ 1^.2^.
and to his Apostles with a blessing of Peace when they were assembled
together; John 2^.19.
and he sent his Holy Ghost to them when with one accord they were met
together: And so the Promise runs, Where two or three is met together in my
Name, there am I in the midst of them. While Christians disagree in their
manner of serving, and blessing, and worshipping God, God will not bless them,
as He will do, if in one way, and with one mouth and heart they glorify their
Father: if they speak the same things, and there be no divisious amongst them:
if he will hear the prayers of Christians when two or three are united
together, how much more when several thousands? nay, not only all in a
Congregation, but all in all Congregations throughout a whole Land are united,
speaking and asking the same things. In this case, sure if in any, the Kingdom
of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent takes it by force: On the
contrary, if there be divisions, we can never be so hopeful in our prayers, for
these divisions most-what causes alienation of affections, and so we cannot
pray with such hopes of Audience, because we cannot then lift up pure hands
without wrath: the clamor of our boiling malice to each other, will outcry
our prayers; our dissentions will make that sweet Incense stink in Gods
Nostrils, and will turn our Prayers into Curses, if we do not speak the same
things, but there be divisions amongst us.

Many more Motives I might heap up to enforce our Exhortation, especially that
drawn from the many examples we have set before us; as that of God the Father,
who being provoked by us, yet by all means seeks peace and union with us; has
sent his Ministers of Reconciliation to beseech us to be reconciled unto him,
loadeth us with his blessings, causes his Sun to shine, and his Rain to fall
on us, and all to induce us to be at peace with himself: And can we be
partakers of the Divine Nature, or Sons of our Heavenly Father, if we be not
Follower^ of him, as dear Children, in endeavoring to be united one with
another? Nay, Christ his Son did become Incarnate to unite us to God, and make
our peace with God; yea, and lo, the Prince of Peace came to dwell amongst men
for this end, when peace was amongst men in Augustus's days, when there was
general quiet and union through all the World, and at his Birth the Angels
proclaimed peace on Earth, good will toward men. O how then can we be
Disciples of Christ, and not follow after peace, to speak the same things, and
that there be no divisions amongst us? yea, and this Oil of Charity poured on
Christ the Head, did run down to the Beard, yea, unto the skirts of all his
garments; for all the Saints of God now in heaven have gone thither in this way
of peace: Abraham said to Lot, Let there be no contentions amongst us, for we
are Brethren; Stephen prayed for his Persecuto^s, Father, forgive them. The
Saints were ever peacemakers, and not peace-disturbers, or dividers: Nay, very
wicked men and Devils are sensible of the benefit of this way of union one with
another; therefore did Ephraim and Manasseh agree together against Judah, Herod
and Pilate, Scribes and Pharisees against Christ: Nay, very bruit beasts covet
an union, saevis inter se convenit ursis: and shall we be more blockish than
they? In a word, God styles himself the God of Peace, Christ the Prince of
Peace; his Name is Immanuel, a Name of Peace, was Crowned at his Baptism with a
Dove, the Emblem of Peace, being in the building (...) Church (...) a
Cornerstone, the place of Peace, coming into the World with a Song of Peace,
and going out of the World with a Legacy of Peace. The Spirit the Bond of
Peace, the Gospel the Covenant of Peace, and the word of Reconciliation,
Ministers Ambassadors thereof, Jerusalem the type of the Church, signifies in
the Hebrew Tongue the Vision of Peace; and the bliss in Heaven we all look for,
is nothing else but Eternal Peace, where we shall all speak the same things
without division to the glory and praise of God: If then we be Sons of the God
of Peace, Servants of the Frince of Peace, Temples of the Spirit of Peace,
Professors of the Gospel of Peace, if we have any Consolations in the Ministers
the Ambassadors of Peace, if we be Citizens of Jerusalem the Vision of Peace,
and hope to be gathered to our Fathers, to enjoy an eternal Sabbath of Peace:
if there be in us any consolation in Christ, any comfort of love, any
fellowship of the Spirit, let it be our care to walk by this Rule of Peace,
Unity, Unanimity, and Uniformity with our Brethren, to speak the same things,
and that there be no divisions amongst us; but let us be perfectly joined
together in the same mind, and the same judgment; and as many as walk according
to this Rule, peace be upon them, and the whole Israel of God.

Now that you may see how Christians are to speak the same things, and how they
may and must order their endeavors to avoid divisions, give me leave to close
my Exhortation with sundry Directions picked out of the Analogy of Faith: The
skilful Physician must not only discover the disease, and persuade his Patient
to use all means to prevent and remedy it, but he must also direct him what
remedies to use, and how to use them. The directions I shall give you, you
cannot like the worse, because most of them, I confess, I have (though in a
different method) out of that excellent Sermon of Doctor Edward Reynolds of the
Peace of the Church, to which I have added some Heads, and some inlargements;
better I could not find, let him do it that can, such wholesome Rules being
therein offered, as would compose the most turbulent spirits to some
moderation, if they would walk up to them; and jointly considered, exceedingly
conducing to heal the breaches of the Church of God.

Then by way of caution, Direct. 1.
that you mistake me not, know, that though you must speak the same things, and
avoid divisions, and labor to be of the same mind and judgment, yet this
Exhortation admits of a limitation, it must be only, if it be possible, and as
much as lies in you, without any shipwreck of truth and holiness: For
howsoever Unity, Unanimity, and Uniformity be well pleasing unto God, yet is it
not such an Unity as he desires, unless it be truth and peace together; such a
peace and unity as is according to truth and godliness in Christ Jesus: there
may be an agreement together in falso, when men hold together for the
maintenance of one and the same common error. Such as is an agreement, as our
Learned Davenant Epist. de pacificat.
observes.

1. Of Heretics, in case of Heresies, when Adversaries speak all the same
things, to deny or deprave the Faith of the Gospel, as Hymenius and Philetus
did, 2 Timothy 2.18.
who sought to overthrow men's Faith in the Resurrection.

2. Of Idolaters, in case of Idolatry; Hos. 4.15.
if Israel play the Harlot, let not Judah transgress, for (...) what agreement
has the Temple of God with Idols? 2 Cor. 6.16.


3. There may be an agreement of Usurpers, in case of Tyranny, when any shall
usurp and exercise Domination over the Consciences of men, to bring them into
bondage unto Doctrines of Errors, and make Articles of Faith for all Churches
to submit unto, as the Romish Church, and especially as the Tridentine Council
have done. In which case the Apostle had no patience to give place by
subjection to them, no not for one hour. Gal. 2.4, 5
Neque enim quisquam nostrum Episcopum se esse Episcoporum constituit, aut
Tyrannico terrore ad obsequendi necessitatem collegas suos adegit, says S.
Cyprian in the Council of Carthage, in the case of Rebaptization Lib. de
sentent. Episcoo. de haretic. rebapt.
. Yea, 2. There may be an agreement in malo, when men combine together in a
Confederacy for the compassing of some mischievous design, as did those forty
and odd that bound themselves with a Curse to destroy Paul Acts 23.12, 13.
: such as is the agreement of Thieves, Cheats, Drunkards, Whoremongers, and
Fornicaters, and Rebels, among themselves: such agreements as these no
Christian ought to join with, or be of the same mind or judgment with them: The
wisdom of the Flesh, and cunning of the Devil, will bring men fast enough to
those cursed agreements, without which he and his knows well enough, his
Kingdom cannot stand. Gods Servants have rather evermore bent themselves by
their prayers and endeavors, to dissolve the Glue, and break these
Confederacies of the ungodly. Destroy their tongues, O Lord, divide them, was
holy David's prayer Psa. 55.9.
. And S. Paul, when he stood before the Sanedrim at Jerusalem, to take off his
malicious Accusers the better, perceiving both the Judges and by standers to be
of two different Factions, some Pharifees who believed a Resurrection, and
others Sadduces that denied it, he did wisely to cast a bone amongst them Acts
23.6, 7, 10.
. In this case then the Rule is certain, that though we must labor for Unity,
yet are we (...), as S. Jude speaks, Verse 3.
to contend earnestly for the great things of the Law and Gospel, those that
are either Foundations themselves, or are most visibly and immediately adjacent
and contiguous to the Foundation. Hence Paul and Barnabas had no small
dissension and disputation with the false Brethren, that taught the necessity
of Judaical Rites unto Salvation: Acts 15 2
And Athanasius the Great would not have the Orthodox Brethren to receive (...)
any Forms, or Letters, Communications, or Pacificatories, from George the
Arrian Persecutor: Aust Epist. 130. and opt. lib 2.
And Basil the Great Epist. 325. ad Epiph.
gives an excellent reason of it, (...): If once (says he) we shake the
simplicity of the Faith, and retain not that as a Rule and Measure of Inferior
Differences, Disputes and Contentions will prove endless; therefore the Unity
that must be labored after, and maintained amongst Christians in the Church,
must be a Christian Unity, that is, a happy Concord, in walking together in the
same path of truth and godliness. The Word of Christ is the Word of Truth Col.
1.5.
; and the Mystery of Christ is the Mystery of Godliness 1 Timothy 3 16.
; and Christ that is the King of Salem, is the King of Righteousness also Heb.
7.2.
: Whatsoever then is contrary to these, Truth, o^ Godliness, or Righteousness,
cannot be acceptable unto Christ James 3.17.
: The wisdom that is from above is first pure, then peaceable; and our Unity
must be the Unity of the Spirit: Ephesians. 4.3.
Ea enim sola Ecclesiae pax est quae Christi pax est, says Hilary. Here are
our bounds set us, our ne plus ultra, beyond which if we pass we transgress,
and are exorbitant, usque ad aras: The Altar-stone is the mear stone; all Bonds
of Friendship, all Offices of Neighborhood must give way, when the Honor of
God and his Truth lies at stake: we must buy the Truth, and not sell it for any
temporal advantages: The Church is Militant, and must maintain Wars with
Principalities, and Powers, and Spiritual Wickednesses: and Christ came to send
a Sword upon Earth against all dangerous Errors of mind and manners. If peace
will be had upon fair terms, or indeed upon any terms (Salvis veritate and
pietate) without impeachment of truth and piety, it ought to be embraced; but
if it will not come upon harder conditions, better let it go. A man may buy
Gold too dear: Follow peace with all men, and holiness, says S. Paul, Heb.
12.14.
without which no man shall see the Lord; not without which peace, but without
which holiness, no man can see the Lord: for the Gender of the Pronoun is not
Feminine, not (...), but (...): without peace some man may see the Lord, having
faithfully endeavored it, though he cannot obtain it, (for that is not his
fault) but without holiness (which if any man want, it is his own fault only)
no man shall see the Lord: Our speaking the same things then, and being joined
together in the same mind and judgment, must have this limitation, so far forth
as may stand with Christian truth and godliness. Now for positive directions:
To this then join in the second place.

That so the main of truth and godliness be but preserved inviolate, nihil
minimum in Religione, yet we know our Savior distinguishes between Mint and
Cummin, Mat. 23.23.
and the great things of the Law. And the Apostolical Synod at Jerusalem, Acts
25.28.
between things ^ecessary and unnecessary; and S. Paul Romans 14.1.
between meats and drinks, and the Kingdom of God; and elsewhere between the
Foundation and Superstructure. 1 Cor. 3.10, 11.
Some truths there are which belong adsidem Catholicam, others which only
pertain ad scientiam Theologicam: Some are questiones (...), says Gregory
Nazianzen, others (...): some are de side, others circa sidem, being such
perilous superinducements as may bruise and wrench the foundation, others
praeter fidem, in quibus salva fide qua Christiani sumus, ignor atur verum, as
S. Austin speaks De peccato Origin, cap 23
, in which we may err or be ignorant, believe or suspend without any hazard to
the common Faith. In one word, as Tertullian distinguishes of sins, so may we
of opinions; some are quotidianae incursionis, such as are usually incident to
humane frailty, and some are dogmat a devoratoria salutis, such as proceed from
heretical pride, or blindness. Now though we must, as I said before, contend
earnestly for the Faith, the Foundations themselves, (against Heresies,
Idolatry, or Tyranny) or such points as are immediately adjacent to the
Foundations, yet so long as there is sound agreement in Fundamental Truths, and
in the simplicity of the Gospel, we must deny our own wits, and silence our
disputes, in matters merely notional, or Canons that have little or no
necessary influence into Faith, or godly living, speaking the same things with
our Brethren in those matters, rather than spend our precious hours in
impertinent contentions: so as for gain of a small truth, to shipwreck a great
deal of love, and by perplexing our minds with less matters, take off our
thoughts from more necessary and spiritual employments. It was a wise and
seasonable rebuke which the Mariners in a dangerous Tempest gave to a
Philosopher, who troubled them with an impertinent discourse, (...), we perish
whilst thou triflest: So is it sad that it can be truly said of any, that
(whilst they so wrangle about such questions as gender strife, those, whose
poor souls, ready happily to sink under the Tempest of Sin and Death) cry out
like the Man of Macedonia in S. Paul's Vision, Come and help us; do for want of
the plain and compendiary way of Faith, Repentance, Good Works, Spiritual
Worship, and Evangelical Obedience, which should be taught them, become a prey
to the envious man, who while we sleep will be sure to watch, and goes about
seeking whom he may devour. O that we would be wise then, by all means to
preserve the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, and in nothing to give
offense to the Church of God, but rather silence and smother our domestica
judicia, our private judgments, and singular fancies and conceits, leaving all
small dissentions to Elias, quum venerit; as the Areopagites did some causes to
the hundred year A Gell. p. 12. c. 7.
, being stiff and peremptory in none of these things against the quiet of Gods
Church, but speaking the same things, even such things that may make men
confess that God is in us of a truth. In absoluto ac facili est aeternitas,
says S. Hilary excellently, God leads not his people unto life eternal by
knots and inextricable questions, by verbal wranglings or contentions:
Curiositate opus non est, we have no need of Curiosity, says Tertul. Our work
is to be Christians in practice, not Critics in doubtful Disputations. We do
but mistake the design of Christianity, if we fix our selves in perplexed
conceits and humors; nay, we pervert it, if we raise and pursue contentions in
the Church, says Mr. Hildersham Upon John 4.23.
: This is a mark of ungodly and graceless men, such as serve not the Lord
Jesus, but their own bellies Romans 16.17, 18.
. It agrees this with S. Judes description of Seducers in his time Verses 8,
11, 12.
: On the contrary, every man that fears God, his great care is to love God, and
keep his Commandments 1 John 5.2.
: But as for doubtful things, he is of a peaceable disposition in them, he is
of the number of them that are quiet in the Land Psalm. 35.20.
: He spends not the heat of his zeal about, for, or against doubtful Opinions,
alterable Modes, Rites, and circumstances of Religion, they are things too weak
to lay much weight upon them, being so little serviceable or disserviceable to
the very design and frame of Christianity, further than as our humility, and
obedience, and meekness, and other Christian Graces, are exercised and
manifested by them: Indeed an eager defending or opposing such kind of things,
is The design of Christianity by M Fowler.
(to use the similitude of an excellent Person) like the Apes blowing at the
Gloworm, which affords neither light nor heat: nay, by woeful experience we find
it very injurious to the very design of Christianity, as that which often
hardens Atheistically disposed persons, when they observe the contentions of
Christians about matters of this nature, for thereby they often take a measure
of their whole Religion; and besides an eager concernedness about indifferent
things, is too ordinarily accompanied with a lukewarm, or rather frozen
indifferencies concerning the most important points, and the Indispensables of
Christianity. It is too visibly apparent to be denied (says Mr. Page 240.
Fowler) that those that have such a scalding hot Zeal either for, or against
things of no certainty, and no necessity, are many of them (as their
Predecessors the Pharisees were) in the very other Extreme, as to not a few of
the weightiest matters of Religion: wherefore in these things I beseech you, so
as Fundamentals of Faith and Godliness be but preserved inviolate, ^et us speak
the same things, and let there be no divisions amongst us. To this end

3. Let our great care be an (...) and (...), a joint obedience to the truth
wherein we all agree, and pursuance of those pious ends we all profess. It Is
the Apostles Rule, this in the very case; P^^. ^.10. 10.
whereunto we have already attained, says he, let us walk by the same Rule,
let us mind the same things; for this we must know, that the love of God, and
Conscience of his Commandments, is the right way to know him, and the secrets
of his Word. Si in Christi lumine ambulare volumus, a preceptis ejus and
monitis non recedamus, says S. Cypr. If any man will do the will of God, he
shall know the Doctrine, says Christ John 7.17.
, Hereby we know that we know him, if we keep his Commandments, says S. John
John 1.2, 3, 4.
. Those things which we learn to do, we learn by doing, says Aristotle. Nisi
fidelium operum usus praecesserit doctrinae cognitio non apprehendetur, says
S. Hilary Psa. 118.
. The right knowledge of Divine Truth is not only intellectual for the Brain,
but experimental for the Conscience, and consists much in the taste of
spiritual things. Quod in cibis gustus, in sacris intellectus, says S. Basil.
Video multos parvo ingenio, literis nullis, ut been agerent peragendo
consecutos, says Pliny Lib. 6. ^. p. 29.
. Hence that expression of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6.3.
Knowledge according to Godliness: They therefore that resolve to make it their
daily care to keep a good Conscience, are most likely by the other helps of
Learning and Industry, to find out the truths wherein Christians are apt to
disagree: for the very Heathen Philosopher Aristotle could say, (...),
wickedness putrifies the principles of the mind, and that such as are men's
courses of life, such are likewise the dispositions of their minds toward
practical truths: A corrupt heart usually makes a corrupt judgment. Dum his
quae volumus doctrinam coaptamus, let us not then be like Painters that can
draw a Ship on a Table, but can build none for use; such as can write a
discourse of Doctrines in Papers, but not express it in our lives; but by an
unanimous obedience to the truths we know, let us dispose our selves for the
discovery of those we know not; that is one good way to bring us to speak the
same things, and to prevent divisions amongst us.

4. To this joint obedience in things wherein we all agree, let us add a
moderation of the fervor of our zeal, against those that are contrary-minded
in the things wherein we differ. There is in the nature of many men a certain
(...), an heat and activeness of spirit, which then principally, when
conversant about objects Divine, and matters of Conscience, is wonderful apt,
without a due corre^tive of wisdom and knowledge, to break forth into
intemperate carriage to disturb peace, and occasion divisions. It was zeal in
the Woman which persecuted S. Paul, Acts. 13.50.
and zeal in him too, which persecuted Christ before he knew him Phil. 3.6.
Acts 26.9.
. If Devotion be blind, and not ruled by Knowledge, and if Zeal be like
Quicksilver not allayed, nor reduced to usefulness by wisdom and mature
Learning, it often proves the occasion of much unquiet in the Church: Through
this zeal, Truth it self is often stretched too far, and by a vehement dislike
of Error on the one side, men often run into an Error of the other, Vide Dod.
Holdsworth 's Lect. 40. p. 350.
As Dionysius Alexandrinus being too fervent against Sabellius laid the grounds
of Arrianism: And S. Chrysostom is observed, in zeal against the Maniches, to
have too much extolled the Power of Nature: And Acosta observes of S. Jerome,
that ardore feriendi adversarias premit interdum socies. So are there many who
out of a hatred of the Papists, run into other extremes of Enthusiasm or
Profaneness: Yea, by this misguided zeal it is, that men do sometimes
marvellously alienate the minds of one another from peace, by loading the
contrary Doctrines with envious consequences, which the Consciences of the
Adversaries do abhor: which course usually tend to Exacerbation, whereby Truth
never gains so much as Charity and Peace do lose. It Is true, Acrimony and
sharpness of rebuke is sometimes necessary, toward men of obstinate and
pernicious minds Titus 1.13. Gal. 2.5.
; but amongst Brethren, yea Adversaries that are not incorrigible, all things
ought to be carried with lenity and meekness Gal. 6.1. and 5.13. 2 Timothy 2. 15.
, and with a mutual (...) or condescension to one another weaknesses Romans 15.1.
. Sepis monsus non nocet, (Epiphanius Here Is. 36.) vespa quo acrius pungit minus
laedit. He observes, that there be some Creatures, that the more they sting,
the less they hurt: And so in any dispute, that man does less hurt with his
Argument, that betakes himself to biting and intemperate Language. In these
things then we should carry our selves, (says Doctor Reynolds, non (...) sed
(...),) as Brethren, not as Enemies, not to uncover the nakedness of our
Brethren. But as it is said of Athanaesius the Great, dissidentibus magnis, by
his meekness he drew those that dissented from him; so should we (if it be
possible) make the truth a gainer by our mild handling of them that vary from
us. Christ himself did divest himself of his Glory and Majesty, to condescend
to our vileness, and bear with our infirmities; so should we imitate the
example of our Master, according to that grave advice of Nazianzen (...); let
us yield to our Brethren that we may overcome them, as a Flint is easily broken
upon a Pillow that yields to it. 1 Cor. 10 14.
Let no man seek his own, but every man another weal^^; even as I please all
men in all things, says the Apostle, not seeking my own profit, but the profit
of many, that they may be saved. Patience and condescension, so far as we can
lawfully, is the true Uniter and Peacemaker Prove. 15.1.
: The soft answer breaks wrath, but cross and thwarting language and practice
rather strengthens it: The hasty Spirit begins the fray, says Bishop
Saunderson, the patient spirit must end it, if it ever be ended, that we may
all speak the same things, and that there may be no divisions amongst us. I
know your Minister cannot say these things, but some will say, he is far from
practicing what he teaches: but I pray be not so'rash in censuring, so to
hinder your selves of the benefit of these wholesome directions; it is his care
to use the Rod, and the Spirit of Meekness, both in their due places, and if he
mistake through weakness, do you pity and pray for him, and do your own parts
the more carefully.

5. To this end also, and to moderate our zeal, according to the fourth
direction, be we clothed with Humility: Our knowledge is apt to beget Pride,
and Pride is the Mother of Contention: Only by Pride comes Contention, says
Solomon; He that is of a proud spirit stirs up strife Prove 28.25.
. Yea, it is the Mother of Heresies, whereas Humility is the chief breeder and
preserver of Unity. Hence the Apostle, when he exhorts to unity and love, he
tells us first, that we must with all meekness, and holiness, and
long-suffering, forbear one another, or else we can never keep the unity of the
spirit in the bond of peace Ephesians. 4.2, 3.
: And when he exhorts Phil. 2.2.
, to be of one accord, and one mind, he tells us, Verse. 8.
that if we would do so, we must in lowliness of mind esteem each other better
than our selves: As the juice of the same Earth is sweet in the Grape, but
bitter in Wormwood; as the same Odor is a refreshment to the Dove, but a
Poison to the Scarabaean^ or Beetle, so the same Learning and Knowledge,
qualified with Charity and Humility, is admirable useful to edify the Church,
which with pride and contempt of others is most mischievous and dangerous. Ever
therefore let us be careful to correct and keep down the rising of our
knowledge by humility, not censuring or despising one another. Pride made the
Donatists to forsake the Catholic Unity, which S. Cyprian (in the same
judgment, but with more humility) did not disturb. Humility in weak ones would
make them docible and tractable, if they were but sensible of their own
blindness in the things of God, they would lay aside their private conceits,
and not rack the Scriptures, to say something for them (as Demosthenes said of
the Oracle, that it did (...)) but they would then refign up their judgments to
the light of Gods Word, and clear Reason, and when their errors are
discovered, hold their peace. And humility in strong ones would make them far
from censuring their Brethren, would put them in the form of servants, and
cloth them with (...), Brotherly Love, which is magnus persuadendi artifex, a
very great means to work on others judgments, to take off all such impediments
as usually rise from personal prejudices in the disquisition of truth. When
Benhadad's servants observed the word (Brother) to come out of Ahab's mouth,
they hastily laid hold on it, as an excellent preparation to settle those
differences which were betwixt those two Princes 1 Kings 20.33.
. It was a good temper in Calvin, who professed, that though Luther should call
him Devil, (for he knew his heat) yet would he still acknowledge him for an
excellent Servant of God. O that there were the same affections in us! Had we
this humility, it would make the one condescend to the others weakness, and the
other willing to learn any (though unwelcom) Truth, and unlearn any (though
darling) error, it would make them obey with duty what they are not able with
reason to gainsay; and so we should doubtless speak the same things, and there
would be no divisions amongst us.

6. As to this end we must moderate the fervor of our zeal with patience, and
mutual condescentions, and humility, so must we ever set our zeal upon the
right object, even upon our selves. Censoriousness of others, is a chief cause
of divisions and differences amongst us. It was this that S. Paul discerned in
the Romans Romans 15.
, the weak were censorious of the strong, and the strong disdained the weak;
but neither of both did look into the other end of the Wallet, to examine
thoroughly their own spirits. We use to say, if every one would mend one, all
would be well: I, but there are many ready to mend, not only one, but ten, a
thousand, all about them: Every one would be mending one, but not the right
one; his Brother, but not himself. O the falseness and hypocrisy of men's
hearts blinded with self-love! Thus does it sill the world with divisions and
offenses: The disease is hypocrisy, as the Great Phytian shows Luke 6.41, 42.
, the symptoms are to be cat-eyed outward in readily espying some thing in a
Brothers eye, even the smallest Moat, and to be Bat-eyed inward, in not
perceiving a Beam in a man's own eye. And a third symptom is to be tampering
with a Brothers eyes, and offering his service, to help him out with a Moat
there, before he think a thought of doing any thing toward the clearing of his
own eyes. The remedy is to begin at home; if we put things in their right
order, the business is done; tu conversus confirma fratres, strengthen thy
Brethren what thou can: Is is a good office, and must not be neglected, but
something more needful is first to be done, that thou may do that much
better, be converted thy self first, be reformed first, (...), Luke 6.42.
then shall thou see clearly to remove the Moat out of thy Brothers eye; be
sure first thy self be converted, and then in Gods Name deal with thy weak
Brother as thou feast cause, and strengthen him. O that those would consider
this that are so forward to censure others, especially their Superiors!
Magistrates and Ministers actions, ever and anon complaining, how ill things
are carried by them, and yet never take notice of their own sins, frauds,
oppressions, sacriledges, and insolences, or pievishness, and other
enormities. Let such turn their eyes homewards otherwhiles, observe how their
own Pulfes beat, and go learn what that is. Thou Hypocrite, cast out first the
beam out of thine own eye. Believe it, we shall never grow to Christian
unanimity in any tolerable measure, whilst this censorious spirit reigns in
us, and while we do not chiefly employ our care and endeavor in reforming our
selves. This, I think, well practiced, would conduce much to this speaking the
same things, and the healing of divisions amongst us. So would it,

7. If we would keep our selves in our own Stations, and labor to do God
service in the Places and Callings wherein he has set us, and not (...) busy
our selves in other men's matters, which, as the Apostle speaks, are (...)
unsuitable to us, and without our measure ^ Cor. 10.13, 14.
. By this one thing has the Church of Rome caused a great Schism in the
Christian World, because she does (...) stretch her self above her measure, and
not content her self with that degree which belongs to her. It is excellent
counsel of Solomon, not only in a case he there put, but in diverse others:
Eccl. 10.4.
If the Spirit of the Ruler rise up against thee, leave not thy place. E sede
itio, may with a little heat turn into sed itio, says Doctor Reynolds. Quidam
in corpore Christi oculi quidem manus, says S. Basil: All are not eyes and
hands in the Body of Christ, to take upon them the burden of great affairs. Are
all Apostles, says S. Paul? are all Prophets? are all Teachers? has not God
dealt to every man a several measure? has he not placed every man in a several
order? have we not all work to do in our own places? must we needs rush into
the labors, and intrude our selves into the business of other men? Haec
magistro relinquat Aristoteli, canere ipse docet. It was a sharp rebuke of
Tully against Aristoxenus the Musician, who would needs turn Philosopher:
whereunto agrees the Answer of Basil the Great to the Clerk of the Emperors
Kitchen, when he jeered him for his soundness against the Arrian Faction,
(...). Your business, it is to look to the seasoning of your Broth, and not to
revile the Doctrine or Doctrines of the Church. All these do commend the
Apostles Exhortation unto you, let every one study to be quiet, to do his own
business. 1 These. 4.11.
The Connection more than intimates, the next way to be quiet abroad, is to be
busy at home: We shall never learn well to be quiet, unless we learn also to
keep our own business. The excellent Bishop Lany has fully discovered, See
Doct. Lany, Bishop of Ely, upon this Text.
how guilty of the contrary hereof are both the Pope, the Covenanter, and
Sectary, in his Sermon on this Text, Quietness is the natural and genuine
effect of orderly keeping in our Callings, and Stations, and our own business.
For all discord must be between two, either persons, or parties; and that which
commonly kindles the Fire is envy, or some supposed injury. Now he that minds
his own business only, can give no occasion to others, of either envy or
complaint; and so in recompense of keeping to his own business, he shall sit
quietly under his own Vine, and under his own Fig Tree. Let none of us then out
of ambition, discontent, emulation, or any other Polipragmatical distemper,
grow weary of our own employments, and interpose our selves in things that are
without, and above our order: But according to the Apostles rule, 1 Cor. 7.24.
Let every one abide in his calling, and keep the station wherein God has set
him, and this will be an excellent help to our speaking the same things, our
unity, unanimity, and uniformity, and that there be no divisions amongst us.

8. To this add also: Remember that (...) enjoined by the Apostle Rom 12.
, be wise unto sobriety. When you are (...) deal with things divine, set bounds
(...) your selves, that you break not through to gaze Exodus ^.12* 21.
: think not to draw every thing in Religion to the rule of your own crooked
presumptuous Reason, to give a quo modo of every thing in Faith! Upon this
account it is that S. Paul charges the Colossians Col. 2.8.
, to take heed of Philosophy, and vain deceits; not but that there is admirable
use of sound Philosophy, and of Reason raised and rectified, so long as it is
subordinate to Faith: but when Reason shall be so proud as to judge of Faith it
self, and admit or reject it, as it shall be consonant or disagreeing to her
prejudice, this is a Tyranny which will quickly overthrow all: Other cause than
this there has been none of the desperate Heresies wherewith the Socinians
have pestered the World, but that they will have all truths to stand or fall at
the Tribunal of their presumptuous Reason. Happy we, and the Church of God, if
all curious Novelties in sacred things be esteemed profane: Modesty becomes
Christians, especially cum de Deo agitur; as Seneca said; be we wise to
sobriety: This would confer much to our speaking the same things, and to take
away divisions from amongst us; and of this advice the two next will be a sull
explication and improvement. So let that be the

9. (...), keep your selves close to the form of sound words Romans 10.^ 2 Timothy
^.13.
Those words and Doctrines which accord best with the grounds of Faith and love
in Christ, those which ascribe most glory to God, and the Grace of God, and
which most conduce to the humbling and abasing of the pride of man, which most
tends to the practice of godliness, to the purifying of Conscience, and
edifying of the Body of Christ. It is a weighty saying of S. Austin De Civ. Dei
lib. 10. c. 23.
, Non parum inter est ad Christianam pietatem quibus vocibus utamur: It is of
no little moment to Christian Piety what words we use; they must be according
to godliness 1 Timothy 6.3.
, and our knowledge, the knowledge of the truth according to godliness. To
which add

10. (...), Be sure to retain and bear reverence to the customs of the Church
of God: Contra fundatissimum morem nemo sentiat Aust. ep. 28.
: Let no man be in love with his private sentiments, contrary to the Churches
well-grounded Customs. Nemo nobis molestias exhibeat sic enim sentit ac docet
Sancta Dei Ecclesia ab origin. Epiphan. in Anchorat. Let no man trouble us in
these things, for thus the Holy Church thought and taught from the beginning.
In quibus nihil certi statuit Scriptura mos populi Dei and instituta majorum
pro lege tenenda sunt, says S. Austin; A known place.
Where the Word of God determines no certainty, and where there is no express
and evident variation from Divine Authority, there must be the Customs and
received practices of the Ancient and pure Ages of the Church, and
Constitutions of her Pastors, be retained as a Law, and to contemn and oppugn
them, he somewhere calls it insolentissima insania, a most proud or insolent
madness; only this Rule must be qualified with this necessary limitation, that
no Authority has any Authority in matters of Faith, Worship, or Doctrine of
Religion, to prescribe or deliver any thing, as in it self, and immediately
obligatory to Conscience, which is either contradicted or omitted in the Word
of God; for that we believe to be fully sufficient to make the man of God
perfect, and thoroughly furnished to every good work 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.
; but as for matters accessory, of indifferency, order, decency, and inferior
nature, and in matters of testimony to the truths of Scripture, and for
manifesting the succession, flourishing, and harmony of Doctrine, through all
Ages of the Church, the godly Learned has ascribed much to the Authority and
usage of the Ancient Churches, the study of the Doctrine whereof, Vide
Littler's Reformed Presbyte rian, Hooker's Ecclesiastical Polity, Mr. Baxter's
Disputation with several other Authors.
the Learned Usher calls a Noble Study: And that the Church both have had a
constant use of such Customs, and right to make and impose them, I could
largely show, by the judgment of all Reformed Divines, Ancient and Modern;
Beza, Bucer, Zuinglius, Chrimenitius, P. Martyn, and Calvin himself says, that
such Customs as serve for the furtherance of Devotion, are not purely Humane,
but Divine: Call. Inst. lib. 1. cap. 10. Sect. 30
Sure I am, that we should retain and observe them, seems to be enjoined by
Scriptures. Inquire of the former time, says Bildad, and prepare thy self to
the search of their Fathers Job 8.8.
. Look the old way, says the Prophet Jer. 6.16.
. It was not so from the beginning, says our Savior Mat. 19.8
. And what a high valuation S. Paul sets upon the Customs of the Church,
appears by his arguing 1 Cor. 11.16.
: If any man seems to be contentious, we have no such Custom, neither the
Churches of God: He is there reproving the Corinthians Innovation of Women
praying uncovered, and men covered. This ill fashion S. Paul confuteth with
several reasons, drawn from the power of Man over his Wife, appealing also to
natural decency therein; and at last concludes with this close, that they could
allege no such Custom in Gods Churches, and to run counter to the Universal
practice of Christianity, is a note of contentiousness, if any man seem, etc.
Now if a Church-Custom carried weight with it in S. Paul's time, when among
Christians, it could not be of above forty years standing, what a Reverence is
due then to those Customs that are continued in Gods Church ever since it was
gathered; which are like Melchisedecks Heb. 7.3.
, without Father, without Mother, or without dissent, whose first original
cannot be found out? which began at the first, or near the first, and so should
in all reason, and good manners, be continued till the last coming of our
Savior.

See this well answered in Dr. Edw. Stillingfleet's Irenicum, page 56.
The great Objection I know is, that these Customs and Ceremonies enjoined, are
an impeachment of our Christian Liberty; but methinks to scruple at them, and
hazard the Churches Peace, and our Superiors displeasure for them, should
rather impeach our Liberty indeed, especially considering that they are not
urged as obligatory to Conscience, per se, in themselves, but only as they are
imposed by Lawful Authority, for Orders sake. And whatever such are commended
by the Churches Customs, or our Superiors Commands, or convenient
circumstances, our Christian Liberty consists in this, that we have leave to do
them; and our refusing to comply with these, can hardly proceed from any thing
better, than a proud affectation of singularity, or at best a superstitious
scrupulosity in us. Sure I am the Apostle implicitly brands it with contention;
and therefore to submit to them, and retain and observe them, it is an
excellent way to this speaking the same things, and that there be no divisions
amongst us.

11. To this end also I exhort you to an (...), a not having the Faith of God
with respect of persons James 2.1.
: Take heed of partiality, or making your selves the servants of men 1 Cor.
7.23.
, an enthralling your judgments to the fancies of any Sect or Party, but rather
cast to bear an equal affection to Truth and Piety by whomsoever it be
professed; for Truth and Piety is Gods, wheresoever it grows, as a Mine of Gold
or Silver is the Princes, in whose ground soever it be discovered: (...). The
contrary to this is as great an occasion of divisions as any I know of. It was
S. Austin's complaint of the Donatists in his time: if one came amongst them,
and assured them of his Religion, Christianus sum; that he was Baptized,
fidelis sum; that he lived in the Churches Peace, Catholicus sum: Christianus,
fidelis, Catholicus, all would not serve the turn to be embraced by them: an
Unity with Christians in his Catholic Church would not do it, he must hold of
another head, or else be no Saint: Donatus his Ear-mark must be set upon him,
or he be rejected. It is the very case this of the dividers of this Age; be a
man never so good a Christian, never so pious or peaceable, damned he is, to
hell he must go, if he join not himself to a Side and Faction, which by many is
nicknamed their Friends, their Brethren, (by way of appropriation) the Godly,
the Kingdom of Christ, and the like. Every one is partial to his own side he
takes to, beyond all reason, ready to justify them in their most suspicious
Enterprises, and to extenuate their most palpable excesses, and as ready to
misconstrue the most justifiable actions of the adverse part; yea, to aggravate
to the utmost their most pardonable and smallest aberations; what is this but
at once to justify the Guilty, and condemn the Innocent? either of which alone
is an abomination unto the Lord Pro. 17.15.
. Hitherto appertains that which the Apostle calls, having men's persons in
admiration Jude 16.
: for there be many that have such a high Opinion of some men, that they are
apt to receive whatsoever they deliver as the undoubted Oracles of God, though
perhaps wanting both probability and proof: And on the other side, they have
such a prejudice against some others, though perhaps of better worth, greater
Learning, and more real Piety, and sounder judgment, as to suspect and disgust
every thing that comes from them, (especially if it does not sapere ad
pallatum) let them lay down their Doctrine never so clearly, or prove it never
so substantially. Thus partial affections to a Side, or to a Party, corrupts
the judgments of men, and inclines them very naturally to divisions: And so
long as men are thus carried away with such partialities and prejudice, they
shall never rightly perform their duties either to God or man. Now, I beseech
you Brethren, let us otherwise learn Christ, let us content our selves with
Christ's Livevery, and as such hear his Voice. We have our Faith and Appellation
from Christ, not from any other person; let us not upon any these undue
respects to any party of men, hold or let go Truth, or Piety, or Unity, and so
make Merchandise of it; contrary to that of Solomon, Pro. 28.23.
Buy the Truth, and sell it not. The Orthodox Believers in the Primitive
Church, did ever keep themselves to the style of Antioch Christians, refusing
the Name of Petriani or Pauliani, or Pais Donati, I am of Paul, or I of Peter,
or I of Donatus: thus let us do, let us lay aside all dividing names and
affections to any party, for those do naturally hinder us from speaking the
same things, and do uphold divisions amongst us: Therefore laying aside all
such partiality,

12. Let us all join our forces unanimously against the Common Adversary. Just
as David did, when his Brethren the Jews had provoked him much, yet could not
he be stirred up to fight against them, but used all his skill and force
against the Philistines 1 Samuel 17.7, 12.
. It is promised as a blessed fruit of the Gospel, which every godly man
prays for, and desires to see, that the Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and
the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid, and the Calf, and the young Lion, and
the Fatling be together, and a little Child shall lead them Esaias 11.6.
: that Ephraim and Judah shall cease to annoy and vex one another, Verse 13.
but all should fly upon the shoulders of the Philistines, and spoil them of
the East. O that we could see this day, that we could lay aside our civil
enmities to join together against our common Adversaries; this would be an
happiness upon earth, almost heavenly, if we could so speak the same things,
that there were no divisions amongst us.

13. To this end let us follow peace jointly, and the things that make for
mutual peace and unity: Let each of us, in our several places, not only have
pious affections thereunto, but also put to all our skill and wisdom, and cast
about for the most proper and seasonable means conducing to so good an end.
(...). It is not enough for every one of us to accept it, or desire it, or meet
it half way, or let it in, or welcome it when it comes, but we must prosecute,
pursue, and go after it: We must venture our selves for it to a si forte, and
quantum in nobis, if by any means we may overtake and apprehend it. Let peace
and unity be our rule, not intangling our Consciences by scruples where we need
not, taking the way that leads to the Land of Peace and Promise, not by Mount
Ebal, by pride, and malice, and ambition, and Schismatical contentions, but by
Mount Gerizim, by humility, and charity, and meekness, and unanimity, and
piety. Thus let us do that we may all speak the same things, and that there be
no divisions amongst us.

14. Yet when all those Rules are observed, except the Lord build the house,
they labor but in vain that build it. Paul may plant, and Apollo may water,
but his blessing is it which must perfect all. By all these convincing reasons
and insinuations, we can but work upon your outward senses, and by the sense
represent fit motives to your understandings: It is God only that can bow and
frame your hearts to peace and unity; we may persuade to unity, unanimity, and
uniformity, and some of you may wish it, but if the God of Peace do not set in
with us, it will not take effect. Non persuadebis etiamsi persuaseris, It is
God that shall persuade Japhet to dwell in the House of Shem Genesis 9.
; Noah's persuasions will not do it, nor Shem's, though they should speak with
the tongues of men and Angels: Let God persuade Japhet, and Japhet will be
persuaded; God is a Lover of Concord, and the Author of Peace. Alas, without
him, what can be expected from us, whose disposition, by reason of that pride
that abounds in us, are naturally turbulent and self-willed. The heart of man
is a sour piece of Clay, wondrous stubborn and churlish, not to be wrought upon
but by an Almighty Power. What man is able to take down his own pride
sufficiently? (many a good man have more ado with this one Viper, than with all
other his corruptions besides:) but how much less is any man able to subdue and
beat down the pride of another man's spirit? only God, with the strength of his
Arm, is able to throw down every exalting thought, and to lay the highest
Mountains level with the lowest Flats. It is he alone that can infuse a spirit
into us, that will eat out, by degrees, that cankered proud flesh, that
breeds all vexations and contentions: He can subdue that self-love that is in
every man's bosom, and make us so vile in our own eyes, that whereas we are
naturally prone to esteem better of our selves than of all other men, we shall,
through lowliness of mind, esteem every other man better than our selves Phil.
2.3.
: In vain shall we Wrestle with our own corruptions, though we put to all our
strength, and wrestle with great wrestlings; as Jacob said upon the birth of
Nepthali Genesis 30.^
, so long as we wrestle with them only. We must therefore to the use of all
other means, a joint obedience to agreed truths, moderation of zeal wherein we
differ, humility, reflecting our censures and zeal upon our selves chiefly,
keeping within our Callings; sobriety, closeness to the form of sound words,
and the Churches Customs; impartiality, uniting against the common Adversary,
and following peace by all means. To them all we must add our wrestlings with
the Almighty (as Jacob did) by our importunate and uncessant prayers, for this
blessing of Peace and Unity. Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, that he would
repair the breaches, and build up the walls thereof; that he would give his
Word of Peace a free passage into the heads and hearts, into the consciences
and conversations of all his people; that so we all speaking the same things,
without divisions amongst us, may grow up together unto a perfect man, to the
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ; which the Lord grant for the
merits and mercies of his beloved Son Jesus Christ the Righteous, to whom with
the Father and the Blessed Spirit, three Persons, and one Immortal and only
wise God, be all Glory, Praise, and Thanksgiving, now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
SOUND CONSIDERATIONS FOR TENDER CONSCIENCES: Wherein is showed their OBLIGATION
Not to forsake the PUBLIC ASSEM^LIES OF THE CHURCH, IN SEVERAL SERMONS upon
HEB. 10.25.

By Joseph Briggs, M. A. Vic. of Kirkburton in Yorkshire.

LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Brooks and are to be sold at the Angel in
Cornhil. 1674.

The Epistle to the Reader; wherein some new Pleas for Conventicles are
considered.
Courteous Reader,
I Do not invite thee to read, unless thou need instructions in this
Subject, and unless thou be an impartial and considerate man; nor will I at all
flatter thee to an applause or approbation, but leave it entirely to thy
Christian judgment and discretion, to use these my Labors as thou find
them. It is not (I assure thee) a conceit of Selfworth that engaged me to
imprint them, or that can oblige thee to cast a candid eye upon them: Only this
I say, to my weak apprehension (such as it is) the Doctrines herein delivered
are Divine Truths; and, as such, I make bold to offer them to the Worlds Trial.
Thy part it is to examine them, and with those Noble Bereans to search the
Scriptures, and see if the things spoken be according unto them; which if they
be, take thou heed of being found in the number of selfish or envious
gainsayers: for if thou reject Truth, or do not receive it in the love
thereof, by whomsoever it be spoken, to the God of Truth thou must answer for
it in the Great Day of Judgment.

It was wont to be a Rule of Peace amongst Divines, that let but Dissenters
keep their Opinions to themselves, or to their Families, or make them Rules for
their own private practices only, and who will then molest or contradict them?
This Liberty of Conscience is freely granted to every man, to worship God
himself, or with his Family, according to his Conscience, i. e. in such a way
and manner as his Conscience (his Judging Faculty) judges most acceptable.
Vide Bishop Sanderson's seventh Sermon ad populum, page 384.
But if any man will go publish his Opinion, to entangle the Consciences of
others, and seek to draw Disciples to himself, and make a Party, and cause
divisions and dissentions amongst his Majesty's Subjects, and so trouble the
Public State, and distract it; to restrain such, or punish them, is no sin in
the Magistrate, no Tyranny over the Consciences of men, no Persecution or
Oppression Vide Ashdon's Epistle before his book, called, Toleration^d
sapproved, etc
, but it is his duty thus to keep men from infecting his Subjects Souls with
Errors or Heresies. Vide Mr. Calamy's Sermon before the Lords, December 25 1644.
p. 38


But now, as the matter goes, this great Evil seems to be unavoidable, and like
a most violent Torrent to bear all before it.

Blasphemers, Schismatics, Heretics, and Idolaters, think themselves loose
and unfettered; to our teeth they say it, they may now live as they list, they
may publish their Erroneous Opinions, and entangle others Consciences, and draw
Disciples, and make Parties, and cause divisions and dissentions, such as we
may justly fear will never be hereafter healed by any ordinary means: It were
sad, if we had no way left us to resist these Public Annoyances; but (blessed
be God) it is not so, this Remedy we have, freedom to profess and publish Gods
pure Word, which is strong, and will prevail 1 Esdras 4.3^.
. For my part I am no Enemy unto men, but only to their Errors: and if I may
be believed in this Infidel, yet credulous Age, I have no inward rancour or
illwill to a Presbyterian, but love the moderate and sober with all my heart,
and do conceive him the best of Sects, though foully too blame in laying a
Foundation for others that are intolerable to build upon, and countenancing
them when his own Interest seems to require it. Nor would I (if possibly I can
avoid it) exasperate him in the least, but have purposely avoided all tart
sarcastical Exprobations as much as I could, except the matter in hand required
naturally a sharp reproof. Passion seldom advantageth Truth; the wrath of man
works not the righteousness of God.

The nature and evil of Schism have been by many excellent Authors largely and
irrefragably opened and manifested; yet may these following Sermons, especially
in this present juncture of Public Affairs, add some further light thereunto,
at least by way of Genuine Consequence: For if men's Obligation to their own
Pastors, and the sinfulness of forsaking the Public Assemblies upon men's
modern pretenses be once cleared, where the Schism is, and at whose door it
lies, will easily appear to any intelligent man. Hence am I apt to think the
Truths here delivered (for so I really think them) will be disgustful to this
gainsaying and rebellious Generation: Nor need we think it strange, that men
should account us their Enemies for their sakes (for telling them the truth)
Thus do we but sip of that Cup our Savior, and his Prophets, and Apostles
drunk of; and we are but sprinkled with that Baptism that they were baptized
withal.

But this we may think strange, that these Truths should be so unsavory unto
them, in whose mouths they were once thought sound and indisputable; nay, that
those who will not allow any thing, no, not a pin or a nail, the least
circumstance in Divine Worship, without an express Scripture for it, and who
cannot (I suppose) contradict the Doctrines here pressed and proved out of the
Scriptures, nay, who themselves (when time was) did urge them as seriously and
vigorously as we now can do, should now, when they are put in mind of them, set
their brains upon the Rack to invent new Pleas and Apologies (grounds only in
their own fancies) to elude them.

Let but any sober foreign Divine, or Divines of the Reformed Churches, that
are uninterested in the Cause, consider well the Constitution of our Church,
and compare what has been formerly said by the best Presbyterian Guides
against Toleration (as they are well and faithfully represented by Mr. Ashdon
in his Treatise of Toleration disapproved,) and as they are handsomely applied
to our present case in the Book of Toleration not to be abused:) I say, let any
impartial Judge compare these with what is said in pretense of Answer, and I
think he could not but be astonished with the evident discovery of a love of
contradiction in the greatest Pretenders to Love and Godliness the World has
ever had: For what can be more light and frivolous in any rational men, then to
think to pass over such weighty considerations (as are in those Books offered)
with such slight of hand, as only to answer, that none can know the
Nonconformists minds better than themselves; that when they inveighed against
Toleration, they never meant that themselves should not be tolerated; that now
the Kings Indulgence, or permission of their Separate Meetings, frees them from
the imputation of Schism; that the intruding Ministers come only as Assistants
to the Parish-Minister, and so offers no violation to the peoples obligation to
him: And lastly, that their Meeting-places are in the nature of Chapels of
Ease.

This seems to be as like the Woman's looking at her Apron-Strings (as we use to
say) to find an Excuse, when put hard to it, as possible can be imagined? What
will not men do to uphold a Party they have Espoused? Well may they plead for
Christian Liberty unweariedly, that cannot do, without this Liberty, to say and
unsay, and say what they list.

Now, as I think, these Novel Pleas for Private Affemblies, in opposition to
Public meetings, must of themselves necessarily fall before the sound
Doctrines delivered in these Sermons; so do I conceive them so ungrounded in
holy Scripture, and so inconsistent with sound Reason, and the experience of
any ordinary Christian, that they deserve no serious Confutation.

But yet because Mr Baxter (a man to whom for some of his Works I bear a very
great reverence) has (in his Sacrilegious Desertion of the Holy Ministry) laid
these particulars down, as being satisfactory to himself, and offers them to
others for satisfaction of their Consciences, and answering our Objections
against them: I humbly conceive this Reverend Person has herein written not
like himself; and as if he had repented of any good he had done, or hoped to do
by his Cure of the Churches Divisions, he could not have devised a more
effectual course to undo all. Thus has he cherished us (of the Church) with
one hand, and smitten us with the other: Thus has he acted the part of an
unfaithful Physician, who when afraid his Cure should be wrought, too soon
administers contrary Physic. I affect not to thrust (...) into a Fray with
him, or any other of that persuasion, nor do I pretend to Answer his Book,
which it is fitter others should do, if it be thought needful; nor do I glory
to be a Discoverer of so great an Authors Errors: but being requested by a
Friend to add a word or two concerning those chief Pleas I before mentioned,
which are so much magnified and insisted upon by such as forsake our
Assemblies, I will attempt to discover their nakedness by Gods help: The three
latter I mean, for the two first deserve not to be again mentioned.

1. It is said by some, that the Kings Indulgence and Declaration of Toleration
does evidently acquit all private Meetings from the imputation of Schism. In
answer, It is not fit for me, or any other Son of the Church (who profess the
strictest obedience and loyalty) to make any saucy descant upon his Majesty's
actions: He is wise as an Angel of God, and freely do we submit to his
Deliberate Councels and determinature, but yet to us it belongs to consider the
nature and extent of his Condescensions and the grounds and reasons thereof so
far as he is pleased to make them known unto us: and thus doing, how little
cause, those that will weigh all things in the balance of the Sanctuary,
(Scripture and sound Reason) and not jurare in verba take every thing upon
trust from the Guids of any persuasion; I say how little cause these have to
think this a sufficient plea to free the Conventiclers from Schism, if they
have nothing else wherein to take Sanctuary, will appear if we consider, 2.

1. The Extent of his Majesty's Declaration, and that at the utmost is a mere
inindulgence or permission of that which he therein and at all times has
declared contrary to his own judgment. the Author of Toleration not to be
abused, evidently shows Sect. Prove. 2^
that the scope of the Declaration is not to make such Separated congregation
more lawful, than they was before, or to approve them as good and lawful, but
rather supposes them to be sinful, at least in his own judgment, while he only
permits them (that is all) just as Moses did the Bills of Divorce for the
hardness of men's hearts: And let the Authority of Church Assemblies in a
National Constituted Church be once clear, and I conceive the unlawfulness of
separate Meetings, in opposition unto them, naturally follows; and how then can
his Majesty's Indulgence acquit and absolve them, Vide Toleration not to be
used.
if there be nothing else that does it. It is well known, that if his Majesty
should not only Approve, but Command, and that not only by Declaration, but by
Act of Parliament, that which is but suspected to be unlawful; nay, perhaps
declared by all parties to be in it self indifferent, the Presbyterian is not
apt to change his judgment, or practice for it, but is oftentimes more hardened
in his opposition thereunto, by its being commanded, and how then can a bare
permission now serve their turns? His Majesty only permits and leaves men to
the guidance of their own Consciences what to do, whether to forsake the
Public Assemblies, and set up their separate Meetings or no; so that if there
be no satisfactory ground for a good Conscience to do it, the said Declaration
must needs leave them as guilty of Schism from the Church, (though not as
rebellious against his Majesty's Laws) as before.

2. The Reasons which the King is pleased to acknowledge did prevail with him,
are evidently Politic, to tolerate these Meetings not for themselves, but some
other ends and reasons of State, even to secure his quiet at home, while he is
engaged in Foreign Wars. Now how can this satisfy Conscience of the
lawfulness thereof, or free the Actors from the guilt of separation? Surely no
more than those inconveniences and unlawful actions are justifiable because
David winked at them, and suffered them go unpunished, when he cried out the
Sons of Zerviah are too hard for me.

3. By the Declaration, the Argument for Conformity taken from wrath only is
removed, only the penalty is taken off, the directive part of the Law, I
conceive, is still in force; so that if it did at all oblige Conscience before,
Conscience has no more liberty now than then, though the body and purse have.

4. That which (in my judgment) leaves them inexcuseable is, that his Gracious
Majesty in his said Declaration is pleased in terms to acknowledge the Church
of England is established by Law, and makes it the standing Rule, and that in
opposition and contradiction to private Meetings, yea, though they should be
allowed of according to the Indulgence. His express meaning and resolution is
declared to be, that the National Church of England should be preserved entire,
as the Basis, Rule, and Standard of Public Worship among us. Now this
evidently supposes all other (though tolerated) Meetings, besides
Church Assemblies, to be against the Rule, and Sects and Schisms from the
National Church. In this is manifestly employed, that to set them up, is to do
that which the Ancient Fathers, especially S. Cyprian, and our Modern Orthodox
Divines, both Episcopal and Presbyterian, have so earnestly declaimed against;
viz. Erigere Altar contra Altar; to set up Altar against Altar, a Church in a
National Church independent from it, yet consisting of such as are its Natural
Members; to break this Churches Unity, and to divide the Members thereof, which
apparently tends to the destruction of the whole: if the Church of England (as
it is settled by the Act of Uniformity) be established as the standing rule for
doctrine and worship, then is it impossible, I think, to defend those that
renounce Union and Communion with it and the public assemblies thereof, though
under pretense of exercising purer administrations. For so Mr. Baxter states
the Case, and for this consult Dr. Edward Stiling fleets Irenicum upon the
point, c. 6. Sure I am it can neither consist with the Doctrines of the old
non-Conformists, Ball, Hildersham, Dod, Perkins, nor of the soberest modern
dissenters. So much for that Plea then from the Kings Indulgence.

2. Like unto it is the second, that the Preachers in these separate Meetings
look upon themselves only as assistants to the parish Minister, and so would
they have us to look upon them. Here is sheeps clothing, but I fear a Wolf
under it. Is it not od that any that will, shall have power thus to obtrude
himself upon the lawfully settled Pastor, how much soever he be unacquainted
with his person, or dissatisfied with his education or principles, ablities or
Conversation? I do not speak it out of rancor or bitterness, but in good
sadness I look on it as a strange incroachment upon and enslaving of a Parish
minister who being himself bound up to Church rules, and orders both by his own
Conscience and the Kings establishing the Church as the standing rule. And how
learned and pious and Grave a Divine soever he be, yet must he have his people
at liberty, to choose to themselves another Pastor, perhaps a man in holy
orders, perhaps not, and he must be accounted his Assistant though he have
none, no not the lest knowledge of him, except (perhaps) he can call to mind, or
his Contemporaries can remember him, that such a one was expelled the
University as a rake heel, or stopped of his Degree as a Dunce, and this I Will
assure you is the Case of not a few in these parts, several such being holders
up of sides and factions amongst us, intruding themselves into our charges
without our consent, nay, and expressly against it, and gathering together a
pail of our people, together with others out of parishes adjacent, to worship
God at the very time of public worship after their own inventions, and yet
those must be, our Assistant (forsooth). I marvel, what Shepherd or Master of a
Family would be willing to have an Assistant thus thrust himelf upon him
whether he will or no, and take part of his flock from under his proper care
and inspection and governance upon pretense of assisting him! just Such an
assistant I fancy the Woolf in the Fable to be (and Matthew 7.15.
you know whom the Holy Ghost Compares to him) when he persuaded the Lambs to
discharge their dogs in pretense of safety, there was no need of them. And we
may justly challenge an excuse if we look upon many as no better, that will
thrust themselves upon us as our assistants. Cant. 2.5.
Take us the foxes the little foxes that spoils the vins; See Dr. Prideaux upon
this Text
those foxes are Heretics or Schismatics within the pale of the Church (say
the Assembles Annotations) as well as Tirants or persecutors without. The
former have not only the craft of that beast, transforming themselves, 2 Cor.
11.13. carrying a fox in their bosoms when they are lambs outwardly, but also
the rage and cruelty; when they get power, none like them; for never did the
Church suffer more from the maddest and blindest Heathens, than from Heretics
and Schismatics that were amongst them.

They spoil the Vines, i. e. they corrupt them even the Churches Psa. 80 14 15.
which they do either by fraud or force, by false doctrines or wicked manners;
either by Heresies which are the great Foxes, or Schisms which are but little
ones at first, but like cubs will grow into bigness This agrees with Mr.
Newcomes Sermon at Paul's Heb. 8.16 46.
1 Cor. 11.18, 19. These are to be taken, that is, found out, judged,
convinced, censured, reproved, and punished Page 18. quoted by Mr. Ashdon in
his preface page 12. See more in the Assemblies Annotations upon the text.
this was sound Doctrine once you see, how ever it be now relished. Take us the
little Foxes, says Christ, they are Foxes, though little ones; no let them
alone, say our Indulgence men, they will be your Assistants. Well, to confine
my self in this spacious field, I must needs say, that if this may pass for a
sufficient plea, (though conjunctly with the rest) then, farewell the Doctrine
of public worship and farewell, the people obligations to their pastors; and
farewell too all those excellent answers the Presbyterian Guides have often
formerly given to the Brownists grounds of separation.

But let us (the Church Ministers) beg the Worlds pardon, if with Solomon's wise
man we have our eyes in our head and would be loath to have them put out: if our
own experiences be trusted so far that we can never believe that they (these
gatherers of Churches) will ever prove our Assistants, but rather annoyances to
us; pricks in our eyes, and goads in our sides continually; for they have
already set our people a cockloft with presumptions, they may now live as they
list; they break the bounds of that strict relation that is betwixt us and
them; they pull down what we build up (order and Decency in Gods worship,
Obedience and Subjection to Governors both in Church and State) we find them
evidently Contradicting us in our soundest Doctrines; (when I first preached
upon this text Heb. 10.25. I took occasion to give the right sense of that text
Math. 18.20. Where two or three are met together etc. and this I did out of the
London Annotations, and Mr. Ball. and S Cyprian (which I freely submitt to the
judgment of any impartial Reader) But lo, so it fell out, that the conventicle
man, my supposed Assistant, preached on purpose on that text, the direct
Contrary to what I had delivered, that very aftermoon, if I was informed aright
from those that, either out of novelty or faction, went to hear him) nay, our
people can with their odious Comparisons under value our Sermons, preferring
those they have in their Kilns, and Barns, and Smith Shops (to use their own
dialect) as much as light before darkness. Now have we not great Cause (think
ye) to esteem them our worthy Assistants? I conclude, unless we could, hate our
selves or our people, and be wholly careless of both, we can never allow this
notion of Assistants, but upon this very account must (indeed in Mr. Baxters
judgment) think these separate meetings unlawful, because we find by sad
experience, they do far more hurt than good if they do any good at all Vid
Sacre le gious De sertion. page 18.
.

3. A like pretense is that of the place of meeting that they must be looked
upon as Chapels of ease. Bravely said! they are no opposite Schismatical
meetings I warrant you, but as Chappells of ease! a notion, that doubtless cost
many a nocturnal Lucubration or hot dispute in a private Conference. It is so
far fetched it smells of the Lamp. The first Author (whoever he was) might well
applaud his happy Invention with an (...), as if he had found out the most
hidden mystery, or received an oracle, for such a kind reception it has found
in our parts as if it were really such. But the mischief is, we of the Church,
though we be branded for it, cannot but declare our dissatisfaction, as much
with this as with the other Inventions, and the reason is, our own Experience
still teaches us fools otherwise. For ask our experiences, for whose case
these new erected Chapels are like to serve, and they will pesently answer not
for the Church Ministers, for sure. (And while we preach and study to preach
Continually being in labors abundant, why should we be enemies to our own
necessary ease altogether?)

Now these do evidently occasion us infinite insuperable troubles; they divide
our peoples into sides and parties; they set our people a cockloft in rebellion
against us; they do in a few days annul all that we have done in many years,
toward the bringing our people into a way of order and obedience; they fill
the peoples mouths with insultations against their Pastors; they set them in a
posture of defiance against us; they render it most difficult for us either to
keep an amicable Correspondence with our people or procure our tithes and just
maintenance from them; they enslave us to their humors, for if we displease or
reprove them in the least, or deny them any Common courtesy, presently they
tell us, they can go to these separate meetings and be welcome; and so many
mischiefs hereof we daily feel, that I may justly Conclude this with that
which our Adversaries hate, even an etc. for they certainly Unhinge the
Government both of the whole Church and of every particular Parish.

But perhaps these Chapels of ease are for the peoples ease or profit, if they
be, it is just as Jeroboams Dan and Bethel was, 1 Kings 12 28.29.
for them he intended as Chapels of ease, to the people; Saying, it is too
much for you to go up to Jerusalem, but his meaning was least the people, going
up to do sacrifice there, should turn again to their Lord Rehoboam Verse. 27.
. He pretended the peoples accommodation and ease, as a cloak to cover his own
diffidence and cursed policy. Just the like plea is used by some for these
Chapels of ease, the Parishes are too large, it is too much for them to go to
the Church for then perhaps in time we might bring them back again to their
just duties and obedience, or if you will, they are such Chapels of ease as
Samaria was to Jerusalem See Mr. Joseph Meed Diatribae. page 205. Nehe 13.28.
, Manasse, brother to Jaddo, the High priest of the returned Jews, had married
the daughter of Sanballat then governor of Samaria and for this he was expelled
Jerusalem by Nehemiah, and therefore he fled to Sanballat his father in law,
and after his example many other of the Jews of the best ranks, having married
strange wives likewise, and loath to forgo them betook themselves thither also:
Sanballat willingly entertained them, and made his son in Law Manasse their
Priest, for whose greater reputation and State, when Alexander the great
subdued the Persian Monarchy, he obtained leave of him to build a Temple upon
Mount Gerizim; where his son in Law exercised the office of the High Priest.
Now this became an occasion of a Continual Schism for those that were
discontented or excommunicated at Jerusalem presently betook themselves to
Samaria, and just so do our people in the same case to these new licensed
Chapels of ease, and the Samaritan preachers thereof, which whether it be a
schism, and a breach of the Unity of the Catholic Church, I leave to those to
judge, who have read how ill the Bishops in the primitive Churches resented it
when other their fellow Bishops received those they had excommunicated into
their Communion.

And now, Reader, do but Consider that not one of these pretenses but they
serve the turns of all Sects, one as well as other, Independents, Anabaptists,
and Quakers, as well as the better sort of non-Conformists, all alike, and so
they are by Mr. Baxter lovingly coupled together as brethren and indeed to them
all these pleas are equally subservient; Consider but this, and then I submit
all that is said both here and in the Sermons to this equal and impartial
censure, and as I freely give leave thou should reject whatever is tart or
sarcastical above what the nature of the thing requires, or whatever to thy
more Sound judgment shall appear false and untrue; so do I only request of thee
this favor (to which even thy self interest obliges thee) that is to believe
me, wherever thou see reason or Scripture for what I say. Consider all and
the Lord give thee understanding in all things.

THE OBLIGATION OF CONSCIENCE Not to forsake PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES.
Hebrews. 10.25. Not forsaking the assembling of our selves together, as the
manner of some is.
BEfore I close with my Text, give me leave to show you in a few words, what
great reasons I have to make choice of it, for the subject of my present
discourse. These are three, My duty, Your necessity, and all Our comfort.

1. My duty in respect of the Church of God, as a Member, but especially as a
Minister thereof. As a Member, for it is every Christians duty, to inform
himself by the best means he can, how it fares with the Church of God, but
especially to take notice of, and be affected with the State of that particular
Church, whereof he is an immediate member. Men are most what too inquisitive of
news, behold this is the news we should inquire after. When Gods people were in
battle against the Philistines, and had the Ark of God with them in the Camp,
it is said 1 Samuel 4.13.
that old Eli, sat upon a seat in the way side watching and harkening, how
Gods people sped: and the reason is given for his heart trembled, for the Ark
of God, therefore he sat watching, that he might hear what became of it. So
when there came one to David out of the Camp of Israel 2 Samuel 1.3.4.
David was very inquisitive how it fared with the Lords host: How went the
matter (says he) I pray thee tell me. The like you see in Nehemiah, Neh. 1.2.
so soon as Hanani came to him, the first question he asked him, was concerning
the state of Gods people that dwelt at Jerusalem, though he wanted nothing
himself being a Courtier in great place and favor, with that mighty King, yet
could he not but inquire of, and be affected with the state of Gods people. Nay
Moses being in the height of honor in Pharoahs Court did not only inquire,
but went out to his brethren and looked on their burdens Exodus, 2.11.
, All these examples teach us that it is our duty, as to inform our selves
about, so to consider the burdens of Gods Church, and be affected with the
miseries thereof, and every one in our several places, to have a care of the
cause of Religion in the world, and especially we ought continually to
inportune the Lord in behalf thereof, and never forget it in our prayers to
God. Ye that have escaped the sword Jeremiah 51.50.
Stand not still remenber; the Lord afar off, and let Jerusalem come into your
mind. Ye that are the Lords remembrancers, says the Prophet Esaias Isaia. 62.67.
keep not silence and give him no rest, till he establish, and till he make
Jerusalem a praise in the earth. Jerusalem is like to become a reproach, an
hissing to the world more and more, if things go on as they do, but we
therefore that are the Lords Solicitors and Remembrancers, (as all the Faithful
are) should (like the importunate Widow in the Gospel) give him no rest, till
he have established and settled his Church in truth and peace, and so give them
beauty and glory, even in the sight of their enemies, so did Nehemiah Nehe. 14.
he sat down and wept and mourned certain days, and fasted and prayed for the
Churches miseries, by this means he had wonderful success in his suite to the
King in their behalf. So might we the poorest and meanest of us all, help Gods
Church very much, and prevail with God and against her enemies, if we would so
cry, and weep, and pray before God for her. Exodus. 17.11.
(h) When Moses held up his hands Israel prevailed, and when he let his hands
fall, Amalek prevailed, Alas our hearts and hands are heavy in prayer and
therefore does Amalek prevail so much as he does, and Israel receives so many
foiles, and is afflicted with so many successions of miseries. Such is the duty
then of every Christian, much more it is of every Minister of the Church, as to
inform himself about, and to be affected with, so uncessantly to pray for it,
yea and to prayer to join all his endeavors to rebuke and oppose all the
enemies thereof, secret or open, whether they be without or within the Church:
it is no standing a neuter in the holy wars of Gods people. He that is not with
the Church to assist her, to the utmost of his power, is against it. Meroz is
to be cursed that will not come out to the help of the Lord and his servants
against the mighty.

The zeal of Gods servants was always stirring and active to stop any
Schismatics or Heretics that did in any Age rise up in and against the Church
of God. Judges 5.23.
Text strangely urged in the late Civil wars against neutrality and
lukewarmness by those who hate us now implacably if we be not mode rate now, as
they call it, that is careless of the Churches welfare.
When in the Church of Corinth, there did but spring up a contention about so
mean a ceremony as covering and uncovering their heads in prayer, (a very
inconsiderable ceremony in comparison) yet he that was ever ready to become all
things to all men, that by all means he might win some, did then bestir himself
by all means to oppose them in their presumptuous violations of the customs
and orders established in their Churches, though it was but in and about
indifferent things 1 Cor. 11.16,
such is the duty then of every Christian, member, much more of every Minister
of the Church of God, and so is it my duty in particular as to take notice of
and pray against, so as much as lies in me to oppose all the Church enemies
and that is one reason why I choose this text, Not forsakeing, etc. And as my
duty ingageth me to this choice. so,

2. Your necessity, for there is none of you all, but you have great need to be
well grounded in matters of the Churches Peace, and Unity, as well as, in any
other points of Religion, else will you be in continual danger of being
seduced, and so falling from your Baptism and Christian Profession; either on
the right hand or on the left. For there are abundance of false Prophets gone
out into the world, never was Satan more let lose; never was there greater
Swarms of Locusts issuing out of the bottomless pit, never was the Church more
pestered with Schisms and Heresies; never was there more broachers and
fomentors of them; and these as they are most diligent, lying in wait to
deceive, they will Compass sea and land to gather proselytes, so have they all
necessary artifices and tricks of subtilty in order to that end they have (...)
Col. 2.4.
enticeing words to beguile poor souls, and (...) Ephesians. 4.14.
Slight and cunning craftiness whereby they lie in wait to deceive; they have a
great deal of cunning even such as cheats and coggers at dice do use, much
craft to beguile and circumvent them that they deal with, there is no safety in
giving them the least audience, or having any thing to do with them, for these
seducers (as our experience teaches us, and Gods spirit has often admonished
us) have a notable vein of persuading, being able to use many reasons that at
first sight, carry in them great probability, and show of truth: hence it is
that many there be who have at first wondered at the gross absurdities in a
contrary Religion, Self-confidence seldom stand firmly in a day of trya^
witness Peter at Chrsts apprehension.
and have thought them such as might be answered by any simple man, and so have
scorned and abhorred them, that yet by being over confident of themselves, and
careless in intertaining familiarity with those Seducers, have quickly been
over born and fallen into the pit of damnable errors, such need there, is
Beloved, for every one to ground themselves carefully in the knowledge of the
truth, as that they may not be so easily turned out of the right way, but may
make straight paths for their feet, that they may go steadily and strongly in
it, Heb. 12.13.
Alas they that are Children in understanding and wavering, they are easily
carried away with every wind of vain Doctrine Ephesians. 4.14.
, and the most pernicious and damnable seducers, do easily prevail with simple
women, that are ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the
truth, 2 Timothy 3.6, 7.
they daily beguile unstable souls, 2 Peter. 2.14.
So great is your need then to be rightly informed in the knowledge of the
truth, and to be well grounded in your religion, least you be unaware seduced
to error and destruction, and that is another reason of my choosing the Text,
Not forsaking, etc,

3. Another reason, it is in order to all our joy and comfort, for the fullness
of our Church Assemblies, and if men could be dissuaded from forsaking them, it
could not but be matter of great joy and comfort to every truly pious heart.
Such a one cannot but rejoice in the frequency and fullness of the public
Assemblies of the Church, and in the Prosperity of the true Religion, and right
worship of God. How marvellously did Gods people rejoice, in the days of
David, when the Ark of God was brought to Jerulem 1 Chr. 15.28.
. And in the days of Hezekiah when the sacrament had been celebrated according
to its first institution, which it had not been of a long time before 2 Chr.
5.26, 27.
, So when Nehemiah had purged the house and worship of God from the corruptions
thereof, and restored it to it is primitive purity, It is said Neh. 12. v. 43.
the people rejoiced with great joy, their wives also and their children
rejoiced, so that the joy of Jerusalem was heard even a far off. And in Ezra.
Ezra 3.11.
all Gods people shouted with a great shout, when they praised the Lord,
because the foundation of the house was laid: so David to aggravate the misery
of his present estate Psalm 42.4.
he speaks of the joy and comfort, he formerly took in going to the house of
God with a multitude of them that kept holy day. And in that great joy the
people of God had at the celebration of the passover in Hezekiahs time. This is
expressed for one cause thereof, that the number of the communicants was so
great 2 Chro 30.26.
for there Assembled to Jerusalem much people, to keeep the passover a very
great congregation. On the other side the faithful and truly pious have ever
grieved to hear or see that the Assemblies of the Church are unfrequented or
neglected, or that any false or Schismatical worship, or congregations were set
up in stead thereof. Old Eli was much more afflicted for taking a way of God's ark then for the slaughter of the people, or for the death of his own two Sons
Hophni and Phinehas 1 Samuel 4.17.
, in like manner, the Holy Ghost notes of his daughter in law, that being in
extremities of her pain and anguish, it would never out of her mouth while
breath was in her body, that the glory was departed from Israel, for the ark of
God was taken away 1 Samuel 4.22.
, So was it this that troubled that zealous man of God Elijah, and made him
weary of his life (z), The children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, 1
Kings 19.10.
says he (that is, they are fallen from thy holy Religion) they have thrown
down thy holy altars, (that is, they have abolished, and shown, contempt and
hatred to thy holy worship) and why should I then desire to live any longer in
such a time? And for the Eclipse of Church Assemblies, we have a notable
expression Zeph 3, 18.
I will gather them says the Lord that are sorrowful for solemn Assemblies,
who are of thee to whom the reproach of it was a burden: in which Text we may
observe five things.

1. That it was one of the greatest sorrows of Gods people, in their
captivite, that they then wanted their solemn Assemblies; doubtless they might
have then some Religious meetings for Gods worship, (yea they had public
fasts then four times a year as appears Z^^h. 8.19.
) yet their Assemblies was nothing so solemn, or so populous, as they was wont
to be at Jerusalem, that was their grief.

2. The Caldeans their enemies was wont to reproach them for this, and to say
to them to this effect, where are your solemn Assemblies now Lam. 1.7.
they did mock at their Sabbaths, they rejoiced and reproached over them,
because they could have no such Assemblies as they was wont to have, just as
many wicked ones do now mock at our Churches, and their ministers, because
people (having the reins loosed) may without fear forsake the public
Assemblies, to erect private conventicles for themselves, and do what they list
as some can say to our very faces now.

3. The Text says this was a burden to to Gods people, to have this reproach
cast upon them, as it is certainly to every true Protestant and godly man, to
hear of the separatists insolenttaunts to the congregations of the Church and
the ministers thereof.

4. Of these that were so sorrowful for the solemn Assemblies, the Lord says
to his Church these are of thee, they are natural and Kindly children of the
true Church, that do stand thus affected.

5. To them he does make a promise, I will gather them, says the Lord: I will
have a special respect to them, and though they be scattered and dispersed, not
one of them shall be lost, but I will bring them back again to their one Land.
I will gather them, says the Lord, that are sorrwful for the solemn Assemblies
who are of thee, to whom the reproach of it, was a burden. Indeed it is a
burden to every one that has a true love and zeal of God in him, to see
Religion suffer the least eclipse in any kind, in any place, to lose any thing
of that luster of purity, sincerity or power, that once it had. Hence when the
foundation of the Temple was laid, under Zorobabel, Gods people that had seen
no better rejoiced in it: but the Priests, and Levites, and chief of the
fathers, who were Ancient men, that had seen the first house, they wept with a
loud voice, while the rest shouted for joy (...). 3.12.
. why? O it grieved their hearts, to see how far short that house, which God
was now to have, came short in beauty and glory, of that that God had had
before in Jerusalem. For as much then as it is every ones duty especially the
ministers, to consider the State of the Churches and especially that of which
they are members, and ministers, to be affected with them, and to pray for
them, and by all means to oppose the enemies thereof. And there is none of us,
but stand in great need to be well grounded in these points that relate to the
Church, least we be seduced by the cunning and diligence of seducers, that are
abroad in the world, and all our comfort will be augmented, if by the light of
reason, and Gods word preached from such Texts (as this I have read) we can
prevent the Apostasy of any from the Church, and can discover the wickedness of
those that are daily forsaking the Assemblies thereof. And it cannot but be
matter of greatest grief to the truly godly to see the solemn Assemblies
neglected, or unfrequented, or private congregations erected in opposition unto
them. All these particulars show I have great reason to make choice of the Text
and such like unto it, till I have so fully discharged my duty and discovered
the mind of God out of the Scriptures about it, that I may leave the forsaking
of our Church assemblies inexcusable, so that they can never plead Ignorance of
their duty and sin, and that I may say liberavi animammeam, I have delivered
mine own soul. To this end and purpose have I pitched on the Text.

Not forsaking the Assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some is.

For the coherence of the Text, I shall wish you to look no further back then
the 22 verse. For the Apostle having in the former part of the Chapter shown
them, that the Sacrifice of Christ's body, which he once offered, has for ever
taken away sin. He presses thence a double exhortation. The first in 22 vese
let us draw near to God, how? even in and through Christ, with a true heart and
full assurance of faith, etc. And the Second is in the 23 verse. Let us hold
fast the profession of our faith without wavering: that is, this Doctrine of
Christ sacrificed and the merits thereof; The truth we have received from
Christ, let us avow it, and not in time of trial upon any condition forsake it.
Now this exhortation he strengthens, by giving of directions, for furthering
their obedience thereunto: the first is, Christans mutually stirring up, and
sharpening one another amongst themselves; that is a special help to constancy
in the true Religion, and a preservative against Apostasy, together with a
godly striving one with another, who shall be first in love and welldoing.
verse. 24. Let us consider one another to provoke to love and good works. And,

2. Another means to this end, is the frequenting Christian congregations and
assemblies. So comes in my Text. Not forsaking etc. In the words you have
evidently two parts.

2. A Taxation of some for the neglect of that duty.

1. The duty is to keep close to, and not to forsake the Assemblies of the
Church.

2. The fault taxed in some amongst them is, that in Schism, or pride, or
purpose of Apostacy they withdrew themselves from these Church assemblies, and
so fell back again, or were in the way of falling back, to the open denial of
Christ: for separation from the true Church, or the Christian society of the
faithful therein, is a remarkable sin, tending to lead men by Schism to
Apostasy, from the profession of the true faith.

1. Of the duty of Christians in order to their proving constant in the true
Religion: even to keep close unto, and not forsake the assemblies of the
Church. The word for assemblies in the Text has a very great emphasis in it,
it is a tricomposite (...) the preposition (...) as both Calvin and Hemingius
upon the place observe signifies novam accessionem, an increase or addition of
some more members to a body congregated, And these were the converted Gentiles,
that being converted to the faith became one with the Jews one and the same
body of Christ. Estius observes, that because the Apostle here writes to the
Jews, therefore, for the Christian Assemblies he uses the word Synagogue,
because he would not vary from their phrase or custom of Speech any more then
needs. But might it not be some private meetings? some separate assemblies in a
corner that he calls by this name, and here speaks of? O no, Interpreters with
one consent, generally interpret it of the public assemblies of the Church in
such public places, as are by Christian Magistrates, or by the Rulers of the
Church, if the Magistrates be not Christian, appointed for the public worship
of God. Not forsaking the Assembling of themselves, that is, says the London
Annotations the public congregation of the faithful, wherein the word of God
is taught, the sacraments administered, and common prayer and public
Thanksgiving are offered up unto God; for unto such public congregations has
God promised his blessing: where has he promised it? Mark, the Scriptures
quoted by the Assembly for it are these Psalm. 27.4.
one thing have I desired of the Lord that I might dwell in the house of the
Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to inquire
in his holy Temple; for herein is employed this promise, that in the Temple, the
house of God, there will God let us see his beauty. Another text quoted by them
is Psalm. 122.1.
I was glad, when they said let us go into the house of the Lord, our feet
shall stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem, thither the tribes go up, the tribes
of the Lord, unto the testimony of Israel to give thanks unto the name of the
Lord. Of such assemblies therefore, even of such as go into the said House of
God, whither the tribes, the Multitude of the right worshippers of God, go up
to pray unto, and praise him, of these does our Text speak. Not forsakeing the
assembling etc. And to these Assemblies the Annotations quote that special
promise, as belonging unto them Mat. 1 20.
Where two or three are met together in my name, that is, for prayer and other
Religious offices, there am I in the midst of them. Christ promises his
gracious assistance to, and presence with his Church be it great and numerous,
or be it small, and with the public and solemn congregation thereof. Yes, say
the Schismatics, where ever two or three are met together there is he in the
midst of them, therefore the promise is to us, or any of the Saints, wherever,
or how few soever they be that thus meet together. There is no Text wherein the
separatist take Sanctuary more then this, but very unsoundly. For as the
Reverend Mr. Ball expounds that place (in his trial of the grounds tending to
separation) page 280, by the contextit appears Christ is there speaking of the
Validity of the sentence of excommunication, and certainly Christ's meaning is
not that every Society that consists of two or three believers met together
to pray or preach, have the power to excommunicate: for no one example can be
Alleged out of Scripture or Ecclesiastical History of the ancient Churches,
wherein any number of the Faithful, did ever lawfully excommunicate or judge any
Member of their Society, without their Guides and lawful Officers, moderateing
the action. There is no promise can be showed out of Holy Writ, wherein any
such authority is bequeathed to two or three private Believers, Disciples or
Brethren. O, no, but the very tenor of the words is to argue from the less to
the greater thus, If Christ be present with two or three gathered together in
his name to ask things agreeable to his will, he will much more confirmin heaven
what ever his officers and servants that have power from Christ to do this
service in the Church in his name shall determine and conclude according to his
will: but they cannot meet together in his name, for this or any other holy
office, that meet together in way of Schism, contrary to his will. Quomodo
possunt duoaut tres in non mine, Christi colligi quos constat a Christo and ab
ejus Ecclesia seperant, says S. Ciprian, how can they be met together in the
name of Christ that do manifestly separate themselves from Christ and his
Church. Cum Haereses and Schismata nata sint, dum conventicula sibi diversa
constituunt veritatis caput and originem reliquerunt, when Heresies and
Schisms arise, and the maintainers of them make separate conventicles for
themselves, they forsake Christ the Lord and fountain of Truth and peace. It is
the Church and they that keep within the pale of the Chuch by unity and concord
to whom this promise runs to give them, what, they meet together in his name to
ask of him, and to be in the midst of them I will be, says he, in the midst of
them, That is, of them that fear me, and keep my precept of peace and truth,
Non homines ab eccelsia dividit, qui fecit, and instituit ecclesiam, sed
exprobrans discordiam persidis, and fidelibus pacem sua voce commendans,
ostendit magis esse se cum duobus aut tribus unanimiter orantibus quam cum
decedentibus pluribus, plusque impetrari posse paucorum concordi prece quam
discordi multorum oratione. Says S. Cyprian De Vnitate Ecclesi^e as I find him
quoted by Doct. Forbes in his Irenicum^
Surely our Savior does not by this promise, warrant divisions from that
Church, which he himself has made and gathered, but rather upbraiding the
contentions of the perfidious, and commending unity and unaminity to the
faithful, he teaches us that he will rather be with two or three of them met
together with one accord in his name, and according to his appointment, then
with multitudes of them that depart from them, and that he will rather answer
the uniform prayers of a few peace able believers, then the jarring prayers of
many that divide themselves into sides and factions. Can they think that Christ
will be in the midst of them, that are met together out of the Church of
Christ? Nay though such should suffer Martyrdom in the confession of his name,
yet cannot that blot and stain of their Schism be washed away in their blood,
Inexpiabilis and gravis culpa discordiae n^c passione purgatur, the great and
inexpiable fault of separation and dissension cannot be purged by the most
bitter passion or suffering, Esse martyr non potest qui in ecclesia non est, he
cannot be a true martyr that keeps not unity in the Church, Ad regnum pervenire
non poterit qui eam quae regnatura est, derelinquit. He cannot attain the
Kingdom, that forsakes her, that must reign in it. It was peace that Christ
gave us and bequeathed unto us. It is concord and unanimity that he has
commanded us. He has strictly enjoined us to keep the covenants of love and
Charity pure and inviolate. So that he can never prove a right Martyr for the
truth that keeps not Charity with the brethren. 1 Cor. 122.
though I have faith so as to remove mountains, or bestow all my goods upon the
poor, or give my body to be burned, and have not charity, it profits nothing.
God himself is love, and therefore they that break the bond of love, can never
have God. God cannot be in the midst of them; so that it is not to private
conventicles that this promise runs, but to the public congregations of the
Church of which my Text here speaks. Not forsakeing the Assembling of your
selves as the manner of some is. My way being thus clear, and the meaning of
the Text being thus made out and explained, I shall from what is said, raise
this observation and prosecute it.

That it is the undoubted duty of all pious Christians, that desire to prove
constant to the true Religion to frequent and not to neglect the public
Assemblies of the Church. Which truth that I may prove undeniable and convince
the judgments of all that are teachable, and will not stop their ears against
the truth, I will proceed in these gradual propositions,

The First shall be the furthest off, Mat. 4, 10s
, It is written thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve. This worship is due unto God, and is due unto God only, for he alone is
qualified with those properties, and attributes, omniscience, omnipresence
omnipotence, etc. that are necessary to make a being Adorable, and so with him
no creature can claim a partner-ship in divine Adoration and religious worship,
without great Sacriledg, nor can any be given to it, without gross and
abominable Idolatry? by this are the Papists therefore convinced of grievious
Idolatry, in that they worship those things with a religious worship, which are
no proper objects thereof; as Images, and Saints, and the like. But I only
name this Proposition, because it is alien from the Text, though the foundation
of all that is to be ^id of it.

Those from whom this worship is due unto God, are all intelligent rational
creatures, and understandings for this very end, that they might know, honor,
and adore him. He made all things, but them especially for himself, to do
homage to him, and therein lies their natural obligation to serve and worship
him.

As for pure spiritual beings, such as Angels are, they need not (being
incorporeal) be circumstantiated, either to time or place in rendering this
actual worship to God.

1. They are not tied to any time, strictly so called, because their very
nature is measured by Eternity, and not by time; and, being of a spiritual
nature, they have neither those avocations, by any particular calling, not
necessary diversions from Gods worship, as man, if he had continued innocent,
must have had, for the very sustaining of his life, and being, which would have
been even in Pa^adise, by ordinary means, by seasonable food. It is therefore
Probable they have no set times, but continue constant in the imm^diate worship
of God, unless when God applies them as (...), as his ministering spirits for
the service of his Church; and then perhaps their, even then employments;
speaks them only distant from the other Angels, their fellow worshippers, and
not absent from the real worship and service of God.

2. Thus it appears they are not limited to any place neither, as they are not
to any limied time of worship; for they being Spirits are incapable of any
local circumscription: As for any further knowledge of the manner and
circumstances of the Angels worshipping and adoreing of God, Scriptures have a
deep silence concerning it, and it is a learned Ignorance for us to sit down
satisfied and contented without the knowledge of that which God has thought
unnecessary to be revealed, indeed to inquire any further thereinto, may run us
upon the rock of bold and unsafe conjectures in those matters, the knowledge of
which we may well spare, without the least prejudice of our present comfort, or
our future salvation. So come we to the.

Though the Angels,

1. Nature dictates clearly, that some time is necessary to worship God in. For
man, being part body, and part spirit, is naturally obliged to worship God with
both external and internal worship; to glorify God both with body and spirit,
which are his 1 Cor. 6.20.
. Now all, especially external actions of man, must necessarily claim some time
for the performance of them, nor can man conveniently set upon Gods worship
unless some time be set a part, wherein he may be sreed and disintangled, from
his ordinary works and inployments. Thus far time and worship seems to fall
under one and the same command; for as God in creating the world, did concreate
time together with the world: so, when God commands any religious worship to be
performed by men, he withal implicitly commands the necessary circumstance of
some time, wherein it may be performed, and it being highly rational, that the
disposal of that time should be at the pleasure of God, whose the worship is;
therefore has it pleased him to set a part some portion of our time, even a
seventh part, when he might have required all, indulging us the rest, even the
six parts to be employed according to the necessity of our nature. Such is Gods
infinite goodness and condescension of love unto us, to allow us so large a
portion of our time for our selves. And therefore they act most basely and
disingeniously, not to say highly dishonourably against God, who grudge him so
small a pitance, or who would rob him of it, or by worldly employments or
pleasures, drinking, or sports, or idleness profane it.

2. Very light of nature also teaches some place to be necessary for man to
worship God in, because every body, such as man has, must by the very
necessity of its being, T^ese 4 first proposition may be seen handled more
largly by Dr. John Stilling ^eet in his Shenna.
be contained in some real place, and indeed to be in a place, is so proper for
a body, as we may as well suppose it not to have a being, as not to admit of a
local circumscription; neither can a body be, nor exist, not operate, nor
perform any action, unless it be in some place, and therefore the worship of
God being an external action necessarily require a place for it. So come I to
the,

5. I say the worship which is due unto God the more public it is, the better
it is, the greater and the more visible is the joint concurrance and Assembling
together of several worshippers, for the performance of the same action of
religious worship, the more acceptable it is to God. This appears by several
considerations.

1. By Gods manifold precepts, both in the old and new Testament, injoyning
several acts of public worship; such were the commands of circumcision, and
the solemn convocation, and ordinance of the Passover, under the Law, their
several feasts, and their sacrifices, with the infinite rites appertaining to
them, and the sundry precepts for Baptism and the Lords Supper, and public
Prayers, and confessions unto God, and collections for the poor, those
sacrifices well pleasing unto God under the Gospel. These and others are
outward visible public acts of divine worship, required by God himself.

2. By public performing of worship to God we stir up and mutually inflame
each others zeal and devotion unto God, and so the more public religious
worship is, the m^re acceptable it is unto God, inrespect of others. St. Austin
in his confession says, that he was almost ravished with the Songs and Prayers
of the Church and Congregation, so that the spiritual comfort, which he
conceived by the sweet and heavenly matter, which then the Christians jointly
and orderly made, and in their public Assembles, made him weep for joy. And,
Ibelieve, there is scarce any Christian, but he has sometimes felt his heart
moved and affected toward God, in actions of public worship, especially if
uniformely and lively performed, more then at other times.

3. Public worship is excellent, as public; in respect of our selves, for
our joining in them is a badge of our profession; its a wearing of Gods livery;
and confessing God before men, it shows to all the world, that we are not
ashamed to profess his word and Gospel, and our belief thereof, end obedience
thereunto. And on the contrary our forsakeing the public assemblies, wherein
God is rightly and purely worshipped, borders upon a Apostasy, and is the next
door to a denying of God, and our profession of Gatholick Christianity.

4. It is excellent, as public, in respect of God, for the more public it
is, the more it tends, to the honor and glory of God, being a public
testimony and acknowledgment of our dependence upon, and piety to him before
all the world, as with the heart we believe, so with the mouth we make public
confession of God unto Salvation: as we have light of grace within us, so
hereby it shines forth before men, that they may see our good works, and
glorify our Father in heaven Christ tells us that a candle is not lighted to
be put under a bushel. Bono debetur manifestatio, says the Father, our good
must be made manifest; therefore candles that have bonum lucis the goodness of
light, must not be thrust, Sub malo tenebrarum, under the evil of darkness; So
that if the candle of light be in our souls that is, if we inwardly worship
God in our hearts and spirits, we must set it upon a candlestick, our inward
piety and worship must appear in our outward and public worship of God before
all the world.

5. The acception of public worship with God above private, is de facto,
notorious by manifest reason of the thing: particularly it is evident in
public prayer, for if the prayer of one righteous man can avail much, how
much more will it when the prayers of many ascends up to the Lord. This must
needs offer violence to the Kingdom of heaven, and the violent shall take it
by force. Surely in every congregation there are some truly righteous, and
their presence cannot but bring down mercies on those others whose prayers for
themselves have no promise to be heard non aeque exoras quum solus Dminum
obsecras, says the Father. Thou do not so soon obtain thy desire, when thou
prayest alone, as when in the assemblies of the Brethren. for in those
Assemblies there is some thing more then prayers even the concord, and consent,
and joining in Love and Charity, and the cry of the Priest, whose office it is,
to make intercession for the people, and, being of the stronger size, to carry
a long with them the weak prayers of the people, and carry then unto heaven,
Quod quis apud seipsum precatus accipere non poterit hoc cum multitudine
precatus accipit. Quare? quia si non propria virtus tamen concordia multum
potest. The thing that a man cannot obtain by himself alone, praying together
with the multitude he shall obtain, why? because when his own worth cannot, yet
the concord and union of the Assembly may avail much. It is no reproach to call
the Churches Liturgy Common prayer, the more common it is the better it is, and
the more effectual; when, not only two or three but a whole Congregation are
joined, nay, all the Congregations of a whole nation do in the same words put
their Common petitions and supplications, O what a shrill noise must this needs
make in the ears of God. St. Jerome likened it to a thunder clap. St. Easti to
the roaring of the Sea, it is like the several strings of a Well tuned
instrument that makes a ravishing harmony, as the flame of one stick is nothing
to that of a bundle on fire together, such is the devotion of one man to that
of a whole Assembly, vis unita fortior, force united is so much the stronger, a
threefold cable is hardly broken. So do the joint prayers of Gods people
united, and publicly put up unto God, move him as it were omnipotently and
irresistably, they mount up to heaven, they rap at the gates and cannot easily
be denied entrance, like as the petition of a whole Corporation is more
avaliable to a King then the single petition of any particular person such is
the power and profit of public worship and devotion. And that by the way is a
forceable argument to dissuade the truly Religious from forsaking the
assemblies, that's the fifth Proposition, the more public religious worship
is, the better it is.

The next in order is this. Prop. 6.
That divine worship may be truly public. There is requisite the free and
full assembling of our selves together in a public place, set a part for the
same. So you see I come home to my Text, so set it home upon your judgments
(...) with fullness of evidence, and strength of reason, as well as Holy
Scripture. Give me leave to prosecute this Proposition by parts. To public
worship; to make it public there is requisite the assembling of Minister and
people in a public place.

1. Of Minister. His presence is necessary, unless in case of unremoveable
impediment, as some sudden sickness, or some weighty cause of absence; for he
is a person set a part for the administration of Gods public worship, he is
consecrated to draw nigh unto God, he is by office an Ambassador or Messenger
between God and man. Gods mouth, an Ambassador to the people, appointed to
beseech them in Gods stead to be reconciled unto him. And he is the peoples
mouth and Ambassador unto God, to offer up their requests for grace and mercy
unto him. Gods mouth to them in preaching, and their mouth unto God in prayer.
Hence Joel. 2.18
the Priests are required to put up petitions and supplications. Let the
Priests, the Priest, of the Lord stand between the Porch and the Altar, and say
spare thy people, good Lord spare them, And as under the Law it was the Priests
office to to burn incense, and Vzziah was smitten of God with a loathsome
leprousie for usurping it. So still under the Gospel it is the Ministerial
office to offer the Sacrifice of public prayer unto God, which is as sweet
smelling incense in the nostrils of God, and for preaching the word is express,
how shall they preach unless they be sent, Romans 10.^0.
how able so ever they be to teach the word and sound doctrine, yet if they
have not a mediate and ordinary call or sending, which though it be by man, yet
is divine, as Luther says they cannot preach to your pr^fit, they come not to
edify but to destroy. They are Luthers words. Let no uncalled speaker,
Beloved, have any encouragement at your hands, having no mission from God. Our
Savior tells you, that what show soever they make of holiness, and
spiritualness, and godliness, and saintship, and the like, yet they are wolves
in sheep clothing, thieves spoiling Gods heritage, deceitful workers,
underminding the truth, therefore takeheed of them, or forsaking the public
assemblies, to run after them to your perversion and destruction, such is the
first requisite to a public worship, the Ministers, the rightly called
Ministers, presence in the Assembly.

2. That puplique worship may be public indeed, the people ought to come and
join in it, every one that would be saved must be member of the true Church for
extra ecclesian nou est salus out of the true Church and Religion, no man can
find assurance of comfort and Salvation. Japhet cannot be saved until persuaded
to dwell in the tents of Shem, nor Noah's family out of the Ark. The visible
Church of Christ is a Congregation of faithful men, in which the pure word of
God is preached, and the Sacraments are duly administered according to all those
things that are necessarily requisite for the same. A true Church is chiefly to
be distinguished from a false by purity and soundness of doctrine, and due
administration of the Sacraments in it, And surely these are unquestionable in
our Church of England, even in the confession of our adversaries, as it stands
at this day reformed from the dreggs of Popery in its doctrine and worship. So
then to this Church let every one join himself, and not separate from it, if he
would be saved Acts 2.47.
The Lord added to the Church such as should be saved. Regia via. The King of
heavens high way to Salvation is, by adding to the Church not by seperating
from it. If God be our Father the Church is our Mother. Gal. 4.26.
Jerusalem which is above, is the mother of us all. Hence the Church is often
called the Kingdom of heaven. Mat. 13.44.
And that promise that is made Esa. 33.24,
the people that dwells there, shall have their sins forgiven, is to be
understood of the catholic Church, and so by consequence is applicable (...)

1. The Tabernacle where the Arc of the Covenant and the Altar was placed.
There God promised to meet with his people, that worshipped him; hence it was
called the Tabernacle of the Congregation, or the Tabernacle of Meeting, as
being both the place of their meeting together and Gods meeting with them.
Exodus 29.42. and 30.36 nd (...) Number. 17.4.
Now this place was fixed as the place of Jewish meeting, as being a type of
Christ our Mediator, by whom alone, we being strangers unto God, became
acceptable to him, it is he that by offering himself a sacrifice to God for
us, has made him a propitious Father to us, and by whose intercession all our
prayers, and service, and worship are accepted. So the Legal worship being to
be performed on the altar and before the ark in the Tabernacle, it did
typically teach that neither our persons, nor performances nor any worship we
give God, would ever be acceptable to him, unless it be presented in and by
Christ who was typed by them.

2. God commanded the Temple to be built for his public worship, not that God
would dwell in houses made with hands Acts 7.48.
but thus by way of condescension, he accommodated himself to his peoples
capacity. That as a sovereign Monarch or Prince makes choice of some great City
for his residence, so did the Lord of Jerusalem, which is called therefore the
City of the great King. And as a Prince has his palace in a great City, so
would the Lord have his Temple within Jerusalem, which is therefore called the
place of his habitation Ps. 76.2.
, The throne of his glory Je. 14 21.
, The perfection of beauty, the joy of the whole earth La. 2.15.
, The place of his rest Ps. 132.14.
. Now the reason why God would have the portable Tabernacle erected by Moses to
be changed by Solomon, into a most magnificent and stately Temple to be fixed
at Jerusalem, it was to typify the heavenly Temple and Sanctuary into which
Christ was to enter after his passion and resurrection, where we shall all
appear before him to adore God in perfect peace for ever more. Then

3. There was also places for worship among the Jews besides not commanded but
only approved by God. viz, Their Synagogues, and Proseucha's, and places of
prayer: for though they were to have but one altar and place for sacrifice
which the Lord should choose to place the ark of his covenant there, the
Tabernacle or Temple, yet had they other places for devotion and religious use.
Their Synagogues was covered buildings, like our Churches, their Proseuch as
were a plat of ground encompassed with a wall, or other enclosures like our
Courts, open above, in these they prayed only, in these they interpreted the
Scriptures also, in the Temple they both prayed, and interpreted, and
sacrificed also: The one was without the City Acts 16.13.
. The other was within Acts 15.21.
Moses having in old time in every City them that preached him, being read in
the Synagogues every Sabbath day: their Proseucha's or place of prayer Mr. Mede
makes as Ancient as the times of Joshua Vid Diambae on Josh. 24.26.
. But as for their Synagogues many Authors will have their Original fetc'ht no
higher then the Babylonish Captivity, thinking that necessity first taught the
Jews the use of them, which after their return they brought with them into
their own Country. But Aretius and Godwin do more probably conjecture that for
as much as the Jews were peculiarly engaged to worship God, and that there was
but one Temple for the whole Nation where at the Males only were bound to
appear but thrice a year; and that an hundred miles distant from them that
dwelt in remote places, therefore that they might not be left wholly destitute
of places for their ordinary meeting for public worship they built these
Synagogues after they came into the promised Land. Sure it is they were in
David's time, whence that place Ps. 74.8.
They have burnt up all the Synagogues of God in the Land; and being called the
Synagogues of God, we may gather thence that the Lord approved them, though he
did not command them. So did our Savior often frequenting them while he was in
the flesh Lu. 4.16.17. and 21.
both evidently testifying his real likeing of those public performances of
religious worship that were then celebrated, and tacitly approved the places
themselves, where they were thus solemnly performed, thus you see there were
these several places for public worship under the Law. But what Shall we now
think of the time of the Gospel? Indeed our Savior Christ has removed all
distinction of places through legal holiness, yet has he still made ample
provision for the authority of places for solemn assemblies for public
worship.

1. The distinction of place through legal holiness is removed by Christ. The
Tabernacle and Temple had a legal holiness and ceremonial Sanctity put upon
them, because of the Arkes being there 2 Chro. 8.11. Exodus 29.43.
. There and only there they was to Sacrifice, without an extraordinary warrant
to the contrary. As the Hebrews say a private Alter was not lawful to be
erected, but by a Prophet; and when ever they prayed they was either to pray in
the Tabernacle or Temple Ex. 25.14. Ps. 99.6.
or else toward the same 2 Cor. 6.38 1 Kings 8.44 Dan. 6.10.
, but that was for the thing typified by them, even Christ, through whom God
accepts both of our persons and prayers, and all our performances. It is in and
through his. Mediation only that we call upon God. Therefore he the substance
being come, the shadows are vanished. There is now no legal or ceremonial kind
of holiness in any place however consecrated, to render any duties there
performed more acceptable unto God then if performed by the same persons in
like manner in any other places. Divine worship under the Gospel is not now
tied to any one place more than other, for any typical holiness in them. The
whole world is Gods universal, and as it were Church Cathedral, and so as we
may pray at all times 1 These. 4.1^.
. So in all places 1 Timothy 2.8.
and he can and will hear us from heaven his habitation, which is constantly
alike distant from us. That all distinction of places through ceremonial
holiness is abolished our Savior evidently teaches in his discourse with the
woman of Samaria Joh. 4.21.22,
she asked him in what place God was to be worshipped, whether on Mount Gerizim,
where the Samaritan Temple was, or Mount Moriah whereon the Temple of Solomon
was built: He answered her, the hour comes when ye shall neither in this
mountain, nor in Jerusalem worship the Father, that is the public worship of
God should not be restrained to any place for its ceremonial holiness, as if it
could render the parts of Divine service more acceptable to God, than if
performed else where, for the body of ceremonial worship was now to expire, and
the partition wall to be taken down and God was to be worshipped no more with
Jewish ceremonies? but the Gentiles was to be admitted to be his worshippers
who together with the, Jews should worship him in spirit and truth, and this
the Prophet Malachy foretold Mal. 1.11.
from the rising of the Sun to the going down of the Sam, says the Lord, my
name is great among the Gentiles and in every place incense shall be offered in
my name, All this then shows the vanity of the Popish Pilgrimages to this or
that place, as being more holy, or to pray before this or that Saint or Image,
or relike, or tuteler God thereof. Since all such difference of place is
abolished by Christ, So that wheresoever we be with Jeremiah in the Pit, or
Daniel in the Lions denn, Job on the dung-hil, Hezekiah in his bed, the three
Children in the Furnace, sonah in the Whales belly, with Christ in the
Mountain, in the Desert, in the Garden, on the House top, or on the Sea snore,
with Paul in the Prison: we may call upon God and he will hear us; thus on the
one side we must hold this fast against the Papists, that all distinction of
places is abolished. So that Christians may lawfully and acceptably worship God
when and where their covenants direct them, Yet on the other hand be not
deceived, as if there was no authority or excellency of some places for solemn
Assemblies, for public worship, still under the Gospel above others.

2. Though the ceremonial holiness, be extinct, yet are there some places holy,
as separate, and dedicate from a common to holy uses, though our Temples be
not, as the Temple of Jerusalem was, parts of our worship of God, nor tipes of
Christ body, nor are we bound to set our faces toward them when we pray, yet
is it written Esa 56.2.
my house shall be called the house of prayer to all nations. The Saints
meeting and Assembling there to pray, makes it be called the house of prayer,
so the Assembly Sanctifies the place, and not the place the Assembly, as the
Temple did, seeing, as I said before we are body as well as spirit, therefore
very light of Nature teaches us, that convenient places for Assembling for
public worship, are necessary, and those places capacious for many, that must
join therein. And although in case of Persecution of Religion the meanest place
is acceptable; yet when God is pleased to give his Church Kings to be nursing
fathers, to allow public places consecrated for public worship, with what
thankfulness then should we repair to them, which many of our Christian
Brethren in the world would purchase with their whole estates and dearest
blood. When God give rest and quietness to his Church from the ten famous
Persecutions, wherein they were glad to Assemble not in the fittest but safest
places, perhaps in Dens and Caves of the earth, I say, when God gave her rest
from them, then did they immediately erect Oratories for public prayers, not
sumptuous and stately, which could not then be possible by reason of the
Churches poverty, nor plausible in respect to the worlds envy: but after when
God was pleased to convert Kings to the Faith then was Temples and Churches
presently built? and in building them no cost was spared, and nothing counted
to dear that was spent about them, Sacrilegious wretches are not in these times
more desirous to pull down, than those devout professors of Christianity was to
set up Churches. Thus did popular consent and the Magistrates civil Sanction
design these places for public worship, seperating them unto it and
prevailing custom has styled them Churches. Nay so did S. Paul himself 1 Cor
11.18.20.22. and 34 compared.
what is it then but arrant madness and sottish Ignorance; in our Quakers to
boast so much of the ligbt within them, and yet to be in such darkness? Its
contrary to the very light of nature, to decry and forsake the places set a
part for religious worship, the necessity whereof for public Assemblies is so
evident even by natural light. How much better did the poor Heathens improve
their natural dictates, than these pretenders to the light within, who from the
sight of the necessity of some convenient place for public worship invented
their Groves, and Oratories, and Temples for the service of their Idol Gods, so
then from all these considerations. Gods own setting a part places for public
Assemblies, under the law, and before it his approving those that his people
did set a part, the authority that such places have by the very light of
nature, as well as by Scripture, and the practice of the universal Church,
though without placeing any ceremonial holiness in them. I conclude that Divine
worship may be truly Public which as public is so acceptable unto God,
there is requisite as public persons Ministers and People to Assemble in it,
so also a public place consecrated for the same, from which excellent
consideration ascend we to an higher, which is in the very Text.

Prop. 7. The most Solemn and public Assemblies of the Church in these
public places, are greatly to be esteemed and constantly to be frequented of
all the faithful members of the same, in the negative ( not forsaking) must
needs be employed the affirmative to frequent them. It is a truth this,
evidently following from those I have delivered. For if God is to be worshipped
by all rational beings, and that must needs be in some place in respect of our
bodily parts, and that more public it is done the better it is, and that it
be publicly done it is necessary there be an Assembly of Minister and People,
Pastor and Flock in a public place, then is it evidently necessary that such
assemblies be frequented by all, in order to the discharge of this debt of
nature, the Worship of God. Indeed to this we are obliged.

1. By self interest, because of the great blessing we may justly look for
from God, upon his Ordinances in the public assemblies, and that more than in
any private meetings whatsoever; for to the Church assemblies is that rightly
applied Psa. 87.2.
, the Lord loves the gates of Zion above all the habitations of Jacob Mat. 7.7.
The whole ^uty of man
. That special part of divine worship Prayer, is compared to seeking a thing
lost, and knocking at a gate we desire to enter into, and sure when many seek a
thing together there is more hope of their finding it; when many knock together
at heaven-gates they will be sooner heard. Hence Gods people to show an
extraordinary desire to prevail with God in their prayers upon extraordinary
occasions, they was wont to be extraordinary careful, that their Assemblies
might be as public as might be Joel. 2.15.
. Blow the trumpet in Zion sanctisie a Fast call a solemn Assembly verse. 16.
, Gather the people, Assemble the children. As if he should say leave none out.
So Jehoshaphat 2 Chr. 203.
Proclaimed a Fast throughout all Judab verse. 13.
. all Judah stood before the Lord with their young ones, wives, and children,
and Ju. 20.26.
all the children of Israel went up and all the People came into the house of
God, when they were to fight with Benjamin and then they prevailed. For this
cause also was Hezekiah so careful togather so solemn an assembly to keep the
Passover 2 Chr. 30.2.1.


2. It Is as necessary, this, for others good, for every man, especially Parents
and Masters, frequenting the public Assemblies, may do much good by their
example. David was much comforted in seeing the peoples forwardness in going to
Gods house. Ps. 122.1.
Multitudes doubtless go astray and forsake the holy Assemblies, by seeing
others of better rank and quality doing so before them: and on the contrary
many would keep close unto them, if the better sort would but more conscionably
frequent them. Hence Solomon made his Scaffold in the Temple; even in the midst
of the Court, even that all the people might see him 2 Chapter 11.13.
, and of King Joash it is said, when Athalia came into the Temple he stood by
the Pillar as the manner was 2 Kings 11 24.
. So it is said of Josiah also 2 Kings 23.2.
; and therefore God did require that the Prince should not only join with the
people inpublique worship, and come in, when they come in, and go out, when
they go out, but also should be in the midst of them, that they might all see
him, and so take good example by him. And as to give good example to others, so
that we our selves may partake of the fellowship and presence of Gods people
that assemble there. For as every godly man loves all such as fear God Ps.
15.4.
, and delights in their Company, Psalm. 119.36.
I am a companion to all them that fear thee and keep thy Commandment,) So
does he take most comfort in their company when they meet together in their
assemblies to serve God. In the life to come, it shall be a great part of our
happiness to meet together with all the faithful, and to stand in the
assemblies of the righteous, as may appear by that observation of the Appostle
2 Ths. 2.1.
. we beseech you brethren by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our
gathering togather unto him, And by the Prophets speech Psalm. 1.5.
sinners shall not stand in the congregation of the righteous. And now we have
some resemblance and foretast of that comfort in our meeting together with Gods
people in the Church assemblies here. For by their presents and fellowship,
Gods grace is both confirmed and nourished, and increased in us Pr. 27.17.
, as Iron sharpeneth Iron, so a man sharpeneth the countenance of his friend,
hence when the Brethren met Paul at Apii Forum, he praised God and took
courage. It revived his spirit to meet with them Acts. 28.15.
, so in respect of the example we are to give others, and that sweetness of
having fellowship with Gods people, we have cause to esteem highly and frequent
the Assemblies of the Church.

3. That tenderness that is due to Gods honor and glory obliges every
conscionable Christian hereunto: as well as his care to give good example, and
own his benefit. For the more public the assembly is wherein we worship and
the better it is frequented, the more is God glorified before all the world.
And the more solemn is the profession which we make of that duty and homage
which we owe unto him: upon this account it is required of great ones Ps 29.12.
to worship the Lord in the Sanctuary, that so they might give unto the Lord
the glory due unto his name. Hence David vowed, Ps. 35.18.
he would give thanks unto the Lord in the great congregation, and praise him
among much people. And Hezekiah resolved to go up to the house of the Lord the
third day, so soon as ever he was recovered. 2 Kin. 20.8.
Indeed we cannot better profess our religion, and homage and obedience unto
God, our love and thankfulness unto him for all his mercies, than by diligent
frequenting the most solemn Assemblies of his Church; hence the Professors of
the true religion are expressed by these two things, Lev. 26.2.
ye shall keep my Sabbaths and reverence my Sanctuary. Nay I add

4. To frequent them is not only our duty but privilege also, it is one of
the greatest mercies we enjoy on earth that we can have liberty to go to the
house of God publicly to Assemble in them to worship him there, and should we
not then cheerfully frequent them? There was nothing I am sure that David
desired more in the time of his banishment, than this liberty, and nothing in
which he rejoiced more, when he had it Ps 27.4.
unicum one thing, only one thing have I desired of the Lord, and that I shall
require, even that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life
to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to visit his holy Temple. Psa. 42.1.2.
As the Heart pants for the rivers of water, so pants my soul after thee, O
God. My soul thirsts for God, even for the living God, when shall I come and
appear before the presence of God! and verse 4. He says that his soul
languished when he considered, that had it not been for the tyranny of his
enemies he might have gine with the rest of the assembly into the house of God;
and Pas. 84.1, ^.
in a kind of abrupt affection he breaks out. O Lord of hosts how amiable are
thy Tabernacles, my soul languisheth, yea, and faints that I might come into
the courts of the Lord. My heart and my flesh cries out for the living God, and
verse the third he seems to envy the Sparrowes and Swallows, that had liberty
to lay their young where he had no access; and then he cries out abruptly with
a wonderful pathetical exclamation, O thine altars Jehova, my King and my God,
And in the three next verses he pronounces them happy? not only that dwells
in the Lords house to praise him, but that has but liberty to come to the
Church, though it were with a long and tedious journey, through thick and thin,
through the Valley of Baca the rain filling the pools. Yea, he prefers a day
spent in Gods house before a thousand elsewhere, and the meanest room and most
contemptible office, a door keepers place, before the highest in the tents of
wickedness. David was deeply Sensible, you see, how great a privilege the
liberty of Gods house is. And it is observable to the same purpose, when
Hezekiah upon his prayer had his sentence of death revoked, in what terms Gods
goodness is declared, behold I have healed thee, and the third day thou shall
go up to the house of the Lord 2 Kings 20.5.
intimating how special a faviour it was that he should have health and
strength, so shortly to go to the worship of God, in the house of God: yea, the
Scriptures plainly teaches us, that though God be every where present ^er.
23.24 See this largely demonstrated. in Dr Stillingfleets, Sherinah
do not I fill he aven and earth says the Lord, the most high dwells not in
Temples made with hands, he is not confined in them Act 7.48.
: yet, is he in special sort in the congregation and Assemblies of his people.
And sure that shows it a great privilege to be in Gods presence, as the Queen
of Sheba thought Solomous servants happy that stood before him. Now Gods
public worship is called the face and preferce of God Ps. 105.4. and 42.2.
Hence when Cain was for his murder banished from the place where his Parents
and their families met together for the worship of God, as Piscator interprets
the place Genesis 4.14.
It is said he went out from the presence of God. And David desired to behold
in the house of the Lord, the beauty of the Lord Ps. 27.4.
, and he said, we will wait for thy loving kindnes^, O Lord in the midst of thy
Temple Ps. 48.9.
And the place of Gods worship under the Law was called Bethel, Gods house, and
the glorious Sanctuary Ps. 26.2.
, because the glory of the Lord filled it and sensibly appeared in it, in the
Tabernacle Ex 40, 34
and in the Temple, and 1 Kings. 8.12
Zion is called the habitation of Gods house; and the place where his honor
Ps. 26.8.
And Gods presence is no less in our Christian assemblies, for so runs the
promise Mat. 18.20.
where two or three are met together in my name there am I in the midst of
them. Hence S. John saw him walking in the midst of the seven golden
Candlesticks Rev. 1.13
. And the assemblies of Gods people under the Gospel may as well be called
glorious, because the glory of the Lord appears in them also, though not so
sensibly, yet no less comfortably and effectually, as is plain by that
comparison the Apostle makes, between the ministry and worship of God that was
under the Law; and this that is under the Gospel; preferting this for glory and
excellency far above the other 2 Cor. 3 8.9.10.
. yea, and as effects of this presence of God, O consider, what benefits are
enjoyed in these assemblies, even matters of that worth that the very Angels
themselves desired to stoop down to behold 1 Pet. 1.10
, that most comfortable and precious treasure of Gods holy word, the ministry
of reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5 18.
the preaching of the word, which is the door of Faith, Act. 14.27.
that ordinance of God by which his Saints are gathered, and the body of Christ
edified; Ephesians. 4.12.
that powerful means by which Satan is made to fall from heaven like sightning
Luke 10.1.
, and his strongest holds are beaten down in us 2 Cor. 10.4.
, that key of knowledge Acts 20.27.
by which is opened unto us the whole counsel of God Romans 4.11.
, Those Sacraments which are seals of the righteousness which is by Faith Psalm.
65.2.
, those Monuments of Gods exceeding love unto us in Jesus Christ, those seals
of the kingdom, those seasts for our souls of fat things full of marrow, those
exercises of common prayer and praising God in their proper places, that house
of prayer, praise, waiting for God in Sion. Heb. 1 14.
O what privileges are these inestimable unutterable; had I the tongue of men
and Angels I could not set it out sufficiently. Such cause have we to love Gods
house, and to frequent and highly to esteem the assemblies of the Saints in it
and we are sensual, Sottish, Foolish, above measure, if we do not frequent and
esteem them. Nay as there is a special promise of Gods presence in such public
assemblies so of Gods special protection of them, of which the Angels are
special ministers. For as they have a charge from God to minister and do
service to Gods people Psalm. 34.7:
and to pitch their tents about them when they assemble to serve the Lord.
Hence under the Law, the Curtains that the Tabernacles were made of was full of
cherubims Ex. 55.1.
with the figures of them; the walls of Solomon's Temple were carved round
about. 1 Kings 6.29
, both which typified the presence and attendance of the holy Angels upon the
whole Church and Body of Gods people, as at all other times and in all other
places, so especially at their Church assemblies; but see a full promise of
protection to them, Esaias 33.20, 21.
read it. Hence David gives this for one reason Psalm. 84.11.
why he, so highly esteemed Gods tabernacles, for says he, the Lord is a Sun
and a Shield unto us, and Psalm. 27.5
in time of trouble he will hide us in his Pavilion, and in this respect they
that are excluded from the Church assemblies are said to be delivered up to
Satan, unto his power and will, and men placed under Gods, protection no
longer. 1 Cor. 5.5
Therefore it concerns us to frequent the public assemblies of Gods people,
both out of self love, and for the good we may reap by others fellowship, and
for others good, and for Gods glory, and for the excellency of the privileges
in having liberty of Gods house, we have all the reason in the World, to
frequent, and highly to esteem them above any private meetings, that seek to
overturn them, or our estimation of them. Now from all that has been said
there naturally issues an.

Eighth Proposition which is in the very letter of my text, That it is a very
sinful thing in any member of a true Church to separate from, and forsake those
holy and public Assemblies, not forsakeing the Assembling of your selves
together, as the manner of some is. That it is sinful appears sufficiently by
what is said, as it is a means of making the worship of God less acceptable,
of giveing evil examples to others, of abateing of Gods Glory, of despite or
contemning so excellent a privilege, of depriving your own souls of the
fruition of Gods presence, and of so great blessings flowing from it, the word
rightly taught, the Sacrament purely administrated, which should nourish and
refresh your souls, and strengthen your faith, and confirm your assurance of
Gods love in Christ. The Churches prayers and so of that blessing which our
joint prayers might bring down with a full measure upon us. Of the praises
thereof, and so that cheerfulness and reviving of spirit which we might enjoy,
by having fellowship in those spiritual songs where Gods people do sing of his
righteousness of all these benefits men wilfully deprive themselves, that
forsake the Assembling together in Gods house. And however some men may
foolishly imagine, that they can do well enough with the private use of the
words though they enjoy not the public, and can pray well enough by themselves
though they have no society with the general and public devotions. Yet is it
sure on the contrary, that there is no such promise made to the private as to
the public. Nay, none at all to the private if the public be neglected, or
contemned. Such a woeful thing it is, for men to do themselves the greatest
injury that can be, to deprive themselves of Gods presence by forsakeing the
assemblies of his people; upon this ground Gods people complained of the effect
of the rage and fury of their enemies; Psalm. 47.7^.
They razed the sanctuary to the ground, defiled the dwelling place of Gods
name, and burnt up all the Synagogues of God in the land, And Jeremiah in his
Lamentations Lam. 1.4.
The ways of Zion lament, because no man comes to the solemn feasts, all her
gates are desolate. And hence the sentence of excomunication has ever by
religious souls been accounted, the greatest of punishments, as casting them
out of Gods presence and giving them up to Satan 2 Cor. 5.5.
so sottish are they that wilfully excommunicate themselves by forsakeing the
assemblies. It is like a man's being outlawed in matters of civil Government, by
which he is deprived of all the benefits and protection, belonging to a subject
of the realm. Just so does this censure put them out of the privileges of
Christians and our of Gods protection for a time, so as to be reckoned as
strangers or forra^ners, as heathens and publicans Matt. 18.17,
The sin of these men will best be discovered if we pass from this eighth
proposition to the second General in the Text.

2. The Apostles taxation of some for this sin of forsaking the Assemblies, and
so putting themselves in a way of apostasy, or falling back from, or wavering
in the profession of the true faith; for so the Text runs, not forsaking the
Assembling your selves together as the manner of some is. So then in the
Apostles judgment those some; whoever they be, are blame worthy, and are to be
reproved, and sharply rebuked what motives soever they may have for forsaking
the public Assemblies of the true Church, they cannot forsake them and be
innocent, it is an act that cannot be acceptable unto God, not forsaking the
Assembling of your selves together, as the manner of some is. As there are
diverse persons that forsake the assemblies: So are their motives to forsake
them different, some give ^ne account thereof, and some another all blame
worthy. Let us but consider and weigh the Apollogies and motives of some of
them.

1. The manner of some is to forsake the assemblies upon pretense of some
corruptions in them. It is holiness and purity these men pretend to in a high
measure, and therefore they forsake our assemblies, because as they affirm,
they are unholy, being mixed assemblies, consisting of both good and bad, vide
Robinsons and Cant books.
a miscellany, Multitudes, of the seed of woman, and of the Serpent, and much
more they inveigh and rail bitterly against them, and thence infer a necessity
of separation from them; Heb. 12.14.
but that this is a most corrupt, and unsound inference will appear if we
consider.

1. That the purest Church on earth is not free; perfectly free from all
corruptions: The spouse of Christ is comely yet black. It becomes Christ's Church
to be as true, so humble, far from arrogating perfection. For any Church on
this side heaven to say that she is absolute, and neither wants nor abounds,
were the voice of Laodicea; or Tyrus in the Prophet. As there is no Element
which is not through many mixtures departed from its first simplicity, so is
there no Church that breaths in so pure an air, but it may justly complain of
some thick and unwholesome evaporations, of sin and error in it. Was not the
Church typed by Noah's Ark: wherein was unclear as well as clean beasts? does
not Christ compare it to a feiled wherein grows both tares and wheat
promiscuously until the harvest; Mat. 13.12.
to a great house wherein are vessels of Gold and Silver, and of Brass earth
and clay; 2 Timothy 2.20
to a sheep fould wherein are foulded both sheep and Goats; Matt. 25 32.
to a company of Virgins all invited by an external call to the Wedding,
whereof some were foolish, some wise; Mat 25.1
to an orchard or vineyard; Esai 61.1.
wherein all are not fruitful trees that bring forth their fruit in due season.
But on some God bestows digging, and dunging unto them, and fencing them,
which cumber the ground and are good for nothing but to be cast into the fire.
To a vine in which are some branches that only bear leaves of profession, or
at the best but sour grapes. Nay, sometimes in a true Church, even the
chiefest members for eminency and Authority are corrupted, sometimes the prime
Governors of a Church (as the chief Priests and Elders in our Saviors time)
may be great enemies of real goodness. Nay, to come closer to our selves,

2. We must acknowledge that even in our Church, and the Assemblies thereof
there is such general decay of that first love, and primitive piety which
consisted chiefly in Humility, Mortification, Obedience, and good works, and
such a general increase of all filthy and abominable sins, and those too
frequently uncensured, unrereproved that there is just cause for any Godly man
to fear least God be about to take away his tabernacle from amongst us, and
remove our candlestick, and go far off from our sanctuary, Ezekiel. 8.6.


3. It is undoubted that when a pious Christian considers these things he ought
to be deeply affected with them, and neither communicate with a whole Church in
any corruptions, that are evident corruptions in it, nor yet partake in the
sins of any the particular members thereof: but observing his brothers
prophanness, his duty is to admonish him, and to bewail his sin, and do what
lies in him to bring him to a reformation thereof. This is the right course, but

4. This is no ground at all for him to separate from the Church, or to forsake
the Assembly there of (it is of Mr. Hildershams Doctrines, agreeable to the
ninteenth Article of the Church of England) and that those Assemblies that
enjoy the word and Doctrine of Salvation though they may have many corruptions
remaining in them, yet they are to be acknowledged true Churches of God, and
such as none of the faithful may make separation from, because,

1. There was never Church on earth free from corruptions, either in the whole
or in its particular assemblies, and yet never did the Saints of God forsake
them, upon that account. Never was there Church from the beginning of the
world, to this day, from one side of the Earth to another, pure in all her
members. Adams house that as the first Church on earth, yet did it contain Cain
a bloody murder, as well as Abel a devout worshiper in it. Presently after did
God raise up Seth instead of Abel, to be a holy seed unto him, and even then
did not the Church continue long free from profane mixtures, but the sons of
God became enamoured with the beatuy, and matched with the daughters of men.
And so the deluge came upon them. Now from the deluge God preserved Noah in the
Ark; there was the Church again, and behold, in that ark there was accursed
Cham as well as a blessed Shem. As also in Abraham's family, a scoffing Ismael
as well as a devout Isaac. And in Isaacs a profane Esau as well as an holy
Jacob; And O what Scandals brook out among the Patriarchs! Ruben became
incestuous. Simeon and Levi brethren in evil. After this, when the Church was
enlarged into great congregations, and assemblies, O what impatient murmuring
do we read of among the children of Israel, what foul Idolatries committed in
the Wilderness, what serveing of Baalim time after time in the Land of Canaan,
what horrible and scandalous sins were committed amongst them under the Judges?
how was polygamy and unreasonable devorces, and setting up high places in the
days of the best Kings? and what a deludge of profaneness and Idollatry must
you needs think there brake out in the worst, when men did not only sin
secretly but openly? they showed their sin as Sodom; when the Priests that
should have restrained them, led them on by evil examples; when the more holy
were as signs and proverbs of reproach, and yet in all these successive
generations, we do not read of any seperations from, or forsaking the Church
assemblies, as the manner of some now is. Its true in Idolatrous times the
Saints did refuse to join with the ungodly in Idolatrous worship. So in Ahabs
time there were seven thousand that had not bowed their knee to Baal but yet
never was the wicked (until convicted and censured) debarred from joining with
the Godly in the true worship, nor was the Godly ever enjoined to separate from
them for fear of defilement by them. Nay, on the contrary we shall find that
when our Savior was born, then was the Church so corrupted that the Temple was
become a den of thieves, and yet then Joseph and Mary the parents of Christ did
join themselves to the congregation in Gods public worship? Nay they went a
long Journey with their child Jesus to satisfy the law to offer their turtle
Doves and a pair of young Pigeons, and to take part with the Priests and Gods
people in that which was good and for the rest they meddled no further then
their places required, an Example Says Calvin and Marlorat express against our
Brownists, and all our Separatists, and Recusants, and that which may justly
and finally stop their mouths for ever might be this? if they would but
consider how corrupt was the State of the Church in our Savior's time, and yet
how far forth our Savior did communicate with them in the service of God not
forsakeing the assemblies of the Church, though then so corrupt.

1. For the Priests and Teachers they were ignorant and unlearned; Matt. 23.16.
verse 3.
Nay, wicked and ungodly John 11.44.
even the High priest himself did enter unlawfully into his calling, for
whereas by Gods ordi, nance be was to hold that once during his life, it was
bought and sold and made annual, which is implied in that expression Luke 4.28,
29.
Caiaphas was high priest for that year.

2. Most of the people in most of the places, where our Savior conversed were
notoriously and obstinately wicked. He lived most in Nazareth and see what they
were there; Matt. 11.20, 21.
All that were in the Synagogue were filled with wrath, and res^ up and thrust
him out of the City, and led him to the edge of a hill to thrust him down
headlong, yea and all the Cities where most of his great works had been done he
upbraided, woe to thee Corazin, woe to thee Bethsaida; ( l) nor were the people
of Jerusalem better. For when Pilat a Gentile offered to release him, all the
multitude crying out at once, not him but Barabas; now Barabas was a robber
Luke 23.18.
. And when Pilat washed his hands protesting for Christ's innocence, they all
said desperately his blood be upon us and our children Mat. 27.25.
, And for the worship it self, that was used in our Saviors time, it was very
corrupt.

1. They then urged the use of many superstitious ceremonies, more strictly
then the commandment, and ordinances of God Mark. 7.9.
.

2. They profaned the Temple and made it a den of thieves.

3. They abused the Discipline and censures of the Church shamefully, Joh. 9.22.
the Jews decreed that if any one confessed that Jesus was the Christ, he
should be excommunicated ipso facto.

4. Their doctrine was corrupted in many points as these of divorce of thest,
Murder, adultry Mat 5.21.28.
. Socorrupt was the Church then; and yet mark, out Savior did not separate
from it, but communicated with the public assemblies in the worship of God.

1. When an infant he was circumcised, and by that Sacrament incorporated into
that Church Luke 2.21.


2. When his mother was purified, he was brought to the Temple, and presented
to the Lord with his offering as the custom was Luke 2.22.
.

3. He often heard such teachers, as taught in the Church Luke 2.46.


4. He was wont every Sabbath to join in public prayer, with the Congregation
that were at Nazareth Luke 4.16.
.

5. He received the Sacrament of Baptism in a congregation of that people. Luke
3.2.
When all the people were Baptized he was baptized also.

6 He communicated in the passover with the people, and the Priest Joh. 2.13.
.

7. He allowed his Disciples to hear those teachers Mat. 23.12.
Nay, he commanded the Leper whom he cleansed to go and show himself to the
Priest, and offer his gift in the Temple. Mat. 8.
Neither did any of the Saints in any Age, nor Christ himself, nor his
Disciples separate from, nor forsake the public assemblies of the true Church,
that enjoyed the word and doctrine of Salvation for any corruptions in them.
Then these instances what can be said more convincing, if men had ears to hear,
what the spirit has recorded of the Churches. The fore quoted Mr. Hildersham
upon this point, has two other reasons why we may not forsake them for their
corruptions, who because he is of much authority with many dissenters, and I
wish they were all of his sober spirit, therefore I will offer them to your
consideration. Valiant quantum valeer possent. Indeed there is no cause to
forsake them for their corruptions, because.

2. Notwithstanding such corruptions yet so long as God continues his word and
doctrine of Salvation to a people, and in their assemblies, it is evident he
dwells among them, and has not forsaken them should men make themselves wiser
or purer then God himself, to forsake those, assemblies which God has not
forsaken till God has forsaken a Church sure no man may forsake it. So shall
any man pretend to be holier and to hate corruptions more than the Lord, the
holy one of Israel? Now you may see Gods promise to dwell among and not forsake
his Church, where the word and true worship of God continues, Leu 26.11.12.
I will set my tabernacle among you (that is my Solemn worship whereof the
tabernacle was a principal part) and my Soul shall not abhor you, and I will
walk among you, and I will be your God and you shall be my people. In Judah is
God known, his Name is great in Israel Psalm 76.
in Salem is his Tabernable and his dwelling place in Sion.

Put may not this Church (may some say) be guilty of such sins and corruptions
as deserve that God should forsake it, and for which God in his word has
threatened that he will forsake it, although he has hitherto dwelt therein.

True, Mat. 2.15.
Esau had justly deserved to lose the prerogative of his birth right, and
superiority over his Brother, when he had despised and sold it Genesis 25.34.
, and God had by his decree said of them, the elder shall serve the younger.
Genesis 25.23.
And Saul deserved to be deprived of his Kingdom, yea, God had said that he
had rejected him. 1 Samuel 13.14, and 15, 23, 26, 28.
yet till God saw it good to put his decree and oracle in execution, and
actually to depose the one from his birth right, and the other from his
Kingdom, Jacob acknowledged Esau his Lord and Superior Genesis 32.4, 5.
and David, Saul 1 Samuel 24.7, 9.
: So though a Church may be unworthy before God of the name of Christ's Church,
for the many corruptions that are in it, and the Lords threatenings are gone out
against it, yet till God put this threat in execution, and actually take away
his Tabernacle and worship from i^, it is still to be acknowledged and
reverenced as the Church of Christ, and not to be forsaken by the members
thereof.

3. Who is it that dare forsake and separate from these assemblies; where men
may be assured to find and attain to salvation; Lord to whom shall we go, thou
have the words of eternal life. Accounting this a sufficient reason why they
might not leave him Joh 6.68.
, but men may be sure to find and attain to salvation in such assemblies, where
the ministry of the word and the Doctrine of Salvation is continued and purely
delivered. For the word and Doctrine of Christ is called Salvation Heb. 2.3.
. It is the ordinary means appointed by God to bring men to Salvation. Romans
1.16.
It is the incorruptable seed, at one time or other effectual in all Gods Elect
that do enjoy it, 1 Cor. 1.21
it is the ingrafted word, James 1.21.
which is able to save our souls. (Thus far Mr. Hildersham.) All the enemies of
our Church cannot deny, but that both many have been and are still saved in the
bosom thereof. Nor can the malice of those Chams that desire to espy the
nakedness of their Mother, and glories to discover them, show one foundamental
error with us, not one Heresy whatsoever, how dare they then forsake our
assemblies as their manner is? What though some others of your fellow members
be guilty of sins and errors, is that any prejudice to your salvation, if you
partake not with them, but rather reprove them, and preserve the true Faith and
religion inviolate in your selves, although they by walking unworthy of their
callings, and neglecting the conditions of the promises, do forfeit their part
in the blessed privileges thereof and the things promised. Yet shall the
promises be made good to you, if you be sound members of the Church. Nor shall
it prove any prejudice to your salvation, that you are mixed with the wicked in
it: if you be not partakers of their sins. Mat. 3.12.
The wheat shall be gathered into the Lords Garner, and the Chaff shall be cast
into the fire. Hence the Apostle, Romans 3 3.
What if some did not believe? shall their unbeleif make the Faith of God of no
effect, sure it cannot and therefore being there is no Church on earth free
from all corruptions, no not in its Chiefest members; being that Saints in
their several ages did not forsake the Church because of corruptions in them,
being our Savior has left us his own practice for an incomparable example,
being God himself forsakes not such Churches, and Salvation may be had in them,
and the profaneness of the ungodly is no prejudice to the Salvation of the
godly members of the Church. Then surely it is a sin in separating from our
Church assemblies upon the pretense of some Corruptions in them. Who, however
they usurp the Title of Saints and Godly, and Puritanes, and Christ Kingdom,
and Spiritual, and the like, yet S. Jude (p) marks them with a black coal,
Th^se be they who separate themselves, says h^, sensual having not the Spirit.
Our Christian duty is to mourn for, and show out dislike unto what evil we see
in the Church or in our fellow members. So did the Faithful before the
captivity; Ezekiel. 9.4.
so did Christ Luke 19.41.
We must wait upon God who will in his due time cast his gold into the furnace,
and purify it seven times, will file off the rust and come with his fan in his
hand, and separate the wheat from the tares at the day of particular and
general judgment Aug. contra parmon lib. 3.
Admonendi sunt pii ut arripiant quod possunt, quod non possunt patienter
ferant, ut cum dilectione and gemant and lugeant donec aut emendet Deus and
corrigat, aut in mess eradicet zizanio and paleam ventilis. But we may not
separate our selves from or forsake the assemblies thereof on this pretense, as
the manner of some is.

2. The manner of some is to forsake our assemblies upon pretense they dislike
the Pastors and Ministers thereof. Some this or other is a miss in their own
minister, and therefore they care not for hearing them, having itching ears,
they hunt out, or up heap teachers to themselves. To these men I shall first
offer two or three things that directly tend to their better information,
concerning their Obligation to their own Pastor, and then I shall answer their
complaints of him: and show how groundless their forsakeing the solemn
assemblies is in this respect. The notes I shall give tending directly to your
better information are Mr. Hildershams again, who I believe gives in them the
sense of all the old Nonconformists in this point, and if they be well weighed,
I do believe they startle those of he Presbyterian persuasion, that separate
themselves from our Church, or set up private meetings in time of public
worship, and consequently in oppositito it. They are these.

1. Doubtless it is Gods own ordinance that every Pastor should have his own
flock to attend upon and labor amongst them, for so it is written Acts 14.23.
the Apostles ordained Elders in every congregation, so speaks S. Paul to Titus
Titus 2.5.
for this cause left I thee in Creet that thou should ordain Elders in every
City, as I had appointed thee.

2. By necessary consequence from the former, it must needs be alike the
ordinance of God, that every one of Gods people should have a Pastor of his own
to depend upon, and attend unto. For the duty of Pastor and People is relative
and mutual, if the one be obliged by Gods ordinance to attend to a particular
people, then is that particular people obliged, by the same ordinance to attend
to their particular Pastor. He may discharge this duty indeed, though they be
so head strong as not to submit to his ministry, though they will not hear, or
be warned by him as their watchman, yet may he, by a Faithful fulfilling the
work that he has recieved of the Lord, deliver his own soul but then all this
while, they by their own perverseness may lose the benefit of his ministry, and
by forsaking him deprive themselves of those holy warnings, and instructions,
which he, from the Lord, prepares for them, as the straying sheep does of that
inspection, and provision which his careful shepherd would have over it, had
it continued in its just bounds, so that it is every ones duty by the ordinance
of God, to expect the Law at his own Pastors mouth, To depend upon his
ministry, and hear what the Lord shall speak to him. Yea, he is obliged to this
even in order to his own benefit.

3. It is Gods ordinance also, (because requisite by good order in the
Churches, which is Gods ordinance) that Christians should be distinguished and
sorted into congregations, according to their dwellings that they that dwell
next together should be of the same congregation, and assembly. The general
equity of these rules shows that it is Gods ordinance. 1 Cor. 14.33, and 40.
God is not the Author of confusion but of peace, as in all the Churches of the
Saints. And let all things be done decently and in order: the word Parochia,
signifying parish does evidently in its Element, denote a compass or circuit of
Inhabitants dwelling next together, and so belonging to the same Congregation,
this as it evidently took place for order sake amongst the Jews, Moses being
read to every particular Congregation, in their particular Synagogues in every
Church, every Sabbath day. Acts 15.21. So for the same same good Orders sake,
which was the undoubted ordinance of God, the same is still on force under the
Gospel. For St. Paul left Titus in Creet to ordain Elders in every City. So
that they that lived together in the same town, was apparently to be under the
charge of the same Pastor, and Elder. Titus 15.
Feed the flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight thereof not by
constraint, etc. 1 Pet. 5.2. Stilling fleet Irenicum 353. and Alii.


4. Our Author while he with other moderate Dissenters, from the Church, have
in some respects allowed men's leaving their own Pastors, to hear others better
pleasing to them, yet have they so far acknowledged the evidence of the truth
of these particulars showing peoples obligation to their own Pastors, that they
taught it thus. That men might not ordinarily or usually leave them, and when
they leave them they must carfully approve their hearts to God, that they have
no other ends in so doing, but their own sound edification only, and that they
go to another Pastor only because they find, they can profit more in knowledge
or Faith or Sanctification, than by their own, they complain that many
Christians make choice of, and applaud, and admire some particular teachers
without any judgment or discretion. That some admire another Pastor rather then
their own, because he makes more ostentation of eloquence, or reading, or
learning, or such like humane gifts. As the Corinthians did, preferring other
teachers before St. Paul himself, because he was rude in speech. 2 Cor. 11.5, 6.
And some only leave their own Pastors to go to others for variety sake, they
have itching ears, and so must have a heap of teachers 2 Timothy 4.
, one teacher (let him have never such excellent gifts) cannot please them
long. And some preferrs others before their own, Pastors, only because they
show more seeming zeal in their voice, and gesture, and Phrase of speech, and
manner of delivery, though perhaps their teaching be nothing so powerful,
wholesome or fit to edify their consciences, as is the Doctrine of their own
Pastor. These and other particulars they complain of which shows that people
are fickle and giddy headed and leave their own Pastors for want of knowledge
and judgment. So that whoever they be that leave them, must be sure to approve
themselves to that God that searches the heart, that they do it not for any
other end or upon any other account, but for better edification. Nay the
Authors urge, that when a man leaves his own Pastor go to another, though he
does it in uprightness of heart only in a desire to edify himself, yet must
he seek to do it with his own Pastors good leave and consent, and why? It is
his unquestioned duty to acknowledge that by the ordinance of God he owes duty
to him as to his superior in things belonging to the soul. These. 5. ii.
Know them that labor among you, and are overseers in the Lord and admonish
you: and esteem them very highly in love for their work sake. Nay, he is bound
to seek his Pastors comfort and give him all good encouragement, that he may do
the work of his ministry with joy and cheerfulness according to the Apostles
rule. Heb. 13.17.
Obey them that have the rule over you and submit your selves, for they watch
for your souls, as they that must give an account, that they may do it with joy
and not with grief for that is unprofitable for you. See here what one of the
best pr^sbyterian Guides that ever this Church had, delivers as sound
Doctrine; and oppose these perticulars to Mr. Baxters late answer of Toleration
not to abused: a book wherein are many strange and ill disgested conceits in my
poor judgment, and the pretenses of other Setters up of private assemblies: and
see if they can have consistence and agreement: and observe that while this
Pious Author allows men's going to another Pastor than their own for better
edification, yet does he evidently understand the settled Pastor of a neighbor
Church, which makes the case quite different from men's present forsaking their
own Pastors, to hear unsettled, intruding preachers, who whether they be
lawfully called to that holy function, I am confident thousands are utterly
ignorant, not have any good grounds to think it. So that for as much as even
these sober dissenters, which did plead for, or at all allowed men's ordinary
leaving their own Pastors, to go to another, have yet allowed it with such
cautions as these, that men must do it for no by end, but for their better
edification only and must be very careful it be not for want of judgment in
their choice, and it must be with their own Pastors consent, and as
acknowledging his superiority, over them, and their obligation unto him, and as
seeking his joy, and comfort, and encouragement, and for as much as this their
allowance, was only with relation to settled Pastors; and if a man should not,
but with such caution leave the Pastor of his own Church, to hear the Pastor of
another Church, much less may he to hear an unknown, novel, corner intruder.
vide in Hildersham on John 4.32. page 342
By this it appears how tender and nice a good conscience should be to do it,
and what a horrible guilt of transgressing the very ordnance of God, there lies
upon the consciences of most that forsake the assemblies, out of dislike of
their own Pastors, and go to others: which particulers being so clearly laid
down I come to show how groundless these men's usual complaints of their own
Pastors are. And that in these following Objections.

Object. 1. Concerning his life. It is lewd or Scandalous, so as they cannot
look for benefit by his ministry.

Object. 2. His opinion it is dangerous, so as they fear to be perverted by him.

Object. 3. His gifts they are mean, so as they cannot hope for much good by
him.

Object. 4. His carriage it is indiscreet or intolerable, and not to be
endured.

1. It is indeed the weightiest prejudice many have against their Pastors, so
as to forsake the assembly for his sake, when they can justly pretend his life
is lewd or scandalous, and would you have us then bound up to his minstry whose
example is enough to undo us? must we needs hear him who hears not himself?
must he guide us to heaven, who walks himself in the in the paths of hell? how
can we credit his words who shows his own unbelief by his wicked life? who
confutes his sermons, by his practices? who pulls down with his life, what he
builds up with his lips! will the Spirit lodge in his lips, in whose heart he
has no room? will the holy God make use of a profane instrument? who can
gather grapes of Thorns or sigs of Thistles? how can we be bound to hear him,
whose life is so lewd, or if we hear him what benefit can we hope for from him?

Ans. I confess it is the most grievous complaint this, that can be if it be
just A wicked minister being of all men most odious and abominable. If the salt
has lost its savor it is good for nothing but the dunghill, if the light of the
world be darkness how great is that darkness. The Vrim and Thummim, Purity of
Doctrine and exemplarity of life are the two great requisites in a Faithful
minister of Christ, far be it from me to patronize or plead for any in whom
there is a notorious defect of these, any such enemy of Christ, or Judas like
traitor to Christ, as every scandalous minister is. But yet may I oppose to
this prejudice these necessary considerations.

1. From such the purest Church upon earth cannot be free. And that.

^. By reason of that innate corruption that is in ministers as well as in
other men, Alas, they are but flesh, tempered of the same clay with others,
polluted with the same original corruptions, prone to the same vices, being
Angels by office yet men by nature? to whom though God has committed the
heavenly treasure, yet are these but earthly vessels still, as frail and weak
as other men. And,

2. Being as prone to sin as others, their temptions are far more then other
men's. For Satan the common adversary of all souls knows his greatest advantage
is in devouring those that should save men's souls. As the Syrians was commanded
to fight especially against the King of Israel: So do the devils chiefly
combat with the Priests and Prophets of Israel. The pulling down of these
pillars is to weaken or raise the whole building, the misleading of these
guides is the way to make all to err. The smiting of the shepherd is to
scatter the slock; to lull a sleep these watchmen is the way to surprise the
whole army. Its Satan's compendious way of destruction to prevert those that
should convert others, to deform those that should reform others, so that they
being as weak as others, and Satan grudging no pains continually to assault
them, is it any wonder if they be after foiled? from such therefore the purest
Church on earth cannot be free.

2. When thy own Pastor is such, yet have thou reason to hear him, and no
reason to forsake the public assemblies for his lewdness sake. The heathen
Seneca could advise men non quia loquitur, sed quid, not so much to weigh who
speaks as the matter spoken, and the Scripture warns them not to have men's
persons in admiration, Jude 16.
nor to have the Faith of God with respect of persons. James 2.1.
Though an Angel from Heaven should bring an untruth, declare another Gospel,
we ought to give no ear to him, let him be accursed Gal. 1.8.
and though a devil from Hell should utter a truth, it is not to be rejected
for his sake that speaks it. Truth is Gods where ever it grows. As a mine of
God or silver is the Princes in whose ground soever it be found. It must be
received for the love thereof, as truth, and for his sake who is the God of
Truth, by whom soever it be spoken. Moses learnt of the Heathen, Jethro his
Father in Law, a platform, for the ordering the magistracy of Israel, Exodus 4.
Pharaoh learnt of his prisoner Joseph how to prevent a famine in Egypt. Genesis
41: 41.
Naaman was instructled by his captive Damosel, where he might get his
Leprously healed. 2 Kings 5.
Old Eli was taught by the Child Samuel: 1 Samuel, 1.
Balaam by his very Ass. It is true the liquor often tastes of the Cask, and
the preachers personal looseness, may much weaken his strongest persuasions. Yet,

3. Consider by our Saviors parable, it appears the ineffectualness of Gods
word most what proceeds from the hearers own corruptions his unpreparedness,
negligence, or obstinate wickedness, the fault is not so much in the seed or
sower, as in the soil, the ground, that is either rocky, or thorny, or high way
side; if it be Gods word it is good seed ever, and the Minister is but an
Instrument, God is the principal Agent to make it fruitful. Paul plants and
Apollo waters but God by his Spirit gives the increase. Now

4. Gods Spirit which breaths where it lists, accompanies sometimes not his
holiest ministers with his saving operations, and sometimes he works by the
lewdest of them. Thence our Saviors admonition Mat. 23.3.
the Scribes and Pharisees (those wicked hypocrites) they sit in Moses chair,
all therefore what ever they bid you observe, that observe and do, but do not
after their works, for they say and do not. If there had been no good to be
reaped by them because of their personal wickedness, Christ would never have
enjoined them to hear them. Had Saint Paul supposed that the Spirit of love
would by no means concur with those envious ones that preached Christ, to
increase his bonds, he would not have rejoiced that they preached him. Phil.
1.15, 16.
Nay, he supposes, that it were possible, for a very cast away to be an
instrument of others salvation, when he said I keep under my body, lest when I
have preached unto others, I my self should be a cast away, 1 Cor. 9.27.


5. Consider, gifts may be where grace is not, edifying gifts for others
benefits in him, who has no sanctifying grace for his own. Judas had gifts fit
for the Apostolical function; those that came to Christ could say, Lord we have
prophesied in thy name, and in thy name have cast out devils. the Scribes and
Pharisees were learned men. As a lame man may with his crutch point out the
right way to others, which he is not able to walk himself, and a crooked Tailor
may make a suit fit for a strait body, which cannot fit himself. And as wicked
Balaam could make a clear prophecy of Christ Number. 24.17.
, so may many edify others, that are themselves unsanctified: many have gone
laden with gifts to hell, God may use his talents to convert others, that is
himself a stranger to the works of grace and conversion; if man have a
competency of edifying gifts, approved by the Church, and so be lawfuly called
to the ministry, it concerns not us, that he want an effectual calling as a
Christian: we are to look to his call as a minister, not to his call as a
Christian: for should the people stand upon their Pastors inward calling to
grace, they could never near any in Faith; for how could they be ever certain
of his effectual inward call, which is known to God alone; the fairest show may
be but Hypocrisy, but the Lord alone knows them that are his 2 Timothy 2.19.
; if then thy minister be lawfully called, sent, and ordained, thou must
receive him, receive a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, yea, thou may
warrantably hope for a blessing from him though a wicked man. Why,

6. Because Gods ordinance, and his promised blessing upon it, depends not on
man's, the instruments, nolyness or wickedness. The promise is suspended upon no
such condition, and will you bind God, where he has not bound himself. May not
waters make a Garden fruitful lighting upon a fit soil though conveyed by a
Pipe of lead or wood, which gets no good it self by all the waters it conveyes;
may not good seed cast into a good soil yield a good increase, though sown by
unwashen hands? had Elias refused meat from the Ravens mouth, might not he have
justly Starved? will a noble man refusehis pardon, because a mean peasant
brings it from the King? the Papists may as well suspend the benefits of the
Sacrament on the worthyness or intention of the minister, as we suspend the
benefit of the word on the same, yet this we hold ridiculous and impious in the
one, and why not in the other? if then the purest Church cannot be wholly free
from wicked Ministers, and if thy Pastor be such, yet have thou reason to hear
him: and not refuse truth from his mouth; and the fault of the words
ineffectualness is most what in the soil, and the Spirit being a free agent
often accompanies the lewdist Ministers, and edifying gifts may be where
sanctifying grace is not; and the ordinance is not suspended on the worth of
the instrument, but only on the power and goodness of God whose it is, then is
this prejudice no sufficient ground for men to forsake the public assemblies
for the Pastors sake, though he be loose, or wicked in his life. In this case
indeed it becomes Christians to to be modest, and not to be apt to speak evil
of him, as the manner is; should our trial be at the peoples tribunal, I doubt
very few Ministers would escape condemnation, but some or other fault would be
found, as who is free? and that so aggravated, our moats made beams our
mol^hils mountains, that every one of us would find a censure severe enough,
for either Lewd, or debaucht, or covetuous, or contentious or Idle, there is
not a Pastor in all Gods Church, but he would have somewhat found a miss in
him, and he must with the Apostle expect to pass through evil as well as good
report^, through hard censures, and bitter revilings in this divided and
corrupted age; but you brethren, I hope you will otherwise learn Christ, do not
like cursed Cham; uncover your fathers nakedness, do not make your Pastors
fault your cup talk, or his infirmities your pastime to rip them up or blazen
them, rather pity them, as being inclined to the same corruptions with others,
and exposed to a thousand more temptations, and pray for him: and by no means
shut your ears against Gods word in his mouth. Look upon him as an instrument
only by whom the Spirit may work. si been vixerit proprium luerum, si been
dixerit tuum toll quod tuum, says St. Austin. If he live well it is Gods work
and his gain, if he speak well it is thy advantage, take what is thine and be
thankful. As for his wicked actions, those happen through the devils malice and
his frailty, curse the dive, I but pity the sinner and pray for him, who is
like to answer for it to his Judge, to stand or fall to his Master, but for his
holy doctrine that is thy portion; refuse not to hear it, consider it, meditate
of it, and practice it: So shall God bless it to thee, though it come from the
lewdest Minister whatsoever: Else rejecting of it, thou must answer for it and
be judged by it at the last day. That for the first motive, for this forsaking
the assemblies, which, you see, is groundless, the prejudice men have to their
Pastor concerning his life.

Obj. 2. Concerning his opinion. For so will some say would you have us bound
to hear him who is popishly affected, or the next door, strict in the Law, too
canonical, nay, we fear superstitious, and so may mix the childrens bread with
poison and mislead us out of the right way; is it not dangerous to hear him.

Answ. To this I oppose these considerations, was not Elias, Jeremy, John
Baptist, Saint Paul, and our blessed Savior (who spoke as never man spoke)
accounted pestilent fellows, ring leaders of Sects, troublers of State,
Deceivers of the people? how should these instances warn you of slandering your
Pastor causelessly, or concluding him erroneous upon the malicious hear says or
surmises of those that are not able to judge of the doctrine, whether it be of
God or no. Yet suppose he be erroneous then must you consider of what Nature
his error is, for though all truths be precious, yet are truths of different
natures, some essential fundamental points, de Fide, of the faith once
delivered to the Saints; some circumstantial, ceremonial, indifferent; some are
perspicuously revealed in the Scriptures, wherein errors are damnable, some are
more darkly revealed, of which wise and holy men in all ages have doubted; now
if it be only in circumstantial and less necessary truths, wherein you dislike
your Pastors opinions, then must not this difference of opinion, beget in you
any heart burning, or alienation of affection, though you do discentire, think
diversely, yet ought you not discordare, disagree, they that unwillingly differ
in judgment, ought yet to be one in heart. The Spirit of God is promised to
lead all his chosen into all necessary truths, but not to all less essential
dissc^ntions have in all ages been between great Clerks and holy Saints;
contentions have even through Satan's crast been cherished in the Church, they
are apt to disagree on earth that shall meet in the same heaven. What remains
then but that love be still kept on foot, and we all endeavor to avoid
bitterness of contention about these things? to follow the truth in love. As in
building Solomon's Temple there was no noise heard of Ax or hammer 2 Kings 6.7.
; So in the spiritual building of the Church we should not let any sound of
contention be heard among us, such is the duty of both Pastor and people;
especially it is the peoples duty to be so a ware of Satan's stratagems, which
is to divide them from their Pastor, if it be possible, as not to entertain any
needless jealousies or evil surmisings, judge cautiously of your minister, if
possible, Search the Scriptures as the Bereans did to see if what he delivers
be agreeable to Gods word, and if you find of a truth, that he and you differ
in opinion in things less necessary and material, your care must be to pare the
Apple and leave the worm, and that which is eaten by it, take the good and
leave the bad, which directions being sound and wholesome, if they be observed;
it will naturally follow that this is no sufficient ground neither, for any to
leave our Church assemblies, for any prejudice men have against their Pastors
opinion.

Obj. 3: The third prejudice is against their gifts, alas will some say our
Minister though he be good and orthodox, yet is he a very mean preacher: he is
no Body for gifts, where such or such come in comparisons. His knowledge
shallow, how can he inlighten us? he is no Orator, how can he work on our
affections? or persuade us? what good can we expect from his dry, sapless, weak
Sermons? or why should we be bound to hear him, when we may have better, by
whom we may profit more, to this I oppose these considerations.

Answ. 1. There may be in Ministers great difference of gifts, without any in
equality at all, for which the one should be preferred before the other. For he
who is inferior to him thou admires, in one kind, may excel in another,
perhaps in a kind more useful and benefical. The gifts of God to his Church are
dispensed in a mavelous great variety, so that there are scarce any two
ministers but they differ in their gifts Cor. 12.14.
. There are diversity of gifts but the same Spirit. In the Body natural the eye
sees better, but the tongue utters better, if the whole body were eye what
would it do for a tongue, Saint Paul had more learning and knowledge 1 Cor. 11.
, being at Lystra styled for his utterance Mercury or chief speaker Acts 14.11.
; yet was not of that excellent presence as other Apostles were. Barnabas in
comforting the afflicted excelled him, being therefore styled the son of
Consolation Acts. 4.36.
. John Baptist was excellent in terrifying secure sinners, Luke 12.17.
he came in the spirit and power of Elias, but our Savior was milder, not
breaking the bruised reed nor quenching the smoking flax Mat. 12.20.
. In liklyhood Peter did in some gifts excel the rest, to whom Christ gave in
special charge to feed his Lambs Joh. 21.15.
. Yet in powerful reproving of sin and denouncing Gods judgments, James and
John excelled him, being therefore styled Boanerges, Sons of thunder, so in the
great diversity of his gifts, that is amongst ministers, yet each of them
excels in their kind, one may have deeper matter, another a more eloquent
mouth; one may be sweeter in comfort, another more powerful in reproof, one may
be graceful in pulpit, another in private conference; one may be excellent in
interpreting to increase knowledge, another in application to breed good
affections in men 1 Cor. 12.8.
. To one is given a word of wisdom by the Spirit, to another the utterance of
knowledge by the same Spirit, one may excel in this gift, another in that, none
in all. Now,

2. Consider this is the Lords doing, for the beauty and benefit of his Church;
their different education, diligence, or industry, is not all the cause of
this diversity of gifts though it be one, Gods gift being now to be acquired in
the use of these means, whence St. Paul's injunction to Timothy Tim. 4.^3.
give attendance to reading, etc. But it comes chiefly from Gods free
disposition, who distributed to every man severally, as he will 1 Cor. 12.11.
. And this

3. Makes much for Gods glory, and the benefit and beauty of his Church. For
Gods glory, for the greatness of his wisdom and freedom of his grace shines
in this difference perspicuously, and for the Churches beauty and benefit: for
flowers of diverse bigness for color and smell, do adorn a field exceedingly
with it is party colored coat, difference of voice, base, treble, tenor, and
counter tenor, and difserence of strings in an Instrument tuned by a skilful
Musician, make the music more melodious. So is difference of gifts an ornament
to Gods Church. Yea, it is suitable to the peoples disposition. For as in the
use of ordinary ^ood, all have not the same appetite, nor like the same meat;
hence God has provided variety of creatures to fit every one, such is his
Infinite goodness to us; so in the Church, one people may profit most by one
man's gifts, another by another. God has different works, and therefore
provides different workmen; nay, the same person may profit best in knowledge
by one Minister, in memory by another, and in affection by another. In some
audiences great and eloquent scholars are fittest, in others such as can speak
to the capacity of babes and idiots. John's gifts was meetest for some men's
disposition, he was an austere man, and came neither eating nor drinking; our
Saviors fittest for others Mat. 11.17.19.
. He suited himself to publicans and sinners. Nay, as this diversity may suit
to different dispositions, So does it serve to increase love and unity amongst
the servants of God, as letting you see they have need one of another, and so
causes them mutually to esteem each other- The eye cannot say to the hand I
have no need of thee, 1 Cor. 12 21.
nor the head to the feet I have no need of you. Thus does it tend both to Gods
glory, and exceedingly to the Churches beauty and benefit.

4. Consider his ministry, whom thou accountest meanest of, is Gods ordinance,
as well as others to whom in gifts he is inferior Man. 25.15.
. The Lord gave to one of his servants five talents, and to another but two,
and to another but one, and he that had but two talents and gained other two
with them, had the commendation of a good and faithful servant, as well as he
that received five and gained five. There was a great difference between Paul
and Timothy, the one aged the other a youth, the one profound, famous for
labors, and success in the Gospel, the other not heard of yet, yet see what
Paul says of him 2 Cor. 6.10, 11.
. If Timothy come see he may be with you without fear, (take heed you wrong him
not, disgrace him not, see that you love and reverence him) for he works the
work of God, as I also do? let no man therefore despise him, Timothy was
ordained a Minister and therefore they was not to despise but reverence him, as
if Paul himself was with them, because he was Gods ordinance, and did the work
of God as well as he. Suitable is that exhortation concerning other Ministers.
These. 5.13.
Have them in singular love for their works sake. The feet of all that bring
the glad tidings of peace must be beautiful in our eyes. And on the other hand
the contempt done to the meanest of Gods servants, reaches to God himself
Luke. 10.16.
. He that despises you despises me.

5. Consider Gods word should be received not for his sake that brings it, but
for his sake whose it is. Hence the Scribes and Pharisees sitting in Moses his
chair, and teaching Moses his doctrine, were to be respected though they were
wicked Hypocrites. Gold and Silver is not of more value, out of an imbroydered
cup then a leathern purse, meat is as pleasing to the palate, as wholesome to
the body, out of a clean earthen vessel, as out of a silver Platter, as a
candle shines as bright in a wooden, as in a Golden candlestick: why should
Gods word then, better worth than thousands of Gold and silver, be less valued,
or the heavenly Manna be disrelished, or the light of our paths be obscured, by
the meanness of the ministers that brings it? Gods word is the same, of the
same intrinsic worth, who ever the minister be, and so should be esteemed and
received by us, who ever thy Pastor be, if he be a true minister of Christ, and
have sufficient gifts, to qualify him for the ministry, then may thou
doubtless, profit by him, if the fault be not in thy self 1 Cor. 12.7.
. The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal, and
ye may all prophecy one by one, that all may learn and all may be comforted 1
Cor. 14.31.
. The best Christian that is may profit by the meanest of Gods servants. Even
Saint Paul professed that this was one cause why he so earnestly desired to
come to the Romans, that he might receive some good, some increase of Faith
even from them Romans 1.12.
. And I am persuaded there is never a Minister that is of the most excellent
gifts (if he have a godly heart) but he can truly say that he never heard any
faithful Minister in all his life, even the meanest, but he could descern some
gifts in him, wanting in himself, and received some profit by him, says Mr.
Hildersham.

6. The fruit and profit, that is to be received by the ministry, depends not
only or chiefly on the gifts of the Preacher but on the blessing of God upon
his own ordinance; for Ministers are but Ministers by whom we believe, and God
for his own Glory may give that blessing to the more unworthyest, he denies to
the most excellent, that the glory may be entirely his own, and that his
strength may the more appear in the Ministers weakness. He sometimes causes
that which the world counts foolishness, to confound the wise, and the weaker
to exceed the stronger, in efficacy and profitableness. Saint Peter did convert
more at one sermon than Christ himself, probably did in all his life, who is
Paul who is Apollo? says the Apostle, but Ministers in whom ye believed, even
as the Lord gave to every man. I have planted and Apollo watered but God gave
the increase. Such is the peoples duty then to depend upon God, for his
blessing in his ordinance, rather than upon the gifts of the teacher. I may
allude to that 1 Cor. 3.5, 6, 7, 8.
. In the morning sow thy seed, Eccl. 11.6.
and in the evening withhold not thy hand, for thou know not whether shall
prosper either this or that, So do thou hear one of Gods servants as well as
another, at one time as well as at another, for thou know not by whose
ministry it is, nor what sermon it is, by which God will be pleased to work
upon thy heart. Indeed on the other hand it is not possible thou should
profit by thy Pastors ministration, if thou attend not, or attend with
prejudice, or without reverence unto, or delight in it, not acknowledging Gods
ordinance in it, or nor seeking Gods blessing upon it. If then there may be a
great difference in Ministers gifts without inequality, if he whom thou
think meanest may excel in his kind, if the difference be from the Lord, and
that in order to his own glory, and the Churches beauty and benefit, and the
meanest be Gods ordinance as well as the best, and the word be to be esteemed
for it own worth, and his sake whose it is, who ever be the minister publishing
it. If thou may profit by the meanest, if the fault be not thy own, and the
profit depends not on his gifts, but Gods blessing. Then though thou may
rightly covet the best gifts, and bless God for them when thou injoyest them,
yet may thou not despise the meanest of Gods Ministers nor despair of profit
by him. Nor is this then a sufficient plea for forsaking the public
assemblies, the Pastors defects in gifts.

4. The last prejudice is from his carriage supposed to be indiscreet perhaps
intolerable. Its true will some say our Ministers life is good, his opinions
Orthodox, and his gifts excellent, but he behaves himself strangely in his
place. Either he is always chiding, and reproving us, A mere Boanerges, a son
of thunder, telling us often of Hell and Damnation, as Ahab said of Micaiah,
prophesying concerning him ever evil, no good. This made Faelix distaste St.
Paul, when he preached of temperance before him and Drusilla, who was most
unchaste, and of judgment before him an unjust judge; or perhaps he is ridged in
keeping us to Church orders: he will not bear with us in what he dislikes
though it were his prudence to pass by. To this Ioppose several considerations.
I confess there may be indiscretion in the best Pastors. Its a difficult thing
both to please men in wisdom, and yet to save, and not betray their souls in
faithfulness. Yet on the other hand it is ordinary for people to blame them
that are faithful, for their faithfulness, under the notion of indiscretion.
Remember Gods strict injunction to those watch men of Israel, to cry aloud and
not to spare, to warn men from the Lord in every evil course, and that under
pain of being guilty of the blood of their souls, that miscarry by their
negligence. And if you consider this, how can you wonder if they be very tender
of suffering any sin to lie upon you they observe unreproved, unreformed, if
they fear Gods displeasure more then man's, and take heed least that you call
discretion be not nicknamed so, being in truth Laodicean Lukewarmness or want
of Zeal. Do but in the next place survey the generality of people in these
days, how dull of hearing are some, how froward and untoward others, how
nicely Hipocritical and tickle others, and how secure others, and it will seem
almost impossible for a faithful Pastor to work on you to reformation, unless
they speak more then discretion and modesty would almost permit.

Consider also if it be not better, the people be not reproved and kept awake,
and at last saved through the Pastors reproofs and corrections, however deemed
indiscreet, then muzzled in their sins. Is it not better a wholesome though
smarting plaster be laid on, where need is, than that corruption should
fester? does not more souls perish by the Ministers lukewarm coldness then
indiscretion? better are the faithful words of a friend, than the deceitful
kisses of an enemy. It is blessed thunder if it do but awake men out of their
sins, you are much more beholdto your Pastor for his plain dealing, and honest
hearted reproofs, in faithfulness to God, and your souls, than if he should
flatter you in your sins with placentia speaking pleasant things. All which
particulers duly considered, do show how groundless men's forsakeing the
assemblies is also, because of the prejudice they too often cherish against his
carriages and indiscretion. Truth is, what ever men pretend, the root of all is
secret malice against the Church ministry, bread and nourished in their hearts,
or at least want of love, malice cannot judge well of any thing, that comes
from him a man loves not, perverts his meaning, construes wrong all his words
and actions, suckes poison from that from which a diligent Be would draw the
sweetest honey; in these days malice between Pastors and People flames out
hot, or at least love is cold, and we know Christ bad his Apostles look for
this entertainment in the world: and so we need not think it strange,
concerning this fiery trial. He bad them expect to be reviled and persecuted,
and have all manner of evil spoken of them, telling them the Prophets of old
had been so used before them Mat. 5 10, 12.
. And Saint Paul says of himself and his fellows that they found their Masters
words true by experience, for they were reviled, persecuted, defamed, accounted
the filth of the world, and the offscouring of all things Cor. 4 12-13.
And when God opened to him at Ephesus a large and effectual door. That is,
blessed his ministry mightily, and gave it entrance into the hearts of men.
Yet were there many adversaries raised up against him 1 Cor. 6, 9.
. Nay, it is made a kind of mark of an unfaithful Minister not to be thus
used Luke. 6. 26.
. Woe to you when all men speak well of you, for so did your father of the false
Prophets Gal. 1.10.
. If I yet pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ, the reason is,
what ever men pretend, it is a Ministers fidelity, and plainness and boldness
in reproving men's sins; that is the prime cause of their hatred and malice
against them; when Jeremy complained every one did curse him, though he had
neither lent nor borrowed upon usury, he hints the cause in the next words,
that he was a man of strife and contention with the whole earth Jer. 15.10.
. Ahab hated Michaiah, because he prophesied not good concerning him, but evil
1 Kings 22.8.
. The two witnesses did vex and torment men by their ministry Re. 11.10.
. Indeed this evil made Moses, Jeremy and Jonah to find out so many excuses, as
fearing to enter upon this so hateful, and thankless a calling, and it tempts
many good Ministers either to give over the calling, if they can live without
it, or at least to be unfaithful in performing it, as breeding them so much
hatred, and displeasure with men. I said, says Jeremy, Jer. 20 9.
I will not make mention of him, nor speak any more of his name: but his word
was in my heart as burning fire shut up in my bones, and I was weary with
forbearing, I could not stay.

Now for a remedy of this disease, oh that people would consider, that near
relation they stand in, and that dear affection they owe to their Minister,
they are their fathers spiritual fathers begetting them to Christ. Pastors,
Shepherds, Watchmen, such as must give an account. That they would consider
the strict command of God for love: hence under the Law the Priest was to carry
in his garments the names of the twelve Tribes on his ^oulders, to signify the
weighty burden he undertook; and in his breast plate, to show his entire
affection unto them, and this affection it is, that makes Ministers faithful
in their office to watch over their souls unwearyedly, to spend and to be
spent, to win them to Christ. And so in spiritual regeneration, as in natural
regeneration, it is love that begets Children unto Christ. And on the other
hand the people should be as careful of love to their Ministers. Saint Paul
records of the Galatians Gal. 4.15.
That they would have plucked out their very eyes to have given them unto him,
far short of the Galatians are those that muzzle the mouths of the oxen that
should tread out the corn. That abridge the hire of the labourer, and withhold
the Churches right. The Galatians was willing to forsake the dearest things
they had in the world, their very eyes, if not their life for the Gospels sake,
and its ministry Gal. 6.6.
. Let him that is taught in the word communicate to him that teaches in all
good things. So I say consider what love is commanded by God from Ministers to
their people, and people to their Ministers. But on the other hand see from
whence all variance betwi^^ them comes, even from the Devils craft and malice,
for no way has he more effectual, to hinder the efficacy of the word then
this. His five thousand years experience has taught him that it is to little
purpose to mutter a syllable directly against Gods word, he sees no likelihood
to beget in Christians, especially in Protestants, adirect hatred of the word
as such. His policy then directs him to work obliquely, to distill into men's
hearts a hatred of their Ministers, so to make them set at naught the word they
preach. This is the devils craft. Now consider lastly how unreasonable this is,
what is the matter? Is there some petty quarrel betwixt you? wipe it of, are
there some occasions of disaffections? look it be not causless, as for the most
part they are. Do they reprove your sins, drunkenness or sacrilege, or
perjury, or rebellions, or prophanations of Gods day or the like. Alas, they
would not do it but in love to your souls, they would have your good will, and
gladly be beloved of you if they durst forbear, to please you, but necessity
lies upon them to cry a loud and not to spare to tell Judah of her sins, and
Israel of her abominations, should you not then rather love then hate them for
this? and say let the righteous smite me and it shall be a kindness, for
faithful are the wounds of a friend, but the kisses of an enemy are deceitful
Prove. 27.6.
. All these considerations do bid you shake off anger, envy and despite by all
means, not to entertain the least seed thereof. No evil reports, no Idle
accusations against your Pastor 1 Timothy 5 19
. But rather to pray for them to God, to deliver them from unreasonable men 2
These. 3.1.
. And as St. Paul speaks of Epaphroditus to receive them in the Lord with all
gladness, and hold such in reputation Phil. 2.29.
. Laying a side all malice and guile and evil speaking, as new born babes
desire the sincere milk of the word that you may grow thereby, and then I dare
say you will find no cause of forsaking the public assemblies of the Church
for your Pastors sake which was the second grand motive we propounded to
consider, why, men are willful to forsake our Church assemblies as the manner
of some is. Besides these two grand occasions of forsaking the assemblies,
there be others we need not speak so largely of, because being but named, they
cannot but be abhorred, and being seen they discover their own nakedness, such
are these following.

1. Some forsake the assemblies and separate themselves from us out of mear
Ignorance, taking offense at many things in our assemblies causelessly, or
without any weighty reason, they do not and are not able to distinguish between
the essentials and circumstantials in Religion, and so look upon any supposed
mistake in the latter, with detestation proper only to the perversion of the
former, and thence violate charity, and break communion with those that hold
the same faith with them. These eager Spirits having a zeal without knowledge,
blow up minute differences, with lasting contentions. They raise disputes about
a pin, or a nail of the Temple, that even endangers the whole fabric, they set
the same value upon the leaves and bark of the tree, as upon the fruit it self,
they make ado a bout a nail, or tile of the house, as if it were of the same
concernment with a pillar or a beam, they look upon that as simply evil, which
is only so in some respects, as it is wrong circumstantiated, or which is
only not perfect in all degrees, whereas did but men deliberately prize that
which they oppose, and proportion their displeasure to the just weight thereof,
their contentions would soon be calmed, and never become quarrels with the
Church of God. Nay indeed in many it is mere sottish Ignorance, that is the
cause of their forsakeing the assemblies of the Church of God, they was never
grounded in the first principles of the Oracles of God, and especially they
would never learn their obligation to the Church they was baptized in, to hold
communion with it. Perhaps these men will say they would fain do right and go
the right way but they would never hearken to their right guides, but gave
their ears first to seducers, being a little too much affected with that show
of piety they saw in them, they put themselves wholly upon their directions and
examples, and so are carried hoodwinckt or blindfold into Schisms and damnable
errors. Thousands there be that have separated themselves that are mere
Ignorants, silly women especially, that was always learning but never came to
the knowledge of the truth, having better affections than principles; whom,
because they would not receive the truth in the love thereof, God has given up
to strong delusions to believe lies; and so in some, that's one cause of their
forsakeing the assemblies, mere Ignorance.

2. This Ignorance is oftentimes proud or conceited. So that's another cause,
damnable pride. The wisest of men arraignes this vice as the ringleader of
divisions Prove. 13.10.
. Only by pride comes contention. Indeed there are few sins unto which pride
is not either a parent or nurse, but above all Schism and Heresy, has its
immediate descent from it, having so many lineaments and features of this
deformed mother, See some of these heads very largely and learnedly discoursed
of by the author of the whole duty of Man in the causes of the Decays of
Christianity, to whom I here acknowledge my self much indebted.
as sufficiently attests its extraction. It is pride that makes some men
dislike whatsoever is not of their own invention, or whatever is imposed by
their superiors, or whatever others have a hand in whom they contemn or hate,
be it never so good or true, or what is contrary to that they have formerly
maintained: and they are loath to deny themselves, as in effect to acknowledge
they was formerly in an error, and in the wrong. Its pride that make some
desire, to go in some singular way, and loath to go on in a beaten tract,
wherein they may be obscured in the throng? with Theudas they are ambitious to
be some body, with Simon Magus to be (...). Some knowing or Zealous person,
they would be taken notice of by their neighbors as a stricter sort of livers,
and would be eminent though by the infamy of Schism or separation. To be called
of men Rabbi Rabbi, is inchaunting music to any Pharisee and the very essence
and constitutive parts of a Schismatic is the esteem of himself and the
contempt of others. I am not as this Publican, was the Pharisees voice, whose
very name signifies separation, and our modern separatists do but echo the
same note, when they pronounce these Church assemblies, and the members thereof
heretical or carnal, from whom they withdraw themselves, Esa. 65.5.
they say as those in Esaias Stand of, come not near me, for I am holier then
thou. But let it be remembered that while the Pharisee looked so fastidiently on
the poor Publican, he renounced communion in prayers much more acceptable to
God then his own, and the observation is truly applyable in our case. The
Transcendant purity and Saintship and holiness, which our Separatists boasts
of? being if brought to the touch but a more sublimated wickedness. And their
pretense for spiritually, being only verified in spiritual pride. By their
fruits of rebellion, disobedience to, and contempt of Magistracy and Ministry,
rash censures, malice, evil speakings, and bitterness, headiness, treasons,
high maindedness and the like fruits, you may know them. So this pride is
another partition wall that Satan uses to divide us from God and one another,
and to make men forsake the Assemblies of the Church.

3. It is the manner of some also to forsake them out of curiosity, this is
that baneful weed, which the devil made shift to steal even into Paradise,
which has ever since affected the richest soils, the most pregnant
understandings. I do not altogether mean that speculative curiosity about the
mysterious parts of our religion, though that be a notorious mean also to
propagate Heresies, when men will not be soberly wise, but will attempt to find
out the depths of those mysteries which God has thought fit to make secret;
prying into the Ark of the secret counsels of God. But that curiosity of men
which is usually about those little trifling notions, and thin aerial
speculations, which do not at all tend to make men wiser to salvation. Men are
not content to know those divine truths which tend to Godly practice, therefore
they think such preachers as insist of them, dry and insipid, and forsake them
to follow those, who will offer them nicer speculations, be they never so
unprofitable to the great end of Salvation vide The Decays of Christianity in
the causes of disputes.
. Besides there is another curiosity that is deep in the guilt of drawing men
from the Assemblies, to which they belong. A curiosity to hear strange
preachers, they have itching ears: their ordinary food do not please them, a
new besome sweeps clean, an uncouth bit is for their palates, a Minister of the
best gifts cannot please them long, as the Athenians were all for enquirng of
news, so are these men all for novelties. In a short time, they distaste the
ministry of their ordinary Pastors and so to please the distempered palates of
their fickle souls, they must needs be gadding abroad, to hear every upstart
Mountebank that is near them, and so this is one great reason of their
forsakeing their ordinary assemblies, as the manner of many is.

4. Another reason hereof is covetousness and interest, the great Idol to which
the world bows, as the Apostle says, they that will be rich fall into diverse
temptations; so do they fall into this sin among the rest. Some men will be
rich, therefore out of respect to their profit, they absent themselves from the
Assemblies of the Church, they must needs spend some Sabbaths in going to
Fairs, or going jorneys, or making bargains, or meeting customers, or looking
to some house business, they cannot get their living, they say, by coming to
Church, and when they come they must needs leave a great part of their family
behind them, for some worldly advantage or other. These are like those in
Malachi Mal. 3^4.
That said it is in vain to serve the Lord, and what profit is it that we have
kept his ordinances? And others there be in the world, that make a show of
religion and piety: that have no other end in their broaching and maintaining
Schisms and separations from the assemblies of the Church, then their proper
advantages. They make divinity an handmaid, religion a stalking horse to a
policy. Jeroboam made the Golden Calves become more venerable Deities, when he
found them sit to serve his jealousies, and Matchiavels policy, that states and
persons should secure themselves of religion was a common practice, long before
it was a rule. In the Old Testament we read of mercenary Prophets that turned
the office into a trade, that divined for money, and even for handfuls of
Barley, and pieces of Bread. And in the New St. Paul speaks of deceivers that
speak things they ought not for filthy Lucres sake Titus. 1.11.
. And the same Apostle declaiming against the love of money as the root of all
evil, he reproves it from its having made men err from the faith 1 Timothy 6.11.
. And it is St. Peter's prediction, that the most damnable Heresies, even the
denying of the Lord that bought them, should be introduced by those, who
through covetousness should make Merchandise of their Proselytes 2 Pet. 2.3.
. And is it not plain how men's itching ears in this Age, do invite many
Mountebanks in Religion, to try experiments upon them, when men Nauseats Old
truths, and Old teachers because they are acquainted with them, and embrace
Doctrines and broachers of them because they are new, when men love such
teachers and are bountiful to none but such as they love, how can it be doubted
but some will suit themselves to their disciples humors to gain money to
themselves, when by sowing tares, they can immediately, reap Gold? our age has
given us sufficient experience hereof, would God that this way of divelish
traffic were at an end. And doubtless as there be many leaders, so are there
many Disciples in the separation, in whom covetousness, and self interest
reigns exceedingly, and by it they are animated in their obstinate continuance
in their erroneous ways, so as to stop their ears to the charms of sound
doctrines, charm they never so wisely. Now O that such would consider, what
the character of infamy is, that remains yet upon Achan, that he troubled
Israel to enrich himself. And on Balaam, that he not only loved the ways of
covetousness, but ensnared the people in uncleanness, and upon those in the
Gospel, that made Gods house a house of Merchandise, and so a den of thieves.
So that another ground and reason of men's forsaking, and propagating
separations from our public assemblies. Covetousness, self interest. I Will
name a

5. Even Idleness, and this both spiritual and natural, spiritual for because
many men will take no pains in the practice of the duties of godliness which
might well employ men's whole lives; therefore they fall into nice and new opin
ions to employ their active minds. So spiritual Idleness in things in which
they should be employed makes men curious, and curiosity contentious. The zeal
of practice of humility, and patience, and self denial, and mortifying the
flesh with the affections and lusts, and renouncing the world and the other
parts of real goodness, this zeal grows cold, and so that of disputes gets and
gathers heat and vigor. A lass our good works in this age fall short of the
first Christians, and then no wonder that our controversies exceeds theirs;
because we spend not our time in the one, which is irksome to flesh and blood,
and therefore we employ it in hammering and forging the other. Pharaoh
understood this well, though he applied it ill, when he thought the Israelites
proposals of traveling into the wilderness to their divotions, was the effect
of their idleness, and so increast their taskes as the properest way to divert
their design; and as spiritual Idleness, so also natural, is often the cause of
division. For as experience shows such men as desert or neglect their secular
callings, are most apt to run after new teachers; and with the widows that
neglected their office of Ministration, to be busibodies and in many families
the she-zealots, neglecting their proper business, the guiding of the house,
have therefore run into conventicles, and upon them have seducers acted their
designs most, leading captive silly women to become duck coyes to whole
families, besides these there are another sort of Idle persons to, that can sit
at home, lurk by their fire sides when they should be in Gods house: and
though they have little or nothing to hinder them, from attending his
ordinance, yet any pretense, a shower of rain, a sore finger, an Aching head, a
thin blast of weather will serve the turn to divert them. O that such would
remember Hezekiahs example, who with in three days after he had been sick of a
most painful and mortal disease went into the Temple Esa. 38.22.
. And the woman that on the sabbath resorted to the Synagogue, though she had a
spirit of infirmity eighteen years Luke 13.10, ^1.
. Alas the cause is, men's hearts are dead, and void of grace, and the love of
God and his word, and so they find little comfort, they take no delight in his
public worship, and therefore are glad of an excuse. David loved Gods
tabernacle well. For his heart and his flesh rejoiced for the living God Psa.
84.12
. Those that taste how sweet the Lord is, will desire the sincere milk of this
word 1 Pet. 2.2, 3
. O thou that art so careless whether ever thou appear in the assemblies of
Gods Church in this life, thou have cause to fear thou shall never stand in the
congregation of the righteous in the life to come Psa. 1.5.
. That's a fifth cause of men's forsakeing or absenting from the assemblies as
the manner of many is.

6. There is a sixth which I will name because I will miss none, and but name
it, because I have spoken in effect to it before. The manner of some is to
forsake them, upon pretense, they can spend their time and serve God as well,
pray and read good books at home as in the Church of God. But God loves the
gates of Sion more then all the dwellings of Jacob Psalm. 87.2.
. David sure being both a prophet and a King could serve God as well in private
as any pretenders, and he had both a prophet and a Priest with him in his
Banishment yet did he for all that long for the public worship of God;
bewailed the want of it exceedingly Psalm 84.3.
.

But I have fully shown you before the excellency and acceptableness of public
worship perfo^rmed by Godly ministers together with his people in a public
place, above any private whatsoever, that is a sufficient consideration to
convince them of sin, that forsake the assemblies upon this account, as the
manner of some is.

Thus have I now both discovered the evident duty of all Christians, and their
obligation to frequent the public assemblies in order to the public worship
of God, and the sin of those men, that either upon pretense of corruptions in
the Church, though they acknowledge it Orthodox, and right in the substantials
of religion, or of some faults in the ministers life, or opinion, or gifts, or
carriage, but in truth out of malice or hatred against him, or out of pride, or
curiosity, or Idleness or upon pretense they can as well serve God at home, do
neglect or forsake the public assemblies. Now what remains but a word of
exhortation, to all that have an ear to hear what Gods Spirit says unto the
Churches, and members of them.

1. I beseech you Beloved in the Lord, to learn to lay to heart your obligation
to attend upon Church Assemblies: and beware of those that endeavor the
divisions of the Church, or to divide and separate you from it. It Is the
Apostles own earnest exhortation, Romans 16 17.
now I beseech you brethren mark them which cause divisions and offenses,
contrary to the Doctrine which you have learned, and avoid them. They are no
lovers of your souls as they pretend, they are no servants of God for your
good, they are no fit guides for salvation, that for things merely external,
adiaphorous, and indifferent, matters of mere order or decency, separate
themselves from the society of a true Church, and would have you so to do. As
if a furious brainsick sailor should upon every occasion of anger or
discontent, cast himself overboard, presuming to be safe enough out of the
ship; the ordinary road way of Gods saving any soul is in the unity of the
Church. And that is in a conjunction of them to some visible ordinary
congregation according to that, Act. 2.47.
the Lord added to the Church such as should be saved, but excerunte nobis,
they who go out from amongst us, because they was never of us, as to their
hearts, I will not presume to judge them as to their final state, yet this I Will
say, that the Church being the Spouse of Christ, and Schism and Heresy being a
work of the Flesh, an effect of so bad causes as I have shown you fully, ranked
by the Apostle with fornication, and drunkenness, and adultery, and the like. I
would not dye in their state for all the world; take heed hereof then I beseech
you.

2. But for Church Assemblies, I beseech you labor to love them and delight in
them and be more thankful to God, for the liberty you have to frequent and
enjoy them, than hitherto you have been. Consider the cloud of witnesses that
is gone before you. Prove. 2.20.
Walk in the way of good men and keep the way of the righteous. They have ever
highly esteemed and diligently frequented the Assemblies of the Church. Christ's
Parents being poor dwelt far off Jerusalem, yet did they go up every year to
the passover, which was the most solemn Church Assembly, that Gods people in
those days had. Behold a witness against them that pretend poverty for their
excuse. The Apostles after Christ's ascension were continually in the the Temple
Luke 24.53.
. And Anna the Prophetest, departed not from the Temple but served God, with
prayers and fasting night and day Luke 2 37.
. And the Primitive Christians continued daily with one accord in Temple Acts
2.46.
. Yea, our blessed Saviors custom was to the Synagogue every Sabbath day Luke
4.16
. And did constantly go to every passover at Jerusalem Joh. 2.1 3.
. behold what witnesses you have against those that pretend they have knowledge
and grace enough, they have no need to go to Church, they canno profit by it,
but can as well serve God at home. Hezekiah the King you see resolved so soon
as ever he recovered to go up to the House of God Esai. 38.32.
. David loved the habitation of Gods house, and the place were his honor dwelt
Psalm. 26.8.
. He counted Gods Tabernacles amiable, his soul longed, nay fainted for them
Psalm. 84.12.
. He made it his choice to be a constant companion of them that feared God
Psalm. 19.63.
. He was glad when they said unto him let us go up to the House of God. Behold
what witnesses you have also against those, that being great and rich, take
state upon them, and think it a kind of debasement to be constant in attending
Gods house and service. Let us in the fear of God follow these excellent
examples, and of what ever degree we be, poor or rich, wise or learned, let us
never forsake the Assembles, or neglect them. If we do, we may easily provoke
God to gives up to our own hearts lusts, or to hardness of Heart in sin, or to
the delusion of Satan to believe his lies. And therefore let us prize the
having oppertunities of attending Gods house. Let us count it one of the
greatest blessings that our candlestick is not removed, nor is there a famine
of the word in our days, not is it persecuted, but that we may securely and
openly worship God in our Churches, and Temples, and not, as our miserable fore
fathers, be glad to do it in hills and holes, in Dens and Caves of the earth.
Let us labor to walk worthy of this blessing while we enjoy it; and to
benefit by it, lest we provoke God continually till he be weary of long sufing:
and so he at length destroy his Tabernacle, as a garden, and lay wast our
congregations Lam. 2.6.
Let it be our daily prayer for the continuance of our solemn assemblies, both
here and in all places of our divided land Psalm. 122.6.
. pray for the peace of Jerusalem, They shall prosper that love thee. Thus let
us do, every one, our selves.

3. Nay, let us, according to the latter part of the verse, wherein our text
is. Let us exhort one another hereunto; let every one call upon his neighbors,
and friends, and draw them to frequent the Church assemblies when the Lord had
prophesied, Esa. 2.2.
That in the days of the Gospel, all nations should flow unto the house of the
Lord, he adds ver. 3.
that by this means it should be done. Many people shall go and say: come let
us go up to the house of God. Especially let Masters of Families, and Parents
be exhorted, not to think it sufficient to come to Gods house themselves, but
see that their Children and servants come also. A Godly Christian cannot be
content, that they should attend him in his house, that will not attend and go
with him to Gods house Exodus 20.10.
. you see the commandment runs that we do not only keep the Sabbath our
selves but must look that our Sons, and our Daughters, our men servants, and
our maidservants, and strangers do the same. And Joshuahs piety runs thus. Jos.
24.15.
I and my house will serve the Lord. And David says expressly Psalm. 101.7.
, there shall no deceitful person dwell in my house, no profane contemner of
religion. And Psalm. 42.4.
he speaks of this as one of the greatest comforts he had on earth, that he
went with a multitude of them that kept holy day, and led them into the house
of the Lord, This if we do not, if we walk not after these excellent patterns
and examples, if we do not with cheerfulness go into the Lords Courts, and
serve the Lord with gladness, and come before him with joyfulness; if we do not
account our days and hours precious that are so bestowed, if we be not forward
to take all holy opertunities, redeeming our time from the world, that we may
spend them in these assemblies of Gods people, if we have neither delight nor
appetite to the words and Sacraments, or the duties of praise and invocation,
if we be dull or lumpish, heavy and spiritless in them, if we be not much
agrieved to see or hear of the congregations being unfrequented or neglected;
and glad to see, and quick to promote the frequency and fullness thereof. It is
because we do not understand our own happiness in enjoying the benefit of them.
As Christ said to the woman of Samaria, we do not know the gift of God Joh.
4.10.
. We are sottish and insensible of the greatness of that privilege we may have
in waiting upon the assemblies. And therefore we are so prone to forsake the
assembling of our selves together, as the manner of many is. From which
grievous sin. God of his infinite mercy preserve us, making us evermore to
delight in his house and presence. For Jesus Christ his sake to whom with the
father, and the Holy Ghost be ascribed all honor and glory, might, majesty,
and dominion, now, and for ever more. Amen.

FINIS.

