A BREIFE DESCRIPTION OR CHARACTER Of the Religion and Manners of the
PHANATIQUES In General.

Scil.

ANABAPTISTS, INDEPENDENTS, BROVVNISTS, ENTHUSIASTS, LEVELLERS, QUAKERS,
SEEKERS, FIFT-MONARCHY-MEN, and DIPPERS.
Showing and Refuting their Absurdities by due Application, Reflecting much
also on Sir John Praecisian and other Novelists.

-- Non Seria Semper -- London Printed, and are to be sold by most Stationers;
1660.

The Description of the PHANATIQUES In General.
PHanatiques in general are fancifull men whose tongues are tipped with
Sanctity, and the name of the Spirit is this, that they know not indeed what
spirit they are of as to profession. They are a people much given to dreams
and to take fancies for revelations and eary presumtions for serious
examination of truth.

Their Religion consists much in externe modes and fashions, in adhering to
some party or Faction, in popular and specious insinuations and pretensions, in
admiration of some men's persons, gifts, piety, and supposed Zeal, in
prevalencies of power, in Worldly successes, in verbal assurances, in loose
confidencies of being elected and predestined to happiness, of being called
Saints, Prohets, preachers in a new extraordinary way, in great Zealotries for
some new form or way of constituting discipline, in boldness to affirm or
deny or do any thing, presuming themselves able to do whatsoever they fancy.

Own nothing for religion in any man or any Church which appears not just
after that color, figure and notion which they are taken withal. Many have
little in them, they can fancy or call Religion, but only a fierceness for
that side which they take, a consoriousnesse to all they count not theirs,
brand all they like not with the mark of Antichrist; some of them make every
thing a sin and error, to which they are not inclined; Others count nothing a
sin to which they have an impulse and are free to, as they call it. Some dote
much on select and covenanting congregations; others are only for private
illuminations, solitary seekings, raptures, prophetic accomplishments, etc.
blown up with their own breath and other men's applauses, set off all that is
done in their way with Epithets of rare, holy, Spiritual, divine saint-like
etc. they have such self conceits of their extraordinary gifts and abilityes
that they call their presumtions inspirations, their darkness light, their
dessolute licentiousness, Christian liberty, their fierceness Zeals, self
confidence a divine call, novelties rarities, their opinions perfections,
distractions, raptures, their ravenings, reasons, their dreams oracles; such
specious and gilded idols Teraphims of their own imagination their fancy
forgeth in the shallow plasnes and fowl puddles of their own invention, where
their confused thoughts are oftentimes sooner out of their mouths than in
their minds.

They are mere slovens in their devotions, have no decent peculiar places set a
part for holy uses, would have no heads bare in the Church but what in
reverence to their Enthusiastic Spirit, imitate the unmannerly Hugonots in
France, and preach with their hats on, are content to have their religion
hatched under the wings and seathers of any unclean birds, magnify what is
most dishonest and uncomely in their foolish ringleaders even their ignorance
set off merely with impudence. Wise men find much of these men's religion
deformed with minicall affectations of words, with studied tones, antic
gestures, apish tricks and grimasses scurrulous expresions, much in them is
sulsome brutish tumultuary confusednesse in their duties, all their Zeal
tending merely to profaness, supinesse, fordidnesse and slovenlynesse.

Nothing pleases their clogged stomachs that is old, though never so true
nothing comes amiss if it be dressed up with novelty, they think even religion
it self is never well unless it be set forth in some new mode and fashion, or
unwounted expressions, silly delusions and babilike novelties delighting more
in things gay and new, then good and old; fansiing all reformed, which is but
changed though much to the worse, even old Christianity set on the new block of
faction inplumed with the feathers of popular and passionate fancies, seek to
divide and destroy all ancient forms of Churches that they may new model them
to their popular way of calling, to advance such opinions and practices as no
holy men of old ever knew, acted or owned for Religious, as if no duties,
ceremonies or Sacraments were heretofore holy, primitively or universally
owned, before these new coyners had set up their mints to print their Idol of
new dressed Spirituality and sanctity, would seem wiser, more perfect in their
words and fancies, than either pious antiquity, tradition or scripture; as if
the private fancies, solitary dreams and single imaginations of filly men and
women were now more holy than Oracles.

Believe no Church or religion is sufficiently reformed till they are most
diametrically contrary to every use and custom of the Roman, abhorring many
things as Popish Superstitions, Antichrist because used by Papists, affecting
singularities and choosing rather to fall by standing alone in Separation of
opinion and government than to seem to have any support by the assosiation with
any former Assemblies. You may sooner convert a Jew than make a Phanatique
yield to arguments that cross him: their fancy is the God they worship, faction
is their Heaven, peace their hell, and the Papist, the Divill, they hate; for
all that help them not, they hold Popish. To be plain, so much bran, filth
and Dross of pride, popularity, chisme, malapertnesse, and contempt of all
men, differing in opinion from them, do hitherto generally appear in the
face, and manners of many of those who more affect the name of gifted men and
Prophets than ever the Pharisees did the title of Rabby. They will hardly ever
make such loves as will be sit for shew-bred the corn being ground in such a
new beaten mill, proves full of grit and gravel.

These Histrionick players, and vaporing preachers, in many places, seek to
fill the world with mere noise and clamours, crying down all ancient Religion
as Antichristian, turning all into spiritual and new prophetic gifts, (to
which they highly pretend) like as those cheats and wanderers do, who swear
they have found out and can sell you the true Elixar, the Philosophers Stone
which will turn baser mettalls into gold, while yet (poor men) their rags sords
and beggary sufficiently confutes their rare skill proclaming to all, they more
need others charity then they are any ways able to relieve any man necessities.

Like the Gnostics, they pretend to be as perfect as the Apostles, Like Comets
Exalting themselves in high notions above the ordinary reach of reason, in
spiritual manifestations beyond plain and ordinary Christians, that they are
not easily calculated by common accounts. Covet to be called spiritual who
walk after the flesh, study to cover their follies and hipocrisies with the
Shows of the spirit of God, as if it were not enough to sin against its
manifest rules and examples in Scripture observed by the Church; unless they
impute also unto it their simplicities, fondnesses, impudencies, filthy
dreams, extravagancies and confusions, counting it no shame to ascribe those
unreasonable absurd motions to Gods most wise holy Spirit, which any man of
right reason, common ingenuity and modesty would be ashamed to own. It had it
been better for such not to have known the way of the Spirit in Scripture, far
mor evenial to err for want of the Spirits guidance and light, than to shut
our eyes against it; and to impute it to our errors, dreams, darknesses and
hipocrisies. Its better to have the heart wholly barren then to lay our
adulterous bastards to the Spirits charge; when indeed they are issued of
nothing but pride joined to ignorance, forgeries and glistring novelties set
off with insolence, since neither the temper of their Spirits, nor their works
or words are like the rules, marks or fruits of the holy Spirit of Christ.

They challinge the spirit of Christ in such a plenary measure and power to
themselves, that they justify their want of ordinary abilites and endowments
by their needing none Excusing their not studing or preparing for what they
utter by their being specially inspired, coloring over their well known
idleness, illiterateness, ignorance and emptiness, by the Shows of special
illuminations, sudden inspirations and spiritual inablements. You must not ask
them where are their Miracles? where their Empire over Devils, where their
gift of languages? where their Prophesies? these questions though just to be
put where extraordinary Inspirations are pretended, are too hard for them, be
they never so godly, if you put them one pin above their pitch, they either
crack, or sound like strings overstrained, harshly, and out of tune.

In their pretended Liberty and Levelling Principles, they justify the
flagitiousnesse of their Villainies, as if the zeal they had for Religion
provoked them to such Outrages; then the most crying Injustice must be thought
the highest Justice the most partial Tolleration must be voiced for Christian
Liberty; the grossest Anarchies good Government, and the most Novel and unjust
Cause that ever was, must needs be cried up for the Good Old Cause. The better
to set off their Opinions and Practices, their Retreat is (as Foxes when
eagerly hunted) to earth themselves in This, the Spirit has taught and
dictated those things unto them, or interpreted or revealed the Scripture to
them in this manner, or impulsed and driven them upon such and such ways as
are uncomely and unwonted. This is done with the same Falsity and Confidence as
Mahomet persuaded the credulous vulgar, that his fits of Falling Sickness, and
the device of his Pigeon coming to his ear, where he had accustomed to feed it,
were Monitions and Inspirations he had from God by his Blessed Spirit.

A vacuity with safety may be concluded in their Heads, whose bodies and
Discourse are filled with too much affectation and vain glory, who like Atoms
Volatle and unsettled, justle and whirle up and down without incorporating any
thing but Air. Their Holiness is mere titular and verbal, like Montanists,
Catharists, and Gnostics of old, or the later cruel and rude Phanatiques in
Germany who cried Holy, Holy, Holy, to their parties and factions, as if there
were holy seditions, holy ambitions, holy sacriledges, holy cruelties, holy
ignorances, holy confusions, holy errors, holy Schisms, holy Hypocrisies in
the hearts and spirits of spiritual men. Under these disguises of
extraordinary gifts of the Spirit, Architophel, and Iehu, and Judas, and Simon
Magus, and the Sons of Sheva and Demus, and the self made Prophetess Iezabel,
and Diotrophes, all false Prophets (and Ministers of Satan) studied to appear.

If any prays publicly in matter, words, or method, approved by the practice
and tradition of the Church, it is (they say) but a form and stinting of the
Spirit, if they preach with exactness and Preparation, it is not the Spirit but
Study and Learning: If they read holy Books, it is but a dead Letter, and
Lip-labor if they celebrate the Sacraments with Reverence and Decency, they
quarrel at the Place, or Time, or Gesture or company, or Ceremonies used of
old. If they use the ancient Doxology giving Glory to the Trinity as the
Greeks and Latin Churches ever did, their Socinian and Arrian Ears are so
offended, as if Christians should ask them leave to own the Blessed Trinity, if
any explicateth the Rudiments for Instruction, the Principles of Christian
Religion, continuing summaries of things to be Believed, practiced and Prayed
for, as the Creed, the Ten Commandments, and Pater Noster, these men fancy
them as the Recitation of some Charms, and look upon the Priest as some
Exorcist confined to these Articles of stinted Spells and Forms. If they name
any Apostle, Evangelist or other Christian of undoubted Sanctity with the
Epithet of Saint, they are so scared with the Popes Canonizing Saints, that
they start at the very name so used, as if it were an unsanctified Title not to
be applied to the memory of the Blessed, but only arrogated to some persons
living, who ambitiously call themselves and their party Saints.

If any of these Gloriosoes and New-Illuminates have any competent gifts of
knowledge, as to something of Religion; yet they have commonly something
monstrous odd, extravagant, either vain or Morose, defective or Superfluous,
light or Tetricall, rude or proud, popular or affectated, and after all, the
cry and noise, and glorying of these men's Inspirings, at the best, all amounts
to no more then but a little Ordinary Knowledge, new glossed and painted over;
whose Ignorance, Weakness, and Confusions, will only serve to betray and
destroy Religion and State, but never to defend it, being more offensive then
defensive; fitter for seduction then reduction, to infect then cure. Their
New-Nursery of gifted Brethren and Prophets, are so AEsopick and deformed,
rather fit to scare men from, then to instruct them in Holiness or Pyety, and
by their mere Formalities, extemporary Pratings, and Contempt, to make wide
Gaps and easy Inroads for Superstition and Atheism.

These Pharaohs Dream of none but lean Cattle in the Field of the Church; the
less wool and flesh they have on their backs, the more spiritual they must
needs be; fed by thredbare hunger-starved Teachers, necessitious and whining
pieces of impudent ignorance, crowch and fawn on every plausible Error, on
every powerful Novelty, on every proud fancy and high imagination, prone to
adorn by their gifts some odd opinion, and set it forth as a Divine Truth:
Like Arelius a Painter in Julius Caesar's time, who when he was to paint any
Goddess, corrupted his art by always making them like some of his Mistresses.
They lick the Sores of any men's Conscience, or the Pollutions of any men's
hands, (as they did of Olivers and the Rumps) labor to turn all solidity of
Truth into nothing but Fantastical Whimsies, empty Notions, and sublimity of
Nonsense. Their Affections like the poor woman's Wort, is often hot in the
point of Zeal, when it is very small in point of judgment, and apt to run out
into much disorder and consusion in rusticall impertinencies, and pitiful
Rhapsodies of confused stuff, spitting out their Poison like the Racovian
Catechism, and such like Primers of the Devil, against all Christian Duties,
extern Decency, and distinction of Order or Office; against all Holiness,
Morality, and Modesty in men's Lives.

None of these Rabbis can content themselves with Restraints of Humane or
Divine Laws, or Principles embraced by their Ancestors, they must ever have
some new fangle of Opinion and Practice to make themselves Remarkable; for
these so cried up gifted men and Saints, if they should use the learned helps
of other men's Labors, and add nothing of the Rawness of their own Invention,
or may not seem to say something of themselves (being so full of the Spirit)
like Bladders, would be forced to burst for want of vent. We finding now a
brighter Light, a warmer Heat, a sweeter Influence from these New Parelij, as
Rivalls in brightness to our old Id est Seeming and mock suns, sometime
appearing with the true sun, as in Eng. 1640.
sun, and threatening now to eclipse it, and uttely expel it out of its
ancient Orb and Sphere. O how should we emulate their blessedness? How should
we be ready as Saint John to fall at their feet? To kiss their Footsteps, to
attend their directions, imitate their Examples, participate of tehir Raptures,
to pry into the third Heaven in Apocalyptick Revelations, to all which in word
and fancy they pretend; imagining perhaps (as some say Turks do) of Blind and
Madmen, that they have special Visions because they want their Eyes, and
extraordinary Revelations, because they are destitute of common reason.

Of their Disciples.
Their Proselytes are rather perverted then converted, made theirs by a
factious adherence, by a fiduciary obedience, or fallacious pretensions of the
Spirits Special Motions; whose silliness makes them gentle Spectators, and
obsequious Admirers of any thing that is new to them or above them, easily
admire what they hardliest understand, and who rather may be said to be
Spectators then Hearers of these men's affected gesticulations.

These Brazen Orators venture to entertain their Leaden Auditors, their
Circumcised Proselytes and silly Disciples, (who like Callow Birds gape wide,
and are greedy to swallow any thing which is brought to them) with stuff of
their own proper invention, impreparation, and discomposure. Nothing is
commonly more weak and flashy (like Whites of Eggs without Salt) nothing more
loose, spungy, and unsubstantiall, then what arises from no higher Source then
their own Brain, their sudden and shallow Fancies which (like Rheum easily
swims out of their Mouths, Lips,) pestilently erroneous, nnd fanatically
confused, most unwholesome and unsavory Medleyes of filthy Fashoods, desperate
Doctrines tempered as the Rats-bane of Old Heretics (which Tertullian tells us
of) was wont with some mixtures of Scripture Texts, some light Inspersions of
truth to make them appetitious, passable, and toothsome, with their at first,
may be, squeamish Disciples, who by little and little (as Mithridates) wonting
themselves to nibble and sip of Poisons, come to that confidence that they
venture to quaff up any Draughts, who by these great Doses of Mercury, occasion
rather Palsies then any Steadiness in the Understanding, by rendering it more
bold then Rational. And the only Antidote these wretched Hearers have against
those or the like poisons of Souls, is no other, but their Custom of drinking
of such horrid and abominable Liquors, whose Venom has so stupefied their
Consciences, that they are past all feeling and sense, either of sin, shame,
or sorrow.

The large Phylacteries of pretended preaching Gifts, of high Expressions of
Zeal, which these men so Pharisaically set forth to the vulgar view, by which
these cunning Quakers seek to lose the eyes of their Spectators in clouds of
Obscurities and Uncertainties, and the Vulgar once dazeled with the glistering
flashes of Pretended Inspirations, Enthusiasmes, and Seraphick Dictates; once
in this maze in the wood of these strange Speculations, those unwonted Notions,
those pretty Legerdemaines in Religion (which Fanatic juglers study more then
solid- Piety) are not able to know where they are as to Religion, nor find out
Truth to lead them out of that Fools Paradise. Poor people being dosed with
Novelties, (as Larkes with dazeling Glasses) picking up Curiosities, or gazing
at Sublimities, or dubious in uncertainties, or entangled with Subtilties, (as
Dear in acorne time, forget their food,) grow lean and fall into diverse
Snares and Temptations, into many Lusts and Passions; many as leaves from Trees
in Autumn, every day drop away and dye in their Mazes and Labyrinths of
Religion, wearying themselves in intricate Difficulties, as some vain and
Lunatic Christians, who busy themselves more how to interpret the
Revealation, then to understand the clear Precepts of the Gospel, advancing no
more in Religion then Birds in a Cage, or blind Horses in a Mill. Thus weak
Proselites being easily deluded and gulled, biassed and swerved with fair
words, specious pretenses, and partial Interests; especially if their Novel
Paedagogues have any show, smack, or tincture of more than ordinary godliness.
The most serious endeavors of these serious men being to captivate the
Ignorant beholders. So trade in nothing but Apes and Peacocks, Pageants of new
opinions, like Pedlers of Religion vend their Toys, Ribands, and Phanatique
Rattles, till the Country gaping be a little over, and the gloss of Novelty
faded away.

Of their Calling and Ordination.
They pretend and fancy to be stamped with the mark of Popular Ordination,
obtrude themselves in crowds, in illiterate heaps, without a Call from God or
man, but rather from the Countreymans Whistle, or armed man's Trumpet; think it
all one power enables them to make a Minister or Priest, which makes a Mayor,
Bailiff, or Constable. They take the liberty to separate themselves from the
Clergy, and by a mutual Call of one another to jugge themselves like
Partridges into small Coveys, which they call Bodies or Churches, even before
they have any Minister, whom they resolve to have out of their own choosing and
ordaining, that they may be sure to have him after their own humor. They may
be as well their own Preachers and Baptizers one after another, as ordain of
themselves any one to be, and exercise that power which they presume to give to
another; which they cannot do, if they have not the power themselves. What
sorry choice do you think they make? How weakly do they examine Sufficiencies?
how wildly ordain him? what sad and slovenly hands do they impose upon them?
what crooked blocks do they hew to be their Mercuries? what I dols do they set
up to be their Shepherds, who can neither see nor hear, or rightly understand
any Mysteries of Religion?

They are a People rather taken with a familiar rusticity in a Minister, than
with the learned Abilities; prefer a Mechanic before a Divine; judge not what
is worthiest, but what is fittest to their fancies) receiving more willingly
one that comes in his own name as gifted, or in their name as chosen and
ordained by them, than if he come in Christ's Name, sent by his Vicegerents.

Such tumors and inflamed swellings they have of their abilities and
self-conceited sufficiencies, that they think themselves at the first instant
fitted for every work of the Sanctuary: their gifts, knowledge, and utterance
are qualifications sufficient for them to challenge the right of ordination or
public Ministry, they need no other patent or Commission. So they will be
ploughing and sowing when they are not apted to break the clods, and harrow the
seed, and this self-sowing comes like to that which springs on the house top,
whereof the mower shall never fill his hand, nor he that binds up the sheaves
his bosom. Like Apes in the Fable, fancy they can build as brave houses,
Cities, or Churches, as the ablest men; but when they come to the Wood, they
have not so much as Saws or Axes, or any tools to begin the work withal.

Alas those poor, but proudly gifted men, these serious people (as they term
themselves) who spread so large sails, hang out such fair streamers; and seek
to make so good a show to the vulgar simplicity, as if they were strong built,
well rigged, and richly laden Vessels, fit to endure those rough Seas and
storms to which truth is frequently exposed; are easily judged by all wise and
learned Christians to be but light keels and flat bottomed boats, by their
floating so loftily, by their running so boldly over any shelves and rocks of
opinion; which shows they have not the due Ballast, weighty Knowledge, and
sound Judegment, the want of which makes them so foolhardy, apt to be tossed
to and fro with every wind of Doctrine,; so prone to grow leaky, either
letting in under water secretly corrupt and brackish opinions, or shipping in
above deck openly and boldly whole Seas of any finister and worldly interests
that are abroad the storms, and waves and confusions of civil affairs. And so
by popular precipitances and licentious extravagancies, are the likeliest to
overthrow and bring all Christianity, by Catholic and Mohammedan Methods, in
Atheism, illiterature, confusion and barbarity: for as they have the least
skill, so have they the most passion and unbridled violence, and least able to
distinguish between the Use and Abuse of things. Whence I gather that saying of
a wise man to be most true, That it is better in Churches, as well as in places
of Civil Power, to prefer corrupt men, than weak and foolish men; the one is as
a thief in a Vineyard, who will only take ripe Grapes till he is satisfied;
the other is as an Ass, eats ripe and green, crops the Vines, treads down much
with his heels, and when his belly is full tumbles amongst them.

To Civil Affairs its likely their spirit prompts them as much to be meddling:
but there they know how to keep their spirit in better order, being overawed
with evident danger attending tumultuary motions. None of those fiery Zealots
are powerfully enough moved to usurp any place in the Privie-Council, to
arrogate the Office or Authority of an Agent or Ambassador, or set himself in
the Seat of Justice uncommissioned; or to intrude into any place Military or
Civil, without warrant from other than their own spirits: though their pride
and ambition may whisper them in the ear, they better dispatch businesses, do
exacter Justice and speedier, than any in Authority; yet the danger of penalty
of intrusion cows their Zeal, curbs their heady spirits, and cuts their combs:
nor are they often so valiant as to act by their pretended impulses in any way
but where they think there may be safety.

Of their Learning.
To speak of their Learning, or rather ignorance, I am ashamed to shame them so
much, if I should show the world their emptiness, shallowness, penury,
nothingness, as to Reason, Religion, Learning, or common Sense: how gross,
confused, flat, insipid, affected they are in speaking or writing? how dark in
Doctrine? how disorderly in Disputes? how impatient in reproof? what perfect
Battologists they are, what circles they make, and rounds they dance in
prayings and sermonings, strong only in railing, cavilling, and calumniating.
How do their pamphlets cheat the buyers with the decoy of some very specious
and spiritual Title, and amuse the Readers with shows of rare notions, as all
were Manna and Aarons Rod in their Ark, when there is nothing but Mice and
Emrods, spurious, hypocritical, and damnable dogmata, strangely mutilating and
deforming ancient Theology in its Morals, Mysteries, and Speculations.

Not a dumb spirit, but a silly, prating, illiterate one possesses them. They
would be counted Apostolical, yet are so far from the gift of tongues,
miracles, knowledge, etc. that they are scarce masters of their own mother
Tongue, neither knowing for the most part what they say, nor whereof they
affirm, nor able with modesty, charity, gravity and humility, to bridle or use
their tongues. They cry out against all humane Learning and Studies, all
Liberal Arts and Sciences, against all Books but the Bible, against the Schools
and Universities, as heathenish and Antichristian, marks of the Beast, as
deformities and impertinencies (where we have Scripture Light) prejudicial to
that immediate Divine teaching to which they pretend, and by which they learn
and teach all true Religion, which needs not any of those rags and additional
tatters of humane learning.

These witless Lack-Latine Zealots, tell their Proselytes and silly Auditors,
that Latin and Greek are the Languages of the Beast, persuade Christians to
burn all Books, that they better understand the Bible, and the Bible too, that
they may better understand the mind of God; which is all one as if the
Israelites should have been persuaded to have rid themselves of the cumber of
their Swords, Spears and Shields, that so they better defend themselves.

Christ did not disdain to converse with the Learned Doctors and Rabbis of his
time, amongst whom he was found after his parents had sought him sorrowing: yet
our wanderers and seekers are loath to seek him, afraid to find him, disdain
to own him among the Learned, lest in so doing, they should seem to confess
they had lost Christ and true Religion in their illiterate Conventicles and
ignorant presumptions.

These great sticklers against Learning confute their own Principles, their
folly falls on themselves, for their despair of learning, makes them despise it
in others; Lucifer-like they pretend light and intend darkness; cry up the
spirit, which is easily done, that they may cry down learning, which is
hardlier attained. But O how do they seriously triumph and rejoice when any man
that is but a smatterer of Learning, and smells a little of the pen and
inkhorn, seems to adhere and lean to them, and stickles for their party and
faction, deceived with their shows of godliness and inspirations. O how do they
prick up their ears, and march then with greater courage (as the Hares did when
they had got a Fox to lead them, in whom they thought was more strength and
cunning than their own fearful feebleness could be guilty of:) even so these
bunglers in reason, wresters of Scripture, and hucksters of Religion, do find
fault with those tools which they have no skill to use, and like cowards
quarrel with those Weapons as unlawful, which they most fear and least resist.
As Apes, who knowing their own uncomely want of tails, would be glad if they
could bring it in fashion for all Beasts to have none, or persuade them to cut
off (as burdens and deformities) those postern ornaments of the body wherewith
nature has furnished the nobler, comelier, and stronger creatures.

What would these illiterate furies give to have indeed such an Illumination as
might in one night make them as learned and able in all points as the Scotists,
Thomists, Sorbonists, and other learned men are, who detect these Mountebancks,
discover these deceitful workers, and set these cheats in the Pillory of
public infamy, to lose their ears, at tandem male audiunt qui male dicunt and
agunt, paring their under nails, and muzling the bolder jaws of this ferine
faction of these desperate and degenerate Christians, who like Balaams beast,
or as horse and Mule being without understanding, are ready to fall upon those
that are fit to be their Masters and rulers both in Church and State. Who
instead of sound learning, have confident ignorance, or fraudulent and
flattering errors or factious semblances of truth to usher in damnable and
Heterodox Doctrines, and in lieu of excellent literature, have only the three
distempers at height which Sir Francis Bacon (in his advancement of learning)
observed to be in most men fantastickness, contention and curiosity, by
imagination, altercation, and affectation.

First, Comparing themselves with themselves, they fancy they grow holier, as
they grow bolder in their opinions and actions: hence they are easily flatered
into high imaginations, and cheated with strong presumptions, as if some common
gifts of knowledge, some skeptical quickness, some volubility of utterance,
some scriptural expressions which they have attained beyond their former selves
or equals, were rare, immediate, and special gifts of the spirit. Then because
they should seem no body if they carry their small wares in an old pack, they
invent some new fashion of Religion, or model of Church Way they fancy most.
Then follow those quick Emotions and stirrings upon their spirits (which have
the quickening only of self in them) these are presently cried up for motions,
manifestations, excitations, and impulses of Gods Spirit on them. Then they are
moved to extraordinary heats, and irregular vehemencies, and illegal
irregularities, as counterfeit possessed are. These fond conceits of their
improvements and perfections, makes them, like careless children, forsake the
lap of their mother before they can stand by themselves, and think themselves
Sophies before they arrive to be Sophisters; or fit Pilots to steer the Ship of
the Church, when they are very mean Skippers and Skullers.

The varity of their conceits, mixtures and inventions, first kindle with
modest sparks, as if they would enlighten, warm, and refine Religion; but after
they have got to them vulgar fuel, they arise to such dreadful flames and
conflagrations, as threaten to consume all that was ever built before them.
Poor men, thus once puffed up with their timpanies and self-conceptions, having
once over-looked their first errors, they never after have leisure, patience or
humility, to discern the gross yet secret distempers which are in their
spirits, the many distinctions, disguises and windings, by which worldly
passions and interests slily creep in, and concealedly work in their hearts,
even then most secretly (and so most dangerously) when under this blind of Gods
Spirit, when the Lord shall be entitled to their whole plot and project of
their follies and furies.

Doct.
Trace them a little farther in their Doctrine, and you will find them to
tread much awry. They are a People taught to be tumultuary against you, and
imperious upon you. Teach that evil of sin may be done, that public good may
come thereby.

They permit divorces in slight causes, affect parity and reject Tithes as
superstitious and judaical; they admit private men to administer the
Sacraments; and in some places commit the power of the keys to women; in
preaching they will not be tied to any Text, nor in praying to any Form; in
communicating they sit at Table, or have no Table at all; and because they
would not seem too superstitious in the time of administration, they are
covered. They love not the old names of Churches (which they slightly call
Steeple Houses,) of the days of the week, of the months of the year, of
Christmas, Michaelmas, Candlemas, etc. in their Almanacks all Saints days must
be obliterated, alias their pious (but mendacious Prognosticator) William Lilly
had not so long kept sanctity with them.

They are afraid to meddle with any thing that ever passed the Popes fingers,
except only the Lands and Revenues of the Clergy; leave nothing to maintain
Religion or its Ministry, but the scraps of arbitrary and grudging
Contributions: Like Don Quixots and Knights-Errant, have so many Romances,
forms, and idaea's of Religion in their heads, which makes them admirable but
not imitable; have such ferocious spirits like pampered horses whom no ground
will hold, neighing after novelties, and give way to long-winded extemporary
specious nonsense above the common capacity. If any wise man comes to hear
them, he soon finds them as dark and dusky as if they had been begotten in the
eclipse of the Sun, and born in the last quarter of the Moon. The heat of these
Rotomontadoes by their overcharged and ill-discharged zeal, usually breaks it
self in sunder in its abettors, assistants and spectators, with such enchanting
Opinions that they make God the Patronizer of their Villainies, Murders,
Tyrannies and Treasons, and boast how clearly it might appear God owned their
Cause and disowned their Adversaries, urging Gods permissions against his
Precepts and Institutions, as though Gods toleration of evil, heresies,
schisms, disorders, etc. did justify them against his Word and Church that
forbids them. Pretend the Spirit to be Patron of their most extravagant
fancies, the deviser of their most incredible opinions, and dictator of their
most indemonstrable dreams and new revelations.

They like no humble, sober, and exact ties of conscience, and duties of true
Religion, by which holy men in all ages have given diligence to make sure their
calling and election, to work out their salvation with fear and trembling, by
repenting, fasting, watching, prayer, by judging and condemning their sinful
self, by mortification and self-denial, coming to the Cross of Christ, taking
it up, and bearing it to all patient sufferings. These are harder disciplines,
rougher severities, stricter Doctrines of piety, than our delicate Novelists,
our gentle Enthusiasts, our triumphing Libertines, our softer Saints, can
endure, who contrary to the examples of good old Christians and Martyrs, glory
not in crosses but in Crowns, not in buffets but in raptures, not in being
counted sinners, but Saints, not in self-denyings, but in self-interesses, not
crucified to the world, but crucifiers of the world, not suffering from the
world, but triumphing in the world.

They are in fancy as the Argonautae bringers of the golden Fleece, the Riches
of Righteousness of Christ, the Treasures of Heaven, the true Gold of Ophir,
pretending that God is their Father, that they are Saints and spiritual
inspired Prophets, sent of God to call the world to repentance, to reign with
Christ, etc. in such conceited confidencies, proud hypocrisies, soft fallacies,
rotten sensualities, libidinous excrescencies, like Estrike birds, set forth
their soft and gay feathers (having but little bodies but less brains) by
wandering from their nests, their Shops and Looms, Thimbles and Bodkins (the
stations wherein most of them have been bred up) and from which they have no
sufficient rule from God or man to move them, having at the best but very
moderate gifts, not tried or approved by any wise men, but only blown up by
the pitiful applauses of some silly men and women, with levity, gapings,
swellings, hollowness, crookedness, and weakness.

These curious Speculatists recite may be by rote some raw and fejume Notions
and disorderly Meditations (which weak men call prophesying) with much error,
froth, and vanity, incident to these self-ostentations of Gifts, which have
more of the tongue than heart or head, and often times resemble more the Player
than the Preacher. Narcissus-like, they are so deluded with the flattering
echo's of their silly admirers, and so taken with their own fashion in such
false glasses, that they are like to dote till they die, and starve themselves
as to all real sufficiencies, by the fond imaginations of how great they have,
and their ignorance of how much indeed they want.

Much of these men's temper and opinion, and after the same riotous fashion, was
that ignorant and abominable rabble of the Circumcelliones (a subsection of the
Donatists) who were wont to ramble idly up and down like squibs with fire and
force, till after great ostentations of piety and devotion, and zeal for
martyrdom, calling themselves duces Sanctorum, Captains of the Saints, and
Contenders for the Faith: they fell at length to pilfering, then to plundering
and wasting whole Countries, opposing in an hostile manner the Vicegerents of
the Emperor Honorius; at length were by him destroyed.

Religion, Perjury, innocent bloodshed and Sacrilege, are drawn on by them
like straight and pinching shoes at first, with the shooing-horn of Religion
and Reformation, with antipathies against Idolatry and abhorrencies of
Superstition: and the better to set off their skill, they make, as Herod, most
artificial Speeches, mixed with preaching and praying; and sprinkling of
Scripture, and Gods Cause; or as Mountebanks, make large haranges, specious and
popular Orations, as gilded bitter pills to give the better Gusto. In this wise
these Hucksters and Cheats of Religion (as the Magicians of Egypt) sometimes so
enchant and delude poor credulous souls, that they believe all that comes from
them to be miraculous; abusing or changing glowworms for Stars, counterfeit
with cropped opinions, and round-headed Tenants with full weight of Christian
Doctrine, still cogging with religious dice, and cheating with plausible
Fallacies (seemingly brought out of Scripture) until poor Believers, like the
bewitched Galatians, Gal. 3.
have lost all or most of their true faith and belief. Yea some of these
Impostors do not leave poor Christians whom they have cozened with fair shows
of the Spirits revelations and new Gospels, so much true faith as to believe
the Articles of Christian Doctrine. And for the better color, some of them
pretend to set up (as John of Leyden did) the Kingdom of righteousness, the
Throne and Scepter of King Jesus: Yet this is but a decoy to entrap the vulgar;
for who will not seem willing to submit to Christ's Kingdom? But we are better
taught than to expect his Kingdom to be of this world. Joh. 18.16.
-- But afterward when their phanatick power comes to be Paramount, you will
find no such lenities and gentle salves, then in popular Proposals and
levelling Principles with Goliabs of uncircumcised enormities, they are much
for a new Paracelsian practice, unexperienced Applications, and Chemical
Extractions; then with the Sword of blood they can be merry in peoples
miseries, with, Populus vult decipi decipiatur, like Muncer and Knipperdoling,
Hacket and Arthington.

These presumptious Phaetons never think they enlighten the Church enough,
unless they set Kingdoms and States on fire. Accoring to the method of those
rare cures they sometimes wrought in Germany about the year 1530. by the
slaughter of an hundred thousand people, in the Anabaptist and phanatique ways
of mutiny and rebellion. To be short, in the first broachings, and after
drawings forth of their new Doctrine, projects and inventions, the Authors of
them more look upon men than God, how it may suit with secular aims and
interests, than the practice of Antiquity. Like the Hantons of the Swisse
become willing upon the least apprehension of advantage to plant the same
Engines and weapons against the wrong side as the right. And their late minted
Doctrinals verminly bred out of the putrefactions of men's brains, and the
corruptions of the times, serve in some sort to scratch itching ears to some
tune of liberty, pleasures, profit or preferment; while they clamor like
Demetrius and his Accomplices, in his pannick fears for his silver and Diana,
where he considered more his gain than his Goddess.

Some, though fiery, yet are orderly and patient in Government; though they
excel in gifts, yet are not swelled with tumors; but these are as unsavory
salt, that is good for nothing, unless it be new boiled in an Independent or
levelling Cauldron, over a Socinian furnace with a popular fire: they are
proud, forward and presumptuous, like the Giant who presumed of his vast limbs
and extraordinary number of his fingers and toes, sc. 24. have such
extraordinary excrescencies, which exceed men's noses, or blind their eyes;
sometimes swelling bigger than their heads. Being drunk with their own fancies,
sometimes reel and stumble upon notions metaphysical, which vainly puff them
up, while they are still Wells without Water, deep, but dark and dry in their
profound follies and profane nicities. Or clouds without moist exhalations,
carried with the tempests of passion and high presumptions, above the plain and
practical way of true Christians, and indeed above the proportion and sphere of
their Gifts and Parts.

A little goes a great way with these illiterates in their supposed
inspirations, and where they cannot go far on, they go round in circling
tautologies, snarled repetitions, intricate confusions, which are still the
same skains of thread which other men have handsomely spun and wound up in
better method and order, which these men have neither skill nor patience to
unfold, but pull out here a thread and there an end, which they break off
abrubtly, to the confounding of all method, order, and proportion, Divine or
Moral.

In their new Models of Independent, levelling, quaking, and anabaptistick
scabious Congregations, they fold up the curtains of the true Church so short
and narrow, to such small figures, and obsure Conventicles and Paucities, that
they will scarce allow the whole company of true Christians in the world to be
so great as would fill one Jewish Synagogue; being (as Pygmalion with his
Image) enamoured with their corpusculoes, the little Flock and new Bodies of
their Churches, or rather meeting-places, shutting themselves up into some
blind corners, and confining Christian Religion to obscure Cells and silly
Assemblies where in stead of the Suns fair light of true Reason, good
Learning, and sound Religion, men should like Owls and Bats, and Moles, only
howl, chatter, and foratch one another in the dark. They are the kind of
Animals which curse the day, cannot abide the light, because their eyes are
weak, their works are dark, and both minds and manners are depraved.

Having presented them to you in gross, I will now give you them in their
Anatomy. They are a fond and fraudulent, pusillanimous and frothy Generation of
vaperers; Plagiaries who infect the common air of Christian Charity, Order and
Peace; bring forth out of the rude mould of their own invention, nothing but
disorder: they are the left Band of Babels Builders, fit Instruments to divide,
confound, and destroy, but never to plant and cultivate; whose lips never yet
dropped like Hermon so much as a dew of sweet and wholesome knowledge on any
place. They are a riotous, promiscuous and incomposed rabble, a swarm of
ignorant Quacks, preaching Mountebanks of the rude and vulgar, of no value,
Mohammedan Juglers, religious Monopolizers, pious Impostors, devout Devils,
angelized Satan's, sanctified Demons, Bells and Dragons of phanatique Divinity,
as the cheating Pontifs of the heathen gods and Oracles, sit still in their
lazy and unlearned ignorance, expecting miraculous illuminations and
assistancies, like seiled Pigeons, the less they see, the higher they soar in
airy, light, and high-flying fancies, as moon-ey'd horses, whose light follows
the flux of reflux of the mad Planet, blaunch and start more by day than night.

There are (says Plato in Timaeo) two diseases of the soul, Madness and
Ignorance: madness is from the abounding with pride and passion; ignorance,
from the want of knowledge and instruction; those men are infected with both
distempers. For they are a People given over to dementation and astonishment,
blindness and madness, to seek after and trust in lying vanities and desperate
hypocrisies, to rest in the flattery of vulgar successes; who think every one
that prospers a Saint or good Angel, and every one that is unfortunate a Devil
or great Offender, as the Barbarians did S. Paul when the Viper seized upon his
hand and he shook it off unhurt. They judge of Spiritual Gifts by bare and
barren forms, by soft insinuations and expressions, by melancholy sowreness,
pharisaical frowns, bold assertions, audacious adventures, and successful
insolences. Fly to their enchantments, by using much Scripture expression, by
following popular sermonings, hasty assurances, uncharitable despisings, by
affecting an odd kind of canting way of writing and speaking: Pretending to
Sanctity, through Reformation, and advancing the Kingdom of Jesus Christ; to
Raptures, Enthusiasmes, holy Convulsions, and Revelations, and such like
quaking and quacking tricks: conjuring up strange hopes, fears and jealousies,
like so many Ghosts and Goblins to scare and amaze the common people.

Like Ambulatory Arabs and wandering Scythians, they must every week or month
change their quarters, to vend their transcendent and damnable Doctrines,
transferring diseases like the running gout from one part to another, more
dangerous than the plague or epidemical malady, breathing out nothing but ashes
and cinders, like Visuvius and Aetna, whose eruptions are vastutions to all
near them. They are fit to be followers of Goths and Vandals, or listed with
Jack Cade or Watt Tyler, or Subjects to John Bowld a Tailor of Leyden, who
assumed the Title of Rex justitiae hujus mundi, King of Justice of this world.
Or to John Williams the last King of Sion and of this mad tribe, who had at
once twenty wives; and wore by his side the great Gideons Sword sent him from
Heaven, as he gave out: who exhorted his Subjects and Brethren the Phanatique
Anabaptists to look upon all other Nations and Religions, as the Israelites did
upon the Cananeans and others of the Land of Promise: but at length he was
burnt at Clave, Anno 1580.

You may find these modern Knipperdolings amongst the Hierarchy of
handycraftsmen, in the Kingdom of the fifth Monarchy men, at the
meeting-places of James Naylor the late Separatist, amongst the Rumps mourners,
or the scattered separate bodies of the late decimo sexto edition, or in the
Court of Justice they lately erected in Ireland, from whence they have driven
the Gentry and Nobility, and extirpated the Natives. They were a Phanatique
livery composed of self-confidence, intolerable boastings, of sequaciousness,
of feminine softness, of lying Prophecies, of violent Zealotries, of swelling
excrescencies, and loud clamours and empty noises of reformation. They have a
head composed of the threads of Faction, and wear a long sword of destruction;
you may easily know them by the gogle of their eye, by their pale and wan
looks, by the queint device of their groaning devotion, by the counterfeit
current of their sanctified tears, by their godly way and zeal, which lately
made them aspire to the Pulpit, and renounce the awle and the anvill, and set
up a new Exchange for Religion at the charges of the honest party. To conclude
my Anatomy, I will epitomize them in a line or two more.

They are mothy and moungril Predicants, Centaures in the Church, half Clericks
and half Laics, the by-blows of the Clergy, gifted hypocrites, severe
Momasses, a whineing people, tribolary Christians, new dwindling Divines, the
prophetical Pigmies of this age; unordained, unblest, untried, unclean spirits,
whose calling, commission, and tenure depends on popularity, flattery and
beggary; their excellency consists in tautologising, in praying ex tempore,
that is, out of all time, without order or method; being eminent in nothing
above the Plebeian pitch and vulgar proportion. They spin out their Sermons at
their wheels, or weave them up at their looms, or dig them out with their
spades, weigh or measure them in their shops, or stitch and cobble them with
their Thimble and Lasts; or thrash them out with their Flayles, and afterward
preach them in some Barn to their dusty disciples; who the better to set off
the oddness of their silly Teachers, fancy themselves into some imaginary
persecution, as if they were thus driven into dens and caves, and woods. Their
holy and learned Academies, where they first conned this chemical new Divinity,
and are since come to so great proficiency, were Munsters Revelations, Geneva's
Calvinism, Amsterdams Toleration, and New-Englands Preciseness.

Their Plantation sprung first from the putrified part of John Calvin, who
being branded with Heresy and Sodomy in his own Country of Picardy, retired
to Angolesme, where he went by the name of Deparcan; there he copied his
Institutions, stealing the greatest part out of the Works of Melancton and
Hiperius Sarcerius; or as Westphally the Lutheran says, he stole all from
Oeclampadius. Thence he went to Germany, and came at length as in regression to
Geneva. Where this our headless (yet fancifull) Monster by Sir John was
begotten on an Elders Maid, and afterward impt upon the stocken of Schism by
Knox and Buchanan, and brought up after the reformed fashion of the Scotch
Kirk, for propagation of the Gospel and better reformation, creeping into this
Nation, and thus multiplied and increased by the phanatique lechery of the
lascivious Rump-Parliament and Olivers Redcoats.

They are crafty enough to do evil, but to do good they have no knowledge or
honesty; they have hands active enough, but corrupt and base ends; secular
interests wrapped up under specious pretensions of piety. Like Watermen, while
they look one way they row another. They abuse Learning to abett Errors; and
Religion, to color hypocrisy; and the name of the Spirit, to indulge the
flesh; and Heaven, to carry on earthly designs. They mistake anger for zeal,
dreams for revelations, memory for conscience, Enthusiasms for Prophesies; to
wave flattery they fall into incivility; and to avoid pride, into baseness.
They are worthy of themselves, and wiser men's pity. If they have truth enough
to save any man, they have uncharitableness enough to damn any Angels.

These Lines perfectly describing all or most of our Fantasticks in general, I
remit their particular opinions to more particular Remonstrances, this very
Relation being a sufficient Confutation.

FINIS.

