BRIEF OBSERVATIONS UPON THE VINDICATION OF THE Trinity and Incarnation, By the
Learned Dr. W. Sherlock.
THE Notes upon the Creed of Athanasius have been already printed by
themselves, and were received and approved by several Learned Men, both of
London and in the Country. Dr. Sherlock has thought fit to oppose to them a
large Book, in which at Page 142. he says, My Undertaking is to vindicate the
Athanasian Creed, and the Doctrine of a Trinity in Unity.

Yet in this Vindication, he has given up to his Adversary, all the ancient
Defenses of this Creed and of the Trinity, on which his Predecessors in this
Controversy, were wont to insist; and has advanced in their room, an Hypothesis
or Explication, never so much as named or heard of before. He pretends to salve
by these two words, Self-consciousness and Mutual-consciousness, all the
Difficulties of this Great Mystery; so sufficiently and evidently, that the
Notion of a Trinity in Unity, is now (He says) as clear and easy, as that of
but One God. But this is too much for any Man to take on his bare word, or
without carefully examining what He has said.

1. Concerning the Divine Substance, Nature, or Essence: for in this Question
these are Equivalent Terms, both with the Vindicator, and with the Author of
the Notes. 2. How does he describe the Three Persons; and how is each Person
one with it self; and how are they distinguished each from other. 3. How are
they united with one another; and how do they All make one God.
First; Concerning the Divine Substance, or Essence, or Nature.
In his Discourses concerning the Divine Substance, or Essence; the Vindicator
seems sometimes to be a perfect Hobbist; to deny all Spiritual and Immaterial
Substance; or that there is any other Substance but Matter, or Body.

He says (for example) at Page 69. We can frame no Idea of Substance, but what
we have from Matter. When we conceive of God as a Substance (he says there) We
find it impossible to conceive, how there should be Three Divine Persons,
without Three distinct Infinite Substances. -- A Person and an Intelligent
Substance are Reciprocal Terms; and therefore Three distinct Persons, are Three
distinct Numerical Substances; and one Numerical Substance, is but one
Numerical Person. He says, that these are all Carnal Reasonings, which arise
from our conceiving of God as a Substance; of which we can have no Idea, but
what is Material. He concludes in the same place, and often elsewhere, We must
not seek for any other Substance in God, but Infinite Power, Wisdom, and
Goodness. But as if he had been a little too liberal in that, he says at P. 72.
Wisdom and Truth are the true Nature and Essence (or Substance) of God. He
often exhorts his Reader, particularly at P. 70. To set aside all these
Material Images of Essence and Substance; and to contemplate God as Eternal
Truth and Wisdom, and then the Notion of God is very plain and easy. He adds at
P. 138. That which has confounded this Mystery (of the Trinity) has been the
vain Endeavor of reducing it to Terms of Art, such as Nature, Essence,
Substance, Subsistence, Person, Hypostasis, and the like.

He presumes to say at P. 139. The Fathers nicely distinguished between
Hypostasis or Person, and Nature, or Essence, or Substance; saying, that there
are Three Persons, and but one Nature or Essence, or Substance. But then, when
Men curiously examined the Signification of these words, they found, that upon
some account or other, they were unapplicable to this Mystery. For what is the
Substance and Nature of God? How can Three distinct Persons have but one
Numerical Substance? What is the distinction between Essence and Personality?

Now I ask, Is this to vindicate the Athanasian Creed, as the Doctor undertook
to do; or to slight and overthrow it? The chief business of the Athanasian
Creed, is to distinguish between the Substance and Persons in God, to show that
the Persons are Three, and the Substance but One. The Vindicator could not have
more effectually given up the Catholic Doctrine to the Note-maker, than by
thus frequently denying, there is any real Divine Substance at all (which is
more than his Adversary required, and than he will accept) and by saying, Men
have unduly used these Terms by their applying them to God. The pretense of the
Brief Notes is no other, but what the Vindicator (we have seen) often grants:
that there is no difference between Substance and Person in God; and that
therefore Three Divine Persons and One Divine Substance is a senseless
Contradiction.

But then it is as senseless to deny the Divine Substance, and to reduce the
whole Notion of God to Wisdom and Truth; for these are Properties that cannot
subsist, but in some Substance. Nor do I think, that the Trinitarians will
forgo their old Explications, by Persons and Substance; for the Doctor 's new
Wind-mills of Self-consciousness and Mutual-consciousness. They will certainly
abide by the Nicene and Athanasian Creeds, which suppose a Real Divine
Substance, in which do subsist Three Divine Persons. It will be always Heresy
with them, to deny Homo-ousios, or that Christ is of Like and Equal Substance
with the Father.

I must not dismiss the Consideration of the Vindicator's Doctrine, about the
Divine Substance, without noting, that his Contradictions to himself, are as
frequent as his Heterodoxies. For tho he has spoken so often, so expressly, and
so much, against Substance and Persons in God: yet when the Metaphysical Humor
is upon him, he talks of these, as of most Certain and Real Things. He says at
P. 47. The Three Persons are Three Real Substantial Beings. And again, The
Three Persons are substantially distinct. Now this is to say, the Three Persons
are Three distinct Substances: for that is the only possible meaning of, Three
Real Substantial Beings, substantially distinct. Thus God at last is not only a
Substance, but he is Three Real distinct Substances. This was the Heresy of
Valentinus Gentilis, that the Three Persons are Tres Spiritus substantiali
numero differentes. I wish the Vindicator better Success with his Doctrine,
than Valentinus met at Geneva and Berne. But the most pleasant of all is, that
after the Vindicator had there said, The Three Divine Persons are substantially
distinct; he immediately subjoyns, tho in one Undivided Substance. Is it
possible a Man should give so little heed to what he says in so Great and Nice
a Question? He has not a sensible Friend in the World, that will not tell him,
that it is as much as to say, The Persons are Three distinct Substances, and yet
are but one Undivided Substance. The first alone is Heresy, the other
superadded to it, makes a gross Contradiction. But there are greater Matters,
about which I must speak with the Vindicator.

Secondly: Of the Persons, their Unity, and their Distinction.
As to the Divine Persons, and the Unity or Oneness of each Person with it
self, and its Distinction from the other two Persons; he says as follows.

Page 67. A Person is such a Being, as has Understanding, Will, and Power of
Action. P. 66. They are Three distinct and Infinite Minds. -- Three Intelligent
Beings. P. 258. They are Three Holy Spirits. P. 67. These Three Infinite Minds
are distinguished just as Three Finite Created Minds are, by
Self-consciousness. -- Each Divine Person has a Self-consciousness of its own,
and knows and feels it self, as distinct from the other Divine Persons. The
Father has a Self-consciousness of his own, whereby he knows and feels himself
to be the Father, and not the Son or Holy Ghost. The Son feels himself to be
the Son, and not the Father or Holy Ghost. The Holy Ghost feels himself to be
the Holy Ghost, and not the Father or Son. P. 104. The Persons are as really
distinct, as Three Human Persons, or Three Men are. P. 105. Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost are as really distinct Persons, as Peter, James and John. P. 149. We
must believe Three distinct Divine Persons, each of which is God. P. 98. We
must allow each Person to be a God. So also at P. 47. and elsewhere. He not
only contends each Person is God, and a God, but it is his Belief (in some
places of his Vindication) that each Person is a most consummate and absolutely
perfect God: For he ascribes to each of them a Personal absolutely perfect
Wisdom, Goodness, Justice and Power. I say, a Personal perfect Wisdom, etc.
besides the Wisdom, Goodness, etc. common to them all by their
Mutual-consciousness. His words are these:

P. 81. There is no Contradiction, that three Infinite Minds should be
absolutely perfect, in Wisdom, Goodness and Power; for these are Perfections
that may be in more than One. P. 84, 85. The Father has his own Personal
Wisdom, and by Internal Consciousness, all the Wisdom of the Son and Holy
Ghost. The Son has his own Personal Wisdom, and by the same Consciousness, the
Wisdom of the Father and Holy Ghost. The Holy Ghost has his own Personal
Wisdom, and all the Wisdom of the Father and Son. At P. 78. He denies there is
in God an Infinite Wisdom, Goodness, Power, etc. but only perfect Wisdom,
Goodness, etc.

He acknowledges at P. 97. and frequently elsewhere; that if the Divine
Persons were distinct and separate Persons, they would be Three Gods: but they
are, he says, distinct, but not separate Persons: Yet he says there, each of
these Persons is (...) singly and by himself, God, tho not separately God.

P. 48. A Finite Spirit's Numerical Oneness can be nothing else, but every
Spirit's Unity with it self, and its distinct and separate Subsistence from all
other: Created Spirits. And this Self-unity can be nothing else but
Self-consciousness; or that it is conscious to its own Thoughts, Reasons,
Passions, etc. which no other Finite created Spirit is conscious to, but it
self. Let us put this remarkable Doctrine concerning the Three Divine Persons
into a short Creed, and then make Brief Notes upon it.

Dr. Sherlock's Creed.
I Believe there are Three distinct Intelligent Infinite Beings, Minds,
Spirits, and Persons; distinguished just as Three Finite Created Minds or
Spirits are, as really distinct as three Men, or as Peter, James and John: Each
of them has a Self-consciousness, whereby he knows and feels himself, as really
distinct from the other two Divine Persons. Also each of them has his own
absolutely perfect (for there is no Infinite) Wisdom, Goodness, and Power: and
by a Mutual-consciousness, each Person of these has the whole Wisdom, Power and
Goodness of the two other Persons. Each Person has his own Understanding, Will,
and Power of Action. Finally, each of these Beings, Minds, Spirits, Persons, is
God, nay each of them singly by himself is a God.

This Creed is not only the Vindicator's Sense, but his very Words, which he
has often repeated in his Book. Let us deliberately, and minutely consider,
whether it, be the Faith of Christians, or consistent with Scripture or Reason?

I believe there are Three Infinite Spirits, Minds and Beings. It Is the first
time I ever heard so in my Life: That God is unum summum Ens, one Supreme
Being; that he is Animus, Men's, Spiritus, (...), a Mind, a Spirit, is the Voice
not only of Scripture, but the agreed Doctrine of all Christians. Let the
Vindicator show me, either in Holy Scripture, or in any Catholic Writer, that
these words are used of God in the Plural Number. Do any of them, like this
Doctor, call God Animi Mentes, (...), Minds, Spirits, Beings? Himself is the
first who has dared thus to speak in express words; and the reason is, because
he saw not what they all saw, that three Infinite Minds, Spirits, or Beings,
are Three Gods: For if one Infinite Mind, or Spirit, is One God, Three Infinite
Minds, must be Three Gods; else we cannot distinguish between One and Three;
nor discern, that the Definition being multiplied, the thing defined is also
multiplied.

God, says our Savior (at Joh. 4.24.) is a Spirit. No, says the Vindicator
(at p. 258, and p. 66.) God is Three Spirits, Minds, or Beings; and to teach
the contrary, is both Heresy and Nonsense. Before a Man bestows such
Complements, he ought well to consider on whom they may reflect: for tho he
thinks, that such as Socinus, and the Note-maker deserve not, that common
Humanity and good Manners be shown them; yet he should have had some regard for
his Savior.

Well; but what if Holy Mother Church be in the same Nonsense and Heresy? Mr.
Savage, who has also written against the Brief Notes, will tell him (at p. 4.
of his Answer) that the Lateran Council has defined, that the Three Divine
Persons are not Three Beings, but that all together they make Unum summum Ens,
One Being. And I will tell him, that the fourth Council of Lateran often
repeats it, that God is not Aliud and Aliud, more Beings or Things; but Vna
quaedam Res, One Thing or Being. Mr. Marlow in his late Book concerning the
Trinity, written (as should seem by the Preface) on occasion of the Brief
History and Brief Notes, describes God at p. 64. One single Being, he adds
there, More than one Infinite Being cannot subsist. But it were endless to cite
particular Authorities in this matter: therefore in a word, all Catechisms,
Systems, Institutions of Theology, Christian Writers (and even Jews and
Mahometans) that have spoken of God, do with our Savior, define him a Spirit,
one Mind, one Being; never three Spirits, three Minds, or three Beings.

I dare not ask it of the Vindicator, because he always answers according to
the present Exigence only; but I would ask any other learned and sensible Man,
What is the adequate Notion, or true definition of Three Gods? I make no doubt,
every such Person would answer without any the least Hesitation; three Infinite
Spirits, or Minds, or Intelligent Beings, are three Gods: Which is the
Vindicator's Definition of one God.

But to involve himself yet more; he believes, These Three Infinite Spirits,
Minds, Beings and Persons, are distinguished just as Three Finite Created
Minds, or Spirits are; they are as really distinct as three Men, or as Peter,
James and John. This is Polytheism, or Plurality of Gods with a witness. It Is
as gross Polytheism, as the Greeks or Romans were ever guilty of. If a Man had
asked the Greek Philosophers, suppose Porphyrie and Hierocles, What Conception
we ought to have of the three great Objects of Greeian Worship, Jupiter,
Neptune, and Pluto? They would have answered, as the Vindicator does concerning
his Trinity, they are three Divine Beings, Minds, or Spirits, distinguished as
really, and just as three Men, or as Peter, James and John. This was their
Polytheism: not that they believed or worshipped a false God, for that was
simple Idolatry, but that they distinguished the Divinity into three or more
Minds, and Beings as really, and just as they distinguished three Men, or as
Peter, James and John.

The Vindicator will not be able to give a Rational and Intelligible Account,
why it should not as much be Polytheism in him to distinguish as really, and
just as the Heathens did? It will not excuse him, to say, that Jupiter, Neptune
and Pluto, were but supposed Divine Persons, but his are really Divine Persons;
for granting so much to him for this time, yet to mistake the Object of their
Faith and Worship, was only Idolatry; their Polytheism consisted in
distinguishing the Object of Worship, the Divinity, into more Minds or Beings
as really, and just as the three Men, Peter, James and John are distinguished.

Therefore the more Learned Trinitarians have been so far from saying, the
three Divine Persons are distinguished just as Peter, James and John, that they
never durst say, they are really distinct, but modally; something more
distinguished (they say) between one another, than from their common Essence;
yet not really distinct. They considered that real Distinction makes Alterity
and Diversity; but the Unity of God does not permit that he should be Alter,
Another, either from Himself, or from any thing that is Himself. Since the
Essence of a thing is that, by which it is what it is; whatsoever things are
really distinct things, must also be Essentially distinct; but now the three
Divine Persons having but One Numerical Undivided Essence, by Confession of all
Trinitarians; therefore they cannot be Essentially distinct, and therefore not
Really, but Modally only. I suppose therefore the Vindicator's Friends will
prevail with him, to abate (in his next) very much of his as really distinct,
and distinguished just as these three Men, Peter, James and John.

Each of these Divine Persons has a Self-consciousness, whereby He knows and
feels himself as distinct from the other two Divine Persons. This Assertion
implies what he afterward adds, that each of them has his own proper
Understanding, Will, and Power of Action. Now I say, this is so great and clear
an Alterity, or Diversity, that no greater can be supposed between any sort of
Intelligent Beings. God and his Creatures are not more truly diverse, than by
having each their own proper Understandings, Wills, and Powers of Action, and
by really Being, and Knowing, and Feeling themselves as distinct from one
another.

Intelligent Beings may indeed be farther differenced by Essential Perfections,
or by Degrees of Perfection in the same Nature; as Angels are differenced from
Men by Essential Perfections, and Peter from John by Degrees of Human
Perfection, and God from his Creatures both by Essential Perfections, and by
Degrees of those Perfections that are common to him and them: but the mere
Alterity or Diversity of Intelligent Beings, or Minds, is no other but what the
Vindicator has imputed to the Divine Persons themselves; namely that each such
Being has his own Understanding, Will and Power of Action; and both is and
knows himself as really distinct from all others. Persons or Spirits so
distinct are as really diverse, or are no more one another, than the Angel
Michael is the Man Peter; or than Peter is Charles, the Lion in the Tower.

The Vindicator has discoursed ^all along so inconsequently, that I have no
hopes he can advert to a Demonstration, that requires any Attention of Mind:
but I cannot doubt that others of his Party will readily own, he has very much
overshot himself; and that there cannot be such Alterity or Diversity in God,
the most simple of all Beings. Can there be any thing in God as diverse and
distinct, as Michael and Peter; nay, as God and his Creatures? They will not
say it; for it is to deny his Simplicity and Unity, and to compound him not only
of several and diverse Parts, but of diverse and several Beings, which is too
manifestly both Heterodox and Impossible. Can He be most Simple and
Uncompounded, who is made up of three distinct Understandings, Wills, and
Powers of Action; and who is constituted of three Beings, or Minds, that know
and feel themselves distinct from one another, as distinct as Michael and
Peter, and even as God and his Creatures? If so, then it may also be said, that
God and his Creatures are One most Simple Uncompounded Being. That is the next
Paradox the Vindicator has to defend. As for his Mutual-consciousness, I shall
demonstrate in its proper place, that it does not only not heal these Breaches,
but incurably widens them, because (I shall show) it is so far from being, or
effecting any real Unity and Simplicity, that it implies and supposes an
Essential Diversity, and a separate Existence of the Three Persons.

Also, each of these Persons has his own Personal absolutely perfect (for there
is no Insinite) Wisdom, Power and Goodness, and by a Mutual-consciousness, each
of them has all the Wisdom, Power, and Goodness of the two other Persons. This
is still somewhat a clearer Explication of his Doctrine of Three Gods, than any
we have yet had: For since each of these Spirits, Minds, or Beings has his own
Personal absolutely perfect Wisdom, Power and Goodness; and that besides the
Consciousness and Sensation of the absolutely perfect Wisdom, Power, etc. of
the other two; there can be nothing wanting to make each Person of them an
absolutely perfect God. If there be indeed three really distinct Spirits, or
Persons, each of which has his own Personal absolutely perfect Wisdom, etc. and
therefore is unabsolutely perfect God, I doubt whether there be a Man in the
World (besides the Vindicator) who will not acknowledge upon that Supposition,
that there are three really distinct and absolutely perfect Gods. But as far as
he seems to be sunk in his Incogitance, I will put to him one Argument.

It Is the most general and allowed Proof that there is but One God; because one
God, or one Infinite Wisdom, Power, and Goodness, is sufficient, as sufficient
as a thousand; and there cannot be in God any thing that is needless, useless,
or in vain. Therefore I say, if any one of the Vindicator's Divine Spirits,
Minds, Beings, or Persons, as suppose the Father has a Personal Infinite (or
absolutely perfect) Wisdom, Power and Goodness, there can be no need or
occasion for any other Divine Mind, Spirit, Being, or Person; more such Minds
were needless, useless and in vain. And from hence it clearly follows, that the
Unitarians have the very same Evidence, that there is but one absolutely
perfect Mind, Spirit, Being and Person, and but one absolutely perfect Wisdom,
Power and Goodness, that there is for but One God.

And whereas Mutual-consciousness makes the Beginning, Middle and End of Dr:
Sherlock's Answer to the Brief Notes; I would know, of what use it can be? What
Perfection can it be to any of the three Divine Persons, to be conscious to the
other two, when nothing is gained by it, no Wisdom, no Power, no Goodness? For
without such Mutual-consciousness, each Person has his own Personal absolutely
perfect Wisdom, Power and Goodness. The Vindicator has found out a new
Attribute in God. Mutual-consciousness, but will never be able to tell how it is
any Perfection: Nay, it seems to be an Imperfection; for to know the same
things over and over and over by Mutual-consciousness, which were before fully
known by Self-consciousness, is the same in Knowledge, that Tautology is in
Speech; they are both needless Repetitions, and therefore the first can no more
be in God, than the other in wise Men.

At p. 78, and 79. he contends, that it is not well said, that God is an
Insinite Being, or Spirit, or has Insinite Wisdom, Justice, Power or Goodness;
because no Being can know what is not to be known; no Goodness or Justice can
go beyond the measure, that is, can do excessive or unjust things; no Power can
do impossible things. But this is a weak Allegation, tho he proposes it with
his usual Confidence and Disdain, to bear him out in this new and impious
Heresy, that the Perfections of God are not Insirite. For things Unjust or
Excessive are not the Objects of Goodness or Justice; and it is as Ridiculous as
it is Heretical, to pretend that the Goodness and Justice of God cannot be
Infinite, because He cannot do things that are either Excessive or Unjust; for
this is a chief Reason why we ascribe to God Infinite Goodness and Justice,
even because he can do nothing at all that is Excessive or Unjust. I cannot
doubt, but that upon second thoughts, the Vindicator himself will discern, that
it was fillily urged, the Justice of God is not Insinite, because He cannot do
unjust things. As for things not knowable and not possible, they are Nullities,
and no more the Objects of Wisdom and Power, or of any other Faculty than
things Uunjust are of Justice; and therefore it is as vainly and impertinently
required, that God should know or do such things by his Infinite Wisdom and
Power, as that He should do unjust things by his Infinite Justice.

But I will farther tell this Opposer of the Divine Perfections, why it is said
the Goodness, Justice, Wisdom, and Power of God are each of them Infinite. It
is so said, because there is in God an inexhaustible Fountain of Goodness and
Justice; that is, he has an indefectible Propensity, and an Infinite
Inclination of doing always and to all, that which is just and good. Also the
things he knows, and which he has and can do, being innumerable and without
End, his Wisdom and Power are also Infinite, or without End.

Finally, He believes each of these Beings, Minds, Spirits, Persons, is God,
nay, (...) of them singly by himself is a God. He grants, and says, at p. 87,
and 97. That if the Divine Persons were separate Persons as well as distinct
Persons, they were without doubt three Gods. But now are not they separate
Persons, each of which is singly and by himself a Person, and God; for what is
a separate Person, or a separate God, but he who singly and by himself is a
Person or God? Single, separate, and by himself, are equivalent Terms with all
Men but the Vindicator. By himself is the very English of the Latin separatus,
or separate; therefore in saying here, that each Person by himself is God, he
has granted that each Person is separately God; which is the thing he all
along denies and abhors, as a giving up the Question to his Adversary.

But he says expressly, each of these Persons is a God. None of his Party ever
said so; they will say each of these Persons is God, or is the God, because
each of them has the Divine Essence, which is common to all three; but that
each Person is a God, is without doubt an heretical Form of Speech, and
necessarily introduces three Gods. For the before a Substantive, denotes the
Unity of the thing spoken of, but a always supposes more things of the same
kind. Thus we say the Sun, the Moon, the Earth, because there is but one Sun,
one Moon, one Earth; and for the same reason we say God, or the God; but we say
a Spirit, a Man, a Person, because there are more Spirits, Men, and Persons.
Therefore he that says, there are three Persons, each of which is a God; or
that says, the Father is a God, or the Son is a God, or the Holy Ghost is a
God; such an one (I say) professes to believe more Gods. I appeal in this
matter to all learned Men, of what Persuasion soever; and even to all who do
but understand Grammar. But I must profess my wonder, that some Trinitarians in
their Explications of their (supposed) Trinity, are no more careful of avoiding
such open Polytheism, it being a Guilt next to Atheism.

Thirdly; Of the Unity of the Persons, and how they make but one God.
Last of all; As to the Unity of the three Divine Persons with one another, and
how they all make but one God: He largely describes it in his 4th Section,
from Page 46, to p. 86. But the sum of all is this.

A Finite Spirit's Unity or Oneness with it self, is no other thing but its
Self-consciousness, or that it knows and feels its own Thoughts, Actions, and
Passions. But if either Finite or Infinite Spirits, Minds, or Persons are
mutually conscious; that is, are internally and universally conscious to one
another Thoughts, Wills, Actions, and Passions, this makes them to be truly
and properly Numerically One Spirit; for ( p. 49.) they are hereby as much one
with each other, as every Spirit is one with himself; and ( p. 56.) they are
hereby united to each other, as every Man is to himself. To make three Spirits,
or Persons numerically one, it is not enough, that one of them is perfectly
conscious to all the rest: they must all of them be mutually conscious; that
is, each of them perfectly conscious to all the rest. Thus God is conscious to
all his Creatures, to all their Thoughts, Actions, and Passions, as fully
conscious as themselves are; but they are not hereby made one with him, because
they not being conscious to his Knowledge and Will, there is not a
Mutual-consciousness between God and them. The Mutual-consciousness of the
three Divine Persons, is the Perichoresis and Circumincession mentioned by the
Fathers and the Schools. For Perichoresis, or that the Father is in the Son and
Spirit, and the Son in the Father and Spirit, and the Spirit in the Father and
Son, is nothing else but their universal Mutual-consciousness. We ought not to
entertain a gross material Idea of the Perichoresis, as if the three distinct
Divine Persons were in one another by a mutual Contract of Parts, for they have
no Parts; the only Union and Perichoresis of Minds and Spirits is, that they
are conscious each to others Thoughts and Wills, as perfectly and inwardly as
to their own. And thus also it is, that the three Divine Persons are one God;
they are one God, and in one another by perfect Mutual-consciousness.

The Vindicator often says, that this Explication of the Trinity, makes a
Trinity in Unity as easy and intelligible as the Notion of One God, or but one
who is God. But being aware that it is not enough that an Explication be
intelligible, if it be not also the true Explication; therefore he pretends to
prove this Mutual-consciousness of the Father, Son, and Spirit, from Joh. 1.18.
and 10.15, 30 38. and 16.14, 15. 1 Cor. 2.10, 11. Then for the Fathers, tho
they do not once name Mutual-consciousness, yet he thinks they meant it. He
alleges a few Passages out of Gregory Nyssen and St. Austin, who are all the
Fathers he quotes, and his Citations are not only not to his purpose, but some
of them clearly overthrow it. I shall show him the respect, to consider what he
has said.

1. Whereas he says, that Mutual-consciousness makes the three Divine
Spirits, to be as truly and properly numerically one; and as much one, as each
Spirit and every Man is one with himself. If this were indeed true, it would as
much over-do what the Vindicator expects from it, as he thinks all former
Explications are short of their Design. For the Unitarians desire no more, than
that it be owned, God is as truly and properly numerically one, as every Spirit
and Man is one with himself; for every Spirit and Man is so one with himself,
as to be but one Person.

Had the Vindicator no way to defend the Athanasian Creed, but by running into
Heresy? could he make out the Unity of the Trinity, no other way but (as the
Creed speaks) by confounding the Persons, or by making them but one Person? I
challenge him, or any other for him, to avoid this Consequence of his Doctrine.
He says in above twenty places, this Mutual-consciousness makes the three
Divine Spirits and Persons as much one with one another, as any Spirit or Man
is one with himself; then say I, they are but one Person; for that is the
Oneness or Unity (the only Unity) of every Spirit or Man with himself. No
Spirit or Man has any other but a Personal Unity with himself.

2. Mutual-consciousness cannot be a good Explication of the (pretended)
Trinity, because it will equally salve the most absurd Doctrine of the
Transubstantiation. For as, according to the Vindicator's Doctrine, the
Godhead, or the One true God, is numerically One, tho there are three Infinite
Persons, each of which is God, and a God; because these three Persons are
mutually conscious to, or have an inward Sensation of one another: So will a
Papist say, there is but one Body-head, or but one Numerical Body of Christ;
but in the Unity of this Body-head or Body, there is first the Original Body of
Christ, and then abundance of Sacred Hosts in diverse places, each of which is a
true Body of Christ, and is by Mutual Sensation and Consciousness (for there is
no Sensation without Consciousness) numerically one Body with the Original Body
in Heaven. It Is true, the Body in Heaven is the Source and Fountain of the
rest, as the Father is of the other Divine Persons, but they are all
substantially and numerically one Body, by Mutual-consciousness or Sensation.
And this mutual inward Sensation or Consciousness they must needs have, because
they are all of them Personally w^ited to one Infinite Spirit or Person, who
(as all Trinitarians say) is Whole and All everywhere present, Totus in toto,
and totus in qualibet part. By this Explication or Hypothesis, all Mr.
Johnson's Demonstrations against the Transubstantiation, are made to vanish
into Smoke. All his Objections from the nature of Time and Extension are
nothing; they are all salved by Mutual-consciousness of the Hosts with the Body
in Heaven; for Dr. Sherlock has assured us, that Mutual-consciousness or
Sensation, does make an Essential, Substantial and Numerical Unity or Oneness
between any number of Persons or Things. The Reason holds for Things as well as
Persons, and for a thousand as well as for three.

3. If, as the Vindicator often says, Mutual-consciousness is the only Union of
Spirits or Minds, such a Mutual-consciousness by which they are universally, or
wholly, or pefectly conscious to each other; this would as much prejudice the
Incarnation, or Hypostatical Union, as the Vindicator hopes it will help the
Doctrine of the Trinity. The Vindicator confesses at p. 269, and 270, that the
Human Nature, or Reasonable Soul of Christ, is not universally, or wholly
conscious to the Divine Person of the Son; yet he says in perhaps forty places,
that a Mutual-consciousness to all one another Thoughts and Wills and Actions
is necessary to make an Union of Minds or Spirits. I say, it follows from these
Premises, that the Reasonable Soul or Spirit of the Lord Christ is not united
to the Divine Person of the Son. If universal Consciousness is the only
possible Union of Spirits, it is impossible there should be an Incarnation, or
an Hypostatical or Personal Union of the Divine and Human Spirits in Christ.

The Vindicator seems to have been, in some measure, aware of this Objection.
For in the Conclusion of his Book, when he comes to the Doctrine of the
Incarnation, or Hypostatical Union, he says, Where different Natures are united
into one Person, this universal Consciousness is seated only in the Superior
Nature; and in the Inferior, only so far as the Nature is capable, and as the
Personal Union requires. But I will forgive the Vindicator, if he can so escape
from me.

First; If, as he says, a partial Consciousness in the Inferior Nature be
sufficient to effect an Hypostatical or Personal Union, it will follow, that
all pious Men are hypostatically or personally united to the Holy Ghost. For
the Holy Spirit is universally conscious to all their Thoughts and Actions, and
they are partially conscious to his Suggestions and Motions, and that by such
an Internal Sensation as they are to their own Thoughts and Inclinations. They
cannot discern one from the other.

Secondly; If a Partial Consciousness between two or more Spirits, where but
one of them is universally conscious to the rest, will make them numerically
one Person, or (what is the same thing) will effect an Hypostatical or Personal
Union; then certainly where two or more Spirits are universally conscious to
one another, it must much more make them numerically one Person, or effect an
Hypostatical or Personal Union. From whence it will follow, that the three
Divine Persons being universally conscious to one another, are numerically one
Person, and are hypostatically and personally united. But this every one knows
is Heresy, and contrary to the Athanasian Creed, which forbids us to confound
the Persons.

Thirdly; But the truth is, a Partial Mutual-consciousness in one of the
Spirits (tho the other be universally conscious) is not sufficient to make a
Personal Union, or to make two or more Persons to be numerically one Person.
The Reason is this, since universal Mutual-consciousness is therefore said (by
the Vindicator) to make more Spirits to be numerically one, because in every
one of them it amounts to as much as, and is equivalent to the
Self-consciousness or Self-unity of each Spirit with it self; for it makes more
Spirits as conscious to one another (and therefore as numerically one) as every
Spirit is to it self: from hence it necessarily follows, that a Mutual
Consciousness which is not universal in both Spirits, cannot effect a Personal
Union, or make them numerically one Person, because it is undeniable that one of
these Spirits (the inferior Nature or Spirit) has not such a
Mutual-consciousness with the other Spirit, as is equal to its own
Self-consciousness, which makes it Self-unity.

Hitherto I have so argued, as to suppose, with the Vindicator, that such a
Mutual-consciousness as he has described when it is universal, may have the
effect he supposes; that is, may effect a Numerical Oneness or Unity, and have
only shown, that however it has several such Heretical Consequences, that it
must not be admitted by him or any other. For we have seen it makes the three
Divine Persons to be but one Person, because (he says) it makes them as much
one, as each Spirit, Person, or Man is one with himself. Also this Hypothesis
will do as much Service to the Transubstantiation, as to the Trinity; for it
will make as Substantial and Numerical an Unity between the Hosts and the Body
in Heaven, as between the three Divine Spirits. Farther, it destroys the
Hypostatical Union; for it is plain that a Partial Consciousness between the
Human and Divine Spirits in the Lord Christ, cannot make a Personal Union, or
make them numerically one Person, because in his Human Spirit it is not equal to
that Self-consciousness, which the Vindicator affirms to be the Self-unity of
every Intelligent Being. But now I shall prove, that,

4. Mutual Consciousness, notwithstanding the Vindicator's confident
Affirmation, and frequent Repetition of it, does not indeed make the three
Divine Persons to be numerially one, or so one, as each Spirit and every Man is
one with himself; nay, it neither is nor effects any real Unity at all. For
tho he is careful to suppose, that the three Persons are mutually conscious by
an internal Sensation, and that they are conscious to all the Thoughts, Wills
and Actions of one another, as each Person of them, and as every Man is
internally conscious to all his own Thoughts and Action, all which he thinks
must make them numerically one Spirit and one God; because (in his Opinion) it
amounts to as much as, and is equivalent to, that Self-consciousness which is
(he says) the Self-unity of each Spirit, and every Man with himself. Tho (I
say) he is careful to suppose thus much, yet I shall mind him of a thing which
will ruin his whole Hypothesis; even this, that the three Divine Spirits or
Persons, tho they are universally and internally conscious to one another, yet
because they are not in the same manner conscious to one another Thoughts and
Actions, as each Spirit of them and each Man is conscious to his own Thoughts
and Actions; therefore the Mutual-consciousness which he supposes they have,
cannot make them numerically one Spirit, or one God. None of them is conscious
to the Thoughts and Actions of the other two as his own, but as rising in and
from the other Persons; but each of these Spirits and every Man is conscious to
his own Thoughts and Actions, as arising in and from himself, from his own
Personal Understanding, Will, and Power of Action.

Let me hear the Vindicator say, that the Son (for Example) knows and feels the
Thoughts and Actions of the Father and Spirit, not as the Thoughts and Actions
of the Father and Spirit, but as his own Personal Thoaghts and Actions, or as
originated in his own Person; and I will allow that such Consciousness does
look somewhat like a numerical Oneness or Unity. But I will demonstate to him,
that so to say, is both Heresy and a Contradiction.

It is Heretical, because then the Father's Personal Action of Generation would
be known and felt by the Son, as the Action of the Son; that is, the Son would
know and feel that he begets himself. Also the mutual Love of the Father, and
of the Image, or Son, whereby (as this Athanasian Doctor feigns) the Holy
Spirit proceeds from them, would be known and felt by the Holy Spirit, as his
own Personal Action, not as the Action of the Father and Son. Both which are
Heretical when affirmed by any.

But besides, that it is Heresy, it is also a Contradiction: It Is just as much a
Contradiction, as to say, that the Person and Personal Understanding of the
Son, is the Person and Personal Understanding of the Father. If we confound the
Persons and Personal Thoughts and Actions of the Father, Son and Spirit, we
confound also their Personal Understandings, Wills, and Powers of Action. If
each Person of them has his Personal Understanding, Will, and Power of Action,
he has also his Personal Thoughts and Actions; and consequently, the Son cannot
feel the Thoughts and Actions of the Father, as his own Personal Thoughts and
Actions, but as the Thoughts and Actions of the Father. But if so, all Men must
grant, that such Mutual-consciousness of the three Divine Persons, neither is
nor effects a Numerical Unity, or any Unity at all. It cannot, I say, make
them one Spirit, or One God, but leaves them as much three as other separate
Spirits or Beings are. For it is such a Consciousness as may be, and actually
is, between the most opposite contrary and separate Natures and Spirits. For
all Men are after this manner conscious both to the Holy Spirit and to the
Tempter. We are conscious to the Suggestions and Motions of the first, and to
the Temptations of the other, by an internal Consciousness; nay by such a
perfect intimate Consciousness, that we do not always discern them from our own
Personal Thoughts, or the Motions and Actings of our own Spirits; which is
somewhat a closer Consciousness than the Vindicator has supposed, or dares
suppose between the three Divine Persons; and yet it leaves us separate Beings
and Spirits, both from the Holy Spirit, and from the Tempter.

5. If there were indeed such a thing as the Vindicator's mutual Consciousness,
I do affirm, it would be so far from being, or from effecting a numerical Unity
or Oneness, that it would be the very thing which would most of all prove the
three (pretended) Divine Persons are numerically three Spirits and three Gods.
For since, according to the Vindicator's Descriptions, each of these Spirits or
Persons has his own Personal Understanding, Will and Power of Action, and his
own Personal absolutely perfect Wisdom, Power and Goodness; three such Persons
are so far from being one Spirit or one God, by Consciousness to each other
Wisdom, Power and Goodness, that the more such Persons are mutually conscious,
so much the more their separate Existence and Divinity is proved. For the more
that any of these Spirits knows and feels of Thoughts and Actions arising in
the other Spirits or Persons, and to which he is only conscious, but is not the
Personal Fountain of them; the more, and more certainly, he must needs know and
feel, that himself has a diverse and separate Existence from them, and therefore
(being an Infinite Person or Spirit) is a diverse and separate God.

I challenge the Vindicator to tell me any other possible way for three Divine
Persons to be assured of their separate Existence and Divinity; that is, that
they are three Gods, but by Mutual-consciousness, or by knowing and feeling (as
he speaks) the Thoughts and Actions of one another, not as their own, but as
the Thoughts and Actions of other Divine Spirits. How should the Father, for
example, know He is a separate Spirit and God from the Son, but by knowing and
feeling the Actions of the Son, not as his (the Fathers) Actions, but as the
Actions and Thoughts of another Divine and Infinite Person? It was therefore a
great Incogitance in the Vindicator, to urge the (pretended)
Mutual-consciousness of the three (pretended) Divine Persons, as their
numerical Unity or Oneness, when it demonstrates them to be numerically three
separate and diverse Beings, Spirits and Gods.

Had the Vindicator said, there are three Infinite Spirits, who are mutually
conscious, THEREFORE there are three Gods; all Mankind would have allowed his
Consequence, as certain and self-evident from that Proposition. But to say
there are three Infinite Spirits, conscious to one another, THEREFORE there is
but one God; this all Men of Sense will laugh at, as a palpable Falsehood. It Is
a Contradiction in the Terms, to tell us of One only God mutually conscious;
for in plainer English it is to say, One only God conscious to, or with other
Gods. Or, One only God conscious to more Gods.

6. But the great Matter is still behind, that after all, our Blessed Savior
himself has declared, that there is not this Mutual-consciousness between the
(supposed) Divine Persons, which the Vindicator has made to be the Substance of
his Answer to the Brief Notes, and the Brief History. Of that day and hour (the
day and hour of the last Judgment) none knows, no not the Angels which are in
Heaven, nor the Son, but the Father only; Mark 13.32. Mat. 24.36. Here it is
expressly denied, that the Son knows the time of the last Judgment, and as
clearly intimated that the Father, and the Father only (therefore not the Holy
Ghost, if we take the Holy Ghost for a particular Person) knows that time.
Therefore, say I, the Son and Holy Ghost are not conscious to all the Knowledge,
Will and Thoughts of the Father, and consequently are not Gods, or God.

To avoid this Argument, the Vindicator and his Party answer, that Christ in
that Text speaks of himself, only as he is a Man, not as he is God, or a God.
Well, but how shall we salve the Honor of the Holy Ghost, for it is there also
said, that the Father only knows that day and hour? Why, for that, the word
Father here does not signify the Father only, but includes the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost. But when mention is made of the Father and the Son in the same
Period, and they are opposed to each other, it is much that neither the Son
should signify the Son, (for the Human Nature, or Christ as Man, according to
the Trinitarians, is not the Son) nor the Father signify the Father, but the
Father and two other Persons. If this be not to form the Scriptures to our
preconceived Opinions, and not our Opinions by the Scriptures; let the
Vindicator himself tell me, what is? Should a Socinian distort the known sense
and use of Words at this rate, what Outcries should we have against them!

Nor was it our Savior's manner to answer after this equivocal delusory
fashion: But when the Disciples were more inquisitive than he liked of, he was
not wont to shift off the matter by an Equivocation, but plainly to tell them,
They asked after what 'twas not permitted to them to know. Will thou at this
time restore the Kingdom to Israel? say the Disciples at Acts 1.6, 7. It Is not
for you to know, says our Savior. How unlike is this direct sincere Answer to
that which the Trinitarians have made for him about the Day of Judgment? For
their Answer runs thus; As to the day and hour of Judgment, of which you
enquire, none knows it, not the Angels, not the Son himself, but my Father
only. But when I say the Son, that is, I my self know it not, I mean (says he
to himself) according to my Human Nature, which indeed is not the Son; and when
I say, only my Father knows it, I mean (says he again to himself) only my
Father and my self, and the Holy Ghost. This is such an overgrown
Equivocation, and Mental Reservation, as in our Town would pass for a gross
Lie: but that the Vindicator and his Party have assured us, that our Savior
himself spoke thus. But I do not think any sensible and honest Man will believe
'em, if he considers it twice.

It Is thus also that they have dealt with God himself, speaking in the first
Commandment; Thou shall have no other Gods but Me, says God in the words of
the first Commandment. And to render this his Sovereign Revelation and Will the
more awful and regarded by us, he delivered it in Thunders that shook the
Heavens and the Earth. Notwithstanding this, and tho every one knows, that the
Style of Laws is plain and simple, and the words to be understood in a popular
familiar Sense, because they are delivered to the meanest as well as the
highest Capacities; yet have those who call themselves the Orthodox and the
Catholic Party eluded this Revelation and Law, to which all the rest refer,
and on which they depend, and have made room for other Gods besides him. Thou
shall have no other Gods besides Me; that is, (say they) Thou shall have no
other Gods but Us, no other Gods, but God the Father, God the Son, and God the
Holy Ghost: Thou shall have no other Gods, but three Infinite Almighty,
All-knowing Persons; whereof one is the Father, another his Son, and the third
an holy Spirit distinct from both.

I persuade my self that no Man can think that so much as one Person of the six
hundred thousand Israelites who assembled to hear God speak, did (or possibly
could) understand that to be his meaning; but on the contrary, when they heard,
Thou shall have no other Gods but Me, they did, and their Posterity to this day
do, understand it no otherways but thus, Thou shall never know or own more than
one Divine Person, even Me who now speak to thee. When Points of Faith are
turned into Laws, we ought to be careful how we elude their plain and obvious
Sense by Subtilties; for such things will not excuse the Breach of Laws,
especially of the first and chief Law, the ground of the rest, to which they
all refer as their chief Design. Rather we should interpret all other dubious
and disputable Scripture-Expressions by such solemn Principal and Chief
Revelations and Laws. The Vindicator, it is said, is writing a Book to prove,
that there are more Persons (the Son and Spirit) besides the Eternal God and
Father of our Lord Christ, who are Gods, or God, that is, he is writing a Book
against the first Commandment. And I confess, that as his Party have ordered
the vulgar Editions and Translations of the Holy Bible, it will be no hard
matter to alledg some very plausible Texts to such as know not the Deceits that
have been used, to make some Texts of Scripture contradict others. But I
challenge him beforehand, to produce but one such Proof or Text for his
purpose, as is not of such suspected Credit and Authority in the Originals,
that no prudent Man would build any thing on it, much less oppose it to the
first Commandment, or is so manifestly saulty in the English Translation, that
some of the most Learned of his own Party do reject it as no Proof; or finally,
is not only not to his purpose, but proves what the Unitarians contend for, the
Unity of God, or that God is One. But this was a Digression; I left off at our
Savior's words, Of that day and hour (the day and hour of the last Judgment)
none knows but my Father only, which I hope were sufficiently vindicated from
the Perversions of Dr. Sherlock, and others.

But let our Savior say what he will, and as expressly as he will, the Doctor
will prove against him, that there is this perfect Mutual-consciousness between
Him, the Holy Spirit, and the Father.

His first Objection is from Joh. 1.18. The only Begotten Son which is in the
Bosom of the Father, has declared him. To be in the Bosom of another,
signifies, says the Vindicator, to be conscious to that Person's Mind, and most
intimate Secrets; therefore the Son is conscious to the Father. Answ. But why
did not the Vindicator produce some Texts to confirm this Interpretation? The
truth is, the Scripture-Sense of this Phrase, To be in the Bosom of another, is
this, to be most dear to that Person, as is clear from Deuteronomy. 28.54, 56. 2 Samuel
12.3. So the Sense of the objected Text is only this, The only Begotten Son,
who is most dear to the Father, has declared him, i. e. has made known his
Will and Commands in the Gospel.

He objects, Joh. 10.15. As the Father knows me, so know I the Father. Answ.
If the Vindicator had looked into the Critical Commentators of his own Party,
he would have seen, that to know in this Text is to love. But allowing him his
Sense of the words; I answer, as much is prophesied of all Christians in
Gospel Times, Jer. 31.34. They shall all know me, from the greatest to the
least of them. Nor does [as] here note Equality of Knowlenge in the Son, but
Likeness only; as at Mat. 5.48. Be ye perfect, even as your Father which is in
Heaven, is perfect. Therefore the Sense is, the Father knows me, and I also
know the Father (not by Natural or Congenit Consciousness, but) by his
Revelation. See Rev. 1.1.

Joh. 10.30. I and the Father are One. This Oneness or In-being, says the
Vindicator, is a Mutual-consciousness and inward Sensation of each other. Answ.
But our Savior explains this Oneness, to be such an Unity or Oneness as is (or
should be) among all Christians; which is not by Mutual-consciousness or inward
Sensation, but Mutual and Inward Love of one another. John 17.11. Father, --
keep those whom thou have given me, that they may be One as we are. Ver. 22.
That they may be One, even as we are One.

Again, he urges Joh. 10.38. The Father is in me, and I in him. The Vindicator
insisteth much on this, as a clear Indication of an inward Consciousness
between the Father and Son. Answ. But here again our Savior has otherways
explained himself, namely thus, that he means such an In-being as is between
all Christians and the Father; an Inbeing by Love, and the Gift of the Spirit,
on the part of the Father, and on our part, by Love, and Obedience, and
Profession of the Truth: Joh. 17.21. That they all may be One, as thou Father
art in me, and I in thee, that they may be One in us. 1 John 3.24. He that
keeps his (God's) Commandments, dwells in Him, and he in him. 1 John 3.13.
Hereby we know we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us of his
Spirit. Ver. 15. Whosoever shall confess, that Jesus is the Son of God, God
dwells in him, and he in God. Ver. 16. He that dwells in Love, dwells in
God, and God in him.

Joh. 16.15. All things that the Father has are mine. Answ. See what has been
satisfactorily said to this, in the Brief-History, page 103.

1 Cor. 2.10, 11. The Spirit searches all things, yea the deep things of God.
For what Man knows the things of a Man, but the Spirit of a Man, which is in
him? even so the things of God knows no Man, but the Spirit of God. Answ. The
Emphasis lies here; that the Spirit knows the things of God, even as the Spirit
of a Man knows the things of a Man. Now adinitting, that the Holy Ghost or
Spirit were a Person, as many Unitarians (particularly the Bidellians and
Arians) believe he is, chief of the holy Spirits or Angels, and called the
Spirit by way of Excellence, and the Holy Spirit, to discriminate him from
Satan, who is chief of the Wicked and Apostate Spirits or Angels. Admitting, I
say, that the Holy Spirit is a Person, yet what hinders that he may know the
things of God, that is (appears by Ver. 9.) the things that God has prepared
for them that love him, as fully and perfectly as the Spirit of a Man knows
the Designs and Counsels of a Man toward other Men? Cannot God as fully reveal
those things of God to this holy and super-eminent Spirit, as any Man knows his
own Will and Designs of Good toward others? and is it not thus, that our
Savior also is said to know the things of God? Rev. 1.1.

If it be demanded, If this be all, Why is this Spirit called the Spirit of
God? I hope the Vindicator knows, that it is the manner of the Hebrew Tongue to
name things great in their kind, by the name of God. He may also be called the
Spirit of God, as Prophets are in Scripture called the Men of God, because both
one and the other are sent by God. And this Spirit is so much the Chief of all
other Spirits, that are God's Messengers; that he is therefore sometimes called
by way of Eminence and Excellence, the Spirit of God. So an Arian or Bidellian
Unitarian would answer to the Objection from this Text. How a Socinian
Unitarian would answer, may be seen in the Brief History, from p. 98, to p. 102.

The CONCLUSION.
THus I have considered Dr. Sherlock's new Explication of the Doctrines of the
Trinity and Incarnation by Self-consciousness and Mutual consciousness, and
therein the substance and force of his Book, which he has so vainly and untruly
called a Vindication of those Doctrines. His Book can deserve that Title in no
other sense, but as it is a supercilious, disdainful, and peevish Answer. But
for that, the Unitarians know very well, that when Learned Men rage in such a
manner, that they have neither Humanity nor good Manners left, it is because
they find themselves pinched: they know too, that Omnis Renegada est Ordinis
sui Persecutor. Those who have hitherto said (who are all that have read his
Books) there is nothing considerable in Dr. Sherlock's Books, but what he
either borrowed from the Socinians, or build upon their Foundation; such will
wonder he would show no better Reasons why he has shifted sides. He promised
at P. 21. to examine the Brief Notes Paragraph by Paragraph, that the Author
might not complain of unsair Usage: But at p. 256, before he was got half
thorough the Notes, he pretends to grow weary of the Note-maker's long
Harangues (tho the whole Notes are less than a Sheet of Paper) and so gives his
Reader only so much of the Brief Notes as he fancied he could deal withal.
Therefore the Author of the Notes will say, this was not only unfair, but
(after a Promise) false Usage: Others say, the Doctor grew self-conscious,
sensible of his Inability, and therefore durst not trust his Reader with those
dangerous Notes, and his crude Answer to them. But where he pretended to
answer, he should not have suppressed so many Periods, nor omitted to take
notice of the Reason used, supposing it was enough if he opposed the Doctrine.
Least of all should an Answerer of his standing and Reputation in Polemic
Squabble, have quietly past by some whole Paragraphs, the most material in the
Notes; or only cast a bald squeezed Jest at 'em.

As to the slight Querks which he sometimes opposes to the Arguments in the
Notes and History, there is an Answer preparing, and almost finished, to every
thing in his Book, to be published, unless in his next he is content to own he
desires it not. For as to the Unitarians themselves, they are upon several
accounts not forward to publish a farther Answer. First, They foresee, that the
Vindication is not a Book, by which the Church of England, or any other Party
of the Trinitarians, will abide; they look for another kind of Answer, and
therefore reserve their Defenses to a time and occasion that may more require
them. Another Reason is, they dare trust the History and Notes with the
Doctor's Answer, tho he durst not trust his Answer with the Notes; only they
desire the Reader to read the Notes and History as they are published by them,
in entire Discourses, not as they are mangled, and cut into Thongs by the
Vindicator. They are confident, that no discerning Man who shall read Dr.
Sherlock's Vindication, and afterward read again the Notes or History, as they
are published by the Unitarians, but will sind himself as much troubled to
untie the Gordian Knots, as if they had never read the Solutions of the
Vindicator. But I will conclude with him, with only observing something to what
he has, with his usual Charity and Sagacity, objected to the Hopes of Salvation
in the Unitarian way.

The Note-maker had said, that, In these Points which have been always
controverted in the Churches of God, it is not necessary to Salvation, that a
Man happen to be of the right Persuasion; it is sufficient if he use reasonable
Diligence to be informed; if after that he mistakes, he is in no fault at all,
his Error is pure Ignorance, not a culpable Ignorance; for how can it be
culpable not to know that, of which a Man is ignorant after a diligent and
impartial Inquiry? To this the Vindicator answers in several Pages, but all the
Argument of his Answer is in these words, Then how comes an Atheist, a Turk, or
a Jew to be in any fault? Does the Note-maker think that no Atheist, Turk, or
Jew ever used reasonable Diligence? And why should not their reasonable
Diligence serve their turns, as well as the reasonable Diligence of Socinians,
and other Heretics? -- And does not the Reason he gives, extend to the whole
Christian Religion, as well as to those Points that (he says) have been always
controverted in the Churches of God?

To this Complement of the Vindicator, I answer. 1. I do not think Atheism ever
was the abiding Sentiment of any Man, who took time to consider; and I deny
that any Atheist ever used reasonable, or but tolerable Diligence to be
informed. 2. As to Jews and Turks, who believe and worship the one true God,
and him only; perhaps they are in a nearer Proximity to Salvation than such, as
against sufficient Opportunities of a right Information, and for Worldly
Interests have apostatized from the Christian Faith, to the Athanasian. 3.
Those that deny the whole Christian Religion, after having known it and the
Reasons of it, the Notemaker is assured whatever Diligence they may have used,
they have not made (as the Notes expressly require) an Impartial Inquiry. They
have been biased by their Prejudices, or their Lusts, against the whole
Christian Faith; as others (we see) are biased against the most Essential
Parts of it, the Unity of God, his Insinite Sapience, Goodness, Justice, and
Power, his real Omnipresence, the Liberty of our Wills to Good and Evil. If the
Vindicator thinks otherways, let him speak out, and plainly tell the World his
Mind; that a Man may have used reasonable Diligence, and also made an Impartial
Inquiry, and yet disbelieve the whole Christian Religion. This, I hope, may be
enough to Dr. Sherlock at present.

As for Mr. Savage, who has also written against the Brief Notes, if he had
pleased to write after an intelligible manner, he seems to be a Person that
might have deserved a careful Answer: But having wrapped himself up in a
School-Cloud, and wrote in such towering Metaphysics, as are much above
ordinary or unlearned Capacities. I am sensible that, with respect to the
Unitarian Cause, his Book can do neither good nor hurt. However, the Unitarians
thank him for his design to inform and instruct them; and they desire him not
to take it amiss, if they also advise him, that the next time he writes for the
Information of the Illiterate and Vulgar, he would write more intelligibly.
For, Learning's Light, when held too high, goes out.

The End.

