A brief Relation or Remonstrance of the Injurious Proceedings and Inhumane
cruelties of the Turks, perpetrated on the Commander and company of the Ship
Lewis of London; with the resolved Captivity of their Ship, Goods and Persons,
by the Men of War of Tripoli and Tunis; with their happy escape from them. 7ber
8 1657
WIlliam Ell, Commander of the Ship Lewis of London, with his said ship at
Alexandria in Egypt, about the twelfth of January last past was pressed by the
Bassa of the said place, to serve for transportation of Rice, Sugars, with
other provisions for the Grand Signiers account, from the said Port of
Alexandria, to Constantinople or Smyrna, which of the two (might with most
convenience and security from the Venetian Armata) be first arrived to, with
contract for the sum of Rials of 8/8 6550. for such goods as the Turks said
they would lade; and for the rest of his ships burden, he was to lade himself
or dispose of as he pleased.

The said Captain and ship thus forced and engaged, the Turks (contrary to the
said contract) keep them from the 12 of January till the 18 of April, (with
promise of consideration for demurrage or loss of time) they detaining him
only for their own convenience. At last dismiss him (with breach of contract
too) both in quantity and quality of the goods promised to be laden) without
payment of any part of his freight, or the least allowance for his so long
attendance.

The Captain thereupon demanding compliance, with contract for freight and
demurrage, is answered with threats of chains and captivity, if he forthwith
depart not with two French ships, which they had in like manner forced to serve
for Convoy of diverse Turkish vessels which were ready to depart with us,
putting on board of us (amongst other Turks) an Officer called Capagee to order
us (as it should seem) according to Instructions given him, whereof we know
nothing, save to sail directly to Constantinople or Smyrna.

The said Turkish Officer or Capagee (so soon as we were gotten into the height
of the Island of Rhodes) commanded us in the Grand Seigniers name, of bear in
for that Port (when we had a fair wind to sail on toward Smyrna) and the 28 of
April we came into Rhodes with all our Fleet, save the bigger of the French
ships, which left us two days before; nor could we hear what became of him.

In the Port of Rhodes we found the Captain Bassa (or General or the Grand
Signiers Naval forces) with forty four Gallyes, seven Tripoli, six Algetre,
four Tunis ships of War; here we are consigned into the Bassa's hands, and kept
two months in worse condition (for blows of all sorts, with weapons and other
ways) then the very Gally-Slaves, and were reduces to want to all provisions,
save bread only, without money to help our selves; nor durst we go on shore to
procure it. And besides all our personal sufferings (and making us row them
with our boats where any of them pleased for the pay of blows and abuses) we
were threatened by those of Tripoli and Tunis, that so soon as the Grand
Signiers goods were out of our ship, they would not only have two youths of
ours (which they had said wait for, to satisfy their inhumane, unnatural
Lust) but also would be Master of our ship, goods and men, or they would set
fire of us, though it were in Port; nor were those words only loosely spoken
as simply bravado's, but resolutions confirmed to us by some Jews passengers
with us, who conversing with them on shore, advertised our Captain of the same;
advising him to provide for the security of his ship, person, and goods.

Notwithstanding all which, and our ships being so leek (by reason of a stroke
on a wrack as we came out of Alexandria) that our pumps went continually, we
yet sailed after the Bassa and his Fleet to the Island of Stangue, where they
then told us we must go to Mettelina (an Island 'twixt Constantinople and
Smyrna) there to deliver all our goods, as well belonging to strangers as to
our selves, and fit our ship to serve amongst them against the Venetians: to
which answer was made that the Captain was under obligation to several
Merchants to carry their goods to Smyrna, that his ship (as they saw) was leek
and unserviceable, wherefore he desired he might be dismissed to make all
possible haste to Smyrna, left the ship might founder under him, and all be
loft. But no reason will serve, follow them we must, whither they please to
lead us, till a fit conjuncture to make us a prey to the Barbarians, whom the
Bassa is forced to humor, fearing their power, and wanting their aid, in this
so great exigent against the Venetians.

By this time the French Captain and the Mariners of each our ships had certain
notice of the design which the Tripoli and Tunis men of war had on us both, and
came to our Captain to give account of what they were too much assured, and
wished him (as they intended to do) to provide for the preservation of himself,
his people and goods.

In this great strait, not having much time to consider, nor others to consult
then our own abused Officers and Mariners, (all struck with deep apprehension
of our greater approaching miseries) after craving Gods assistance and
direction, the Captain resolves all difficulties and expedients: And first,

1. That he had left a considerable part of his stock at Alexandria, with all
the freight (or pay) due to him for the present service vice to the value of
Rials 8/8 20000 or thereabouts, to provide lading for his ship against his
return from Smyrna thither, and that he had in his ship the value of other
Rials 8/8 25000. or thereabouts (for his own and owners account) in goods no
where vendable save in Turkey (or at best of little value in any part of
Christendom) and therefore he not going into Turkey, would be the certain loss
of all the Alexandria stock, with a very great part of that in the ship.

2. That if he should escape from the Fleet and go for Smyrna (whither 'twas
probable his now mutinied Mariners were likest to be persuaded to go) That
then for disobeying the Generals command of going to Metelina, (and under
pretense of the Grand Signieurs dis-service) the General might make life and
goods a prey to his fury and avarice.

3. That if he should go with them to Metelina, and unlade all there, our goods
would be imbezelled and lost, we having none there to take care of any thing,
nor any one of language to speak for us, if we should be kept amongst them to
serve against the Venetians, and by accident should be taken by them, there
could be no better expected then loss of ship, and captivity of persons; as it
befell Captain Mersie in the ship Peter, about two years since.

4. That a French Captain which went away from Alexandria about four days
before us, besides loss of all was taken and hanged by the Venetian General,
only for bringing provisions to the Turks, and hereof we had notice at Rhodes.

5. That against this desperate destructive resolution of the Barbarian
Corsares to make prize of his, our persons and goods, we could have little hope
of protection from the Captain Bassa or General, for that five days before we
arrived at Rhodes, the said seven ships of Tripoli (which were then in the
Grand Seignieurs service, and had received their pay before they came out of
Tripoli, which notwithstanding) did near Candia seize on the ship Resolution of
London, Captain Thomas on his way toward Scandarone, with the value of Rials
of 8/8 100000 in ready money and goods for the account of our Merchants, and
made sale of our ship, persons and goods at Rhodes, in the presence of the
Grand Seignieur and Armate, which ought to have protected our ship, men and
goods, and released all according to our Capitulations, had the Tripoli ship
been simply in the capacity of Barbarian Rovers, and much more being in the
Grand Seignieurs pay, and consequently of is own Navy.

The whole premises considered, with the assurances (the French Captain and
Officers affirmed they had from very good hands of the inevitable destruction
which was designed for us; together with the general Resolution of our men not
to run themselves further into an apparent misery which was yet avoidable; we
on the 6 of July, near the Isle of Samos, took our opportunity to leave the
Turks in the night; and by Gods blessing on the 28 of July we arrived at
Livorne, for which great deliverance, the good and provident Lord be for ever
blessed; our Captain and all with him humbly conceived, that God directed them
to the most Christian and prudent expedient for the preservation of so many
Christians, estates, liberties and lives, which otherwise must inevitably have
perished, with their poor families depending on them all whom may now by Gods
providence live to serve their Country.

We are now informed that some officious persons here, clamor high, condemning
this our act, as like to be prejudicial to the estate in Turkey; and that
therefore they would endeavor to procure the great Dukes denial of us the
usual privilege of his free Port. And that we shall neither have reception nor
protection, but would enforce us to return into the Barbarians hands, from
which God has so graciously delivered us; but had the pertest of those
critical pretenders been under the same distress, they would questionless have
considered with us that life being the most desirable of all temporal good (For
skin for skin and all that a man has he will give for his life) next liberty
and estate, which makes our being a comfortable wel-being; and then the
reputation of justice and prudence, which are man's chiefest ornaments and
accomplishments, and all these at brink of inevitable ruin, and but one only
way left to escape it. It is believed they would have concluded with us that
preservation of all was preposeable unto self-felony, self-betraying of liberty
and estates (with the wel-being of all our dearest relations) in fidelity to
the trust reposed in us, by whom employed us, and forfeiture of the repute of
prudent, or able to manage, imputation of all which must necessarily have been
incured, had we not used this only means to save what else had been totally
lost.

And for jealousy of prejudice to the estate in Turkey. The Tenth Article of
our capitulation provides as follows; viz. That no English-mans person or
estate (except of such as have become sureties by public Act) shall be liable
to the debt or default of any other, and questionless the Lord Ambassador with
his power and authority will have better account of Capitulations from a
Council of State, where things are calmly debated, that all parties may be
understood, then poor men could have had when in the hands of merciless
Barbarians, who had determined our general destruction; besides the two youths
which were committed to our Captains Tuition (for education as well in
Christianity, as in abilities to be serviceable to their Country; he was as
willing to preserve from being forced (by cruelties) to turn Turk, or suffering
other unspeakable abuses; As Lot was to incur inconveniences to himself rather
then to expose his two strangers (once retired under his roof and protection)
to the abuse of those (and these are no less) Nefarious Sodomites, who at
Rhodes violated two Greek youths belonging to the Galleys, for which some of
the soldiers (who were the instruments of bearing them away) were hanged, but
the youths could never be recovered out of the hands of the Barbarian Captain
who had them; So little these Monsters value the Bassa's authority. But not to
be troublesome with much more which might be said: The sum of all is
self-preservation, natural and rational, and when that is at stake (which such a
train of dependences as attended this case of ours) It Is humbly conceived, that
all other circumstances (nay even legalities themselves) are not considerable;
and if in order to self-preservation, a Moses obscured himself, a David feigned
madness and a Paul escaped out of a window in a basket; It may be hoped there is
nothing in this act of ours contrary to Canon or civil right. And to take of
all suppositions of making any advantage of the Turks goods, It is desired that
the interessed in the ship would become security to his Highness the Lord
Protector, that just account shall be rendered of all that belongs to the Turks;
and that the balance due to them shall likewise be deposited in the hands of
whomsoever his Highness may think fit to appoint to be disposed accordingly,
after the case is more fully examined, controverted and judged; for we desire
to give a good account of our selves in all particulars, to enjoy our Country
and friends, and with our persons and substance to serve his Highness and the
State, as our Captain and many of us in the same ship did, on the engagement
with the Dutch before Livorne, under Captain Badiley, to the knowledge of all
the Levant Company, in whose service our Captain has been employed ever since
his childhood; nor has any other way of livelihood, save by the service of his
friends in the Levant Navigation. And therefore humbly desires that this Case
may have gracious audience, and himself and company acquitted or condemned
according to the merit of it.

And in the mean time we further pray, that the interessed in the ship would
become petitioners to his Highness for his Letter to the great Duke of Tuscany,
that we may with the usual freedom of his Port, buy, sell, and receive our dues
without oppression or molestation from any pretenders whatsoever; That we may
not be necessitated to any resolutions unworthy our Christian profession, or
our Nation.

And lastly, it is humbly desired, That this our case may be represented to his
Highness in the same dress it comes to you, for simple attire best becomes so
sad a truth, which (with our selves) we with all humility, prostrate at his
Highness feet, with prayers for his length of happy days.

This Remonstrance with a Petition to his Highness the Lord Protector, was
delivered to Mr Secretary Thurloe, Wednesday last, being the second day of
September. 1657.




