A BRIEF RESOLUTION Of the present Case of the SUBJECTS OF SCOTLAND, In order
to Episcopal Government, by Sacred Authority re-established in this KINGDOM.

OR, Episcopus Scoticanus Redivivus.

For the satisfaction of the People.

AVTHORE PHIL-ALETHIO.

Hos. 10. 4. They have spoken words, swearing falsely, in making a Covenant;
thus judgment springs up as hemlock in the furrows of the field.

Numb. 30. 5, 8, 12, 13, 15, 16. If the husband or father, shall any wise
disallow of the vows or oaths, of his wife or daughter, after that he has
heard them; they do become void, and neither stand nor bind; and the Lord shall
forgive her, because the husband or father disallowed her.

Printed in the Year, 1661.

A BRIEF RESOLUTION Of the present Case of the SUBJECTS OF SCOTLAND, In order
to Episcopal Government, Reestablished by Sacred Authority in this KINGDOM.
CASE. Whether the Lieges of Scotland, have any real necessity imposed on them
by any Oath or Covenant, to any just scrupling of closing with Episcopacy, to
which by Sacred Authority this Kingdom is lately restored.

WIth what Caution and Wariness men ought to imbarque themselves in all manner
of Engagements, needs not much Oil or Labor spent upon the Enquiry; Scripture
alone is sufficiently able to instruct us, sometimes terming it a bond, Ezekiel.
20 37. Sometimes a snare, Prove. 6. 2. And verily he who does unadvisedly
engage, does many a time entangle himself in an intrigue of inextricable
difficulties, out of which, he cannot so easily wind himself; especially in
the matter of Oaths in the time of popular confusions; Men then being ^noxious
to so many precipices of danger, in making Shipwreck of Conscience, through
Error and Mis-prision, on the one hand; with fear and force, on the other. We
need not much Range abroad in the inquest, after witnesses to this truth, our
own homebred late popular Covenants and Engagements, bearing so much
lamentable evidence of it upon them, to this very day; whileas these are still
made use of, as the Master-engines of some Polypragmatick-Male-contents, for
staving of, honest and well-meaning People, from that duty, they owe to God,
their Mother Church, and our Gracious and undoubted Sovereign, by making it
their constant and zealous endeavor to invegle the people, by presenting these
as indispensable Bonds, which are, indeed, but so many snares, and so many
Flaxen Fetters and Cob-webs, which themselves in the most essential Points, do
break through at pleasure, (as God-willing shall be made clearly to appear, in
the sequel of this Discourse) and yet amuse the Vulgar, who reach not to the
depths of things, as if these were inviolable and indissoluble sacred wyths,
wherein they must ly tied neck and heel.

That therefore, we may make appear, how far, the late Oaths, Covenants, etc.
whereby the people of this Land did engage themselves, against Episcopal
Government, in this Church, do bind, and how far they may be dispensed with, as
to an after-performance, and so whether to be reckoned among Sacred Bonds, or
sinful Snares: I shall (howbeit as much has been already said, to discover the
sinfulness and invalidity of these Oaths, etc. by His late Majesty of Immortal
Memory, in His Admirable Book, and Debates, etc. and by the Learned and
Renowned Doctors of Aberdene, in their Demands and Duplys, as may put to
silence all those who, together with their duty, have not forfaulted a Sober,
Rational mind) lay down very briefly, some few irrefragable Propositions
concerning the bindingnesse of Oaths and Covenants in the general; from which,
I shall draw a resolution of the Case in hand, by way of Corrolary; and then
leave it, upon the sober, and impartial consideration, of all un-prejudged, to
resolve, whether these Covenant-Engagements be the indispensable Oaths of God,
(as some ^o usually phrase it, for amusing the simple) or not. As for these
P^nciples and Propositions, which, (I trust) may infer a full and satisfactory
solution of the present Case; I shall, studying brevity, reduce them all to
these eight, following.

Propos. jma. There is this first Proposition. No man may swear, or by subtilty
or violence induce others to swear, unlawfully. This is full of evidence; none
being free to sin, or any-wise to engage others to sin; but to swear, or to
induce another by any means, to swear unlawfully, is, beyond all peradventure
sinful; and therefore. etc. but we leave this on its own evidence, and go to
the next.

Propos. 2da. There is this second Proposition. That is not a lawful or
justifiable Oath, which is not attended with Truth, Righteousness and
Judgment. This Proposition is borrowed, from the Prophet Jeremiah, Jer. 4. 2.
Thou shall swear, the Lord lives, in truth, in righteousness, and in
judgment. Where we find the Holy Ghost, laying down three grand qualifications
of a lawful Oath; viz. 1. That it be in truth; which requires not only, that
the thing sworn be true, but also, candor and sincerity, in the undertaking,
without all falsehood and double-mindednesse. 2. That it be in righteousness;
which requires, that the thing sworn, be just, and in it self lawful to be
undertaken: which is all one with that which Judicious Casuists speak, viz.
That the Oath be undertaken, Super re licita; Since God is not to be assumed,
either for Witness or Over-seer of a thing simply unjust (as, if the matter
sworn be unlawful, he is) who is a God of most pure eyes, and cannot behold
iniquity: And moreover, because it binds a man, to the doing of a thing, which
yet the very intrinsecal condition of the matter, refuses a performance of.
Upon this ground, Herod was not bound, notwithstanding his promise and oath, to
deliver the Baptist's head, to Herodias her daughter; no more, were these
forty Conspirators against St. Paul, Act. 23. 12, 13, etc. Neither, David by
his having sworn and vowed the destruction of churlish Nabal, 1 Samuel 25. 22,
etc. And then 3. that it be in judgment. Which requires, that the thing
undertaken by Oath, be not unmeet and undue to be performed, but due and
convenient, and, which is mostly imported, that it be deliberately and
pensiculately set about. These three qualifications, are ingredients absolutely
necessary, for constituting a lawful Oath; being, that it is intrinsecally
sinful, to swear either falsely, or unjustly, or to swear the performance of
that, which is unmeet and inconvenient to be undertaken, as also, to engage
rashly, unadvisedly, and without deliberation into any Covenant or Oath
whatsomever. But,

Propos. 3ia. There is this third Proposition. A promissary Oath, which is
undertaken, to the certain prejudice of another man's just right, cannot be
attended with justice. This needs not much debate upon its evidence; being,
that Justitia tribuit ^uique snum, Justice being a virtue, whereby, to every
man his Due, and Own are rendered: If therefore any Oath engage, to the
performance of that which does clearly prejudge any other, in that which is his
due and just right, it is an unrighteous Oath, and because of its injustice,
is, of it self, vacated from being binding or obligatory. But,

Propos. 4ta. There is this fourth Proposition. No prejudice or violence, done
to the right of any other man, can be so highly dangerous and sinful, as that
prejudice and violence which are done to the just right of the Supreme
Magistrate, and His Sovereign Authority. This is undeniably irrefragable; for,
in so far, as the Public Interest is beyond the Private, in regard of worth
and excellence, and as to intemerable preservation; so far is the prejudice
done to the just right of the Sovereign Magistrate and His Authority,
incomparably sinful, beyond what can be done to the right of any private
Subject or Subjects whatsomever. But,

Propos. 5ta. There is this fifth Proposition. The just right of the Sovereign
Magistrate and His Authority, is egregiously trampled upon and prejudged, when
private Subjects encroach upon it, and do upon suspicion or jealousy of
disallowed intentions or actions of their Sovereign Princes, combine,
confederate or bind themselves to Allow, Enact, or Establish any thing (much
more, to reverse or repeal allowed established and standing Laws) concerning
any matters belonging to Religion, (upon the well or ill administration
whereof, the greatest security or ruin of a State depends) without much more
against the consent and command of lawful Sovereign Authority. This Proposition
is clear, not only from the Municipal and known Laws of this Kingdom, but even
from the very Law and light of nature it self; for it is obvious to every
Tenderer of Sovereignty, that it is one of the choicest and most inviolable
Jewels of the Crown of a Supreme Power, to which none are coordinate, but all
subordinate, as to every Supreme Power, as Supreme, all must needs be; viz.
That no Popular Combinations, Bonds or Leagues, should be among Subjects, upon
what score or pretense how specious soever, without, much less against the
consent and command of the Authority foresaid; for, and if it were f^ee for
Subjects, thus at pleasure to Combine, Confederate, etc. A King (in which the
Supreme Power, in a true Monarchy, resides) were but a bare, weak, titular
King, and shadow only of a Sovereign, depending precario upon the Subjects,
whom at pleasure they might cast off or destroy; nay, and of it self, it opens
a patent door for the eversion and ruin of all Government and Supreme Power,
so that any who will, may, by a Confederacy rebel, upon one pretext or another.
Hence it is evident, there can be no greater encroachment upon, no higher
prejudice done unto Sovereign Authority, then for Subjects in any-wise to
Combine or Bind themselves, against the Supreme Royal Will and without consent
of the Sovereign. And, if it be, so high a prejudice done to the just right of
the Sovereign, for Subjects in any case to Combine or Confederat without him,
were it even to the carrying on of standing and known Laws; what a heinous
injury must it infer, upon the Sovereigns just right? for Subjects to Combine
for the reversing and repealing of established and standing Laws, without, nay,
and forcibly against Royal Commands: is not this, the most superlative and
transcendent prejudice, which can be done to the just right of the Supreme
Authority?

But here now, that we may a little more unfold this Proposition; it would be
noticed that it is deemed a favorable plea by some, for Subjects, tho in no
case else, yet in the Concern of Religion, to Combine and Confederate, without
the allowance or consent of Sovereign Authority, for redressing abuses and
reforming disorders therein; especially when the Supreme Magistrate being
required thereto, does deny his concurrence, and withhold the shoulder. But
such men, they are not aware, that in this they join issue with Phanatick
Anabaptists and the bloodiest of the Popes devotionaries (who with them, in
this, resemble Sampson's Foxes, being linkt together by the Tails, though their
Heads look different ways) and with them cry up the lawfulness of carrying on
a Reformation in Religion, by outward force and violence: so much contrary to
the ways and Word of God, Joh. 18. 36. My Kingdom is not of this world, etc.
If it were, my servants would fight. Where, blessed Christ Jesus does plainly
insinuate, that His Kingdom being spiritual, cannot, must not, be advanced with
temporal arms: for the weapons of the Christians warfare, are not Carnal, but
Spiritual, 2 Cor. 10. 4. There is no command from Christ to kill and slay the
common enemies of our Religion, but contrariwise to pray for our persecuters,
and not to resist evil, Matthew. 5. 44. See also other Scriptures, such as Zech.
4. 6. 1 Timothy 6. 2. and 2 Timothy 2. 25, etc. Nay, and this course, it is against
the very nature of Religion it self; for, faith which is the Soul of Religion,
is an inward act of the soul, which all the force in the world, can neither
plant nor extirpate; ^am suddenda non cogenda est. Conformable to this, was the
constant Doctrine and Practice of the Pious, Sober, Primitive Church (which had
learned better what belonged to Authority, then to resist the Ordinance of God,
even in a Heathen Caesar) whose Religion enjoined them not to kill, but to be
killed for it; Nor was this for want of ability but of Authority: As we read in
the most Ancient Apologists for the Christian Faith, such as Arnob. Lactant.
Cyprian: cont. Demetr. Tertull. in apol. and. ad Scap. Just. in Tryph. August.
in Psalm. 144. Ambros. in luc. 22. 38. Athan. epist. ad solit. vitam agentes,
etc. Then further, Popular Reformation, or Covenanting for Reformation of
Religion without concurrence of the Supreme Magistrate, has no warrantable
president, but rather to the contrary in Sacred Writ: See those Scriptures at
convenience, Deuteronomy. 29. 2, 10, 11, 12, etc. Josh. 24. 25. 2 King. 23. 23. 2 Chronicles. 15. 8, 12. and cap. 29. 3, 10. and cap. 34. 31, 32. Ezra 10. 3, 4, 5. In
all which and in many the like, you have ever the Chief Magistrates, Moses,
Joshua, Hezekiah, Josiah, etc. concurring, or rather going before the People,
(as their place required) in the several Reformations therein mentionate; but
no where the people Covenanting upon a Reformation of Religion (even in times
of the worst of Kings) without concurrence of the Supreme Magistrate: Arise,
for the matter belongs to thee (says the whole Assembly of Elders there met)
to Ezra, the prime Ruler; in that cited place, Ezra 10. 4. To shun the force of
which Argument, and for a sinful impairing the Supreme Power of the Sovereign;
some have ^ancied a supposed co-ordination of power (I shall not once name
these, whose impudence has imboldned them to assert a monstrous Subordination
of the Sovereign to the People) betwixt our King and His People in their
representative Meetings.

This, indeed, is the Arch-pillar, upon which some of no small Note, have laid
the stresse of their Cause, for the supportment of the lawfulness of
Popular-reformings, without the Supreme and Royal Consent. But, surely, this,
as it is a most pernicious, so a most empty, airy, inconsequent speculation.
Inconsequent, because, if a co-ordination of Sovereign Power, be supposed twixt
King and People; then a joint concurrence of both, in every act of Supreme
Power, is necessary, if the act be not spurious and illegittimate: so that by
this, the people, de jure, may no more reform without the King, then the King
without the People; both singly considered (according to this dream) being but
Subjecta potestat is supremae partial^^, and both jointly considered only, the
adaequat and complete subject of Sovereignty. Empty and groundless, for, what
a wild imagination is it, to place a coordinate power with the King, in the
representative Body of the People, when the Sovereign only, has by fundamental
Law, the right of calling, and then of dissolving, at pleasure, the said Body;
and what an absurd phoenomenon must it needs be? to conceive in a body, a
co-ordination twixt the Members and the Head thereof; and the King is the Head
of all the Tribes, 1 Samuel 15. 17. and such an Head, Vbi seeds meri imperij est.
But further, this whimsey is repugnant to the true condition of Monarchy; for,
this supposed co-ordination of the Supreme jus^ive Power, must necessarily
infer or suppose a communicability of the Sovereign Power, to more then one;
which, notwithstanding, in true Monarchy, is so properly belonging to, and so
inseparably settled in the Person of the Sovereign Prince, as that it cannot be
derived or communicated to any other, save only in way of deputation and
commission when and how far forth himself pleases, in the outward exercise and
administration of the same. Since as Bodin rightly gives it; Necess^ est ut
regnum quantumcunque est, ac jura omnia Majestatis, in solidum VNI, partitione
sublata, tribuantur; alioquin non Monarchia sed Polyarchia dicetur. De republ.
lib. 6. cap. 8. And indeed, however many Sharers there are in the Supreme
Power, so many Supreme Governors or Sovereigns (respectively, and according to
the different Interests they have, more or less) there shall be. Oh, what
Chimera's of invention, will men make use of to uphold most groundless
conceits, they have once embraced, for strengthening and promoving of their
sinful and selfie designs and interests. But to leave this,

P^rpos. 6ta. There is this sixth Proposition. A justifiable Oath must be
undertaken in bonum finem, for good ends and purposes; ends, consistent with
the welfare of our Neighbor, especially of the Church and State we live in. (A
clause, say Casuists, necessarily supposed, though not always expressed in
such engagements) under this, much is comprehended; as, that a lawful Oath
cannot engage to the doing of any thing, repugnant or obstructive, to the
performance of some greater moral duty, one or another: so the Learned Grotius,
de jur^ belli, lib. 2. cap. 13. n. 7. Immo, etiam si res quae promittitur non
sit illicita, sed majus bonum morale impediens; sic quoque non valebit
jurawentum, etc. Hence also it it is, that we ought by no means, to Vow,
Promise or Swear peremptorly, against the doing of any thing, which yet the
real equity thereof, either then, or upon occasion farely offered, may
afterward justly require and efflagitate at our hands. The ground of this
comprehensive Proposition, briefly is, because, the greater moral duty, is
still to be preferred to the lesser, as to practice and performance; and in
affirmative precepts, this is acknowledg'dly evident; these being such as
oblige, licet semper, non tamen ad semper; as Divines universally take it.

Propos. 7ma. There is this seventh Proposition. No Oath is or can be
justifiable or of binding force, which is taken against a righteous, laudable
Oath formerly sworn. For, one lawful Oath can never make void another, much
less can an unlawful, vacat the obligation of a righteous Oath. It is a clear
case resolved by Judicious Casuists, that a lawful Oath cannot be contra pactum
aliquod licitum prius initum; for such super-faetation of dissonant Oaths or
Promises, does ever beget a direct nullity in the latter. So that he who has
sworn Allegiance to the Sovereign, and to maintain Episcopal Government in the
Church; (which we now suppose to be lawful) and thereby bound himself, to
maintain the just Right, Power and Authority of his said Sovereign, or the
forsaid Form of Church Government, he cannot, by any second or supervenient
Oath, be tied, to do any thing that may tend to the violation or infringement
of his former engagement; and if he have so ensnared himself, the obligation
is, ipso facto, void and null. But,

Propos. 8va, and ult. There is this eight and last Proposition. A man is bound
in conscience, to reve^^, renounce and disclaim that, Which he was induced to
engage himself by Oath, unlawfully to perform. For, an Oath, which is,
Sacramentum pietatis, as it is in the mouths of all, cannot be vinculum iniquit
at is, cannot be a bond of iniquity. No man can be, by any rash Oath, or any
Oath whatsomever, engaged so, as to stand oblidged, to do and perform that,
which is in it self sinful and unlawful to be done; but (...) bound in
couscience to break that snare which was never a real, but merely a supposed
Bond. Aquinas says well, 2da, 2dae. quaest. 89. Jurans illicitum, peccat
jurando, and peccat servando.

Over and beyond all these, there are (I know) many other cases, in which, the
person once engaged to act, may be disobliged from a necessary performance; as,
when he pomises or swears, to perform somewhat impossible, and beyond his
reach; De impossibilibus, enim, nemo tenetur, is the received maxim: or, when
his condition is notably changed, from what it was, when first he entered the
obligation; for then, some inevitable and remediless impediment, may obstruct
the performance: and many suchlike useful Cases may be touched upon; but the
Propositions already laid down, are the most Catholic or Universal and surest
Landmarks, by which, we may examine the legality and bindingnesse, of whatever
engagements; where they fail All, or any of them, the supposed Promise or Oath,
doubtless, becomes void and frustrate; entangle us it may, in the Snares and
Bonds of sinfulnes, as the wise man calls them, Prove. 5. 22. but not oblige us
to a necessary performance of the thing undertaken; not even then, when as we
freely and voluntarily incur the snare, much less, when it is forced upon us
(which is much to be adverted in our present disquiry) by an over-awing,
prevailing Faction; This loosens and weakens the ty much, if superveening thus
to other circumstances; for, Non potest id civium consensu factum censeri, quod
erepta liberate fiat. Bodin. de rep. lib. 2. c. 5.

And now, if our late Oaths, Covenants and Leagues, be squared according to
these irrefragable rules above recorded; what bindingnesse or obligation may be
found in them, will be easy to determine and resolve, by their impingence upon
most of the forsaid Propositions: All these popular and tumultuary engagements,
being in their very essence, combinations among factious Subjects, without and
against the known will and consent of Supreme Authority, and that, not to ca^^y
on or pursue laudbale and settled Laws, but (without all parallel) to reverse
and repeal established and standing Laws, against the Royal Will of our
Sovereign Lawgiver; and, therefore, in the judgment of the most rigid at this
day, acknowledged to have had much sin in them, upon this very Score. Much
might be said in discovery of the sinfulness and unlawfulness of these late
Covenants and Oaths; not only in regard of their efficient Cause, as made by
Subjects against the will of their Sovereign, in such things as necessarily
required His consent: but further, in respect of their subject matter, as being
guilty of high injustice to the right of the King, both in the matter of
combination without Him, and of conditional Allegiance to and preservation of
Him, as also, the altering of Religion established by Law, without His consent;
and as engaging, to accuse all Malignants (not accepting a man's own self) and
to endeavor that all such, may be brought to punishment, without hope of mercy
or pardon; binding also to pull down the established Church Government, before
agreement upon another; and every man to go before another in the example of
Re^ormation, without either waiting for the Minister to direct, or Magistrates
Authority to lead the way; then these, what can be more unjust? binding also to
impossibilities; as, to defend and assist ALL that engage into these O^t^s; and
never to offer their opinions to neutrality or indifferency: the very taking
also of these Oaths, was, in fact, directly contradicent to the formal words
thereof; for, whereas they swear to extirpate Schism and Faction and to
preserve the Liberties of the Kingdoms and Authority of the King; The very
taking and enforcing of these Oaths, being a vowed Schism from their
Mother Church, a sworn Faction against their more Loyal Neighbors, the
greatest prejudice to the Liberties of the Kingdoms, the taking of these being
destructive to all legal Public Liberties; and the highest contempt that could
be offered to the Kings Authority; as appears not only from what is
abovesaid, but further in this, that some of these Oaths did engage,
absolutely to preserve the power of Parliaments, but the Kings Person and
Authority with reservation; for this end (forsooth) that the world may judge of
their Loyalty, and how they had no intention to diminish his just Power. But
left this short word, by enlarging on these and such like peccancies of these
late Covenant-Oaths, should swell into a volumne; We shall forhear: Nor shall
we speak of the unparalelled fraud and force, practiced in imposing these
Oaths, upon honest and wel-meaning Subjects; neither of the grand impostur's,
whereby factious and selfdesigning men, did speciously usher-in and drive-on,
their own base carnal interests, under the color of the interests of Jesus
Christ, in our sadly-experienced late Tragedies: And shall briefly, draw a
corrolary, from these above-specified Propositions, concerning the Point of
Episcopal Government in this Church, and the s^eming obligation of the Subjects
in this Land, by their Oaths and Vows, against it. And it is this. 1. That
these Oaths, in the first place, were, in the judgment of many of the most
Sober and Learned, simply sinful and unjust; upon the score of their tendency
to the extirpation of that form of Church Government, which they conceived to
be of Divine Right and Institution; so that in order to all these, who were
then, or are yet, of persuasion, that Episcopacyis, jure divino, these Oaths
cannot be supposed to be any wise in point of conscience binding: And, sure,
more may be said, for a Divine Right and Institution, of an imparity in degrees
and even in office, among Church-guides, and so, for Episcopacy, then can be,
for any other Form, or Model of Church Government in the World. But, Secondly,
Passing this, and supposing only Episcopal Government to have been, upon the
matter, indifferent; (as, I trust, the more modest, sober and moderate will
readily acknowledge) then, for Subjects to engage by Covenants or Oaths, for
the utter extirpation thereof, without the concurrence of Supreme Authority,
nay, and against the consent and express will of the Sovereign Magistrate, and
the established standing Laws of this Kingdom, of which, the King alone is the
Fountain and Origin; Cum ipse sit author juris, ut Bracton. lib. 3. tra. 1. c.
9. And as another eminent in Law, says well, Vita and caput and autoritas in
Principe est, omnium, quae in republica agi solent. How sinful, then, must
needs these Oaths and Engagements, have been? How contrary to the just Right of
the Sovereign? (Who in Adiaphoris and indifferents, is acknowledged by all, to
be Summus and Supremus Arbiter) and therefore how invalid and insufficient, as
to obligation upon any, who have been ensnared by them; is obvious to every
eye, that will not shut it self, against convincing light: How much, also, such
are concerned heartily to homologat and close with His Majesti's Gracious
Resolutions, in the present setlement of this long tossed Church; is as
apparent. But, Thirdly, As to the most rigid, who (to the admiration of the
truly Sober) would assert an intrinsecal unlawfulness and sinfulness, in
Episcopal Government, however so well regulated; I say, that even their Oath for
the Extirpation of Episcopal Government, cannot oblige even as to them; being
that for private Subjects by themselves, to endeavor to establish or prefer
any new Law, however so just and laudable in it self, or to reverse and rescind
any standing Law, however so unjust and sinful, against or without the
Sovereign's Will and Royal conse^^, is heinously sinful and rebellious, and in
it self, and fine operis, plainly Anarchical and eversive of all Government
whatsomever: and, I trust, no Oath to act rebellion, sin or Anarchy, will be
supposed by any sober, to be binding, unless it be to a speedy and hearty
repentance; so that even the Engagements and Oaths of those who are most rigid
in this matter, were in themselves, beyond all contradiction, sinful; and
therefore can in no ways be obligative even as to those: So that, upon what
ever account else it may be, that it pleases some men zealously to engage
against Episcopacy, in its present setlement and re-establishment, it cannot be
upon the value of their Oath (as they would make simple people to believe, as
if that were an indispensablety stressing their consciences) that being in its
own nature, sinful (all combinations without Sovereign consent, being such, as
themselves will now freely acknowledge) and therefore they cannot but see
themselves in conscience obliged to reverse and mourn for these their sinful
Oaths. And to deal a little freely, so much talking of Oaths, and indispensable
Oaths, with the frequent threats of the danger of perjury, which have been so
much thundered out, to fright welmeaning and tender Christians; cannot be looked
upon by considering persons, but as so many methods and impostures to delude:
whileas, even the most violent pressers of the bindingnesse of these Oaths
against Episcopacy, do in their open professions and acknowledgements, renounce
and disclaim the obligations of these Oaths, as to the combination and
confederacy that is in them (consederacies and combinations among Subjects,
upon what pretext soever, without special allowance and consent of the Supreme
Magistrate, being, by themselves acknowledged to be sinful and rebellious)
which yet is, if not, the very formalis ratio and essence of these ensnaring
Covenant-Oaths, yet doubtless, the prime object and man foundation of them:
whileas also they acknowledge the unbindingnesse of these same Oaths, as to
conditional and reserved Allegiance, by undue and unwarrantable limitations and
restrictions; and yet still press the Oath and its bindingnesse against
Episcopal Government: and in a copulative Oath (such as these Oaths and
Covenants acknowledge themselves to be) if the obligation, as to any one point,
be dissolved and loosed, it can hardly be understood, how as to the whole or
any other particular, there can be any more bindingnesse therein. What will the
forsaid acknowledgments infer, being weighed in the balance of discerning men,
but that, were it not, that the fear of incurring the censure and penalties of
treason, did overawe; these Covenant-Oaths, etc. would be still vigorously
asserted, to be as binding and obligative in point of combination, without and
against the Sovereign Magistrate's consent; and in order to conditional and
limited Allegiance, as they are said to be, in order to the point of
Episcopacy. To dispense with these Oaths and Covenant-engagements in these
great Points and Interests, and yet, still to set out the same as indispensable
ties and Sacred inviolable Bonds, against Episcopal-Government; is not this
handsomely to play the Pope? in dispensing in some more weighty, and binding
consciences, in lighter concerns of one and the same copulative Oath: or is it
not rather (as some observing persons, give it) to act the impostures, in
imposing upon the Peoples easiness and credulity, for upholding of the
tottering Diana of a Para-mount Power, some have so sinfully usurped, and so
tyrannically practiced* and are yet so unwilling to part with, left the power
of this Church be recovered into those hands, out of which it was wrested by
violence and injustice.

And what a needless noise is it, that is so much raised by the zealous
clamors of some, against Episcopacy; may it not be remembered, that it was
declared, by the contrivers and abettors of the Covenant, in its first rise;
that though they supposed Episcopacy to be against Law in Scotland, yet, they
did not require any, by taking of the Covenant to abjure it, but that the
practice of it should be forborne and the matter referred to a free General
Assembly. See Ministers Answ. to the 4. them. of the Doctors of Aberdene. And
one would think that the edge of such preposterous zeal, might have been rather
blunted then sharpened, by these last three and twenty years exeperience. And is
not Episcopacy a Government, which had its rise in the Apostles themselves, and
by continual and universal succession; has since, been still owned and
practiced by the Christian Church; as the continued succession of Bishops in
the See's of Alexandria, from Mark the Evangelist; in Jerusalem from James the
Apostle; in Antioch from Peter etc. show, If historical credit may be given to
such Worthies, as Irenaeus, Eusebius, Socrates, Theodoret, Hierom, with many
other grave and famous Ecclesiastic Writers; in so much, that ^^^tus, for
affirming a Bishop not to be above a single Presby^er, was generally reputed by
the Christian World for thirteen hundred years together, as well in the Eastern
as Western Church, for a downright Heretic: a Government which has been
still owned in the Church of Scotland, when Order and Government did overtop
Faction and Interest, and ever still, till Seditions, Tumults, Insurrections
and Rebellions did go current for Discipline and Order: And in a word, a
Government, which by the universal consent of the Churches of Christendom,
both in Asia, Africa, Greece, Russia, and other parts of Europe, that never
acknowledged any subjection to, or dependence upon the Sea of Rome, has been
constantly embraced, and the Opugners of it generally branded for Heretics;
which of all other Forms has undovbted the best Title to Divine or Apostolical
Institution; against which nothing is, or ever could be, objected, but the
humane infirmities and personal failings of some particular men, from which no
Government is or can be totally exempted and privileged; which, in the most of
these few Churches who want it (some whereof are under the want of Bishops,
because they cannot tell how to come by them, their Princes being of a
different Religion, and so will allow none but of their own; others there be,
who are willingly without them, because settled in such a Government, as they
find most suitable to a Popular State, and dare not venture upon a change; all
others enjoying the felicity of Episcopal Government, either the thing and name
both, or else the thing under another name, viz. Superintendents, Inspector's,
etc. by their best and ablest Ministers, has been frequently desired. Our
practice, sure, is without all parallel, in that never did we read of any
Church, before a misleading Faction in this our Church of Scotland, that ever
turned out their Bishops (if they were of the same Religion) vowing to root
them out by the Sword, contrary to the command of the Supreme Lawful
Magistrate. So that we must needs accuse all the World besides our selves, of
folly, Antichristianism and ignorance, or then resolve to forbear our peevish
quarrellings against this Government of the Church by Bishops, to which through
Gods Mercy, and His Majesty's care, this broken Church is again restored. To
all the former it may be added, that in all the Bible it is not to be sound,
that the power either of Ordination of Jurisdiction, ever was exercised by a
singl. Presbytery (yea, and it is none of the least of doubts, whether there be
mention of any judicial consistory of single Presbyters simpliciter pares, in
all Sacred Writ) without delegation from, and in a dependence upon a Superior
Power, residing in a single person. If then, the design of some Zelots against
Episcopacy, may not seem to have worse at the bottom, and do not tend to lead
Subjects into misconstructions of His Majesty's Gracious Intentions, let the
impartial, determine. So that, to draw toward a conclusion, we may see, how
contrary such Oaths and Vows are to the duty which good Subjects, by virtue of
their relation, and as Subjects, they owe to their Sovereign; how contrary to
due Allegiance; how obstructive and repugnant, to the performance, of the great
moral duty of obedience, due by Subjects to Supreme Authority, and the
established Laws thereof; as also, how inconsistent with the welfare of the
Church, and State we live in; and consequently how sinful, is easy to discern
by comparing these Oaths, etc. with the irrefragable Propositions, above set
down.

And therefore, if any (according to our last Proposition) good Subject or
Subjects, have been drawn, by any pretense, persuasion or force whatsomever to
bind himself by Oath or Covenant against Episcopal Government, which was, and
now again is established by Law; he has not sworn in justice, but engaged
himself to the certain prejudice of His Sovereign's just Right, by a sinful
combining with private Subjects against His Authority, to the doing of many
things contrary to established Law, and (which is most impious) by endeavoring
to introduce the form of a Solemn Oath upon a matter so incapable of, and
indisposed for such a Form; if any, I say, has been thus engaged, he is
obliged, in duty and conscience to disclaim, reverse and renounce his said act;
otherwise, beside the horrid scandal which he shall draw upon the Reformed
Religion, he does run himself upon the breach of the third Command, by making
his Oath, a bond of iniquity. And for the further satisfaction, of the
satisfiable; it may ponderate, that the power imposing these Oaths, was
originally invalid and naught; and where the fountain is corrupt, the streams
issuing thence, can by no means run clear, Nam quod deest in causa deest in
effectu; and therefore, what is done in virtue of such invalid power, can
scarce amount to right or lawful; as grounded upon such a rotten Basis of
pretended Authority. And, which ought exceedingly to stisfie Subjects, in their
dis-obligation from these ensnaring ties, Our Father, I mean, Pater Patriae,
without whose consent, no vow or engagement of the child is obligative, as we
may see, Numb. 30. 4, 5, etc, that a Virgin or a Wise making a vow without
consent of the Father or Husband, is dis-obliged therefrom, if the Husband or
Father hearing of the vow, do disallow thereof; and, we being, in a moral
sense, as much at the dispose of the King, the Father of the Country, the
Civil Father of us all, if not more then Children at the dispose of their
natural Parents, whileas the vows forsaid are dispensed and irritate by Him,
they can be no more binding ties to us, (suppose them otherwise lawful) and we,
His diffent being any ways signified to us, are dis-oblig'd and no more bound,
but may forgo these vows; and in our so doing, the Lord will forgive us, as it
is in Numb. 30. 6. forgive us, not for that we renounce these Vows, that being
duty; but for our rash or cowardish engagement in them, without due consent,
that being our sin.

If it be said, that, our Civil Father, His Majesty His consent was indulged to
these Engagements, which may therefore be still supposed to be binding, To this
it is replied. First, This does not take away the unlawfulness of any of these
Oaths and Vows, which were undertaken, antecedently to any Royal and
Authoritative consent thereto procured; so that such who before that
before-alleg'd consent, did engage in these combinatory Oaths, did therein
heinously sin, so that these are thereby obliged to nothing but Repentance; The
first Swearing and Covenanting at least, being rebellious and sinful. But,
Secondly, Any Royal consent that ever was procured or granted, was a violented,
coacted consent, and therefore, in Law, to be looked upon by all honest
Subjects, as a non-consent, coactus enim consensus, nullus; so that the Princes
involuntary and constrained yielding and ceding to a prevailing Faction,
affords and lays no just title or ground of obligation, no not upon Himself,
in the exterior Court, much less upon His Subjects: N^m, ex action
involuntaria, non nascitur, obligatio. reg. juris. vid. cod. hb. 2. tit. 20.
And then, Thirdly, That supposed consent of our present Sovereign, is obvious
to the eye of all the World, to have been forced and coacted; He being by a
Faction in this Kingdom, at that time, most undutifully, and disloyally kept,
as a Noble Prisoner, rather then a free King, and by them violented, to give
color of life to these things, which in their very nature did bereave
Sovereignty of its breath: and therefore that consent is now repealed, as
appears from His Majesty's present Resolutions, and His High and Honorable
Council, their Proclamation, of the date September, 1661. relating to
Church Government. So that hence no show of any title of obligation, as to
these Vows and Oaths, does affect the Subjects, but rather to the contrary; His
diffent being of equal force to disoblige, as His consent is, to ty or oblige.

And now, by this time, I trust, it does appear, that for any stiffly to oppose
the setlement of this Church by Episcopacy, is so unwarrantable; that none who
has any sense of Religion to God, of charity to their Mother Church, or of
grateful duty to their Gracious King, will presume to justify; and, if any
will prove so peevish; Subjects, I trust, know better how to value Peace, being
so harrassed and spoiled by the late intestine Divisions, then to be so easily
engaged again, to devote that little blood and treasure which remains, to the
sinful and ambitious lusts of a few men whom, though our King and this Kingdom
were not able to call to an account, (which yet they may find) yet there is a
God in heaven, who sees all their hearts, and will one day, judge and be
avenged of all such their sinful actions.

By what is said, men may see, at any time, how weak the cords of an unlawful
Oath, Vow, or Engagement are and how little they bind, save only to Repentance,
and that for their unadvised rashness, if spontaneously undertaken, and for
their cowardice, if through fear, submitted to. By this also it may appear to
how little purpose, men make use of these ties and fetters, that bind not in
truth, but only ensnare; like to those cords wherewith Sampson was bound, and
as easily upon occasion broken asunder; being, that there wants a twisting-in
of these conditions required in the Propositions premised, to strengthen and
confirm them: nay, so far are they, from holding fast the person Engaged, that
upon a due back-search and examination, they help to set him looser; when as he
shall seriously bethink himself of the guilt and burden of sin he yet lies
under; Nam tolerabilius est promissum non facere quod turpe, est. Ambros. de
offic. lib. 3. cap. 12. no other way of escape, then, but by a speedy
cancelling of the obligation.

Briefly, and to conclude this short word, for satisfaction (in which we have
appeared, upon no other incentives, but, of conscience, of Loyalty, and of zeal
for order and beauty, in this our Mother Church) of the Scrupulous; Where the
Promise or Oath, both for matter and manner, is rightly undertaken; we cannot
be too anxious and solicitons in keeping of it, so Matthew. 5. 33. Religiose
observa juramentum: was one of Pythagoras, his first lessons to his Disciples;
yea, God himself, has vouchsased it a room, within the catalogue of his most
glorious titles, of being faithful, and keeping Covenant: otherwise, where
fraud or force, with the like, shall happen to interpose, and withal, the
matter, in many respects above-specified, be injustifiable; concerning such an
obligation, when, or wheresoever undertaken; the best resolution, in my humble
opinion, is, that it is ill taken and worse kept; nay, and is of it self void
from the beginning, and binds to nothing, but, what I heartily wish, all may
find in the end, REPENTANCE.

FINIS.
Si quis necessitate coactus juraverit, pignusve posuerit, quo is ad insidias
Domino suo parandas, vel ^pem, injuste cuivis ferendam, adstringitur, resiliat
potius quam quo coepit, insistat, suademus. L L. Alured. c. 1.

Consilium, prudensque animi sententia jurat, Et nisi judicii, vincula nulla
tenent.


