A PARALLEL OR BRIEF COMPARISON OF THE LJTVRGJE WITH THE MASSE-BOOK, The
Breviarie, the Ceremonial, and other Romish Ritualls.

Wherein is clearly and shortly demonstrated, not only that the LITURGY is
taken for the most part word by word out of these Antichristian Writts; but
also that not one of the most abominable passages of the Mass can in reason be
refused by any who cordially embrace the Liturgy as now it stands, and is
commented by tbe Prime of our Clergy.

All made good from the Testimonies of the most famous and learned Liturgick
Writers both Romish and English.

By R. B. K.

Seen and Allowed.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Pain, and are to be sold at the Castle in
Cornehill, 1641.

THE PREFACE.
The reformed Religion is a great Enemy to Satan's Kingdom.
THe Kingdom of Satan these last thousand years has not been so much
indamaged by any work of God, as by that glorious reformation of Religion,
which in the days of our Fathers the LORD stirred up many Protestant
Potentates and Divines to undertake, and to this day with an undaunted courage
and mavelous success to maintain: it is nothing strange to see or hear of
plots singularly crafty, of practices eminently cruel, employed by the
vassalls of the God of this world for the crushing of that reformation which
has preved so divine an engine to profligate error, profaneness, and all
other wickedness, whereby the souls of men were wont to be led away to their
destruction without controlment.

Satan's new devise to overthrow the reformed Religion by his mediators of
peace.
The old devices of the Devil against the Protestant Churches by their long use
are a little blunted and become nothing either so terrible or effectual as
once we felt them* the learning, vivacitie, and indefatigable industry of the
Jesuits and other Romish orders, in their Voluminous Writings: the spite and
rage of Antichristian Princes, in their wars, massacres, banishments, and
persecutions of all kinds, have done their worst upon us, and yet by the
mercies of our Protector, we stand firm against all these efforts. Our restles
enemy finding himself in these his former endeavors disappointed, has lately
run about to a new point of his circle, and thought meet to assay another
quarter of our walls, which to him appeared more weak and less attended, than
those upon which he had spent his strength, and skill so long in vain. When
the most subtle disputations and sharpest swords were not likely with haste
enough to bring forth our ruin, behold that mischievous General sends forth
the reserved squadron of Knights of his new order of refined Reconcilers, by
whose pretenses of friendship and peaceable mediations, he is confident to
overthrow the Protestant cause more quickly than by the heads and hands of all
his former Soldiers. The experience he has had of the efficacious operation
of this engine, when at the first framing it was managed by the weak hands of
Cassander, his remembrance how many thousand souls by the unhappy conceits of
this man's moderation were kept in the bosom of the great whore, when upon the
clear sight of her abominations they were on their wing to have forsaken with
speed her communion, fills him now with hopes of drawing over to Rome whole
Nations and kingdoms of Protestants, when he perceives this his noble
instrument to be fallen into the hands of far greater spirits, and men armed
with much greater authority.

Holland by this engine was well near catched in the net of the Pope and
Spaniard.
The Churches and States of Holland having outridden all their former tempests,
by the blast of this last spirit, were well near dashed on the rocks of a
total ruin: Arminius and Utenbogard, breathing nothing but charity and
moderation of the rigours of Calvin and Beza, after they had gotten the
shoulders of Barnevelt and Grotius to support them, in a short time did bring
these famous Provinces in a more evident hazard, to fall into the mouth of the
Spanish Lion for their bodies and estates, and of the Romish she Wolf for
their souls and Religion, than forty or fifty years of cruel and
continual war had ever been able to reduce them.

By this instrument Cardinal Richelieu is laboring to destroy the Churches of
France.
How ever the Cardinal of France by the sword of the King his Master, has
weakened the Protestant Churches of that Kingdom in all their outward
securities, much more than all the enemi^s that ever professed to oppose them,
yet his peaceable weapons are far more terrible than all his instruments of
war. Whither his finger did stir in that late smoke of Amirant and Testard,
I do not know, but the world does now see him ready to strike (if he can) to
the very heart these gracious Churches with Cassanders sword. This is all the
labor of his hypocritish emissary Milletier, once amongst the most zealous and
learned Gentlemen of the Religion there, but lately having tasted of the
Cardinals favor, by all the means he can endeavoring avowedly to persuade
the Churches of France not to become at the first full Papists, but only to
pass from their first reformation as rash, to enter into a new capitulation of
peace with the Pope, to keep so much and leave so much of the reformed
Religion, that if his importunate advise were hearkened unto, the most both of
Pastors and people of their own accord without any violence from the Kings
force or persuasion from the Jesuits craft, behoved incontinent to fall in such
a mist of confusion, that they could not eschew to betake themselves either to
open Atheism or plain Popery. No engine against our Churches pleased that too
too wise man so well as this of a pretended reconciliation. Wherefore if it
should fail in the hands of his servant Milletier, as indeed his too palpable
siding with the Pope has made him to the most of Protestants contemptible and
ridiculous, yet has his Master projected other means for the prosecution of
this design: his familiar and frequent conferences with the prime Ministers of
the Religion; his contentment to hear of a Patriarchate in France, of
translating the Popish Bible and Liturgy in the vulgar Language, and some
other such fables, has no other end but to amuse the Protestants with pleasant
and foolish dreams, that the Papists at last are inclining to meet them in the
midway; that by this means they may be drawn from their old station, defended
so long with rivers of the best blood of France, that they may desert a great
part of their cause on vain hopes of an equitable condiscending, and when they
are brought to the mid term they imagine, they may either by persuasion be
drawn quite over to the Romish side, or else quickly by force be chased out of
France.

The greatest operation of this engine was in the Isle of Britain.
But of all the Regions of the world this evil Cassandrian spirit did choose
the Isle of Britain for his principal habitation, having once gotten
possession in the heart of the great Arch Prelate there; from him as the head
without much ado he diffused his venom into the most of the inferior members,
numbers of the Clergy were incontinent in all the Dominions so far
intoxicated with this p^stilentious vapor, that how much true protestant life
remained in their breast, it is hard to say. By all appearance too great a
number needed no more for their posting to Rome, but a Warrant from the King
and Parliament, yea so great a mind had they to the voyage, that many of them,
notwithstanding of the King and States express discharge are found as
fugitives much beyond the midway, if not within the walls themselves of that
Babel: who pleases to perus^ with attention that late Treatise of the
Canterburian self-conviction, will find it more easy to recite the Catalogue
of Romish errors, which were avowed by a great number of Divines, with the
hearty approbation, or at least open countenance of all the Bishops, than to
find any abomination of Popery whereof they were free.

The Canterburians by the means of the Liturgy did most promote their wicked
design.
Amongst the manifold policies employed by these new ingeniers to steal away
the hearts of people from their zeal to the Protestant Religion, to diminish
their hatred of Popish corruptions, piece and piece to bring them insensibly
within the doors of the Harlots house: their masterpiece for these ends was
the crying up with all their strength of the Liturgy and Popish ritualls: they
knew that amongst people the capacities of few did reach to the comprehension
of doctrinall controversies, they perceived that the division of Protestants
from Rome was most if not alone sensible in the use of their Liturgy and
rituals; a civil society with Papists we did never refuse, diverse also make
no scruple to come to their Sermons, but to countenance their worship, to
partake of their Sacraments, to join with them in their Missall, Breviatie,
Pontifical, or any other of their Ceremonial books, all true Protestants have
ever abhorred as superstitious and idolatrous pollutions. To remove this great
if not sole wall of separation, See Halls defense of his Remonstrance, p. 10.
our Masters of the new art did make it their chief task to frame all the
rituals of our Church in such a mode, that they should in nothing at all cross
with the least offense the mind of the Pope himself: and as if it had not been
favor enough to Papists to have removed out of our Books of devotion, every
thing any ways displeasing to them, they will yet more show their care of
complying with the desires of these their friends; when the reframing of the
Liturgy comes into their hands, by cunning conveyance they will slide in so
many more new clauses from the Romish Missall, as may serve at their first
explanation to be a fair bridge to all our people to walk straight over the
ancient ditches of division to the midst of the City of Rome. They saw by
sensible reasons, that when we did embrace such a Liturgy as did justify the
Mass Book of the Papists, their Breviarie and all other their public
devotions, in all the most material exceptions we were wont to take at them,
that then we were brought to an inevitable necessity to conjoyne at the first
occasion with the Papists in these things wherein our separation almost alone
was apparent.

The Liturgy of old was a pregnant mean to subdue England to the Pope.
Beside reason and sense they were taught by ancient experience, that the
easiest way whereby the Pope of old subdued the most of the Western Nations to
his obedience, was by the snare of his Liturgy; they were not unacquainted
with the history of foreign Churches, at least of their own: It was not
only in Italy, France, and Spain, where the Pope after his long wars and
contests both with the Preachers and people, for the receiving of his Ordo
Romanus, at last sore against the heart both of the Churches and States by the
violent oppression of misled Princes, did bind the yoke of his Service Book so
fast on the necks of these realms, that to this day the knot of that slavery
could never be gotten either loosed by art, or cut by force; but in England
above all Nations the first introduction of the Romish Liturgy was tragical
and tyrannick, for notwithstanding of all that the crafty and in famous Apostle
Austin could do, the Churchmen of England were never induced to receive that
Roman order, till that cruel maledictine Monk by the sword of the misinformed
King, had massacred 1200 of the most zealous and innocent of his opposers, to
the end that the seed of Romish rituals being watered with the blood of so many
Martyrs, might take the deep^r root in English ground; surely when once that
cruel Monk, then Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Popes Apostle to England,
had brought that Romish service into the Church over the carkases of so many
martyred Divines, the slavery of the whole Nation become so pitiful, that for
many ages without any possible remedy, both their souls, bodies, and estates
were trod upon by the foul feet of the Roman Antichrist.

These tried experiences did encourage much of late our Leaders to assay the
reducing of our Church in that old beaten path to the obedience of the
Apostolic Sea. The English Liturgy which contained the m^st tolerable
fooleries of the old order of Satum was winked at in the beginning of King
Edward and Q. Elizabeth's Reign, by many gracious men overswayed by the
prepotent Popish faction, hoping withal in due time by the power of preaching
to get all that trash cast out, and all the mist of these shadows dispelled:
but in this hope they were much deceived, for that book which at the beginning
might have (albeit with some difficulty) been gotten quite removed, in
process of time was so rooted, became so lovely to many of the Clergy, that
when this new faction of Reconcilers was lifted up on the stage of this Isle,
they found it the best instrument they could have wished for the promoving of
all their designs: the greatest follies and most inexcusable faults thereof,
which in the days of former Governors were either altogether neglected or but
softly pressed, by our new Masters wisdoms were all punctually and most
straightly urged: these men gave unto many passages of that Book, which by a
benign interpretation were wont to be drawn unto a protestant sense; their
first and native exposition according to the mind of these Popes who had at
the beginning composed them; and finding it most easy by a little variation to
get in much more of the Romish stuff, they procured from the King, as if it
had been for the use of the Church of Scotland alone, the reframing of the
whole Book: in this their work they inserted so much farther of the Romish
ritualls, that if God had not crossed their design, it had been in all
appearance most easy for them so to have dressed that new service in a second
Edition (which by a fresh Proclamation for a full uniformitie in the worship of
God amongst all the Kings Subjects, might have been imposed on all the three
Dominions) that Protestants should have no longer made any scruple to have gone
to the Popish Mass and Matins, nor Papists to have come to the English
Liturgy, when both of them with their eyes did see these books at last to have
become really the same.

It is mavelous that any good man should now be zealous for the Liturgy.
It is strange that men who profess more than ordinary zeal to the peace of
the Church of England, should at this time be so earnest soliciters for the
preserving of this Liturgy, when the far most part, if not simply all the
godly of the Isle are longing with great expectation, and greater desires to
see that instrument after all the evil they have suffered by it to be broken
in pieces; these bygone years the truths of God, of the highest quality in a
very great number by their Brethren the Canterburians were shamefully trod
underfoot, the world truly wonders how then these men's pens and tongues were
employed, where their remonstrances, their defenses, their apologies lay then
buried? when the whole Protestant religion before their eyes was violate, when
a deluge of Arminianisme and Popery was overflowing the Land, were they not
then dumb as fishes? did either the King, or the Parliament, or the Country
hear one syllable of the smallest complaint from them? but now when the holy
Miters of Prelates begin to be touched, when the book of sacred Ceremonies
comes in hazard of a removal, heaven and earth is filled with their
clamours, no end there is now of their pamphleting, as wave presses wave, so
their irrefragable propositions must be seconded with their divine Episcopacy,
and that backed with a remonstrance, and this with a defense; and however all
these should swell never so big with disdainful pride and most bitter
injuries, yet the world must forsake their senses, and take all for the most
sweet, mild, and humble moderation. I will pass no censure on that Spirit
which leads men of eminent parts and dignity to a dumb silence, when both
Church and State are set on fire about their ears by Incendiaries of their
special acquaintance and intime familiarity, but wakens them to high and
outrageous passions, when Bishops and Ceremonies come to be called in question,
only they would beware least this their second practice be a just punishment
on them from God for their first fault, least for their former betraying (at
least through their connivance) the truth of God, and liberties of their
Country, they be now scorched with the flames of intemperate zeal for keeping
in the Church that trash which they may know has ever been, and now is like to
be an occasion of most pitiful division both in Church and State, which the
world knows has ever been a rod of Scorpions in the hands of the sons of
Belial, to scourge along all the Kingdom many amongst the best both pastors
and professors of the whole Land, which themselves have seen with their eyes
to have been the prime instrument whereby the Canterburians were like in a
short time to have redelivered all these Dominions into the hands of the Pope,
and which if they please they may know to be of that nature that to the worlds
end will make it very apt to do the like service to any who shall have the
like boldness and occasion to reattempt the like designs.

The scope of the subsequent Treatise.
But with the Liturgy of the Church of England I will not meddle, those whom
more properly it concerns will doubtless now shortly in all seriousness
recognize upon it, whether or no at this divine occasion when without the least
hurt to any soul it may most easily be gotten quite removed, it ought not once
for all to be cast away for the remedying of many great evils wherewith in all
bygone times it has afflicted both Church and State, as also for the procuring
of many great blessings which through the want of its encumbrance all other
reformed Churches this day enjoy. It is my only intention to consider the
Scottish Liturgy, which the Bishops persuade the King to be all one with the
English, and is indeed by the English Authors so cunningly contrived that no
sensible difference to a common and running eye will appear: according as the
general Assemblies and Parliament of Scotland give express warrant, and as
now thanks be to God both his Majesty and this gracious Parliament of England
does freely consent; I will show that this our Service Book is not only taken
well near word by word, out of the Sincks of Rome, but also that all the filth
which runs in any laines of the Mass, is either clearly to be seen in the
gutters of it, or at least secret conduits are laid under its streets for to
receive all the mire of the Romish rituals, whenever it shall be the pleasure
of a misleading Prelate to open the Sluses for deriving to us more of the
Romish puddle. It is my labor in this subsequent Treatise to show not so much
that the Liturgy is in the Mass, whereof none do doubt, as that the Mass is
in the Liturgy: that the matter and the form, that the substance and the
accidents of the Mass are here; that of the integrall parts those which are
incomparably the worst, do actually and expressly appear in our Service; that
all the portions of the Mass better and worse are in our Book, if not
expressly (as very many be) yet virtually such a seed of them being sown that
for their bud, blossom, and fruit, they needed no more but a command from a
Bishops mouth to a Printer, upon a privy Warrant from Court, purchased by
false information; if this I make good to the sense of every imprejudicate
Reader, I hope all reasonable men will absolve of rigor not of unjustice
only, the decrees of the Scottish Church against this unhappie Book, and all
those within her jurisdiction who have contributed their endeavors for the
contriving, imposing, or defending thereof, and who yet refuse to give any true
security of their purpose to oppose, if that same Book or a worse by a misled
Church, or misinformed Prince, should to morrow again be recommended, though
not peremptorily commanded to be embraced by our Nation. With what safety a
flock of Christian people may be committed to the charge of men of that temper,
it is easy to judge.

CHAP. I. Of the Mass, and the parts of it in General.
The Papists call the Mass their Liturgy or their Service-Booke.
THat ye may behold the general accord, if not identitie of our Liturgy and
Service Book, with the Mass: consider first the words, and then the matter;
for the words, the Papists most gladly will call their Mass by the name of our
Service and Liturgy. And we must make no question to call our Liturgy or
Service by the name of their Mass, for the accord of Papists to our name, see
the Jesuit Saints in his Liturgy. page 8. printed at Anwerp. 1560. professing
that the most convenient name which can be given to the Mass, is that of
Liturgy and Service. Si placet Missah Hebraeorum ad Graecos traducere, quo id
facias aptissime, non aliud quam Liturgias nomen comperies, contra si liturgiam
Graecorum vis ad linguam sanctam revocare per Missah id cures necesse est. Si
Latin utrumque postulas nullum quam officij nomen significantius habebitur quo
Latina Ecclesia cum agitur de sacrificio saepe delectatur.

The Prelaticall men call their Liturgy the Mass.
For our contentment to take their name of Mass to our Service, see
Pocklington, Sunday no Sabbath, subscribed by Canterburies Chaplain about the
midst, where from a supposititious testimony of Ambrose, he will have the
saying of their second service at the Altar, to be just the same with that
which that Authout calls Missam facere caepi dimissis catechumenis, that none
but Schismatics will deny their harmony with the ancients in this
Missification: but it is not only that part of the Liturgy which they have of
late begun to call the second service, to which they will give the style of
Mass, as Cozens used to do long ago in Durham, where the former part of the
Communion he was wont to call the Matins, and the latter the Mass, as ye may
see in Smarts Sermon printed at Edinburgh 1628. But the whole Service
Pocklington will style with the name of Mass in the foresaid Sermon toward
the end; where this supposititious testimony of Austin, quidam cogunt
sacerdotem ut abbreviet Missam, and ad eorum libidinem cantet, he translates,
some force the Priest to curtall Divine Service, or to say or sing it after
their fancy. Bishop Montagu in his Antidiatribae page 10. makes no scruple of
the Mass so far as concerns the word; yea, and the matter too, if ye put a
commodious sense upon it. Missam ipsam non damnamus quoad vocem quippe cum
nihil impietatis habeat, sed neque Missae (...) sano sensu intellectum. In the
words here betwixt the parties you see a perfect agreement.

Our men approve the matter of the Mass.
In the matter, consider if there be any discord of importance, the English not
refusing to approve the Mass, the Papists not refusing to approve the
Liturgy. For the first, Pocklington in his Altar near the end is approved by
Canterbury to profess upon a very false alleagence, that K. James would like
well enough of the Mass, if the Priest would shrive it of Transubstantiation:
now any may defend that Transubstantiation cannot be inferred by any sound
reason from any part of the Mass as it is read at Rome, or if it be inferred
from any passage therein, then from these mainlie which of late have been put
in our Book: so that they who like of the Mass, if it wanted
Transubstantiation may like of it as it stands this day at Rome; for
Transubstantiation cannot be deduced from the words of it, but by the glosses
of the interpreters, which may agree as well to the words of our Service, as to
these of their Missall how ever Transubstantiation it self will not deterr us
from the Mass: here Montagu embracing that word as well as the other of the
Mass, Antidiat. p. 10. De vocibus dixi ne missae quidem imo ne
transubstantiationis certamen moveremus. And how far he is from the matter
of Transubstantiation we will find hereafter; here only mark how near he
draws the Romish Mass and English Liturgy in his recusancie. p. 1. [Our
service is the same in most things with that in the Church of Rome, the
differences are not great, nor should make any separation] how small a
difference they put betwixt their service and the Mass, see the Letter of the
King and his Council in King Edwards days, Acts and Monuments, vol. 2. p.
667. [As for the service in the English tongue, it perchance seems to you a
new service, and yet indeed it is no other but the old, the selfsame words
in English which were in Latin, having a few things taken out. If the service
of the Church was good in Latin, it remains good in English; for nothing is
altered, but to speak with knowledge, that which was spoken with ignorance.]

The Papists approve the matter of the Liturgy.
Thus do the English Prelates judge of the matter of the Mass, hear what the
Papists say of the matter of the Liturgy. Pope Pius the fourth is said to have
offered his approbation to the Liturgy. For this see Mortons appeal, p ult.
also Cambden his life of Queen Elizabeth, p. 46. in these words. The Pope,
Pius-quartus sent unto her Vincentio Parpalia, Abbot of S. Saviors with secret
instructions and letters of flattery, the report goes that the Pope gave his
faith that he would confirm the English Liturgy by his authority, so as she
would join herself to the Romish Church, and acknowledge the primacie of the
chair of Rome; yea, and that certain thousand crowns were promised to those
that should procure the same. The Council of Trent was nothing opposite to
this offer of the Pope, for about that same time being consulted by the Popish
Nobility of England, if it was lawful for them to countenance the Liturgy,
they did no ways discharge or give any sign of disallowance to this fact
albeit they would not give any act of their approbation when there was no
condition of advantage propounded to them. Yea long thereafter Pope Gregory the
13. repeated the offer of Pius to the Queen of approving the Liturgy upon her
admission of his Primacie, for this see the late Bishop of Canterbury, Doctor
Abbots in his expli^at^o illustrium quaestionum c. 4. p. 112. Cum testibus
Pontificijs magnates aliquot nobilesque Anglicani per legatos inea quaestione
Concilium Tridentinum interpellarint prae memoriae lapsu aut oblivione patres
non omiserunt, quin potius credo per conniventiam quanda^ tacitos praeterijsse
prospicientes quam incommodum futurumesset tot tantisque suarum partium aut
carceris aut exilij molestiam facessere, and nesciebant an ali quis venturus
esset Pontifex, qui jactura suae partis deliberate perpensa ad damnum
resarciendum liturgiam Anglicanam posset approbare and confirmare, id quod a
Papa Gregorio 13. Reginae oblatum fuisse modo titulus supremae gubernationis
Romanae sedi redderetur, pervagato hominum and magnorum sermon jactitatum
aliquando significat Houlettus number vere illud an falso nescio, at solet ex
indulgentia sua sanctissimus Pater quae videntur duriora nonnunquam concedere
quo facilius secreta sui cordis desideria amplissime consequatur. By these
testimonies it is clear, how near the Papists think the Liturgy draws to
their Mass, and how near the Prelates think the Mass to come to their
Liturgy both in words and matter. But it will be more manifest how little either
of the parties are deceived in this their judgment, If we will cut both the
Bodies of the Mass and Liturgy in small parts, and so lay limb to limb, and
member to member, here will the analogy or disproportion, the agreement or
disagreement, the diversity or identitie appear to the eye of any common
beholder.

What are the parts of the Mass.
The most received division of an whole is into parts essential, integrall or
subjective, to find the essential parts of the Mass actually, and in
express words in our service is no great labor: For to the essence of the
sacrifice of the Mass are required but two things, or three at the most,
according to Bellarmine de missa, Lib. 1. c. 27. To wit, the consecration, the
oblation not before nor after but in the consecration, and thirdly the
consumption in the Priests receiving alone in both the kinds, these will be all
found as expressly in our Book as in the Missall as hereafter shall be
showed.

The subjective parts of the Mass are the diverse kinds and species of the
Mass, for of Masses some are ordinary and daily, some extraordinary and
solemn, and these again of a great number according to the-severall
festivities wherein and diverse ends for which they are celebrated upon these
several sorts of Masses, the greatest part of the Missall is spent, and upon
these likewise more then two parts of our Book are consumed.

But the parts of the Mass most commonly spoken of are the integral of the
daily and ordinary Mass, with these let us begin, and that with those which
are principal. The necessary ceremonies or circumstances especially the
universal ones which run along the whole body of the Mass, such as the Priest,
the altar, the vestments, the crossings, the perfumings, etc. may well receive
the names of parts, at least the large and frequent Rubricks concerning them,
but because these are but ceremonies and at best but among the integral parts
less principal, we will let them alone till we have first considered these
which are confessed by all to be most principal members of this unhappie
body, of these more or fewer are made according to the diverse conceptions of
writers. Innocentius reduces all to three heads, Bellarmin to four, Durandus
to five, Thomas to six.

Bellarmines four parts de Missa. lib. 2. c. 21. are first Missa
Catechumenorum, the part of the ordinary Mass whereat the Catechumeni might
have bin present: secondly, the Offertory thirdly, the Consecration or Canon:
fourthly, the Communion. Our Service at the Communion has all these parts in
the same order, the first part in the English, seemed not clearly enough
distinguished, for there followed no mention immediately of an offertory, nor
at all of a consecration, but in our Book all are clearly professed and in
England now also are like to be better considered, for the Missa Catechumenorum
by Canterburies men is called the first Service, performed in the body of the
Church, the rest as the Missa fidelium is called the second Service, and
appointed to be officiate only at the Altar, and that in the Quire, none
present but only Communicants, expressly against the old Canons and Customs
o^ that Church, which now no man but a Schismaticke must challenge; for this
see Pocklington in his Sunday no Sabbath about the midst [ dimissis
catechumenis missam facere caepi. Saint Ambrose began the second Service as
our Church calls it, at the Altar, having before finished the first Service in
the body of the Church, no man will go about to put away this sweet harmony
which our Church still keeps with antiquity but Schismatickes.]

But passing the division or Bellarmine, we will follow that of Thomas in his
third p. quaest. 83. art. 4. in corp. as serving more to clear that black
body which has indeed much need of clearing, as being the most mistie and
dark piece that ever my hand touched. He draws it to six heads, the first he
calls a preparation, the next an instruction, the third an offertory, the
fourth a consecration, the fifth a participation, the sixth a Thankesgiving: all
these we will go through in order.

CHAP. II. Proving the preparation or first part of the Mass with all the 12.
particles of it, to be in our Book, either actually or virtually.
The ten Particles of the introitus are but all late inventions of Popes, and
yet all are in our Book.
THe preparation is subdivided in a number of parcells. 1. The Pater Noster. 2.
The Ave Maria. 3. The Oration. 4. The Introitus. 5. The Uersicle, Gloria Patri.
6. The Confession 7. The Misereatur. 8. The Absolution. 9. The Letany Kyrie
eleison. 10. The Angelike hymn, Gloria in excelsis. 11. The Salutation,
Dominus vobiscum, with the responsorie and cum Spiritu tuo. 12. The Collects.
All these go often under one name of introitus, being but the beginning and
ingresse to that which follows. All these ten or twelve parts of the Mass,
are but so many patches put in by the superstition of several Popes, the truth
of this, who pleases to see, set them read Morney de Missa. c. 1. p. 80. and
c. 3. p. 107. And especially his Authors Walafridus, Berno, Albinus,
Tungrensis, etc. In the eleventh Tome of Bibliotheca Patrum, Hittorpius his
auctarium. For the present I cite but two testimonies which will not admit
Bellarmines elusion from two Popes which labored as much to understand the
Mass as any of their Colleagues either before or after, Gregory ep. l. 7.
Epist. 63. Mos Apostolorum fuit ut adipsam solummodo Orationem Dominicam
oblationis hostiam consecrarent and valde mihi inconveniens visum est, ut
precem quam Scholasticus composuerat super oblationem diceremus, and ipsam
traditionem quam Dominus composuerat non diceremus. He avowes that the
Apostolic times had no other order of Communion but to say the Lords Prayer
with the institution from the Gospel, and Saint Paul's Epistles as I take it,
also that the very Canon it self, let be the preparation, was made by a late
Scholar, Innocent 3. de Mysterijs Missae Lib. 2. c. 18. Caelestinus Papa
constituit ut Psalmi ante sacrificium canerentur antiphonatim, quod antea non
fiebat, sed Epistola tantum and Evangelium legebantur. So before Caelestine
none of these ten or twelve parts of the introitus were extant, nothing was
read or sung before the Epistle or the Gospel: of the Church of Rome Bellarmine
grants this, but he has better reason to grant it of other Churches, for read
these Liturgies which falsely are ascribed to James, to Basile, to Chrysostom,
composed as it seems in the very late and corrupt times of the Eastern
Church, ye will find at most but some Psalms and prayers for confession of
sins, all diverse from these in the Mass, and diverse also among themselves.
So then we may take all the parcells of this first part of the Mass to be
the Popes invention, which either for antiquity or universalitie are not much
considerable, yet such pieces must be obtruded on us, for try which of them
our Books do not bear.

1. The Pater Noster,
The first, the Pater Noster; not that whereby the Apostles are said to
consecrate, for that follows in the Missall, and our book also long
thereafter, but that which the order of Sarum puts immediately after the
introitus, with this our Communion begins, it is the first words the Priest
says at the Altar after the Roman order of the Pontifical Mass, where this
Pater Noster is the first speech which the Pope reads at the altar, for thus
does the Pontifical printed at Lions 1542. testify, fol. 119. p. 2. Quibus
indutus surgit Pontifex and ad altar stans detecto capite, dicit, Pater Noster
qui es in coelis, etc. And this as it seems according to the Canon before the
Breviarie rubricae generalis. c. 32. Pater Noster and Ave Maria semper dicuntur
secreto ante omnes horas, so we see that our Matins must begin with it, and
our Mass also.

2. The Ave Maria.
As for the second parcel, the Angelike salutation, Ave Maria, it is not
actually in our Book; but may we not say it is in it potentially? when my L.
of Canterbury (in whose power it will be to put into it at the next edition
these passages of antiquity, which will be found expedient for our further
union with other Chrians) has permitted Mr. Stafford to print at London of
late the defense of the Popish use of this salutation to sing in his Poems
omnis terra revibrat ave, and to invey in his Prose against Puritans, who have
left this practice of their ance^^ors: These are his words toward the end of
his female glory. [The Puritants reject all testimonies of her worth, as Hail
Marie full of grace, the Lord is with thee; they challenge to themselves a
greater measure of knowledge, but a lesser of piety then had their ancestors,
by disclaiming words and phrases familiar to antiquity; of one thing I will
assure them, till they be good Marians, they s^all never be good Christians
while they derogate from the dignity of the mother, they cannot honor the
Son.] When these words are challenged, Peter Heylen appointed by Canterbury to
answer, and Chrystopher Dow allowed in the answer, he was pleased to make,
does not retract or disallow any thing in these sayings: What then shall we
expect from our Bishops, but a Canon to injoyne those who will not be
Puritans, who will not leave the piety of their Ancestors, who will not be
contemners of CHRIST; That they become at last so good Marians as to join
hereafter, their Ave Maria at the back of their Pater noster?

3. The Oration.
The third part of the preparation, is the First Collect, the very name is
little less then the Mass, if we believe Bellarmine; he counts the Collects
the chief parts of the Mass: for the which the Mass it self uses to be
called a Collect, eaedem collectae dicuntur Missae, quia sunt pars quaedam
eaque non minima Missae. L. 2. de Missa. cap. 16. This first Collect in the
Missall of Sarum, is the same with our first Prayer after the Pater noster to a
Letter. Thus speaks the Priest in the Mass: Deus cui omne cor patet and omnis
voluntas loquitur -- quem nullum latet secretum, purifica per infusionem S.
Spiritus cogitationes cordis nostri, ut te perfect diligere, and digne laudare
mereamur, per Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum, Amen. Missale ad usum Ecclesiae
Sarisburiensis Parisijs 1555. fol. 141. And we turn it Almighty GOD, etc.

4. The Introitus.
The Fourth part is the Jntroitus, the 43. Psalm so called, because sung by the
Quire antiphonatim, while the Priest is coming in, or rather for that fourth
versicle of it, introibo ad altar Dei which is most chanted: This is not in
our Book actually, yea, w^e think it was put out of the English expressly, both
for the great impertinencie of it, and also the evident abuse, which was made
of that introibo ad altar, meaning it, of the ingoing of a Priest to a proper
Altar, for as proper sacrificing as was in the old Testament: yet we may take
it virtually to be in our Book, for it is a part of the Mass which Canterbury
professes he likes well, and says, (but not truly) that it is in the Church
of England, these are his words in his Speech before the Star Chamber, p. 44.
[After the Judicial worship was ended, as far upward as there is any tract
of a Liturgy, this was the introitus of the Priest all the Latine-Church over,
and in the daily prayers of the Church of England, this was retained at the
Reformation.] I think his Grace is mistaken in that he says, venite was the
introitus in the Latine-Church, for all the Missalls I have seen of the
Romish-Church, which to him are the Liturgies of the Latin-Church, have never
venite for the introitus, only in the Breviarie, it is the invitatorie for the
Matins, and so the English retained it, indeed the Greek-Church uses it for the
introitus, as we read in Fortunatus Antiphonarie, Cap. 21: But never the
Latin. I grant the Papists could be content to change, and take in this venite
in place of their old introibo, for Heigam in his exposition of the Mass,
approved by the Doctors of Doway, printed at St. Omers, 1622. p. 83. avowes
that the Angels were heard to sing in Constantinople, this venite adoremus for
the Introitus, but most falsely: for all that his Author Fortunatus says, in
the forenamed place, in their own edition at Paris, 1610. is, hunc Psalmum
audivi Constantinopoli, in Ecclesia. S. Sophiae in principio Missae celebrari,
the singing of it by the Angels, is Heigams false addition to Fortunatus.
However my Lord of Canterbury shows his good liking of the Latin introitus,
and, albeit he mistake the Psalm, yet that which we most except against in
the Latin true Introitus, he does approve of it; for let be to approve the
Priests introibo ad altar, he adds the convenience, not only to go in to the
Altar, but to adore even the Altar it self; Domino and altari ejus, which he
alleages, the English-Book imports: albeit, authority too loose here, does
not constrain the practice. This is much more than the Romish introitus,
albeit, no more than the Papists practice, according to other parts of their
Mass.

5. The Gloria Patri.
The Fifth part, is their Gloria Patri. This we have more formally then they,
for according to our Rubric, i^ must be sung at the back of every Psalm;
yea, of every Hymn: but the Roman Rubric admits sundry dispensations.
Breviarium Roman. Rubricae generales, cap. 21. In fine Psalmorum semper
dicitur, Gloria Patri praeterquam, etc. For the matter of this Hymn, let it be
as old as Bellarmine can make it, yet the first Author who can be alleged for
putting it in the Mass, is Pope Damasus, and that as Bellarmine avowes on
false grounds; yea, the joining of it to the back of any Psalms, seems later,
let be the putting of it in the Mass, but the singing of it after the fashion
of our Book, is a new invention to hinder the people to sing, Glory to the
Father, and to the Son, to hinder the Minister to sing, as it was in the
beginning, to make the first, the Priests song alone, the second, the peoples
responsorie only, is the Romanists very late invention: We are rold by Isidor,
and the rest of the old Rationalists, that the answering of the people was the
invention of the Italians, as the Reciprocrations and Antiphonies was the
invention of the Greeks: but this answering of the people, which in our Book
is ordained at the back of Gloria Patri, is a Noveltie much later then any of
these old Writers on the Mass: for Walafridus cap. 25. shows, that the Hymn
was no ways divided in his days; but in all Churches it was one passage, sung
without division of parts, albeit with variety, the Spanish Church keeping
this form Gloria and honor Patri, and filio, and Spiritui sancto in saecula
saeculorum, Amen. Latini vero eodem ordine and ijsdem verbis hunc hymnum
decantant, addentes tantum in medio, sicut erat in principio. Berno has the
same observation: So that this part of our Book, seems to follow the late
Roman orders against the practice, not only of all the Reformed Churches, but
all the ancient also: yea, more precise are we here, than the Romanists
themselves, as I have said.

6. The Kyrie eleison.
The sixth part, is the Kyrie eleyson, this is a very powerful and efficacious
part of the Mass, Magna est istorum verborum efficacia says Durand the
Rationalist lib. 4. on this Rubric, legitur enim quod dum beatus Basilius
Kyrie eleison clamasset, portae vicinae Ecclesiae sint apertae, rursus cum B.
Geminianus Kyrie eleison clamaret quinque Reges conversi dicuntur in fugam,
unde forte significat aliud quam Domine miserere, quod tamen nos ignoramus.
These so miraculous words are used in the Mass, and put at the back of the
song of Jntroitus, mainly to obtain mercy to the Quiristers, whose mind by the
melody of their song, was puffed up to vain Pride, so does Amalarius show us.
Kyrie eleison necessario constitutum est a praecepteribus Ecclesiae, ut
cantores post finitam antiphonam, deprecentur Domini misericordiam, quae
deprimat inanem jactantiam quae solet sequi cantores: habent enim quandam
exultationem propter egregiam compositionem melodiarum. This was put into the
Mass by Pope Gregory, a Father of many other Superstitions, he confesses in
his 63. Epistle of the seventh Book, that he changed the Greek form; for it
was their custom, when their Priest did make the prayer for the people, by way
of assent, to subjoyne (...) as you have it in Morney de Missa. lib. 1. cap. 7.
from Sidonius Apollinaris. Gregory would keep the Greek words, he would have
them thrice repeated, he would make them to be said by the Clergy, and the
people only to answer, he would have the Name of Christ put in the midst, thus
far he counsels. But his successor Innocent the third, tells us more;
that the intention of these three sentences, is to call on God the Father, Son
and holy Ghost, for to obtain mercy for three kinds of sin, Original,
Mortal, and Venial: yea, to obtain from the Father, mercy for sins of
Infirmity which are against him, from the Son, sins of Ignorance which are
against him, from the Holy Ghost, sins of Malice which are against him. Est
peccatum fragilitatis per impotentiam, simplicitatis, per ignorantiam,
malignitatis, per invidentiam, hoc est, peccatum in Patrem, peccatum in Filium,
peccatum in Spiritum Sanctum. B. Gregorius Kyrie eleison ad Missam cantari
praecepit a Clero quod apud Graecos ab omni populo cantabatur. This order our
Book follows, the Presbyter saying, let us pray: Lord have mercy upon us,
Christ have mercy upon us, Lord have mercy upon us. For the language they will
make no scruple, they keep latin words enough as obscure as these Greek ones,
to wit, Benedictus, Magnificat, Venite, etc. Andrews in his Sermon of
Imaginations, after the beginning, maintains the lawfulness of this practice,
in these words. [Some will hear no Greek or Latin, yet S. Paul feared not to
use terms as strange to the Corinthians as Maranatha, Belial, Abba, which
easily he might have expounded: but it liked him to retain his Liberty in this
point.] Neither will the Papists stand much in this point to the Greek, for
they grant that the Greeks themselves, pronounce these words in Latin. So
Albinus de celebratione Missae, Kyrie eleison Latin Graeci, and Graece Latini
proferunt. Biblo. patr. auctar. page 278. E.

7. After the Introitus, Gloria Patri, Kyrie eleison follows the Confiteor, 7.
The Confiteor.
where first the Priest confesses his sins, and the people say, Misereatur:
Then the people confess their sins, and the Priest says, Misereatur,
praying for Mercy and Absolution. This Confession is general, no particular
enumeration; it is only of Venial sins, and the Absolution is not
Sacramental: for the particular Confession is in secret before the Mass, and
to this auricular Confession, the Priest pronounces the Sacramental
Absolution. Innocen. lib. 2.13. Pontifex de peccatis suis cum astantibus
confitetur. Illud autem in hac confessione notandum est, quia non in specie sed
in genere confitenda sunt peccata, quoniam ista confessio non est occulta sed
manifesta; To this Durand adds, that the Psalm of Confession was put in the
Mass by Pope Coelestine, Rubrica de confessione, Heigams exposition of the
Mass. cap. 22. [As the Confession was general, so the Absolution is general
which the Priest gives only by way of Prayer, and not of Sacrament, as that ego
te absolvo, and extends it self no farther, than to the taking away of
Venial sins.] This he learned from Hugo de Sancto Victore, fit communis
confessio ut mundemur a peccatis venialibus, fine quibus communis vita non
facile ducitur. Consider whether all these three parts may be said to be
actually in our Book; both the Confiteor, the Misereatur, and the Absolution,
the Confiteor and the Misereatur is twice in the Mass, the Absolution but
once, so is it with us. The Confession of sins in the Mass, is shorter,
confiteor quod peccavi nimis cogitatione, loquutione, and opere which we say,
not only thus shortly; [Wee acknowledge our manifold sins which we have
grievously committed, in thought, word, and deed.] But in our first
Confession, we go through all the ten Commandments, and craves a Misereatur
for every one of them.

And this form of Confession we have learned from the hours of the Virgin
Mary, after the order of Sarum, printed at Paris 1533. where, after the Latin
prayer is subjoyned a form of Confession in English, going through all the 10.
Commandments, and acknowledging the breach of every one with this conclusion:
[whereof I cry God mercy] that this our Confession is so general, that it
excludes mortal sins to the auricular confession before the Sacrament, I can
hardly think: yet we see that the Rubric expressly calls this Confession
general: Also we know that the English Divines of the faction, do now
distinguish betwixt Mortal and Venial sins, and that the special Confession
whereto the Rubric in the visitation of the sick referres, is applycd now by
them to an auricular Confession, to be made by all the Communicants before the
Communion: However this double Confession of the Mass, and our double
Confession, seems to be really one.

8. The Misereatur.
8. As for the Misereatur, its one, word by word in both Books; for so the
Missall of Sarum. page 141. Misereatur vestri omnipotens Deus, and dimittat
vobis omnia peccata vestra, liberet vos ob omni malo and confirmet in bono, and
ad vitam perducat aeternam, Amen. This we turn, [Almightie GOD, have mercy
upon you, pardon and deliver you from all your sins, confirm and strengthen
you in all goodness, and bring you to everlasting life, through Jesus Christ
our Lord, Amen.]

9. The Absolution.
9. The Absolution of the Priest in the Mass, and of the Priest in the
Liturgy, differs not in the matter; there it is, deinde dicat sacerdos
absolutionem and remissionem omnium peccatorum vestrorum, spatium verae
poenitentiae and emendationem vitae, gratiam and consolationem Sp. sancti
tribuat vobis omnipotens and misericors Deus. Sciendum est quicunque sacerdos
officium exequatur, semper Episcopus si praesens fuerit dicat absolutionem.
With us [then shall the Presbyter, or the Bishop being present, pronounce this
Absolution. Almighty GOD have mercy, etc.] Both the Absolutions are naught,
but a prayer for Remission. There is indeed in the Confiteor of Sarum, two
clauses about the Saints, which our Confession wants; for it says thus:
Confiteor Deo, beatae Mariae, omnibus sanctis and vobis, quod peccavi nimis,
precor sanctam Mariam, omnes sanctos Dei, and vos orate pro me, the last clause
of the prayer to Mary and the Saints, no marvel that our Book leaves it out,
for the Roman Missall has put it out before us: See fol. 26. Micrologus also
has put it away in the Parish Edition of Labigne. 1609. In his 23 chap. Thus
he recits that portion: Confiteor Deo omnipotenti, istis Sanctis, and omnibus
Sanctis, and tibi frater quia peccavi in cogitatione, loquutione, and opere,
ideo precor te, ora pro me. But our men will not care much, in their Confession
to put in both these clauses. For as shall be showen when we come to the Canon,
they do defend the lawfulness of praying to the Saints and Angels, yea they
pray by the Merits of the Saints, to obtain grace from GOD. So Field writes,
but ye must remember it is a posthume appendix, which the World saw not, till
the 1628. When my Lord of Canterbury sat in London and made that same year
Bishop Andrews tell us many strange tales after his death, as a little after
Bishop Mountague made Doctor Overhall after his death also speak to the
World, very uncouth language, as we shall hear hereafter.

10. The next part is the Angelike-Hymne 10. The Angelike hymn.
which is in our Book, word by word: Thus speaks the Priest after the order of
Sarum: Gloria in excelsis Deo, and in terra pax hominibus bonae voluntatis,
laudamus te, benedicimus te, adoramus te, glorificamus te, gratias agimus tibi
propter magnam gloriam tuam Domine Deus Rex coelestis, Deus pater omnipotens,
Domine fili unigenite Jesus Christ, Domine Deus agnus Dei, filius Patris qui
tollis peccata mundi, miserere nobis, qui tollis peccata mundi suscipe
deprecationem nostram, qui seeds ad dextram patris, miserere nobis, quoniam tu
solus sanctus, tu solus Dominus, tu solus altissimus Jesus Christ cum S.
Spiritu in gloria Dei Patris, Amen. Confer this with our Book, you will
find it translated to a Letter. This piece of the Mass, is a patch of many
hands; the first words of it are Scripture, the words of the Angel in Christ's
nativitie. This was put in the Mass, as Albinus alleages, by Telesphorus, and
was ordained to be sung every Sunday by Symmachus long thereafter; the rest of
these words after the Angels words, are ascribed to Hilarie, but this Albinus
proves by no authority, and himself lived in so late and fabulous a time,
that we may not lean to his writ. It is confessed that a number of the
Churches hymns, which used to be ascribed to Hilarie and Ambrose, are the
fruit of dull and base Spirits, many hundred years after the death of these
Fathers. The words of Alcuin are; Telesphorus natione Graecus ex anachoreta,
constituit ut hymnus diceretur Angelicus (ante sacrificium ad Missam nocturnam
natalis Domini, as Innocent comments it) Symmachus post Telesphorum
quadragesimus quintus constituit, ut omni die Dominico and natalitijs Martyrum
idem hymnus diceretur. Auct. Bibl. patr. p. 276. E. Incipit sacerdos hymnum ab
Angelis decantatum, sed a beato Hilario Pictaviensi postea auctum and
consummatum, and hoc ipsum ad imitationem Angelorum: From this place this tale
by the rest of the Rationalists, is chanted and rechanted, according to their
custom of transcribing one another words, with dissimulation of their
Authors. Innocentius puts to this addition, that the Priest in this Song
represents the Angels, yea, Christ the great Angel, Mox sequitur hymnus
Angelicus, quem ille primus inchoando pronuncia^ qui Angelum magni consilij
repraesentat. This Durand and the rest of the later takes from Innocents hand.
In this hymn the Missall makes mention of Marie, but neither for invocation
nor adoration, and so our men will make no bones of that commemoration.

11. The Salutation.
The next part is the Salutation which Sarum fol. 143. thus expresses [vertat se
sacerdos ad populum, dicens, Dominus vobiscum, and chorus respondeat, and cum
Spiritu tuo] Our Book has it thus [the Presbyter with a loud voice
pronouncing, the Lord be with you. Answer, and with thy Spirit.] The words of
this Salutation, the people may not utter, no not the Deacon, and Durand gives
a good reason in Rubrica de Salutatione, Lib. 4. [Sane Diaconus non dicit
Dominus vobiscum per horas eo quod non ita gerit personam Christi sicut
sacerdos, qui ea in persona Christi utitur.] Howsoever it seems a mocking of
God and man, that this salutation of the people should be used where no people
is, and Innocent, besides many other Popish writers, does confess the acts of
the Church, which are yet extant in the distinction of consecration, never to
say this part of the Mass but where the people at least two persons are with
the Priest, yet now it is otherwise resolved from P. Damianus reasons, that the
Priest in his chamber alone may well say Dominus vobiscum albeit none be with
him, because he must say no other prayers than these which are in the form
appointed by the Church, which must be inviolably kept without any change, also
in that his pensum which for the Church he says to God, the whole Church with
whom he is one in faith, is supposed to be present, and to reap the benefit
of his prayer; so speaks he in his treatise of Dominus vobiscum. c. 7.
[Ecclesiasticae traditionis regulam sive soli, sive cum pluribus uniformiter
observate, si enim Doctores Ecclesiae id expedire decernerent in Ecclesiasticis
officijs, alium multis ordinem tradidissent, sed unum contenti remota
diversitate composuere, unum nos docuerunt ordinem inviolabili semper
observatione tenere, providerunt enim quia quicquid in divinis obsequijs a
quolibet Ecclesiae membro reverenter offertur, id etiam fide and devotione
cunctorum universaliter exhibetur.] Which most idle superstition our Book
seems to approve, for the first Rubricke obliges every Presbyter to say the
morning prayers, whereof Dominus vobiscum is a part, and gives liberty to say
it in private in their secret chamber, as well as in public in their families
or Church.

In the peoples answer, and with thy Spirit; their meaning is that God may
direct the Priests mind, that he may have an intention to pray, and to
consecrate the sacrifice, else their prayers would not be accepted, nor the
host be trasubstantiated; for this see Durand Lib. 4. fol. [Hac responsione
populus se refert solum ad actionem immolationis, ad quam sacerdos accedit, and
in qua per Spiritum totaliter elevatus, and ab omni terrenitate prorsus
abstractus esse debet.] For this salutation no author in the time of purer
antiquity can be alleged, Bellarmines eldest citations are but trash in the
late and corrupter times.

12. The Oremus.
12. The last part of the preparation is the Oremus, the posterior Collects that
stand before the Epistle, of this more or fewer may be used at the Priests
discretion, one, three, five, seven, keeping always an unequal number.
[Sacerdotes in Missa septenarium numerum non excedant, na^ Christus septem
petitionibus omnia corporis and animae necessaria comprehendit, quia vero Deus
numero impari gaudet sum mopere, quidam observant ut impares dicant oratio^es
in Missa vel unam, vel tres, vel quinque, vel septem, unam vel tres propter
unitatis Sacramentum vel Trinitatis mysterium] This we observe, for at the
beginning we use after the Pater Noster but one, and that word by word from
the Mass, here before the Epistle we use three. The first is that of the day
which for common is word by word from Sarum, as we shall see in due time; for
the present take but one example. In the day of Epiphany, see if our Collect
before the Epistle be not the English of this Oremus. [Deus qui hodierno die
unigenitum tuum gentibus stella revelasti, concede propitius, ut qui jam te ex
fide cognovimus usque ad contemplandam speciem tuae celsitudinis perducamur per
eundem Dominum, etc.] The other two are for the King according to the pattern
of Sarum also, there is naught in them which a Papist will not subscribe to see
their Oremus in Sarum, conclusiones Missarum. [Da quaesumus omnipotens Deus
famulo tuo Regi nostro salutem mentis and corporis, ut bonis operibus
inhaerendo, tuae semper virtutis mereatur protectione defendi, per eundem
Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum, Amen.

CHAP. III. Proving the Instruction or second part of the Mass with all the
particular portions thereof, to wit, the Epistle, Gospel, Homily, Credo,
tractus, Gradual, sequentia, to be in our Book either actually or virtually.
The Eight parts of the Instruction, are to be found in our Book.
THe second part of the Mass, which Aquinas and others after him call the
Instruction, is subdivided into eight portions, the first four only
principal are the Epistle, Gospel, Creed, and Homily, these we have all from
the Mass: the next four are less principal and of small consideration, to
wit, the Graduall, Halelujah, tractus, and sequentia, these the Papists will
dispense with, though they be left out, and our Book-men may not oppose,
though they be put in, but let us go through all the eight in order.

1. The Epistle.
The first is the Epistle, the putting of this piece in the Mass is ascribed to
Pope Alexander, and Damasus, so Gemma Animae. cap. 88. [Epistolam and
Evangelium Alexander Papa ad Missam legi instituit, Hieronymus autem Presbyter
Lectionarium, and Evangeliarium, ut hodie habet Ecclesia, collegit, sed Damasus
Papa, ut nunc moris est, legi censuit:] but who ever have put the Epistle in
the Mass it seems incredible, that the abuses of the Epistle, which this day
are in the Mass, and in our Book from it, can have any very ancient, or yet
very judicious author. Why against the order of the New Testament are the
Epistles set before the Gospel, the reason which the Rationalists give, is that
the Epistles are baser then the Gospel, Alcuin indeed denies this, but
Walafridus and the rest after him avow it: also because that the Epistle has
the office of John the Baptist, making way for the Gospel of Christ, they
contain moral instructions, and are but like to the Law, and so their
doctrine is of less worth then the doctrine of the Gospel: the Epistle is read
by a Subdeacon in a lower place, the people sitting; but the Gospel must be
read at least by a Deacon in a high place all reverently standing, see Innoc.
Lib. 3. c. 29. Durand, Lib. 4. fol. 53. I cite but one passage of Rupertus de
divinis officijs. Lib. 1. c. 32. [Epistola vox legis est suam in Joanne
imperfectionem profitentis, and ad perfectionem Evangelicam suos auditores
transmittentis. Quam vis autem saepe de Apostolicis sumatur literis, tamen in
eo gradu est, ac si semper de lege sit ac Prophetis, semper enim moralitatem
vitamque activam magis quam contemplativae sublimitatem, quae in Evangelio
radiat, instruit. Igitur morale Legis officium agit Epistola, tantum distans ab
eo quod in officio Missae praecedit sancto Evangelio, quantum servus a Domino,
praeco a judice, legatus ab eo qui misit illum, quapropter cum legitur non
injuria sedemus, cum tamen sanctum Evangelium audimus demissis reverenter
aspectihus sicunt Domino nostro assistimus.

Another evident abuse there is, that in the Mass and our Book, the Acts of
the Apostles, the Revelation, the Prophets, any book of the old Testament
should be called the Epistle except only the five books of Moses. Walafridus
points at the noveltie of this corruption in these words, cap. 22. [Videtur
autem non alias lectiones ante Evangelium fuisse tunc positas, nisi tantum
Apostoli Pauli quod S. Damasus Papa ad Hieronymum scribens ostendit, and
fortasse inprimis solius Pauli lectiones eo loco legebantur, postea autem
omnibus latius augmentatis aliae lectiones non tantum de Novo, verum etiam de
veteri intermixtae sunt Testamento. To this Durandus adds, Epistola tamen non
legitur de quinque libris Mosis, quia in illis temporalia promittebantur, fol.
53.

A third abuse in the Epistle is, that never a full passage is read but a
shread, beginning after the beginning of a Chapter, and cutting before the end,
choosing out parts most impertinent for the purpose, and very often directed to
color some idle or superstitious conceit: To these and other such faults, the
Epistles of our book are subject, as well as these of the Mass; for commonly
in both books, the same passages of Scripture are set down for Epistles, as
on S. Stephens day the seventh of the Acts, upon Innocents day the 14. of the
Revelations, 1. of Lent, 2. of Joel, the Tuesday before Easters, the 50. of
Isaiah.

The second is the Gospel.
The next portion of the instruction is the Gospel, here we follow the pattern
of Sarum as much as in the Epistles, as the Missals read the Gospels without
any order, but that which the sole pleasure of some Popes in the latter times
has given to them, beginning at the end of a book, at the midst of a Chapter,
ending with the beginning of a book, looping every day here and there without
any reason or example of antiquity which can be shown, so does our Book
follow preciselie, look for example the first four Sundays in Advent,
wherein the first Sunday our Gospel is Mat. 21. v. 1. in the second, chap. 21.
verse. 25. in the 3. Matthew. 11. verse. 2. in the 4. John 1. verse. 19. of such
coursing what reason can be given, but a conformity with Sarum in times of
Popery.

As in the matter of our Gospel we follow the Missall so in our forms. The
Epistle was contumeliously debased, but the Gospel is superstitiously exalted,
Rupertus Lib. 1. c. 37. and from him Durand, Evangelium principale est omnium
quae dicuntur ad Missae officium, sicut enim caput praeeminet corpori, and illi
caetera membra subserviunt, sic Evangelium toti officio praeeminet. For this
cause Pope Anastasius ordained, that when the Gospel was in reading, all should
stand on their feet, and that with their head and eyes bowed to the ground for
reverence. Anastasius Papa decrevit ut dum Evangelium legitur, nullus sedeat:
Also the people must say before the Gospel Gloria tibi Domine, and after it is
ended, they must say Deo gratias: The reasons see in Durand, Lib. 4. fol. 59.
This we are enjoined twice, least we should forget it, both at the Communion,
and in the Collects, Epistles, and Gospels for the whole year, we get leave to
sit at the Epistle, to be silent when it begins, and silent when it ends, but
all the time of the Gospel we must stand, and use our exclamations both at the
beginning and end of it.

The Book of the Gospel must stand upon the Altar to signify that with the
preaching of the Gospel ever must be conjoined the sacrifice of the Altar, and
when it is to be read, the Deacon must come, and lift the book from the Altar,
to signify that the sense of holy Scriptures must be taken alone from the
warrant of the holy Church, see Heigam. page 122. In the ceremonies and
significations it seems we must agree with Rome, for we see that among the
decent furniture wherewith our Altar is adorned, the text of the Gospel is a
chief part, also the necessity of the Altars and sacrifices, where ever the
Gospel is preached, and the taking of the sense of Scripture from the hand of
the Church, ye may see express passages from Heylen, Montagu, and White, in
Canterbury-selfe-conviction.

Farther, when the Deacon has lifted the text of the Gospel from the Altar,
he gives it to the Subdeacon to carry at his back, two wax candles are
lifted from the Altar by two Acolytes, to be carried burning before him so
long as the Gospel is in reading, the cross or crucifix is also on Festival
days carried before the Gospel, also a Censer with fire and Incense, the book
is crossed, and perfumed, and when the lesson is ended, the Book by the Deacon
is kissed, the reason of all these ceremonies, see in the forenamed places of
Durand and Jnnocent, from none of these superstitions we can be long secured:
Our Deacons are begun already to be consecrate, the chief part of their
office is their Service at the Sacrament, and their reading of Scripture; the
orders of Subdeacon and Acolytes are proclaimed to be convenient, if the Church
had maintenance for them, by Andrews: the wax Candles are standing on the
Altars already: the silver Crucifix is avowed by Pocklington to have a meet
standing upon the same Altar; the crossings and perfumings and lights are
maintained by Andrews, as Canterbury sets him forth, the kissing of the Book
is now daily practiced.

3. The Creed of Constantinople.
The third portion of the instruction is the Creed of Constantinople, Credo in
unum, etc. This is put in the Mass by Pope Mark according to Durand, or by
Pope Damasus according to Innocentius. Damasus Papa constituit, utsymbolum
cantaretur ad Missam, Lib. 2. c. 49. or rather it was put in the Mass long
thereafter, for Walafridus tells that the Latins learned this part of the
Mass from the Grecians, and that after the Council of Constantinople, cap.
22. This Bellarmine approves de Missa, Lib. 2. c. 17. as also Walafridus
addition, that the French and Dutch Church received not this part of the Mass,
till the days of Charlemaine and that through the occasion of the heresies of
Felix.

This part of the Mass we have word by word from the Missall of Sarum, fol.
143. yea, the Romish ceremonies about it, put out of the English Liturgy, we
seem to resume, the English says no more, but that the Creed shall follow
the Gospel; the reason of which order the Rationalists give at length, but our
Rubricke before the Creed says farther, to wit, this Creed shall be said or
sung all reverently standing up, importing first that at the reciting of the
Creed of Constantinople, not that of Nice, nor that of the Apostles, we must
use much more reverence, then at the reciting of the Epistles of the Apostles,
or writings of the Prophets, even the same reverence we use at the reading of
the Gospel, of this Durand gives a good reason; [ Quia symbolum verbum est
Evangelicum, ideo stando illud audire, sicut and Evangelium debemus, Lib. 4.
fol. 60. col. 3.] Next our Book imports the singing of the Creed, and that
according to the reasons of the Mass, which at this place takes rather in that
of Constantinople, then the Creed of the Apostles or of Nice, because it
agrees better to the song by musical voices or instruments then these; so
speaks Walafridus, c. 22. [Et notandum, Graecos illud symbolum, quod nos ad
imitatione^ eorum intra Missas adfumimus potius quam alia in cantilenae
dulcedine^ ideo transtulisse, quia Constantinopolitani Concilij proprium est,
and fortasse aptius videbatur modulis sonorum quam Nicenum, quod tempore prius
est] Thirdly, the saying or singing of the Creed is given in our Book,
neither to the Priest, nor to the people, as the Gospel immediately before was
enjoined to be read only by the Priest, and the acclamations to be said only
by the people, but the Creed is to be said neither by the Priest, nor by the
people, but it is to be begun by the Priest, and to be sung through by the
Quiristers, for the mysterious reasons ye may see in Durandus: after the Creed
is sung, the Priest bowing down kisses the Altar as we have in Heigam. page
162. This ceremony Heylen in his Epistle to the King before his antidotum
commends in the person of these, who did fall down and reverence with
affectionate kissing of the Altar.

4. The Predication.
The fourth part of the instruction is the predication, this was a principal
part of the Sacrament, which was much regarded not only by the ancients, as
we may see in the order of celebration set down by Iustine Martyr, and
Dionysius Areopagita, as also in manifold Sermons yet extant of Cyprian,
Basile, Ambrose, Augustine, and others, which they delivered at such occasions,
but even in the later times in the second Council of Toledo. c. 2. and the
first of Lateran, c. 10. where strict order is taken for Preaching of the word,
that is, as the place makes clear for the exposition and application of the
Scriptures before read to the reproof, instruction, comfort, admonition of the
people, as their present state did require. This part of the Mass is
acknowledged by Durand, Lib. 4. fol. 224. col. 2. yea, in the Roman pontifical
there are sundry rubricks spent upon it, among the rest we have these words,
fol. 224. col. 4. Si autem post Evangelium ut plerumque fit in curia sit
praedicandum, Pontifex sedet and accipit mitram a Diacono, tum ille qui est
praedicaturus accedit ad eum, and pontifex benedicens ei, dicit, Dominus sit
incorde tuo, and in labijs tuis ut digne and fructuose annuncies verba sancta
sua, tum surgit praedicator and accedit ad pulpitum and exequitur officiu^
finita praedicatione expectat in pulpito praedicator, etc. It is most clear
that in all antiquity, to the very latest and most corrupt times, the care not
of reading only, but preaching was seriously recommended to all Bishops and
Presbyters, as we may see in their orders of consecration yet standing in the
Pontifical, yet at last the ignorance and carelessness of the Clergy grew so
great, that this duty was all utterly neglected for sundry ages, as we may see
acknowledged by the Council of Trent, the history of it printed at London in
Italian, fo. 165. so in the Missals of Sarum, this part of the Mass is
omitted, and how ever the English Rubric have an express command for a
Sermon, Evangelio lecto sequitur concio, and the very Council of Trent have
strict acts for reforming the old neglect of Sermons, injoyning to the B.
himself, let be to other Presbyters the duty of preaching, at least every
Sunday, and all holy days, as the chief part of the Episcopal office, to
feed the Souls of their flock with the bread of the Word preached; yet our
Book seems to like better of the old order of Sarum, which according to the
custom of these dark times, did neglect Sermons, so our Rubric is conceived,
[After the Creed if there be no Sermon] directly absteining to give any
injunction for Sermon at the Communion. How great enemies our Bookmen are to
Sermons, it is shown at large in the Canterb. self-conviction, The Papists
even at Trent makes it needful to preach every Sabbath; yea the Popish Princes
this day, who have any taste of devotion, be their affairs never so weighty,
will have two Sermons every Sabbath; so we see in the life of the late Emperor
Ferdinand; but our men at most will admit but of one, yea, they think that one
in a month is enough, and all that their Canons do require, and that one must
be very short, without any prayer either before or after. What spite they carry
at the preaching which this day is used in England, may be seen in the words
which Canterbury makes Andrews use after his death, and which himself uses
before the Star Chamber in his late Speech; yea, these men are now brought to
avow in Print the great expediency to put down preaching, by bringing us back
to that order which was used in England in the time of Popery, where the want
of our present kind of preaching, did keep the people in their ancient
simplicity, and so in that old laudable integrity and devotion; see passages
for all this in the Self-conviction.

As for the Homilies which are ordained to be read in place of Sermons, their
form is taken from the Roman Breviarie, which after the reading of the Lessons
from Scripture, ordaines the reading of many Homilies; the English Liturgy
also permits the reading of Homilies, printed by the Reformers of Religion, in
these places of the Land, where maintenance cannot be had for a preaching
Minister; but here our Book seems to be worse than either the Roman Breviary,
or the English Liturgy; for the Homilies which are in the Breviary, were
composed of old by the ancient Fathers, and these Homilies of England are most
orthodox, and composed by the most sound Fathers of that Church since the
Reformation; but our Homilies which we are obliged to receive are not yet
extant, and the composition of them, as of all our Books is committed to the
hands of that faction, who of late in their printed Sermons, have vented all
the points of Arminianisme, and the far most and grossest points of Popery,
if not all without any exception, as the Self-conviction makes good; when they
have stuffed their Homilies so full as they think good, of Arminianisme and
Popery, we must approve, subscribe, and use them daily, as the public doctrine
of our Church, or else be excommunicate as rebellious schismatics without any
remedy; for the composers of these Homilies take to themselves in this act the
title and authority of our Church representative, whose dictates must be
embraced under the highest pains both civil and spiritual. Yea, beside the
burden of Homilies, it seems we must lay down our back to bear the Legends
also, whether they be of gold, or of lead, or of dross; for as the Breviary
puts their fabulous Legends and Martyrologies at the back of their Homilies, so
our Bookmen are beginning to print the great convenience of reading in the
Church to the people the lives and histories of the Martyrs, see Quaeres.

The four less principal parts of the Instruction.
As for the four less principal parts of the Instruction, to wit, the
Graduall, Halelujah, tractus, and sequentia, which are sung betwixt the Epistle
and the Gospel, the Papists will grant that they are put in only of late, to
hold up the musical harmony, and so may well be omitted, yea, they are
discharged by the Council of Toledo, and came in only by custom; hear
Walafridus Confession of the Graduall and Halelujah, as for the tractus and
sequentia, they were not heard of even in his days, cap. 22. [Responsoria and
halelujah quae ante Evangelium cantantur, deinde adjuncta videntur and
prohibita canonibus Hispanorum, in illis enim jubetur ne aliquis hymnus inter
lectionem Apostolicam and Evangelium in ordine Missae ponatur, ex quo
intelligitur id aliquos tentasse tunc temporis, sed propter novitatem rei
studium eorum non fuisse receptum, quod tamen postea usu Romano commendatum ad
omnes Latinorum pervenit Ecclesias] This Bellarmine cannot deny, de Missa, l.
2. c. 17. yea all the four parts are of so small importance, that the Papists
themselves would be quit of them; so speaks Spalato of them as they stand in
the Breviary, l. 7. c. 12. art. 96. [Antiphonae, responsoria, versiculi and
ejusmodi minuta, quae ut puto, cantus and modulationis gratia intermisceri
lectioni solita fuerunt ad tollendum fastidium ubi Musicae locus non est, non
videntur necessaria, impediunt enim cursum piae and utilis lectionis] This
Spalato did learn from Cardinal Quignonius, who did print the same advise
with the good liking both of Pope Paul the third and Clement the seventh. The
Cardinals words are these in Spalatoes next section, giving a reason why in
his Breviary he put out all these four things which were in use to be sung
betwixt the Epistle and the Gospel [Versiculos responsoria and capitula
omittere idcirco visum est, quoniam cum introducta sint ad cantus potissimum
modulandos, and legentes saepe morentur, cum molestia quaeritandi locum,
relinquere voluimus, nec enim ad precandum cuncta salubria and utilia congeri
debent ne clerici graventur iniquiori pondere] ye see how with the Pope and
Cardinals good leave, we may leave out of our Book all these particles in hand.

But suppose that the Pope this day would be more precise, and require strictly
the use of them all, our men would easily yield to this his rigorous
importunity; for consider, 1. The Graduall.
if in all these four parts of the Mass there be any thing which their
stomachs could not well digest, the graduall or responsory is naught but two
verses of a Psalm sung on the gradus or steps of the Altar, the first by two
Querister boys in their Surplices, the other in way of answer by the whole
Quire, as we see on the first Sunday of Advent, where the graduall is the third
verse of the 25 Psalm, Vniversi qui te exspectant non confundentur Domine, the
Versicle responsory to this is the fourth verse, Vias tuas Domine notas fac
mihi and semitas tuas edoce me.

2. The Halelujah.
The Halelujah is naught but this Hebrew sentence, which we read often in
Scripture, used on festival days.

3. The tractus.
The tractus is but a line of other Scriptures, which on fasting days in times
of sorrow is put in the place of Halelujah and sung tractim heavily, laserly,
in sad, grave, and long notes, as the first Sunday of Lent the tractus is the
first verse of the 91 Psalm, Qui habitat in adjutorio altissimi in protectione
Dei coeli commorabitur. The versicle or responsory, is the second verse of that
same Psalm, Dicet Domino susceptor meus es tu and refugium meum Deus meus,
sperabo in eum.

4. The sequentia.
The sequentia or prosa, is a song of praise put at the back of Halelujah, a
long rithme in prose used at some few high festivals, invented first by
Nocherius a dutch Abbot, and put in the Mass by Pope Nicolaus, as Durand tells
us, l. 4. fol. 56. col. 3. Here is nothing which our men will oppose, as in
that famous sequency of Pentecost S. Spiritus adsit nobis gratia, quae corda
nostra sibi faciat habitacula, expulsis inde cunctis vitijs spiritalibus etc.
In some of their sequencies, I grant, there are contained praises of the B.
Virgin and other Saints, but no ways so gross as these which follows in the
Canon, and are defended by our men as lawful, as shortly we shall hear: So
then the four little and less principal parts of the Instruction, will not
be refused by us upon any reason, if we keep the grounds of our Book, when
ever it shall be the will of our Clergy to put them in, with the other four
large and principal parts of the same Instruction.

CHAP. IV. Concerning the Offertory and Exhortations.
HAving gone through the two first members of the Mass, the Preparation and
Instruction, and the twelve portions of the first, with the eight portions of
the second, and so the first twenty parts of the Mass as it lies in the old
Missall of Sarum, and having showed how that all the principal of these twenty
parts are actually in our Book, and the rest to the very least virtually, we
come now to the Offertory, The Offertory.
this in the Mass follows the Gospel and the Creed; the reason of the
connection Pope Innocent gives it in these words, Ordo conveniens est ut post
praedicationem Evangelij sequatur fides in cord, laus in ore, fructus in
opere; fides in symbolo, laus in offertorio, fructus in sacrificio, quapropter
offerenda cantatur, quia sacrificium laudis offertur. Mysteriorum missae, l. 4.
c. 53. These words Durand transcribes. This order our Book follows precisely,
after the Creed shall follow the Homily, and after it the Presbyter shall
earnestly exhort the people to remember the poor, saying or singing these
sentences.

This part of the Mass was not in use in the primitive Church, so does
Walafridus testify, c. 22. Offertorium quod inter offerendum cantatur, quamvis
a prioris populi consuetudine in usum Christianorum venisse dicatur, tamen quis
specialiter addiderit officijs nostris aperte non legimus cum vere credamus
priscis temporibus patres sanctos silentio obtulisse vel communicasse quod
etiam sabbathe Pasche nos hactenus observamus, sed sicut supra dictum est,
diversis modis and partibus per tempora decus processit Ecclesiae and usque in
finem augeri non desinet. That this was a part of the Mass which of late times
had been put in, wherewith antiquity was not acquainted, Berno confesses in
the very same words of Strabo. Honorius gives the invention of this portion to
Gregory the father of many more innovations of the Church, Gemma animae, l. 188.
Offertorium Gregorius Papa composuit, and ad Missam cantari statuit, This is
said not only of the singing and music of the Offertory, but of the
composition of the very matter of it, we grant long before the custom was to
make offerings or public gifts of bread and wine, and yet never before the old
Agapae were abolished, which were in use after Tertullians days, but we say
withal, that the Offertory as it is now in the Mass, and as our Book
translates it hence, seems to be an invention far later than Gregorius
days; for in his days that Canon of the third Council of Carthage, which we
see standing in the decret de consecrat. 2. Can. in Sacramento, or rather that
fifth of the Canons called Apostolic, injoyning nothing to be brought to the
Table but bread and wine, and all other gifts to be brought to the house of the
Bishop, these Canons were then in use, no moneys then were set on the Table by
the hand of the Priest; that it was so the Roman order puts it out of question,
this order is not alleged to be composed before Gregory, yea the barbarismes
of it will make it many ages later, and yet even in it no money offered, only
bread and wine, out of the which the elements for the Sacrament were taken. The
first that seems to have admitted the offering of money at the Altar, expressly
against the old Canons and customs, seems to have bin that good man
Hildebrand, Gregory the 7. for to him does the Canon Law de consecrat. did. 1.
ascribe the Canon, (Omnis Christianus) injoyning all Christians to bring some
thing to offer when they come to the Mass, drawing that which before was only
bread and wine to aliquid, money, or what ever might be for the use of the
poor Priest; but what ever Pope has been the inventor of this kind of
Offertory, which this day stands in the Missall and in our Book, it is one of
the Jewish ceremonies, if we will believe Durand, l. 4. fol. 65. Ritus igitur
synagogae transivit in religionem Ecclesiae and sacrificia carnalis populi
translata sunt in observantiam populi spiritualis.

The first part of the Offertory.
This Offertory may be subdivided in four portions, the first is passages of
Scriptures sung or said for the encouragement of the people to contribute: In
this portion our Book seems to go beyond the Missall in corruption in three
respects; first, in the needless multiplication of passages to the number of
sixteen, recommending in the posterior Rubric the saying not only one of
them, but of them all, whereas the Missall eschewing here tediousness, beside
its custom, is content with one passage alone, as Durand remarks, l. 4. fol.
62. Secondly, the passages of the Missall do no ways savor, for the far
most part of a Legal, Jewish, or any proper Oblation, neither does the English
passages look that way, but the passages which our Book here does use, as may
be seen in the first five, set in the forefront, all out of the old Testament,
carries directly to a legal oblation. Thirdly, how ever the avarice of the
Romish Clergy be notorious, and their purpose in this part of the Mass to draw
money from the people to their own purses be well known, yet they are not so
impudent as to make a profession in their Book of such a base design, but our
men think no shame to avow their design, to intervert the peoples oblations,
and to spoil the poor of their alms, for all the Scriptures which are said
for the Offertory, where one is for an alms to the poor, three are expressly
directed for a gift to the Church and the Priest, however some of the same
Scriptures be used in the English, yet all their Rubricks hinder this abuse and
misapplication, and do not permit the Clergy to take up for themselves what
was given only for the poor, but our Rubric is express for the giving of
the one half to the Presbyter, and the other half to any pious or charitable
use that the Priest thinks meetest, the Church fabric, or what else, though
the poor should sterve.

The second part of the Offertory.
The second portion of the Offertory, is the offering up to God the moneys given
by the people, this I think is the daily practice of the Mass Priest, yet I
find not any thing in the Missall, or Expositors of it old or new except some
thing in Durand, which looks that way, the English Book has nothing of this,
but all which is given is directed as a simple alms to be put in the poor
man's box, and without further ceremony for the poores use alone, but our Book
here has a fair and clear Jewish peace offering; for as the people under the
Law did give their offering not to God directly, but first to the Priest, and
he did not offer it to God but upon the Altar, so here the Deacon having taken
the oblations from the people gives them in their name to the Priest, and he
sets them upon the Altar or Table there to be presented before God, this
ceremony is borrowed from the Missall by way of analogy, for there the plate
with the offering of the bread must be presented by the Deacon to the Priest,
and he must place it before God on the Altar. Take it in Durands words, l. 4.
fol. 64. Subsequenter Diaconus ipse patinam cum hostia Pontifici repraesentat,
and Pontifex seu sacerdos hostiam collocat super altar. The mysteries hid in
these actions see in the place, only he shows a reason why it is necessary
that the Deacon must put these oblations in the holy hands of the Presbyter,
fol. 66. Sacerdos oblationes manu tangit repraesentans illud, Levit. 1. and 4.
ponetque manus super caput hostiae and acceptabilis erit and in expiationem
proficiens.

The third part of the Offertory.
The third and maine portion of the Offertory, is the placing of the bread and
wine upon the Altar, the offering of them up to God, even before the
consecration with certain prayers to be a peace offering, that so they may be
fitted for the matter of the Propitiatory sacrifice following; of this oblation
thus speaks Heigam, p. 175. [The Priest having placed the bread and wine in a
readiness to be consecrate, he requires the holy Trinity to accept his
oblation] and Bellarmine de Missa, l. 2. c. 17. Illa prior oblatio praeparatio
fuit ad posteriorem oblationem in qua proprie sacrificium consistit, quapropter
recte dicitur praeparatum sacrificium quando materia sacranda Deo per quandam
oblationem est dedicata.

To this offering of the bread and wine on the Altar the Romish Church in the
late and worst times detorted all what was said in a good sense of the peoples
offerings, in this they put the maine part of their Offertory, almost
neglecting all other things to which the term of offering was wont to be
applied, and by this offering made way for that more wicked oblation which
follows in the Canon; the Church of England detesting this abuse plucked it up
by the root and put it far away from their Book, but our men have put it onus
in express terms and in such a place that the subsequent prayer for the
Church must mainly be applied to it [and the Presbyter shall then offer up and
place the bread and wine upon the Lords Table that it may be ready for this
service (or on the Altar that it may be ready for that sacrifice, this is now
the more ordinary style of our Booke-makers) and then he shall say let us pray.]

The fourth part of the offectory.
The fourth part of the offertory is a number of prayers said upon the bread and
wine, not for consecration nor oblation, but for acceptance of God to be the
matter of that following sacrifice of these prayers there are five public 1.
suscipe sancte Pater, etc. pronounced on the bread that God would take it for a
sacrifice, which the Priest offers for himself, for all Christians dead and
living that it may profit them. The next is offerimus tibi Domine an offering
of the Cup with a desire that it may go up in a sweet smelling sacrifice for
the sins of the world. The third is suscipe sancta Trinitas a request for
both the bread and wine conjunctly, that they may be a sacrifice for the memory
of Christ's resurrection, and for the honor of the blessed Virgin and all the
Saints that have pleased God from the beginning of the World. The fourth veni
sanctificator a request to the holy Spirit to come and fill with his fire the
hearts of the faithful: The fifth in spiritu humilitatis a desire in the spirit
of humility and contrition to be accepted with the sacrifice they are
preparing for God.

The secret prayers are diverse at the Priests discretion, the most common is
this short shred for the Church. Ecclesiae tuae quaesumus Domine unitatis and
pacis dona concede, quae sub oblatis muneribus mystice designantur. I find also
in Sarum joined to these prayers, this short preface, fol. 144. Hostias and
preces tibi Domine offerimus. These secrets or this Secretella as Durand styles
it, are the principal and chief prayers of the offertory and the only
prayers, which were in use of old in the Mass; these we see put in the bosom
of our offertory prayers word by word with the forenamed preface, whereof
Sarums Rubricke says Notandum quod in omnibus Missis pro corpore praesenti and
in anniversarijs cujuscunque fuerint and in trigintalibus dicitur hostias and
preces, fol. 144. So we begin our prayer, [we humbly beseech thee to accept
our alms (called immediately before oblations) and to receive these our
Prayers which we offer unto thy divine Majesty, beseeching thee to inspire the
universal Church with the Spirit of truth, unity, and concord, etc.] As for
the first five public prayers, they may be well left out of our Book, for
they are not in the old Missalls, Bellarmine grants they were all invented of
late, and are not to be found in any of the old expositers of the Mass,
quinque autem illae orationes suscipe sancte Pater, etc. neque antiqua admodum
sunt neque in Romana Ecclesia ante quingentos annos legebantur, unde etiam
Walafridus, Rupertus, Amalarius Alcuinus imo etiam Innocetius tertius and alij
veteres non meminerunt illarum orationum sed transeunt ab offertorio ad
secretas: yea they are of so little consequence, that the present Missals take
one or two of them as they please at the Printers discretion. Sarum printed in
a fair edition at Paris 1555. has only two of them, suscipe sancta Trinitas
and inspiritu humilitatis; so though we should have omitted them in our Book
it would have been no sacrilege against the Mass, albeit no necessity
obliges our Book men to omit any of them, three of them for their matter
contain no scruple for them to stick on, what inconvenience arises from the
matter of the other two concerning the honor of the Saints and Prayers for the
dead we will see hereafter when we come to the Canon, that they make no bones
of such things, but swallowe them all down, being a little sweetened and
mollified with their commodious interpretations.

We make a sacrifice in honor of the Saints, and for benefit of the dead.
Yea in the same very place they seem to make direct way for the worst
absurdity in the Mass prayers, to wit, the offering of the sacrifice of Bread
and Wine in honor of the Saints, and for benefit of the dead, for in that our
Offertory prayer longer alone than all the six prayers in the Roman Offertory,
after the hostias and preces which Sarum commands never to be here omitted,
and the secretall, Ecclesiae tuae quaesumus, the only offertory prayer in the
Elder Missals, and after the petitions, for the King, his officers, the Clergy,
and their flocks, and for those in affliction, taken all for their matter out
of the Letany as ye may read it in the Sarum office of the Virgin Mary, fol.
124. after all this our Book subjoynes these new additions to the English
Liturgy, showing that in this same offertory they will have the Saints highly
honored, the wonderful grace and virtue which has appeared, and been declared
in these Saints who in their several generations have been the lights of the
world, proclaimed here to Gods praise: What say the Papists more for the
honor of the Saints in their offertory, the specifying of this general with
the particular names of the Virgin Mary, of the Prophets, or Patriarchs,
Apostles, or Fathers or any men or women who were known to have been the
lights of the world in their several generations will be naught against the
grounds of our Booke-men, who now are heard often in their public prayers and
thankesgiving to particularize these names with great disdain and contempt of
the scandal which they know the simple takes at this their practice.

As for the other point, the offering of these oblations and prayers for the
benefit, not only of the quick but of the dead; we see that after they have
commended their oblations to be mercifully received of God, and put to their
back, prayers for the good of the living in all degrees and callings, they
immediately subjoyne not only their thankesgiving, but their prayers and
supplications for the dead, even for the salvation of their Soul [that we and
all they may be set at the right hand of thy Sonne] and the dead (for which
among the rest of the mystical body of Christ this salvation is sought) are
distinguished expresselie in two ranks: one are styled Saints who had
wonderful grace, and were the lights of the world in their several
generations, others of far inferior quality, only Gods servants who are
dead in faith, and now rest from their labor, the meetest description that can
be of the faithful in Purgatory as they are distinguished from the canonized
Saints in heaven if we will believe Bellarmine: As then the Mass referred
their oblation of bread and wine, and their offertory prayers upon it to the
honor of the Saints in heaven, to the benefit of the living and good of the
faithful who are dead in what ever place they be, whether in heaven, or else
where, so does our Book, but no ways the English, for in this place they pass
the honor of the Saints, they speak not of the benefit of the dead, and the
blessings they crave to the living have no reference at all to the oblation of
bread and wine, for they have plucked up by the root that pestiferous weed,
which yet our men have planted again in the old place, and put to the back of
it our offertory prayer after the manner of the Mass, so that these benefits
craved in that prayer either for quick or dead ought not to be excluded from a
relation yea dependence from the preceding offering of bread and wine to which
they are annexed. See B. Forbes in the self conviction, taxing the Church of
England who by Bucers advice did put out the words which import prayer for the
dead, which he most earnestly labors to have again restored as they were in
the old Missall.

We make any offertory without a Communion.
There is a Marginall Rubricke added also to our offertory prayer which is most
strange [when there is no communion these words say they shall be left out] I
remember not that such grossness in the Missall is expressed, it is I grant
their doctrine and daily practice to offer the sacrifice of their Mass for the
present and absent, for the quick and the dead without any Communion, for the
presence of a congregation to celebrate the Sacrament, or to offer the
sacrifice of Christ's body and blood, they do noe ways require, and far
less any communion, the presence of the congregation they think merely
accidental and needless to the perfecting of the Mass and their
communicating much more, for the Priests consumption to them is all, yet they
say not so much in their book, but contrary ways in all their Masses there
are expressly Rubrickes for a Communion and post communion as we shall hear;
so it is very strange that our men here were not content to have made so many
additions except this caipstone had been put on, that all the former service
that the oblation of the bread and wine by the Presbyter on the Altar may well
be done without a communion, yea without any congregation assembled for such an
end, charity it self cannot be offended by imputing to these men's senses
which their words do so clearly bear, that hardly can any other exposition
be put on them.

Our exhortations are needless.
After the offertory are subjoyned in our book 3. large exhortations, which are
not in the Mass, but in the Mass there are sundry exhortations and prayers
which will be found meeter for this place then any of these three, the first
seems to be altogether needless and scornful, it is spent in a multitude of
words, obtesting all to communicate, at that time there is none present who
ministers any such attestations, non-communicants are put to the door at least
in the end of Missa Catechumenorum before the offertory, the Curate in the
morning or night before took up the names of all Co^municants as it is in the
first Rubric of the Communion, and before this exhortation he did see in the
offertory the faces of all Communicants, these who gave up their names in the
morning, and presently did contribute their offering as Communicants, need not
be earnestly obtested to come to the Table, and others they are none present,
or if they were any according to the custom of the Church and command of the
former Rubricke, they might not be admitted.

The next exhortation is as unreasonable to wit, to be reconciled with their
neighbors, to make satisfaction for wrongs, to come to a Minister to disburden
their conscience, or as they do now directly expound that passage to make
their auricular confession in the ear of the Priest; these things at that time
and place are not possible to be done without marring the whole action, and so
ought not then to be exhorted unto: As for the third, how good and pertinent so
ever, yet may it not well be omitted, that in it alone we should not break
our uniformity with the Roman Catholic Church, which in all the rest of our
book we have so carefully kept, and if we will in this be stubborn, the
Papists will easily dispense with it, for in it naught is contrary to the
tenets of their Church.

After the exhortations follows the invitation to repentance, the general
confession and absolution with the grounds of comfort, this is naught but that
second confession of the people and their absolution which the Mass puts at
the back of the Priests confession in the introitus as we before noted.

CHAP. V. Concerning the Canon of the Mass, Consecration, transubstantiation
and adoration, etc.
The ordinary Prefaces.
WE are now come to the Canon, a part of the Mass, whereupon the Papists fond
love, and the Protestants just hatred is chiefly spent, take Bellarmine for a
witness of these contrary affections, de Missa, Lib. 2. c. 17. Sacrum canonem
ut summa reverentia semper Catholici retinuerunt, ita incredibili furore
haeretici hujus temporis lacerant.

This member of the Mass consists of Prayers and prefaces: The Prefaces are
either extraordinary for high times or ordinary for common Masses, the ordinary
prefaces we have word by word, for so reads the Missall: Hic dicit sacerdos
sursumcorda, respondet chorus, habemus ad Domi number, sacerdos gratias agamus
Domino nostro. Resp. dignum and justum est, sacerdos vere dignum and justum
est, aequum and salutare nos tibi semper and ubique gratias agere Domine sancte
pater omnipotens, aeterne Deus, and ideo cum Angelis and Archangelis, cum
thronis, and dominationibus and cum omnibus militiae caelestis exercitibus
hymnum gloriae tuae canimus sine fine dicentes, sanctus, sanctus, sanctus
Dominus Deus Saboth, pleni sunt coeli and terrae gloria tua, hosanna in
excelsis: Our Book turns it thus, [After which the Presbyter shall say, lift
up your hearts. Answer. We have them up unto God, the Presbyter, let us give
thanks, etc.] saying all the preface to a letter, the end of these words is
according to Bellarmine, to make way to the great sacrifice that then is
drawing near, dicitur praefatio quia est excitatio populi ad illam actionem in
qua proprie sacrificium consistit de Miss. Lib. 2. c. 17. or as Heigham. p.
282. [The preface serves to dispose Christians to devotion while the Priest
addresseth himself to recite the holy Canon which contains the most
ineffable and incomprehensible mystery of the consecration of the body and
blood of our Saviour] what mysteries are hid in every one of these words, yea
in some letters besides the words, especially what vain imaginations are
drawn from the orders of Angels, see who has leisure in all the Rationalists
for in these conceats all of them agree to vage.

As for the Authors who put in these patches to the Mass, so says Innocent,
Gelasius Papa sacramentorum praefationes dictavit, Sixtus autem, hymnum
sanctus, sanctus, sanctus cantari instituit, Lib. 2. c. 61. So likewise Durand
with him; the first words sursum corda were in the ancient times used in the
Sacrament, but all the following are but late patches, yea the first words were
some ages ago abused to the furthering of the blasphemous sacrifice: hear
Alcuin de divinis officijs cap. de celebratione Missae, sursum corda hortatur
sacerdos populum tanquam dicat corda vestra a terrenis curis sursum ad Dominum
dirigite ut sacrificium Deo offerendum quod mihi obtulistis digne offerre
valeam exhortatione^ quaesequitur vere dign^m etc. Gelasius composuisse
dicitur. Amalarius, Lib. 3. c. 21. Hymnus Sanctus, etc. a Sixto Papa additus
est ut in gestis Pontificalibus invenitur, the reason why he might have been
moved to this act, we have from Gabriel Biel in Heigham, a boy in the time of
an earthquake at Constantinople, being ravished up to the heavens after an
hours stay reported that he heard the Angels sing the hymn of Sanctus, and
was commanded to desire the people to sing the same, which when they did, the
earthquake ceased: For the composition of the Preface we may hear Honorius in
Gemma animae, Lib. 1. c. 89. Leo Papa praefationes composuit sursum corda de
Ieremia, gratias agamus Deo de Apostolo sumptum est, sed Gelasius Papa ad
Missas cantari instituit Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus, Sixtus Papa dimidium de
Esaia, dimidium de Evangelio composuit, and ad Missam cantari statuit.

Extraordinary Prefaces.
As for the extraordinary prefaces, of old they were many, but thereafter the
Popes did canonize ten, which we may see extant this day in the Missall: Thus
speaks Durand. Notandum quod licet olim innumerae essent praefationes, hodie
december tantum sunt canonizatae, etc. Lib. 4. fol. 84. This Bellarmine reckons
out from him, de Missa. Lib. 2. c. 17. and both from the Canon Law, did. 79.
Et de consecratione did. 1. Of these ten our Book makes use of five, in the
1. of Christmasse a little of the Mass Preface is changed in our Book, but it
is done both needlessly and to the worse, for so says the Missall: Quando per
incarnati Verbi mysterium nova mentis nostra oculis lux tuae claritatis
infulsit ut cum visibiliter Deum cognoscimus, per hunc in invisibilium amorem
rapiamur. This is in nothing worse then our preface, yea in our Preface is
matter of more quarrel for it says that Christ was borne on that day which to
some breeds no small scruple.

In the second of Easter, there is no change at all, for thus say they in the
Mass, Et te quidem omni tempore, sed hac potissimum die gloriosius praedicare,
cum Pascha nostrum immolatus est Christus, ipse enim verus est agnus Dei, qui
abstulit peccata mundi, qui mortem nostram moriendo destruxit, and vitam
resurgendo reparavit, and ideo cum Angelis, etc. Our book does but turn these
in English.

The third, on the Ascension day our Book takes almost word by word out of the
Mass per Christum Dominum nostrum qui post resurrectionem suam omnibus
discipulis suis manifestus apparuit, and ipsis cernentibus est elevatus in
coelum ut nos divinitatis suae ribueret tesse participes, and ideo cum Angelis,
etc.

The fourth Preface of Pentecost the Missall sets down thus, Per Christum
Dominum nostrum, qui ascendens super omnes coelos, sedensque ad dextram tuam
promissum Spiritum Sanctum hodierna die in filios adoptionis effudit,
quapropter profusis gaudijs totus terrarum orbis exultat, sed and supernae
virtutes, atque Angelicae potestates hymnum gloriae tuae concinunt sine fine
dicentes; What here our Book changes is of their mere pleasure without any
necessity.

So in the fifth Preface of the Trinity, there is no material change; Thus
has the Missall, Aeterne Deus qui cum unigenito filio and Spiritu Sancto unus
es Dominus non in unius singularitate personae, sed in unius trinitate
substantiae, quod enim tua gloria revelante de te credimus, hoc de filio tuo,
hoc de S. Sancto sine differentia distractionis sentimus: we repeat the same.

The other five canonized Prefaces are for the solemnities of the Epiphanie, of
the first day of Lent, of the Apostles and Evangelists days, of the feasts of
the Virgin Mary, of the feasts of the Croce; all these solemnities our Authors
do keep but the last, and the last may be enjoined to be observed according
to their grounds, when ever it shall come in their will to command so: What
ever is said in any of these five Prefaces they embrace it all, only some
doubt might be made of some ambiguous words in the feasts of the Apostles, but
that they digest them and more hard pills we shall show at once, so that our
want of these five Prefaces, and our possession of the other five, depends
allanerly upon the same ground, to wit, the sole pleasure of our Book-makers
who were content at this time to put in the one, and hold out the other, for
the demonstration of their free will in the exercise of this act.

The Canon it self is but late trash.
After the Prefaces follow the Prayers, these altogether go under the name of
the Canon, the action, the secret; our adversaries brag much of the antiquity
and holiness of these prayers, but the more advised of them as ye may see in
Field, Append. ad lib. 3. c. 1. do astrict the spiration of antiquity and
holiness, but to a small part of these, for how ever the Jesuits please to
magnify to the skies this Canon, yet they which understand it much better then
the best of them, confess that it is but patched like a beggars pall of a
number of clouts by diverse hands often without discretion, Pope Innocent, l. 3.
c. 9. and Durand from him, Secreta quae secundum diversos and canon and actio
nominatur non tota simul ab uno, sed paulatim a pluribus ex eo quoque
perpenditur fuisse composita, quod ter in ea sanctorum commemoratio repetitur,
in secunda quippe commemoratione supplentur qui de primitivis Sanctis deesse
videbantur in prima: And in the next Chapter, Traditur quod Gelasius Papa
quinquagesimus primus a B. Petro qui fuit post Sylvestrum per 160. annos
Canonem principaliter ordinavit, herewith does Honorius in gemma Animae c. 90.
agree: Canonem Gelasius Papa composuit, etc. subjoyning the names of a number
of Popes, who put to their proper additions to this cento, this same does
Walafrid. cap. 22. and diverse of the old Rationalists. All the Canon as it lies
in the Mass our Book does not borrow, neither was it necessary, for the kind
mother Church of Rome can well dispense with some difference, yea with a
greater variety than is betwixt our Book and theirs, in this part take
Bellarmines caution for this benignity, de Missa, l. 2. c. 18. Neque negamus
verba Canonis diversa fuisse and etiam hodie esse apud Graecos, and apud
quasdam Latinorum Ecclesias, neque cogit Romana Ecclesia, ut Chemnitius
mentitur, ut omnes Canonem Missae Romanae tanquam necessarium, omnino ad
Eucharistiam consecrandam servent, nam and in ipsa urbe Roma, and alibi per
Italiam videmus Romano Pontifice consentiente a Graecis retineri Liturgiam
Basilij and Chrysostomi and Ambrosianam Mediolani and quam dicunt Mosarabam
Toleti in Hispania. Our men take in expressly the principal members of this
portion, these things which the Papists do most love and the Protestants most
abhor, and what they omit they show their good liking of it all, without
balking any one line. For the demonstration whereof consider that the prayers
of the Canon use to be divided in a number of parts, in five, six, seven,
eleven, twelve, in more or fewer, as Authors are pleased diversely to conceive,
we shall take them up in six parts.

The worst parts of the Canon are in our Book.
The third and fourth only are the principal, even those pieces whereby alone
the consecration and oblation of the great sacrifice is performed, for here
alone it is Vbi sacerdos accedit ad Dominici corporis consecrationem, according
to Durand, l. 4. fol. 73. Of these parts it is that Innocent exclaimes, l. 4.
c. 1. Ecce nunc ad summum sacramenti verticem accedentes, ad ipsum cor divini
sacrificij penetramus. These parts he calls the heart of that wicked body of
the Mass, this unhappy heart the English had pulled out, that the Serpent
might never again revive among them; but our men with an high hand and open
face profess the restoring of the life and putting in again the heart in the
body of that dead hydra: They put up in capital Letters their prayer of
consecration and memorial of oblation, and set down at the back of the same
Rubric the same words which the Missall uses for their transubstantiation; and
to the other the same words which they use in offering up their unbloody
propitiatory Sacrifice, who ever can clear our Book of these abominations,
must clear the Missall of them, for these places of the Missall whence alone,
or at least far most directly and principally the Papists do infer these
their capital errors, the same places are expressly set down in our Book
without any circumlocution.

We have borrowed the Popish consecration.
A Rubric for consecration alone without any further addition in these days
had been obnoxious to suspicion of an evil intent, our Book-men knew that
however the term of consecration uses not so much to be stood upon, yet that
the Romish Church does use it in no other sense than to demurmurate a number of
words on the elements for their transubstantiation into the body and blood of
Christ, and not as we do for the sanctifying of the Elements, or applying them
to the holy and sacramental use by reciting ^he words of Christ's institution
to the people, not to the dead elements: Durands doctrine is this day common
among our Adversaries, Dicimus illud non consecrari sed sanctificari, differt
autem inter haec, nam consecrare est consecratione transubstantiare,
sanctificare est sanctum and reverendum efficere ut patet in aqua benedicta.

We are enjoined in consecrating to turn our backs to the people, and so by
consequent to whisper in what language we will.
A Rubric for consecration alone then had been suspicious, especially here
where the English, yea no reformed Liturgy had any forms of consecration, but
now while to their consecration they will add a clause of the Ministers
posture in this act, commanding him during the time of consecration to leave
the former stance he was enjoined in the first Rubricks to keep at the North
end of the Table, to come to such a part of the Table where he may with more
ease and decency use both his hands, the world will not get them cleared of a
vile and wicked purpose. The Papists will have their consecration kept
altogether close from the ears of the people for many reasons, especially that
by ignorance of their words reverence may be conciliate to them, and the people
may not be able to get them by heart and to profane them, which some Shepherds
once did to their great hurt, for they pronounced the words of consecration on
the bread of their dinner in the fields, with intention to do what they did
see often the Priest to do in the Temple by this pronunciation, their bread
before their eyes was transubstantiate into flesh, and fire from heaven came
down which destroyed that flesh and them, at least stroke them dead for a
time; whereupon it was decreed that the whole Canon thereafter not only should
be in a tongue unknown to the people, but also should be whispered so secretly
that no man but the Priest alone should hear one word of it: This history is
set down in such a number of the Popish writers that I need make no citations,
only the reformed Church counts the secret murmuration of their Canon, and
words of consecration, a very vile and wicked practice against nature, reason,
and all antiquity; so that we must take it in a very evil part to be brought
toward it by our Book, for when our Table is brought to the East end of the
Quire, so near the wall as it can stand, and the Minister brought from the end
of it to the bread-side with his face to the East and his back to the people,
what he speaks may be Hebrew for them, he may speak so low as he will or what
he will, for were his face to the people and his voice never so extended, yet
in so great a distance he could not be heard, but now being set in the furthest
distance that is possible, and being commanded not only to turn his shoulder,
as he was by his North stance in all the former action, but his very back by
his new change of place and not being injoined to extend his voice as some
where he is, what can we conceive but it is their plain mind to have the
consecration made in that silence which the Romish Rubric in this place
injoines: Whereupon Durand from Innocent and others thus comments; Canon
secreta voce celebratur ne sacro sancta verba vilescant, fertur enim quod cum
antiquitus public et alta voce Canon diceretur omnes pene per usum illum
sciebant, and in plateis and in vicis decantabant, unde cum quidam pastores
illum in agro cantarent and panem super lapidem posuissent ad verborum ipsorum
prolationem panis in carnem conversus est, and illi ipsi divino judicio igne
coelitus misso percussi sunt, propter quod sancti Patres statuerunt verba illa
sub silentio dici, inhibentes sub anathemate ne proferantur nisi a sacerdotibus
super altar and in missa and cum vestibus sacris. This injunction we are
directed to keep while we are not only enjoined to go so far from the people,
as the remotest wall and Table will permit, but to use such a posture that our
back must be turned to them, that so our speech may be directed to the elements
alone, and that in what language you please, and no ways to the people from
whom we have gone away, and on whom we have turned our back.

This is Bellarmines maine prop of celebrating the Sacrament in an unknown
tongue, de Missa, L. 2. c. 11. Verba consecrationis non dicuntur ad instruendos
auditores, sed ad elementum consecrandum, elementum autem nullam linguam
intelligit, quare impertinens est ad oblationem, utrum Missa dicatur lingua
vulgari aut non vulgari. For this wicked practice of silence and going from the
people Bellarmines great argument is, the practice of the Jewish Priests in
these words, c. 12. Habemus exempla sacrificiorum veteris Legis, nam Levit. 16.
describitur solenne sacrificium incensi ac jubetur solus sacerdos intra velum
ingredi and sacrificare and orare pro se and populo, omnibus alijs foris
exspectantibus and non modo non audientibus, sed nec videntibus sacerdotem quo
etiam ritu sacrificasse Zachariam patrem praecursoris, Luc. 1. Yea as the
Jewish Priest to be more hid from the people in some solemn sacrifices went
within the veil, so the Popish Priest will have the vailes and curtains of
their Altars drawn about him while he is uttering his Canon and secret
consecration; this we have from Durand, Lib. 4. fol. 72. Ad quod
repraesentandum in quibusdam Ecclesiis sacerdos secretam intrans quibusdam
cortinis, quae sunt in utroque latere altaris, quae tunc extenduntur, quasi
tegitur and velatur. Is it not to this that here our Book-men lead us, my L. of
Canterbury is not content in his Sermon before K. James 1621. to avow it is
expedient that the substantial Church now should go beyond the typick Church
of old in the sumptuous magnificence of many ceremonies, but approves of late
his man Dr. Poklington in his Altar Christianum a little after the beginning
to praise their zeal, who made their altars of gold, or silver, and
consecrated them, laying on them carpets and corporalls, and enclosing them not
only with railes of timber, but vailes and curtains of cloth, yea to use
expressly the present argument of Bellarmine for closing up the Priest in his
sacrificing, or making his consecration, so that not only his words may be
removed from the ears, but his person from the eyes of the people, for so
speaks the Doctor there with Canterburies good leave after the midst of his
Book [As the people were excluded from the altar of incense, they stood without
all the time that he was praying or burning incense within, Luke 1. So in like
manner the altar built by Paulinus was in medio constituta, set in the midst of
the holy place (which practice he is urging to be restored in the Church of
England, and defending where it is already set up) which did represent the
Sanctuary from which the people were all utterly excluded, the people might see
the Priest going into the Sanctuary, might hear his bells, but himself within,
his gestures, his actions they saw not.]

When our Book has professed a consecration and at such a place of the Church,
and with such a posture of the Priest, that it must of necessity be so secret
from the people, as the Priest may say it in what language he will, and in so
quiet silence as he pleases, for who can challenge him when he is in his
Sanctuary divided by his vailes and railes from the people, when the prayer
which stood here in the English Liturgy is some impediment in their way
opposing their Popish consecration, they have removed it to another place
fitter for their designs, when our Book and these men whom we have reason to
take for good Commentators to it avow so much, who can blame us to be grieved?
but when they go yet further to bring back the very words of the Mass for
their consecration and oblation, the worst words, I say, that the Mass has
for that end, how shall we not be desperate of any good from their hands?

The very words whereupon the Papists build transubstantiation, our Book takes
from the Missall.
The Popish prayer in Consecration stands thus in the Mass: Quam oblationem tu
Deus omnipotens in omnibus quaesumus benedictam, ascriptam, ratam, rationabilem
acceptabilemque facere digneris, ut nobis corpus and sanguis fiat dilectissimi
filij tui Domini nostri I. Christi qui pridie quam pateretur accepit panem in
sanctas and venerabiles manus suas, and elevatis oculis in coelum ad te Deum
suum patrem omnipotentem, tibi gratias agens benedixit, fregit, (a rubric
interlaced hic frangit hostiam) deditque discipulis suis, dicens accipite and
manducate ex hoc omnes, hoc est enim corpus meum (a rubric here also post haec
verba inclinet se sacerdos ad hostiam, and postea elevet eam supra fronte^ ut
possit a populo videri) simili modo postquam coenatum est accipiens and hunc
praeclarum calicem in sanctas and venerabiles manus suas itidem tibi gratias
agens benedixit, deditque discipulis suis dicens accipite and bibite ex eo
omnes (the rubric hic elevet sacerdos calicem, as before, hic inclinet se) hic
est enim calix sanguinis m^i novi Testamenti mysterium fidei qui pro vobis and
multis effundetur in remissionem peccatorum, haec quotiescunque feceritis in
mei memoriam facietis.

This Romish prayer the latter parts of it are said by them to have been
composed by Pope Alexander, so Durand, L. 4. fol. 74. Haec verba qui pridie
usque ad hoc est corpus meum, Alexander Papa primus canoni addidisse dicitur,
as for the former part which is the prayer formally said by them on their
hostie, we heard before how Innocent ascribes its composition to Gregory's
Scholasticus, albeit no ways as it stands in the Missall and our Book, for in
that Scholasticus time the words did run clearly against transsubstantiation,
see how they are set down in the fourth Book de Sacramentis, c. 5. among
Ambrose works, but posterior to his days, Accipe quae sunt verba; dicit
sacerdos, fac nobis hanc oblationem ascriptam, rationabilem, acceptabilemque
quod est figura corporis and sanguinis Domini nostri I. Christi qui pridie quam
pateretur in sanctis manibus suis accepit panem, respexit ad coelum ad te
sancte pater omnipotens aeterne Deus gratias agens, benedixit, fregit,
fractumque Apostolis suis and discipulis tradidit dicens accipite and edite ex
hoc omnes, hoc enim est corpus meum quod pro vobis confringetur, similiter
etiam and calicem etc. This prayer composed by whomsoever yet as it stands this
day in the Missall and in our Book from it, is the maine ground they have in
the Mass for their consecration, transubstantiation, and adoration of the
Host, they do controvert among themselves about the words of consecration, the
Archbishop of Caesarea de capite fontium a French Preacher of late has made
much ado to have the consecration made by the words of the prayers, as the
Greek Church ever did think, but the current of their Doctors strives to have
the power of consecration placed alone in the five words, for this is my body,
etc. This question is taken up and agreed by the Missall and our Book,
ascribing the consecration to the prayer and words of the Institution
conjunctly without any prerogative to the prayer facere digneris ut nobis fiat,
above the narration qui pridie, or to this narration above the prayer.

As for transubstantiation, there is no Papist this day but will avow that from
the clause ut fiat nobis corpus and sanguis being expurged of the gloss which
it bare of old figura corporis and sanguis, from this clause, I say, all
Papists think their Transubstantiation clearly to flow, if not as from the
words which makes the conversion yet as from the words, which evidently
presupposes the conversion presently to be made by the words which in the
Missall and our book immediately follows, I grant that some of the old
Schoolmen put such Commentaries upon this passage that we may deny to the
Papists the flowing of their trasubstantiation therfrom, for Aquinas. p. 3. qu.
83. art. 4. ad septimu^. Non tamen videtur ibi sacerdos orare ut consecratio
impleritur, sed ut nobis fiat fructuosa, unde signanter dicit ut nobis corpus
and sanguis fiat and hoc significant verba quae praemittit dicens hanc
oblationem facere digneris benedictam, id est, per quam benedicamur, scilicet
per gratiam: ascriptam, id est per quam in caelo ascribamur, ratam id est per
quam de visceribus Christi esse censeamur, rationabilem, id est per quam a
bestiali sensu exuamur, acceptabilem ut qui nobis ipsis displicemus per hanc
acceptabiles ejus unico filio simus, but what ever one or two of old may be
found to speak, yet the current of their writers even of old, and all of them I
know this day do avow that their monstrous transubstantiation by clear
inference is deduced from this passage, Innocent the third, the most nocent
father of this monster, so does expound it, Lib. 3. cap. 12. petimus ut hanc
oblationem Deus faciat benedictam, ut eam consecret in rationabilem hostiam,
and acceptabile sacrificium ut ita nobis, id est, ad nostram salutem panis fiat
corpus and vinum sanguis dilectissimi filij Dei: so Bellarmine de Missa, lib.
2. c. 23. Non oramus pro Eucharistia consecrata, sed pro pane and vino
consecrando, neque petimus ut Deus benedicat and sanctificet corpus and
sanguinem Christi; sed ut benedicat and sanctificet panem and vinum, ut per eam
benedictione^ and sanctificationem fiat corpus and sanguis Domini Heigam whom
the Doctors of Doway of late have given to the English nation for an approven
expositor of the Mass, c. 48. p. 242. on our words. [Heere begins the
principal part of all the holy Canon which is the consecration where the
Priest beseeches almighty God that the creatures of bread and wine may be
sanctified and blessed, yea changed and converted into the precious body and
blood of our Savior, worthily is this word (fiat) added in this place,
because there is required the same Almighty power in this conversion which was
in the creation of all the world, and in the incarnation of the Almighty, for
God said, when he was to create the world, fiat lux, and our Lady said to the
Angel when Christ our Lord was to be incarnate, fiat mihi, so the Priest in
this place, fiat corpus;] I know no Popish writer who this day takes this
passage in any other sense.

Great appeareance that our men intend to have their words expounded popishly.
That our Bookemen desire us to take it in any other meaning, there is no
appearance, they have let no clause fall from their pen which rejects
transubstantiation or at lest a corporal presence, these which in the English
book did cross it are now put out, at the delivery of the elements, the
English has two sentences which are against the coporall presence in the
elements: This our book has scored out as impertinent, their Rubrieke gave
leave for the Minister to carry home the relikes of the elements to be employed
as he thought meet in common uses, this our Book does strictly discharge: no
consecrate bread may be carried out of the holy place but as the Papists
injoyne all the relickes of the H^stie and wine even these that stuck on the
Priests fingers to be gathered together and consumed in the holy place by the
Priest or Deacon, or else burnt, and the ashes to be put in a holy vessel, so
all the remains of our holy elements must be eaten by the Priest himself or
these Communicants that day which the Priest counts most fit, and they must be
eaten with great reverence, and that only in the holy place And to the end
that all dangers may be eschewed which may befall on the unreverent eating of
these elements for we know what ado the Papists make if a crumme of the
consecrate bread, or a drop of the consecrate wine should fall to the ground,
or upon the beard of a laick, for eschewing of such greevous inconvenients, we
are ordained to consecrate, and ever to consecrate as little as may be, yea far
rather to be short of necessaries, though it should be supplied with new
provision, and that to be consecrate over again, beginning at such a part of
the canon as the Rubricke of the Mass does prescribe than to have any to leave
about the consumption whereof, the devote mind might be perplexed: yea as if
they would avow manifestly their belief, and their commanding of our souls to
believe with them their transubstatiation, Se Canterb. Selfe-conviction. c. 6.
and Sup. c. 2.
at least their real presence of the body within the elements, they will have
the linen clothes which cover the consecrat elements to be called a very
coporall, the world knows that corporalls were never heard of in this
Sacrament till transubstantiation was borne.

All these changes, transpositions, additions, parings of the English Liturgy
here, our men among their friends profess are made propter sacramentarios. Mr.
Mitchels Epistles are known counting not us alone in the Scottish, French,
Fleemes, Switz, and other Churches as ever they did Zuinglian and
Sacramentarian heretics, but even the body of the English Church, which loves
not to add to their old Liturgy. We have the more reason to be afraid for
their humor of novation when we see what sundry of that faction have lately
printed on this subject, that they agree with Lutherans and Papists, and with
them have no controversy at all about the matter it self of the real
presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament, that all the question is about the
manner of the presence, which question they pronounce to be needless, as being
about a mode which is not necessary to know, yea which is impossible to be
determined, being a mystery imperceptible, yea that none here will make any
controversy but devilish Puritans and Jesuits, whom an evil Spirit possesses
to the maintenance of factions and schisms in the Christian Churches, which
without their unhappie humors would easily agree, yea to facilitate the
agreement; they are come further to the very mode of the Popish presence, or at
least so near as is possible, without the open avowing of it in terminis,
professing such a presence of the body in the very elements, and upon the
Altar, that for it the Altar it self as the chair or throne wherein it sits
must be adored and worshipped, not only the elements which are far nearer to
it. For all this there are passages brought in the Selfeconviction from
Montagu, Pocklington, Canterbury, and others of that faction: here I will not
repeat, only hear one passage of D. Laurence Sermon, I like S. Ambrose,
Lombard, Bucer, Roffensis and Harding, who advice in this argument to forbear
the determination of the manner of presence, but to cloth our fancy with
indefinit and general expressions, as I like not those that say he is bodily
there, so I like not those that say his body is not there, because Christ says
it is there, and S. Paul says it is there, and the Church of England says it
is there, and the Church of God ever said it is there, and that truly,
substantially, essentially, not only by way of representation or commemoration
and yet without either, con, sub, or trans, which the ancient Church said not
but by a real, and nevertheless spiritual, mystical, and supernatural
presentation and exhibition, we must believe it is there, we must not know how
it is there: It is a mystery they all say, and it were not a mystery if it
were known. The presence they determine yet the manner of his presence they
determine not, they said he is there, but they said, the Lord knows how. page
71. 18.

They are for bread worship and Altar worship.
As for the adoration of the Hostie, and so the vilest Idolatry that we
challenge this day in the Church of Rome, it is builded upon the forenamed
Rubrickes, directing the Priest in the consecration to take the Hostie in his
hand, to lift it up, to bow before it, and the people then to prostrate: how
near are we brought to this in the consecration, we are directed to take the
patine and chalice in our hand, they needed not have abstained from the word
hostie, the latin Mass words of patine and chalice are as unkoth to us, yea
Pocklington with Canterburies leave as he delights to bring in use the words
of officiating Priests with patine and chalice and corporals, carpets and
vailes, so likewise the words of Hostie and Sacrifice, yea Montagu shows his
contentment of the words Mass and Transubstantiation, always we are directed
to take in our hands the chalice and the patine with the hostie not for eat
king of it, or distribution of it, nor any such end: to say that the end of
this taking in our hands is that same for which the Papists use elevation, to
wit, the Priests inclination and the peoples prostration see if any charity
does hinder these suspicions, it is now the daily practice of that faction not
only at the consecration to lift up the consecrat elements that the people may
see them (as one of our chief Bishops professed to my self, it had been his
custom to do these many years bygone if my memory be good) but also to bow
before them, both at their taking up and laying down, so that at least they
may be perceaved to give four inclinations to the elements before the act of
receiving: As for the people, there prostration we cannot be far from it, when
we see their head and Prince my Lord of Canterbury complaining in print of the
laxnes of authority that urges not all to bow, prostrate, and adore not only
at, but to the very Altar, for the relation it has to the body which usually
sits thereon; must authority urge all to adore the Altar for the Sacrament that
is but some times upon it? And shall it permit people to be so profane? for to
this vice Canterbury gives no better name, yea a far more scurrile epithet)
as to neglect adoration to the consecrate Host which brings all that respect
to the Altar whereupon it is laid.

Our fears of such intentions are increased, when we see that in discourses
and printed books they are not ashamed to clear and free the Papists of all
Idolatry in these acts wherein all our reformed Divines put their very
Idolomanie and madness upon Idols: D. Montague whose late writtes M. Dow by
Canterburies license, pronounces to be most orthodox and antipapisticall, and
Peter Heylen when from Canterbury, and as he says from the state he answers
Burton, absolves with a great elogie from all error and dissonance from the
Church of England, taking as I think the Canterburian faction for the Church
by a great mistake. D. Montague I say thus approven of late in his apparatus
shows us how Papists are not Idolaters, for he tells that no Christian who is
a member of the Catholic Church can be an Idolater, how consonant to himself a
little thereafter, I do not say, only thus he speaks p. 1. Et certe quamdiu
palam non deficiunt a pietate and cultu Dei proprio ad idolatriam etiam moribus
impij, vita contaminati tolerantur in Ecclesia non minus quam miluus and corvus
immunda animalia erant in arca Ecclesiae prototypo singulari at nullus erat in
arca (...), nec in Ecclesiae societate quia (...) pietatem Christianam quatenus
Christianam execratur. Now that the Papists are members of the true Church
neither heretics nor schismatickes, but members of the same Body, burgesses of
the same city, sons of the same Father with us Protestants, and though they
maintain stiffely to death all their popish tenets, yet that they ought in
peace and love to be tolerated, and that Divines who deny this are but mad,
see page 283. sectam and haeresin non faciunt ij qui constanter retinent
doctrinam traditam, neque enim ille haereticus dicetur qui per omnia Romanam
fidem integerrimam profitetur, and p. 347. Haec est illa Helena quae nomen
jamdiu Christianum partibus and factionibus distractum in mutuas caedes
concitavit impie and crudeliter inter ejusdem Ecclesiae membra, ejusdem cives
civitatis, ejusdem patris filios, odijs, convitijs, maledictis, ferro s^ammaque
saevitur in rebus plerumque non tam fidei, quam curiositatis, scimus autem ait
Cyprianus, quosdam id quod semel imbiberunt nolle deponere, nec propositum suum
facile mutare, sed salvo pacis and charitatis vinculo quaedam propria quae
semel usurpata sunt apud se retinere, nolebant illi a suis opinionibuus
dimoveri, facile tamen patiebantur dissentientes, at alia nunc sunt tempora,
diversi mores, quicquid factioso alicui aut furioso Theologo, etc. Yea in his
Origines he gives to the putters down of the Popish Idols in the Church of
England no better style than furiosi iconoclastae, p. 162. and religiosi
nebulones, 174. yea p. 40. he proclaims the distinction of latria and dulia,
and avowes that no Papist ever gave to any creature the worship of latria, and
all the question we and they have long tinkled on for the worshipping of
Saints, Relicts, Images, or any other consecrate things with dulia is but vain
and for a shadow: That we have been but toying upon ambiguous and obscure
words; yea that to those holy things a religious reverence and worship of dulia
is truly due if so it be not a divine latreia which no Papist will give them
more nor we, martyrum reliquias, (...), deposita, (...), si quae nancisci
potuerimus genuina nec fucata libenter suscipimus, and veneratione sua debita
ac congrua hcnoramus, (non (...) as he spoke before) deveneratione autem
debita hoc est modo and mensura disquirendum, inprimis Dei cultum (...) quem
appellant nec possumus alicui creaturae nec debemus sive humanae sive Angelicae
quamvis excellentissimae impendere, hoc fatebitur Bullingerus and tota schola
non insanientium (...) nolunt enim illi quovis modo cuicunque creaturae latrian
ne quidem cultu relativo exhiberi, sed non constat quis sit ille cultus latriae
soli Deo praecise and peculiariter debitus, quibus terminis circumscribatur
quis ille qui solis debetur creaturis, quis modus, gradus, mensura, parts,
conditio, limitatio, omnia vacillant, vel ignorantur nec illud agitur ut
constare possint, lusum est diu in hac quaestione and illusum per ambiguitates,
e privatis nempe vel contendendi vel ditescendi respectibus, constet aute^ hoc
and facile conveniet inter nos de sanctorum reliquijs venerandis; magnam certe
gratiam ab Ecclesia Christi and partibus inter se contendentibus inierit is vel
ille qui doceant quousque progredi in hoc Sanctorum cultu, and (...) possumus.
Interim quod pueri solent in hac re ut in multis (...).

The other author I spoke of is D. Laurence, Chaplain in ordinary in his
Sermon Preached lately before the King subscribed by Canterburies Chaplain and
printed (as the book says) by the Kings special command, he makes idolatry
the giving of Divine honor to a creture, and so purges the Church of God of
this damnable crime: even as Schelford in his last Sermon notes that images
become not idols till they be worshipped with divine worship, and that as Gods,
yet Laurence preaches that religious worship and adoration may be given to
creatures especially to the Altars for the singular presence of Christ's Body,
yea that divine worship which he calls (...) (expressly distinguished from
religious veneration and prostration belonging to Creatures) may be given to
the Altar but not terminative, only transitive for it is for the respect of
God who is there, yea farther he will have the Creator and the creature adored
with one conjunct divine adoration without any distinction as Christ's Godhead
and manhood without any abstraction are adored with a divine adoration, so
Christ's body and the Altar (much more the elements) are without any abstraction
to be adored with one and the self same honor, hear the Doctors words, [As
Christians distinguished their oratories into an Atrium a Churchyard, a
Sanctum a Church, a sanctum Sanctorum a Chancell, so did they conceave a
greater degree of sanctity in one of them than another, and a greater degree
of the presence of God: as that distinction of holy places continued after
Christ, so did the reason of that distinction, the whole is the house of God
because that although the Lord be without these walls, yet is he more within,
as we are not presumed to be so much abroad as at home, as the Church conceived
him to be in all the parts of his house yet it conceived him to be more present
in one part of it than another, which was the reason that the consecration of
the Sacrament was in one place, albeit the distribution was in another, where
our Liturgy has enjoined also the second service to be read, and after
childbirth the presentation of thankesgiving and oblations, and all these in
respect of that peculiar dispensation of Gods presence in this division of the
Church, as within the veil in their division of the temple, having an Altar
here answerable to the mercy-seate there, as also in respect of the union
betwixt this place and Christ's humane nature from 12. to 16. p. a different
holiness of places there is confessed, and this arises from a different
presenee of God in these places, and there must follow also a different respect
toward these places, else were there not a suteablenesse betwixt honor and
merit, which natural justice requires: we read of civil respect, not only
to the persons of great men, but to their portraitures, their chair of estate,
their chamber of presence; and we read of reverentiall respects to the
Tabernacle, to the Temple, to the cross and Gospels of Christ, for as persons
and things have been in a religious or civil estate, so have religious and
civil persons ever esteemed of them, nor is all this to insinuate the
derivation of Gods honor on any beside God; God divert that damnable idolatry
as far from me as he has done from the Church of God: Some things have a
civil respect, others a religious, but the Lord only a divine, this religious
respect is called by Damascen, (...). Reverentia vel honor religiosus debetur
omnibus quae proprie spectant ad cultum; this honor is religious not only quia
imperatur a religione, but also quia fundamentum habet in relatione rei vel
personae alicujus ad religionem et cultum sacrum, page, 25. we find in Ignatius,
(...), a honor due to the Altar, and adgeniculari aris a kneeling to the
Altars in Tertullian, and (...), an adoration of the Altar, in the fifth
Council, and reverentiam altaribus exhibendam in the Synodals of Odo, (...),
in Damascen, yea divina altaria, and in the Greek Liturgies, an humble
prostration before the Altar, and in Damascens life of Mary the Egyptian,
(...), although they gave a religious reverence to these places, yet they
terminate that religious reverence in God, not in the places; the throne is
honored for the King, he that respects the house for the owners sake, respects
not the house but him: although the humane nature of Christ receive all from
the divine, yet we adore the whole suppositum in gross, which consists of the
humane as well as of the divine, so because of Gods personal presence in the
place, we adore him without abstraction of his person from the place, p. 39.]
I doubt if the grossest of the Jesuits have spoken so plain language, for the
adoration with religious reverence of the mind, and prostration of the body,
not only before but unto the Chancel, the Altar, the Cross, and by good
consequent, as I think, much more unto the elements, which in all respects are
nearer that body, which makes by its presence all the rest to be so adored.

The Popish coursing about the Altar, and crossings approved.
Many other points of agreement might an acurate paralleler find betwixt the
Mass and our Book, in the present passage I point but at other three, to wit,
in coursing and in crossing, in neglect of breaking and intention to
consecrate: we reprove in the Papists their folly to course from one nook of
their altar to another, from the North to the South, from the right horn to
the left, from the end to the midst, and from it to the end again; for these
mysterious reasons we may read in the Rationalists. What other thing does our
Rubric import, bidding us leave our North standing, where we were in our
Preface, and come to another part of the Altar during the time of consecration,
that when it is ended we may return again to the North end? Also that the end
of our coming to another place in the consecration is the more ease to use
both our hands, what use here of both the hands is possible, but that which the
Romish Rubricks at this place do injoyne, the multiplication of crosses,
whiles with the right, whiles with the left hand, whiles with both the arms
extended so far as they may be; this could not be done if we stood at the North
end of the Table, for then the East wall of the Church would hinder us to
extend our left arm, and so to make the image of Christ's extension on the
cross perfectly. The Papists to recompense the want which the people have in
their ear by the Priests silence and turning of his back upon them during the
time of consecration, as our Book speaks, they think meet to fill their eyes
with dumb shows, not only to set up the crucifix on the Altar, on the
Pillars, on the Tapestry, on the East glass window, where it may be most
conspicuous to the eye, but chiefly to cause the Priest at the altar to make a
world of crosses and gestures, all which must have a deep spiritual sense.
Will not the present Rubric give us leave to entertain our people with the
same shows, the crucifixes are already set upon the Altar, on the Tapestry, on
the walls, on the glass windows in fair and large figures. The lawfulness
of crossing not only in Baptism, but in the Supper and any where is avowed, as
in the Self-conviction is shown, what other bar is left us to receive all
the crossings that are in the Mass, but the sole pleasure of our Prelates who
when they will, may practice that which they maintain and force us to the
particular use of these things which they have already put in our Book in
general terms. The breaking of the bread unnecessary.


Again, we challenge in the Papists that in their form of consecration they
have put out not only the forenamed sentence, Quod est figura corporis and
sanguinis, but also that other sentence, which for a long time stood in the old
Liturgies, Quod pro vobis confringetur, that by the razing out of these words,
they might put away the breaking of the bread in the distribution to the
people, they have indeed a breaking of the bread after the consecration into
three parts, all which are eaten by the Priest for very absurd ends; but when
they distribute on Pasche day to the people, they will not break but provide to
every one a round Wafer to be put in their mouth, for if they did break there
would be great danger that some little crummes of the bread in breaking should
fall off, and that so many bodies of Christ as in these are broken mites of
bread, should fall to the ground, and be trod on or lost, for this cause when
they break the hostie into their three portions, it is done with great
circumspection above the cup, that all the crumbs may fall in the blood and be
drunken down with it by the Priest, but no breaking must be of the bread which is
given to the people: With this practice our Book does agree, for it says not
which was broken for you, but which was given for you, no direction in any of
our Rubricks for breaking of the bread, yea one Rubric pronounces that Wafers
shall be lawful to give to the people, albeit usual bread may suffice.

The Priests intention avowed.
Farther all know what great disputes we have with the Papists about their
intention to consecrate, and what fearful perplexities they are put in, both
Priest and people, by their Rubric which will have the Priests intention
absolutely necessary for the consecration, as we may see in these two cautels
of the Mass: Proferendo verba consecrationis circa quamlibet materiam sacerdos
semper intendat conficere id quod Christus instituit and Ecclesia facit: The
other, Si autem per nimiam distractionem habitualis intentio cum actuali
tolleretur, videtur quod deberet verba consecrationis cum actuali intention
resumere, sic tamen quod nollet consecrare si consecratio facta esset; this
intention to consecrate our Book avowes in the Rubric in hand, [let him lay
his hands on so much as he intends to consecrate.]

Thus much for our prayer of consecration, borrowing from the Mass these
sentences word by word, whereupon they build their consecration,
transubstantiation, and adoration, whereby they put away the breaking, and take
in the coursing, and manifold crossings, with the Priests intention to
consecrate; the rest of the words of the Romish consecration may all be
easilier digested than any one of these corruptions we profess to borrow, yea
our men avow plainly their approving of this part of the Mass as it stands in
the Canon without any change, see the appendix ascribed to D. Field after his
death, L. 3. c. 1. [In this sense says he it is which we find in the Canon,
where the Church desires almighty God to accept these oblations of bread and
wine which she presents unto him, and make them to become unto the faithful
Communicants the body and blood of Christ, who the night before he was
betrayed, took bread into his sacred hands, lifted up his eyes to heaven, gave
thanks, blessed it, and gave it to his Disciples, saying, Take ye all of this,
for this is my body: And in like manner after the Supper, etc.] nothing is in
this part of the Mass, but all there is justified.

CHAP. VI. Concerning the Propitiatory Sacrifice, and the rest of the Canon.
Our prayer of oblation from the Mass, and not from the English Liturgy.
Follows the prayer of oblation, as in our Book so in the Missall subjoyned
immediately to the words of consecration, thus stands in the Missall the Romish
memorial, Vnde and memores Domine nos tui servi-ejusdem Christi filij tui
Domini Dei nostri, tum beatae passionis, nec non and ab inferis resurrectionis,
sed and in coelo gloriosae ascensionis offerimus praeclarae Majestati tuae de
tuis donis ac datis hostiam puram, hostiam sanctam, hostiam immaculatam, panem
sanctum vitae aeternae, and calicem salutis perpetuae, supra quae propitio ac
sereno vultu respicere digneris, and accepta habere, sicut accepta habere
dignatus es munera pueri tui justi Abel, and sacrificium Patriarchae nostri
Abrahae, and quod tibi obtulit summus sacerdos tuus Melchisedec sanctum
sacrificium, immaculatam hostiam supplices te rogamus omnipotens Deus, jube
haec perferri per manus sancti Angeli tui, in sublime altar tuum in conspectu
divinae Majestatis tuae ut quotquot ex hac altaris participatione, sacrosanctum
filij tui corpus and sanguinem sumserimus, omni benedictione coelesti and
gratia repleamur per eundem Christum Dominum nostrum. Here our Book does much
reform the English, a Rubric for oblation they have none, but we proclaim a
prayer of oblation, and that not of the former Offertory, wherein the bread and
wine was offered on the Altar in a peace offering, but of a second sacrifice,
even as the Mass distinguishes, to the which the first offering was but a
preparation.

Secondly, The most of this prayer in the English is put after the Communion to
be a thankesgiving and a spiritual sacrifice of praise to GOD for the
blessings in the Communion received, but we correct and draw it back from that
place and set it at the back of the consecration, where it stands in the
Missall, and make it change the English nature, resuming the old Romish Spirit
to be no more a thankesgiving but a prayer, and that of oblation of a new
sacrifice to God for sin.

Thirdly, We put in sundry clauses which the English put out, as these words
[may worthily receive the most precious body and blood of thy Son Jesus
Christ] borrowing them from the Mass clause in the same place, Quotquot ex hac
altaris participatione sacrosanctum filij tui corpus and sanguinem sumserimus:
And the first eight lines which gave the form of the oblation we resume from
the Mass, professing Christ's ordinance to make, and our intention to make,
that is, both according to the Popish Commentary and late English style, offer
up in a sacrifice if we believe either Bellarmine or Heylin, the one Lib. 1. de
Missa, c. 12. maintains that in the institution hoc facite is rightly
expounded, sacrificate; the other in his Antidotum, avowing that Christ in the
supper made the Apostles sacrificing Priests, and gave to them as Priests power
in these words hoc facite: How ever the most pregnant passages which can be
found in the Missall for the Romish propitiatory and unbloody sacrifice are
translated hence and put in this our prayer: I grant that some things are added
and some things detracted, but both the detractions and additions are made for
our disadvantage, we want Gods acceptance of that bread and cup, as of the
sacrifices of Abel, Abraham, and Melchisedec, his command to the Angels to
bring this sacrifice up to the heaven; but by these clauses our Divines use to
reject the Romish Propitiatory sacrifice, and so they might not stand in our
Book which will admit of no bar to that abomination, the clause we add in
the end of our prayer, one part is taken out of the prayers which in the Mass
do follow: Non aestimator meriti, sed veniae, quaesumus largitor, and does
nothing cross the doctrine of merit: The other part is taken out of the prayer
which in the Mass immediately goes before: Hanc igitur oblationem servitutis
nostrae quaesumus Domine ut placatus accipias per Christum Dominum nostrum, now
from this clause both Bellarmine and Heylen conclude their unbloody sacrifice,
the one de Missa, L. 2. c. 21. Hanc igitur oblationem servitutis nostrae, etc.
ubi aperte ostenditur eam oblationem proprie esse sacrificium quippe quae per
ministerium sacerdotum Deo offertur. The other in his Antidotum out of all the
Liturgy chooses this one place to prove that the English Church in the Supper
offers up to God, a proper, outward, unbloody sacrifice: These words as in
the English Liturgy they stand in a thanksgiving after the Communion have no
such show, but as they are transposed to stand at the back of a consecration in
a prayer of oblation before the communion, may well prove this intent.

We must offer the Popish sacrifice of the Mass.
Farther, the sacrifice which here we pretend to offer is the oblation of praise
and thanksgiving; See how Bellarmine expounds this part of the Canon of the
Mass, L. 2. c. 21. Falsum est per sacrificium laudis cujus in canone fit
mentio debere accipi sacrificium spirituale quod in laud et gratiarum action
consistit, significatur enim ea voce sacrificium very corporis Domini, quod
sacrificium laudis dicitur, quia p^r illud Deus magnopere laudatur et gratiae
illi aguntur pro summis ejus in nos beneficijs, unde eti^m sacrificium
eucharisticum merito nominatur; that the Canterburians take this sacrifice no
otherwise now, see Peter Heylen in his Antidotum about the midst, where in the
matter of this sacrifice my L. his Grace gives him leave to utter at length far
other speeches than ever dropped before from any English man, which pretended
opposition to Papists; the farthest that Montague himself, let be Andrews,
Hooker, or any other of their Divines, did go, was to a commemorative,
improper, spiritual sacrifice, but that man will have here a proper,
corporal, outward, unbloody sacrifice offered, for which the Ministers of the
Gospel are constitute by Christ as proper Priests of Melchisedecks order, as
ever were these of the Law after the order of Aaron, this sacrifice cannot
possibly be any other but of the body and blood of Christ, for the offering of
the bread and wine is the first sacrifice, and but preparatory, and upon it the
Evangelicall Priesthood is not grounded, the offering up of praise alms, our
selves are expressly by Heylen excluded from that sacrifice he speaks of, so it
remains that he must profess the offering up the very body and blood in an
unbloudy and propitiatory Sacrifice. In this place heart his own words: -- [The
passion of Christ as it was prefigured by the Lords ordinance to the Jews in
the legal sacrifices a part ante, so by Christ's institution its to be
commemorate by us Christians in the holy Supper a part post, a sacrifice it
was in the figure, a sacrifice in the fact, and so by consequent a sacrifice in
the commemoration or in the postfact, a sacrifice there was among the Jews,
foreshewing to them his coming in the flesh, a sacrifice there must be among
the Christians to show forth his death till he come and if a sacrifice must be,
there must also be Priests to do, and Altars whereupon to do, for without a
Priest and an Altar there can be no sacrifice, yet so that the precedent
sacrifice was of a different nature from the subsequent, and so are also both
the Priests and the Altars from these before, a bloody sacrifice then, an
unbloody now, Priests derived from Aaron then, from Melchisedeck now, an Altar
for Mosaicall sacrifices then, for Evangelicall now, the Priests were ordained
by Christ, to wit, the Apostles and their successors in the Evangelicall
Priesthood, there is a hoc facite, for the Priests only who have power to
consecrate, hoc edite is both for Priest and People.] Thereafter at length he
produces many testimonies of antiquity for true, proper, external,
corporal, visible, mystical sacrifices in the Church, but for no better
purpose than the Papists before him have done, who laid all these citations to
his hands.

If there be any clause in the Mass prayer of oblation concerning their
unbloody propitiatory sacrifice for the remission of sins which is not in
ours, as hardly ye will miss any sentence necessary for this purpose, yet if
any be, it is little matter, it may be soon added, for there is naught in this
part of the Canon which our men will not gladly embrace; for this see the
Appendix to Dr. Field L. 3. c. 1. p. 201. where he justifies all this part of
the Mass to a letter, and shows how we may truly offer to God the body and
blood of Christ in a propitiatory sacrifice for remission of sins and
pacifying of God: Such justifications of the Mass were wont to be counted most
unreasonable, albeit possible, by all Protestants even those who came nearest
to the Roman Church, yea by Papists themselves who had any ingenuitie. In that
same place of Field, we may read of Luthers censure of the Canon, yea of
Cassander and other Papists, their desire to have the Canon reformed, at least
glossed with marginall notes, but in that 28 year, wherein this Appendix long
after the pretended Authors death was Printed, my L. of Canterbury did sit in
the sea of London, and had power to make men both living and dead speak from
the Press language, which was never before heard in the reformed Church;
albeit since the uncouth voices of sundry their dead men, both Andrews,
Overhall, Field, and others, have been made to ring loud over all the I Will for
men's amazement.

Our men do reject nothing of the Canon of the Mass.
We have gone through the principalll parts of the Canon, that which Pope
Innocent styles the heart of the Canon and head or top of the Mass, Cor and
summus vertex, there is in it yet four other prayers, two before the
consecration and sacrifice, and two after, these our Book has passed by, but
upon no necessity, there is nothing in any of them which our Men have not
avowed, thus have they made Field speak after his death for all these four
prayers, and what ever else is in the Canon, p. 221. [The Canon of the Mass
rightly understood is found to contain nothing in it contrary to the rule of
faith, and the profession of Protestant Churches] what dislike they have of any
thing in these prayers, we shall see in discussing the particulars; the first
of these four because it is long let it be divided in three parts, behold the
first; Te igitur clementissime Pater per Jesum Christum filium tuum Dominum
nostrum supplices rogamus, ac petimus ut accepta habeas and benedicas haec
dona, haec munera, haec sancta sacrificia illibata inprimis quae tibi offerimus
pro Ecclesia tua sancta, catholica, quam pacificare, custodire, adjuvare and
regere digneris toto orb terrarum una cum famulo tuo Papa nostro and antistite
nostro and Rege nostro, and omnibus orthodoxis atque Catholicis and Apostolicae
fidei cultoribus: The chief things here that our Book-men might seem to have
reason to mislike, is the making of the Sacrament a sacrifice, which they offer
to God for the Church and all the members of it; next that the Pope the
Antichrists name must stand in the prayers of the Church. Thirdly, That the
Bishops name must stand before the Kings, but none of these things will trouble
their stout stomachs.

What the Canon speaks of a sacrifice they approve.
For the first, that they make this Sacrament a true sacrifice we showed before,
and that this their sacrifice they do offer up to God for the welfare not only
of all Christians living, but also for many of the dead, we may see in many
late approved writs, Montagu apparat. p. 379. Vnde Tertullianus de corona
militis ait, pro natalitiis annua die facimus hoc est (...) offerimus in
commemorationem agonistarum J. Christi. Dow against Burton about the midst
[That the ancient Church had oblations for the dead, the ancient Liturgies put
it out of question] Poklinton in his Altar not only at the beginning brings
out with approbation from the Decretals that Canon of Fabian; Decernimus ut
omnibus di^bus Dominicis, altaris oblatio fiat, but also about the midst has
these words [At the Altar their Priests did stand at their solemn stations and
offer prayers there pro omni Episcopatu nostro, etiam pro Regibus] poynting
expressly at the place of the Mass in our hands: And thereafter, at the Altar
also were commemorations made in Cyprians time, and who had made a Deacon his
Executor, the Canon was that for such a one non offerretur, nec pro dormitione
ejus celebraretur neque enim ad altar Dei meretur nominari in sacerdotum
prece, qui ab altari Dei sacerdotes avocare voluit.

What honor the Mass gives to the Pope, they yield it to the full.
For their affection to the Pope its not enough for Montagu and others of his
fellow servants to power upon the reformed Divines in general often, and in
special upon Calvin, Beza, Scaliger, Casaubon, and such, all the venom which
spite can invent, Novatores, schismatici, furiosi, zolotae, Lemanici, Puritani,
and what not. To speak with great respect of the Popish Divines, especially of
sundry of the Jesuits, as of profound, grave, moderate Theologues, to inveigh
against the overthrow of Abbyes, and wish earnestly the restitution of
Monasteries, that the holy Monks may live as Elias and John the Baptist gave
them example. To speak not only of Bellarmine, Baronius, Boromeus, as of good,
pious, and godly men, let be miraculously learned, but to avow the office of
Cardinal to be an eminent dignity in the Church, a due reward of virtue, and
worthy by all much to be respected, with this they are not content except they
let the world know also their great respect to the Pope himself, to call him
Antichrist who dare among them, except he desire to be trampled upon as a
peevish ignorant Puritan; they will have their succession and derivation from
the Pope a maine pillar of their Church, without which prop the Church of
England would fall to the ground. Hear Poklington with Canterburies applause,
speaking in his Sundays Sermon at the beginning [Our Diocesan can derive
himself the successor of an Apostle, otherwise we would have taken his call
for the voice of a stranger] and in his Altar thus he says [Miserable were we
if he who now sits Archbishop of Canterbury could not derive his succession
from St. Austin, and St. Austin from St. Gregory, and St. Gregory from St.
Peter, his Grace can say, ego sum haeres Apostolorum, I and my Predecessors
have kept possession, I have received the right faith from the right owners]
This favor they bear not only to the old Popes, but even to these of the
latest and worst times; see what commendation Montague gives to two late Popes,
Orig. p. 114. Patrum nostrorum vel avorum memoria duo summi Pontifices viri
optimi and doctissimi Adrianus Sixtus and Bellarmini avunculus Marcellus
secundus extitere, See in the large Supplement what praises he powers on the
head of the present Pope Urban.
yea these Popes whom the world knew to be monsters of men, Montague will have
to be called most holy Fathers by all who are not Puritans, by virtue of the
place which they enjoy in the Church of God; see his Orig. par. 1. p. 417.
Certis quibusdam titulis and elogiis homines (...) constitutos ab omni retro
antiquitate viri prudentes etiam and religiosi honorarunt, istos honorum
lemniscos non est cujusvis conculcare, sed nec palam reprehendere id quod
solent (...) Puritani, Pontificem Romanum suam sanctitatem indigitare
certissimus est character Antichristianismi, non tibi sed religioni dicebat
olim Isidis ad orator, cum asinus portans mysteria se putaret adoratum, honorem
pari modo non Paulo alicui quarto, Alexandro sexto, Iohanni 12. caeteris si qui
sint prodigia and propudia honestatis, sed religioni exhibendum contendimus,
hoc est eminenti dignitati qua ultra alios in Ecclesia Dei praediti sunt, sed
est haec phrenesis hominum solummodo fanaticorum quibus omnia displicent nisi
quae de suo cerebro confinxerint, quanquam nec illa placere diu possunt: It was
too much that many of these men often have professed their willingness to give
to the Pope, notwithstanding of all the defaults of that Sea, upon the
condition of some Reformation, his old place to be the Patriarch of the West,
unto whom all the Western Clergy did owe some obedience and subjection, yea to
have him as he was of old the first Patriarch of the Christian world, so
Montague Antidiatrib. p. 81. Necesse est ut caput Ecclesia habeat, Ecclesiae in
summa collectione caput est Christus, Ecclesiae per parts capita sunt
constituti Episcopi, hoc est praesunt cum authoritate capitis singuli in suis
paraecijs, censetur inter ista capita Pontifex, habet ille locum, jus antiquum
obtinet, caput est Ecclesiae particularis Romanae cui praeest, praecipuae olim
parti Christiani orbis, hoc est, cunctis ad Occidentem regionibus cum
authoritate quadam, non illa quidem singulari and suprema, praefuit Pontifex,
et si non obstaret perdita illa ambitio prae esset hodie eti^m ^um sed de jure
humano, p. 74. Sedem Romanam appellat coryphaeam subscribo and eodem ipse
titulo candem sedem cohon^stabo, p. 51. De Principe Petro non litigamus, de
successorum primatu aliquatenus, domicilium principatus non domolimur, i. e.
damus a Petro ad aetatem Augustini in Ecclesia Romana Apostolicae cathedrae
semper perviguisse principatum, p. 49. Vbicunque multi, and multiplicitas ut
ordo eluceat and harmonia conservetur, ab uno arcessenda est origo omnis, unde
autem melius origo omnis quam ab Ecclesia principali, loco debetur haec
praeminentia: loci primatum and illum ordinis and propter utrumque praestantiae
habeat si voluerit Romanus Pontif^x, p. 147. ante quam terminos transposuerat
antiquos, Romanus Episcopus quidni dicebatur -- scio alias and amplector
Romanum Pontificem vocatum Benedictum, scio Papam and pastorem nominari, quid
si haec omnia nomina usurpabat, quid si and Apostolicum, p. 41. He regrates
that the Pope is so far debased that he should be spoyld of his just and
proper dignity: Gens avium unaquaeque tandem suas sibi plumas repetendo
furtivis coloribus denudatam proprijs etiam quod non oportuit improbantque
vehementer (...) circumcisam ac spoliatam, nudam, ridendam, exsibilandam
corniculam exposuerunt; In that same page he assures that Christian Princes and
people will gladly yet give to the Popes this old honor and tribute if they
will amend their manners; Exhiberent etiamnum, ad priscos illos mores si tantum
revertatur and exempla pietatis majorum: Thus far Montague went above ten
years since, but to go thus far on, that, even this day, without any
reformation, the Pope when he is a monster in his private life, for the
spiritual dignity he has in the Church above all other, by virtue of his
place he ought to possess his old style, not only of holy Father, but of
holiness in the abstract, and that all who will deny this are mad frantic
Puritans, who goes thus far cannot but think the Liturgy of all Western
Churches to be faulty, where the Popes name is not put in the old place of the
public prayers.

Yea they will have their very Bishops preferred to Kings.
As for the Kings place after the Bishop, the ambition of our Book-men is
capable of such extravagancy: Poklington before in his relation of the ancient
custom puts indeed the King behind the Bishop, and these men often in their
Writs urge that example of Theodose that the Emperors were not permitted to
have place to stand at the Altar being but Laics, and not capable of that
spiritual dignity proper to Priests, that the Princes highest privilege is
to come to the Altar with his offering, and then without stay to depart. The
Popes Legate Seignior Con is made much of among them who propounds to our
Prince the example of our old Scottish devout Kings, who did salute the meaner
Priests as their superiors, yea it was marked in our Sovereigns Coronation,
that when the greatest Marquis was admitted in that solemnity but to the
kissing of his Majesty's hand, the meanest Bishop got a kiss on the cheek;
many strange things are alleged of the Clergies ambition among us, whereof I
wish time may clear them to be guiltless. Montague in his Antidiatrib. p. 80.
Ille principatus obtineat in Ecclesia ut revera semper obtinebat, summus
sacerdos inter caeteros (...) ut appellant enim graeci Patres passim, Episcopus
constituitur (...) ut vocatur ab Ignatio -- Monarchae sunt Episcopi in suis
(...), Monarchae in suis (...) Metropolitae, Monarchae Patriarchae augustiores,
p. 40. Sacerdotij culmen (...) non ignorant Reges; Serenissimus Britanniarum
Monarcha minime omnium ignorant, fatetur antem ultro aliquo modo in quibusdam
supra regiam dignitatem eminere cum vetustis and orthodoxis patribus, (...),
says Chrysostom, meaning that the Bishop is a Prince of greater dignity than
the Emperor, Gregorius Nazianzenus scripsit in Apologia (...): So much as the
Soul exceeds the body, tantum Regno sacerdotium, and quantum Deus praestat
hominibus, tantum regiae potestati praestare sacerdotium -- haec enim non
nesciunt in lege Dei edocti and eruditi Reges, cum Constantinus olim, Pipinus,
demum Carolus, Fredericus occurrerint, de equis descenderint, venientes
exceperint religionis antistites Christianae, venerationemque exhibuerint, We
need no more scorn the Canonists for preferring the Pope to the Emperor so
far as the Sun is above the Moon. Since Dr. Montague is applauded to prove
from Scriptures and Fathers, that any Bishop is as far above the King as the
Soul is above the body, yea as God is above man.

The next part of the first prayer is this, Memento Domine famulorum
famularumque tuarum and omnium circumstantium quorum tibi fides cognita est,
and not a devotio, pro quibus tibi offerimus vel qui tibi offerunt hoc
sacrificium landis pro se suisque omnibus pro redemptione animarum suarum pro
spe salutis and incolumitatis suae, tibique vota reddunt sua aterna Deo vivo
and vero. Of this commemoration of the living in general, and in particular of
benefactors, they will make no scruple who in their solemn prayers delight to
name their Patrons with all their styles, as for the offering for their Souls
salvation the former place of Field does justify it.

The commemoration of the Saints in public prayer avowed.
In the third part of this prayer is the greatest difficulty, so it says,
Communicantes and memoriam venerantes inprimis gloriosae semperque virginis
Mariae genetricis Dei and Domini nostri I. Christi, sed and beatorum
Apostolorum and Martyrum tuorum Petri, Pauli, Andrea, Iacobi, Joannis, Thomae,
Iacobi, Philippi, Bartholomaei, Matthaei, Simonis, and Thaddaei, Lini, Cleti,
Clementis, Sixti, Cornelij, Cypriani, Laurentij, Chrysostomi, Ioannis, and
Pauli, Cosma and Damiani, and omnium sanctorum tuorum, quorum meritis
precibusque concedas ut in omnibus protectionis tuae muniamur auxilio, per
eundem Christum Dominum nostrum, Amen. The exceptions which use to be taken at
this part of the prayer are mainly two. First, The particular enumeration of
the Apostles names, and of other old Martyrs, of this our parties make no
question, for diverse of them have printed lately their good liking of the
dyptiches reading in time of the Sacrament, which has the names of a great
number more and less known Saints than here are expressed. The second is a
desire of blessings from God for the merits of the Saints, this they make Field
after his death clearly to defend, p. 223. [Let us come (says he) to the other
objection concerning the commemoration of the blessed Apostles and other Saints
and holy Martyrs, by whose intercession and for whose merits the Priest and
people desires God that they may be kept safe, etc. The Saints our Mediators
of intercession, by virtue of their own merits.
] This he would show to be no point of Popery by the testimony of Bucer, but no
ways pertinent to his purpose, as his own citation will clear, yea they have
begun long ago to proclaim the Saints departed our Mediators of intercession,
as Christ is our Mediator of Redemption, so Montague Antidiatrib. p. 19. Non
abnuerim illos esse orationis and intercessionis ut loqui soletis
intercessores, Jesus Christus solus est and absque alijs Mediator redemptionis,
and quoad meritum passionis suae (...) Mediator intercessionis; he avoweth that
naught does keep him from the particular invocation of the Saints, but their
ignorance of his particular estate, and confesses his willingness to invocate
his Angel-keeper, whom he knows to understand his affairs, and any other
Saint also, if he knew that by any mean they could hear him. Tu mihi proba
posse me certum esse de scientiu Sanctorum particular Iquocunque, tand^m modo
acquisita, ego certe quod ad meipsum at tinet sanctos defunctos Iaurea donates
immortali, bearam puta Virginem; sanctissimos Apostolos, caterosque
gloriosissimos Martyrs non vereber adire, interpellari, alloqui, supplicibas
precibus deprecaeri habeant me commendatum suis intercessionibus apud Deum
patrem per filium suum. Now for their cognition of our estate they are speaking
of sundry probably ways, these Saints who have lately been on the earth, they
tell us take with them all the knowledge of humane affairs they had in their
body, also the advancement of the Virgin Mary above all the Angels, how easy
is a revelation of our case by God or an Angel, or the report of a lately dead
soul. For the matter of merit they are as clear as Bellarmine, avowing with
approbation in their comitiall Verses, Virtutum sancta and speciosa caterva,
salutem divino ex pacto quam meruere dabunt.

The second prayer of the Canon is this: Hanc igitur oblationem servitutis
nostrae sed and cunctae familiae tuae quaesumus Domine ut placatus accipias
diesque nostros in tua pace disponas, atque ab aeterna damnatione nos eripi,
and in electorum tuorum jubeas grege numerari per Christum Dominum nostrum: The
first words which alone are used by the Papists to a wicked purpose, we have
them as I showed before, the rest formed by Gregory none of them will refuse.

Prayers for the dead avowed, also Limbus Patrum if not Purgatory it self.
Of the two prayers which in the Canon follows the consecration, the first is
this: Memento etiam Domine famulorum famularumque tuarum qui nos praecesserunt
cum sign fidei, and dormiunt in somno pacis, ipsis Domine and omnibus in
Christo quiescentibus locum refrigerij, lucis and pacis, ut indulgeas
deprecamur per eundem Dominum nostrum. This is the only place of the ordinary
Mass, whereon universally the Papists hold their Purgatory and Prayer for the
dead: Now all this prayer as it stands they make Dr. Field to defend, yea the
Bishop of London put his hand to Cozens devotion in the fourth Edition, wherein
yet does stand a Prayer for the Soul departed out of the Body, that it may be
preserved from hell and darkness and carried to Abraham's bosom, and now they
are beginning to lay down clear grounds for Purgatory; Montague under
pretense to set down Dr, Overhalls tenet after his death about Limbus Patrum
with his own amplifications as he professes, has these words among many more;
Apparat. p. 61. 1. Obijciunt nullus tertius locus indicatur in Scriptura
praeter infernum damnatorum and coelum. R. si indicatur pios ante Christum in
infernis non fuisse quod videtur constare, Luc. 16. Nec ulli homini coelu^
patuisse ante Christum quod satis clare indicatur, Heb. 9.8. Simul indicatur
necessarium fuisse aliquem alium locum ubi fuerint constituti, usque dum via
Sanctorum per Christum aperiretur utcunque quis, qualis, aut ubi sit ille locus
non indicetur: praeterea licet non indiceretur in Scriptura non esse tertium
locum, non tamen inde sequitur non fuisse tertium, quia multa sunt quae non
indicantur in Scriptura, locus ille Matthew. 25. Loquitur non de loco aut statu
animarum ante Christum, sed de statu and loco finali post finem saeculi, cum
duae tantum erunt absque dubio hominum societates, and duo tantum loca, alter
praemij, alter poenae sempiternae, quo sensurecte asserebat Augustinus contra
Pelagium, non esse tertium locum praeter infernum and regnum Dei aut inter
mortem aeternam and vitam aeternam. Immediately before he presses the most of
the Scriptures which the Papists under the name of the Fathers abuses for the
probation of Purgatory; Ante adventum Christi omnes ad inferos deduce bantur
inquit Hieronymus in 4. Ecclesiastae, inde Jacob ad inferos descensurum se
dicit, and Job pios and impios in inferno queritur retineri, and Evangelium
dicit magnum chaos interpositum apud inferos, and revera antequam flammeam
illam rotam and igneam romphaeam ad paradisi fores Christus cum latrone
reseraret, clausa erant coelestia, nota ut Samuelem quoque credas vere in
inferno fuisse, and ante adventum Christi quamvis sanctos omnes inferni lege
fuisse detentos. Also locus est qui locus vocatur et abyssus in qua non erant
aquae, in qua animae recluduntur sive in refrigerio, sive ad poenas: Postquam
eo descendit Christus inferorum claustra perfodit, diripuit, vastavit,
spoliavit, vinctas inde animas liberando. How far Limbus Patrum with such
Scriptures and reasons maintained is from the next adjacent cellar of
Purgatory, especially when we consider what they do maintain also of the
state of Infants unbaptized any man may judge.

The last prayer of the Canon is; Nobis quoque peccatoribus famulis tuis de
multitudine miserationum tuarum sperantibus partem aliquam and societatem
donare digneris cum tuis sanctis Aopstolis and Martyribus, cum Ioanne,
Stephano, Matthia, Barnaba, Ignatio, Alexandro, Marcellino, Petro, Perpetua,
Agatha, Lucia, Agnete, Caecilia, Anastasia, and cum omnibus sanctis tuis intra
quo^ nos consortium non aestimator meriti sed veniae quaesumus largitor,
admit per Christum Dominum nostrum. Nothing here is to trouble their stomach,
the commemoration of particular names in prayers at the Altar we proved before
they defended, though here be diverse names that are unknown, yet they approve
the old Martyrologies, and in their Calendar of Saints are a great number of as
obscure and uncertain names, yea Montague will have no story questioned which
the long practice of the Church has allowed, albeit for it no testimony of any
ancient can be produced, Orig. p. 276. Nihil est memoriae proditum quod ego
quidem sciem hac de re apud vetustiores sive historic s, sive patres, probabile
tamen est hane rec^ptam Ecclesiae consuetudia^m de traditione vetustiore aut
scriptis etiam Patrum ^^tustioribus nunc d^peraitis dima^asse.

CHAP. VII. Concerning the last two parts of the Mass, the Communion and Post
Communion.
BEing now somewhat weary with the former collection, I am forced to draw what
follows into short bounds: After the consecration and oblation and the rest of
the Canon, follows in the Mass before the Communion some preparatory prayers,
according to the Rule which Durand in these words sets downs L. 4. fol. 92.
Hoc autem breviter notandum est, quod sacerdos ante perceptionem corporis and
sanguinis Christi debet dicere orationes a sanctis patribus institutas.

Our Pater noster in this place borrowed from the Mass.
Of these Prayers which stand at the back of the Canon, the first is the Pater
Noster, however we show before that some of the ancients did avow the
Apostles, and their followers for a time to have used no other set form of
prayer at the Communion, but only this of our Lord, yet the putting of this
prayer at the back of the consecration and Canon, w^^^^ut a late invention of
Pope Gregory, as himself and all the Rationalists from him declare; take it in
Innocents words, Lib. 5. c. 28. Beatus Gregorius Orationem Dominicam post
Canonem super hostiam censuit recitari: This in him was counted a noveltie, and
therefore in his Epistles it behoved him to use Apologies for it and to set
before it a Preface to make the reciting of it in this place of the Mass to be
taken in good part, being said sometimes before in that same action: Praeceptis
salutaribus moniti, and divi a institutione formati dicimus Pater noster: To
this Preface of Gregory the formers of the Missall thereafter put to the word
audemus, and as ye heard from Pope Innocent, this is all said super hostiam,
for their boldness to call God their Father in this place, and that with bold,
loud, and high voice, while as in the whole Canon they scarce durst peep but
muttered all in great silence: This their boldness now comes from the
consecration and oblation whereby they have Christ the Son of God corporally
present in their hands, and have offered him in a propitiatory sacrifice to the
Father: When this is perfectly done, they are bold to say their Pater Noster.
For this hear Heigam, p. 30.5. The Priest having gotten as it were a good
opportunity, having now before him the Lord and maker of heaven and earth, and
that according to his corporal presence, he exhorts all the people heartily
to pray, saying, Oremus Pater noster: The English avoyds all these
superstitions, they say the Lords prayer after the Communion, but Gregory's
Preface, Praeceptis salutaribus moniti, etc. And the latter addition audemus
dicere, they scrape out. Innocents rule to say it on the consecrate hostie they
abhor, and put the prayer in a place where it cannot be possibly so abused,
but here we leave the English Novalists these Sacramentaries, and put our Pater
noster in that same place with the same Prefaces, with the same boldness of
speech which the good old order of Sarum prescribed before the Sacramentaries
of England or their Patrons were borne.

Also our Prayers of humble access.
The other prayers wh^ ^e Priest uses before the Communion are diverse, one or
more of them to be said according to his good pleasure, all of them run on two
points, confession of unworthiness to come to Gods table, and a prayer, by the
Sacrament to be profited in Soul and Body; so ye may see in the prayer, Deus
qui de indignis dignos facis, and de peccatoribus justos, and de immundis
mundos; And in that prayer, Domine, non sum dignus qui intres sub tectum meum:
Our prayer of humble access is formed plainly out of this, yea it speaks in
grosser terms than any of the Mass prayers of this place, for the most
common of the Priests prayers of access is this; Corporis and sanguinis tui
Domine Jesus Christi Sacramentum quod licet indignus accipio, non sit mihi
judicio and condemnationi, sed tua prosit pietate corporis mei and animae
saluti, Amen. What they call the taking of the Sacrament of Christ's body and
blood, we call the eating of Christ's body and drinking of his blood, they
desire that the receiving of the Sacrament may be profitable to the salvation
of their soul and body, we pray that our Bodies may be cleansed by his Body,
and Souls washed by his blood. The English have indeed this our prayer word by
word, but in a place that puts it out of all suspicion, to wit, before the
consecration, but we will have it in the proper place where the Mass requires
it, and that with a Preface, that its our prayer of access to the Communion.
In this place being so transposed and Prefaced, it may well serve the turn of
those who profess their design in changing the English Book in these places
to cure the diseased mind of Sacramentary Puritans.

There is also in the Mass before the Communion some ceremonies used, as the
breaking of the Host, the putting of one part of it in the cup, the giving of
the Pax and some prayers joined with these actions, some of them, as the Agnus
Dei, we have word by word in our Morning prayer, the rest have naught in them
that our men will make any scruple of, only there is in the exposition of the
last clause of the Pater noster, Libera nos quaesumus, etc. mention ma^^^^ the
intercession of the blessed Virgin and Apostles; but how well they like of such
intercession, Mortague shows us, and if he cannot be trusted, as it seems he
ought to be, for since B. White is removed, he is the principal Writer of that
faction we have to do with; or if Schelford likewise have no credit in his
avowing that the keeper of the Saints day obtaines thereby the intercession of
that Saint, and the neglecter of that solemnity receives a great spiritual
loss, even the deprivation of the heavenly prayers of the neglected Saint: If
we can believe neither of these take a third, Dr. Andrews in his Stricturae,
who must be above all exception, especially when he is presented to the world
after his death by my L. of Canterbury: These are his words in the midst of
that little Treatise [We celebrate the memories and keep the feasts of the
blessed Martyrs, as well for imitation, as that we may be partakers of their
intercession:] Is not this a clear enough text put by my Lord of Canterbury in
Montague and in Schelfords hands, which may uphold all the Commentars and
deductions that they have made upon it.

The worst ceremonies of the Mass avowed.
As for the Ceremonies themselves of breaking the Host, of putting part of it in
the Chalice, and taking them out again for the representing of Christ's burial
and resurrection, of their giving their Pax to the people, of their kisses and
crosses, and bowings, none of all these things in reason can trouble our men,
for they defend the Churches power in making so many significant rites as she
thinks expedient: All these named and many more particulars lie under their
general, the power which they give to the Church, will extend it self to the
finding out and imposing all these rites were they yet to be invented, and so
many more as can come hereafter in the fancy of any who has a place and spirit
for leading in the Church: the most of these rites they have avowed already to
be lawful, yea the worst of all the Ceremonies and significant signs of the
Mass they have proclaimed long ago to be good, to wit, the use of Images and
prostration before them; ^^on this madness a great part of the faction, their
zeal is now spent, albeit none of all the reformed Churches have kythed more
zeal against Images both in doctrine and practice, than that of England; the
Homily against the Peril of Idolatry, will bear witness, but this now is
one of the diseases of this age, whereof Canterbury complains of to the King
in his Preface to Andrews Posthum works. This Iconomachian heresy is one of
these fevers, a fit of that frenzy, wherein this last and most corrupt age is
fallen, to which his Graces medicinal hand offers a potion; albeit, as he
there professes, without great hope to get his perverse Patient by all the
craft he can use, purged of the inveterate and now desperate disease; however,
he will show his endeavors that posterior ages may know and praise his labors
to relieve the age wherein he lived from these epidemick evils whereto the
malign influence of Prior times did make it subject. Behold the tablet in hand
which his Lo. by the hand of his Apothecary the Montebank Dr. Montague presents
to us to be swallowed for our health, We must fall down before Images.
Antidiatrib. p. 24. Haeretici nequaquam censeri debemus in posterum (...)
asservamus enim diligenter and cum cura Petri, Pauli, B. Virginis Deiparae,
Sanctorum aliorum innumeras imagines praesertim vero I. Christi redemptoris
crucifixi -- etiam in templorum adytis, cryptis, lararijs, and p. 26. Sunt apud
nos quod aliquoties dicendum frequentissimae imagines in Ecclesijs perstallos
ut vocant Canonicorum per fenestras, ambones, vasa, vestimenta, and ipsa (...);
he disallows not the religious use of Images but idolatry, p. 27. Tantummodo
taxamus (...) usum and utilitatem non sollicitamus ullo pacto, the greatest
fault he alleages on the Papists here is not idolatry, p. 24. Pergamus ad
Romanae Ecclesiae (...), this fault he charge them with but for the fashion,
for he grants the great convenience of Images in the Church to stir up
effectually by their sight and to invite the hearts of people to sorrow for
sin, love of Christ, joy, and all other holy affections, ibid. He says farther
that the honor of the Image is for the architype, and what co^^^mely is done
to the Image, redounds to the person whose image it is, that those who do any
disgrace to the image of a Saint are mad and should be punished, p. 128.
Verissimum omnino est (...), ut Caesaris imago in numi mate, ut Meletij
character in pala annuli, quod si quis Caesarem in charactere and numismate suo
(...) in archetypum transit ea contumelia, quod si quis Sancti alicujus
imaginem d^decore afficiat, illum ego and (...) optaverim and suae temeritatis
poenas dare: Yea if the old Laws be not exercised upon the breakers of Images
which Canterbury makes Heylen to avow to be this day in force as they were in Q
Mary's days, Studley with his Graces approbation has Printed that the hand of
God will be on such profane persons, for he Prints that he knew a Churchwarden
who had taken down a Cross in the Paroch, much frequented by some devout
people, and that for the taking down and breaking of that Image the poor man's
swine were stricken with madness, and that he thereafter in despair did drown
himself. Yea which is wonderful, Montague leaves not the matter till he bring
us to ^all down and adore before the Image, just as we do before the Altar, p.
30. Christiani omnes adoramus Christum, imagini and simulachro non prosternimur
^^ram imagine forsan, quid ad rem? Invitatio est ad pietatem ex intuitu; toll
scandalum ita si velis, prosternaris: ante mensam Dominicam inclinamur, in
genua procumbimus, venerationem exhibemus, non tamen mensam adoramus. Will any
Papist require more for the outward act than to fall down before the Image? Yea
does the spirit of error suffer these men to stand at an adoration before the
Image and before the Table, has not God given them over to vent their
adoration and prostration not only before, but unto the Table for the respect
of the body that lies on it, unto God, and to his Altar, and so by Montague his
reason to use adoration, not only before Images, but to Images, when the
horns of that Spirit are come out so long they deserve no compassion who will
be deceived with it.

The Priests consumption of the sacrifice enjoined.
In the Communion we follo^ the order of the Mass, there the Priest must
communicate, and that in both kinds first: if that once be, the sacrifice of
the Mass is perfected, though no other communicate, his participation they
enjoin as absolutely necessary and alone essential to this action. This we
ordain straightly that the Presbyter himself first receive in both the kinds,
this is the Priests consumption, wherein (as Bellarmine before did show us) the
maine part of the life, soul, and essence of the Mass did consist. Of this
our Church was never careful, it was indifferent for our Minister to
communicate at what time, in what order he thought meet.

A door opened for removing of the cup from the people, and the putting of the
bread in their mouth.
Beside this, we are enjoined to give otherwise to the people than we take our
selves; the Presbyter must take it in both kinds, the people must get it in due
order, not a word of both kinds for them, they have given us just occasion to
suspect them of the Popish sacrilege of withdrawing the cup from the people,
often in print of late they have forsaken the grounds whereby we oppugn this
Popish crime, they tell us that Scripture does not command the giving of the
cup to the people, that the peoples possession of the cup is grounded on sole
tradition, that bibite ex hoc omnes concerned the Apostles not as Disciples or
people, but as Priests. Hear Doctor Montague in his last Treatise, Orig. p.
396. Vbi jubentur in Scriptura infantes baptizari, aut in coena Domini sub
utraque specie communicantes participare, sexcenta sunt ejusmodi in rebus
sacris a Deo institutis, Ecclesiae mandatis and usurpatis ab Ecclesia de quibus
possumus profiteri nihil tale dicit Scriptura, Scriptura hoc non praedicat. D.
White of Ely in his Treatise of the Sabbath after 73. p. among his traditions
reckons the baptism of Infants, the right sanctifying of the Sunday, the
service of the Church in a known tongue, and the delivery of the communion to
the people in both the kinds. Heylen Antidot. about the midst, tells us that
hoc facite belongs to the Priest alone, and to the Apostles as Priests, but hoc
edite to the Priests and people both, he will not be pleased to say so much of
hoc bibite, Canterbury sets down in Andr^wes posthume stricturae a little
after the beginning the acknowledgement of the ancient custom of the peoples
communicating in one kind in diverse cases without any appearance of dislike
of such mutilation of the Sacrament. These are his words [It cannot be denied
but reserving the Sacrament was suffered a long time in the Primitive Church,
in time of persecution they were permitted to carry away how great a part they
would, to keep it by them, and to take it at all times for their comfort, and
those that lived as Hermits in remote places were likewise permitted to take
with them so much as they thought good, to take it at times -- As for the sick
it was always sent them home were the distance never so great, and against the
time of extremity it was thought not amiss to have it reserved that if the
Priest should not be in case to go to the sick party and there to consecrate
for him, yet at least it might be sent him] Yea Dr. Poklington is applauded by
Canterbury to praise the Church of England, not only for their Altars, Fonts,
Walls, Glasse-windowes, Vestry, Lavatory, Reclinatory for confessions within
the Chancell, but also for their repository; now it is known that no part of
the Sacrament used to be reserved and put in the cibor or repository for the
use of the sick or others, but the bread only. By this practice the Papists
vehemently press us with the needlesnesse of the cup in all these cases: And
by these preparatives the simple needlesnesse of it for the people in any case.

While also they scrape out of the English Rubric the giving to the people the
Communion in their hand, and put in for it the giving of it in due order, they
make way to another Popish abuse of putting the bread in the peoples mouth,
Vide large Supplem.
as being too profane to handle that which so often after the consecration they
call the body of the Lord, and by this due order they evidently distinguish the
people from the Clergy that are present, the one communicates at the Altar,
but the other is more unholy than to get leave to come near to the Altar, but
were he a King he must receive the Communion without the rail. This diverse of
them in their late Writts avowes to have been the practice of antiquity, which
they pretend themselves desirous to imitate.

In the delivery of the elements the English Liturgy is left, and the Mass
followed.
In the Communion it seems the Romish Church ties not precisely to any one
form of words in the delivery of the Elements; for in the Missall there is a
diversity in the form of these words: My Sarum has this form, Corpus Domini
nostri I. Christi sit mihi peccatori via and vita in nomine Patris Filij and
Spiritus Sancti, Amen. But the most common form I see is that of the Roman
Missall Corpus Domini nostri Jesus Christi custodiat animam meam in vitam
aeternam. This our Book follows adstricting to one only form of words, and
that of the Roman Missall, correcting as it were but most unhappily the English
Liturgy, for both we add a Rubric here [the party receiving shall say,
Amen] and repeat it also at the other element, for this sentence savouring so
much as words may do of their corporal presence, they will therefore have it
much heeded, and the people to seal it with their Amen. Also that golden
sentence of the English Liturgy, that served much to hinder what ever evil
imagination people might have taken of a gross corporal presence of Christ's
body and blood in the elements or on the Altar, either from the words in hand
or any other that golden saying [Take, eat this in remembrance that Christ dyed
for thee, by faith eat him in thy heart with thankesgiving] they score out by
their new Index least such a firm pillar should stand for these vile
heretics the Sacramentarians to lean upon.

At the taking of the other element the Priest says, Sanguis Jesu Christi
custodiat animam tuam in vitam aeternam. This our Book borrowes [the blood of
the Lord Jesus which was shed for thee, preserve thy body and soul to life
eternall] for fear of Popish transubstantiation; the English put to this
sentence [Drinke this in remembrance that Christ's blood was shed for thee, and
give thanks] But our men have spunged this away, propter Sacramentarios, least
any thing should be here to hinder our return to our old faith of the real
presence within the elements, and that to this faith we might the more be
hastened immediately they subjoyne a Rubric, to cover the remains of the
consecrate elements with a corporal. Now Pope Innocent tells us that
corporaeles pall^e significant linteamina quibus corpus Christi involutum suit,
this linen is not called a corporal till after the consecration, for only
then it does involve and lie about the body of Christ, before the consecration
the corpus was not present, and so before they will not give the linen the
style of the Corporal.

The Post communion is approved.
The Post-Communion is some prayers which the Priest says after the
participation: These in the ordina^y Mass are thankesgivings to God that has
given the blessed food of Christ's body and blood, and desires to find the fruit
of that blessing in sundry forms of words, the same in substance with our
Collect of Thankesgiving. The most common form is this, Gratias tibi ago
Domine sancte Pater, omnipotens aeterne Deus, qui m^ refecisti de sacrosancto
corpore and sanguine filij tui Domini nostri J. Christi, and precor ut hoc
sacramentum salutis nostrae quod sumsi indignus peccator non veniat mihi ad
judicium, neque ad condemnationem pro meritis meis, sed ad profectum corporis
me and animae salutem in vitam aeternam, Amen. The only thing that any would
except against this or any other of the Post Communions is the terms which may
import the corporal presence, but these we leave to take in as gross words
as the Missall does use. The English have in this place the Lords prayer, and
another prayer of thankesgiving; but our Book must rather be dissonant from the
English than from the Roman Liturgy; these prayers must not stand here but be
put to such places and ranked in such an order as Sarum of old prescribed,
only in one thing we follow the English order in singing their Gloria in
excelsis, which the Mass had long before as we show in the proper place.

After all, while the Priest puts off his cloths, there are read sundry
Psalms, and Scriptures, and prayers, none whereof our men will get refused,
and all is closed with the Bishops or Priests blessing, the same which we use,
as for the first part of it, it was in the Mass before the giving the pax or
peace to the people, but the last part the Mass so expresses it, Benedictio
Dei patris omnipotentis descendat super nos, and maneat semper in nomine
Patris, Filij, and Spiritus Sancti, Amen: which we turn [The blessing of God
Almighty, the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, be amongst you, and remain with
you always, Amen.]

Nothing in the Mass at all which our men will not embrace if it were pressed
on them by authority.
It remains that we should parallel with our Book the accidental parts of
the Mass so to call them, the most of these we have actually, their vestments,
hoods, surplices, rotchets, miters, copes of all colors filled with numbers of
images, palls, corporalls, challices, patins, offertory basins, wax candles,
vailes, railes, stalls, lavatories, repositories, reclinatories, bowings,
duckings, crossings, kissings, coursings, perfumings. These we have already,
and what of the ceremonies we want, it were easy to fetch testimonies from our
parties writs for their lawfulness, or at least to show the necessity of
taking them when ever they shall be imposed by our Bishops upon as good grounds
as we have taken the rest.

As for the parts subjective, the diverse kinds of Masses our Book has enough
of them, it spends 78 leaves on them alone, it has of them above an hundredth
and seven, all borrowed from the Missall almost word by word; some from the
Sanctorall, but most from the temporal, the changes that are be not
considerable. What in the particular Masses the order of Sarum joins to the
Collects, Epistles and Gospels, to wit, the Office, Oration, Tractus,
Sequentia, Communio, post Communio, there is no syllable in them to my memory
which crosses the wrins of our party, but my present weariness and necessary
a vocation to other studies; also the hopes now we hear by the great mercy of
God, and goodness of our Prince, to be quite of this unhappy Book, suffer me
not to proceed any farther. I must also upon the same reasons leave at this
time my i^^ended Parallel of the Breviarie with our Mattins and Even-song, also
the Ceremonial with our Order of Baptism, Putrification, Burial, etc. in all
these will be found betwixt the Romish Orders and our Book too great an
identitie.

A COMPEND OF THE PRECEDING TREATISE, in a Speech at the General Assembly of
Glasgow, 1638.
THe imposing of the Books on the Bishops part is an act of greater tyranny,
than ever was used in this Nation; for some few men by a Letter purchased from
a Prince to press on a Nation against the hearts of all ranks and estates,
contrary to many Laws of this Church and Kingdom, standing both in force and
practice, three or four Books full of novations, all to be believed in every
point, by every person, under pain of the great Excommunication, does cast our
souls, bodies, and estates under a slavery intolerable. In England, yea in
Ireland to this day, as our adversaries confess, the smallest rite was never
enjoined without the consent of a Convocation or general Assembly. By this
preparative the Mass, yea the Alcoran or Talmud will not be gotten refused;
let all the Kingdom cry they are against Scripture and the Laws of Church and
State, they shall not be heard, if so some two or three prime and leading
Bishops will oppose: no bar had been left us against the Alcoran, let be the
Masse-book, but the sole will of our gracious Prince, if so this practice of
our Bishops had gone on.

Secondly, The service Book is all for common word by word drawn out of Popish
Ritualls, which this day are used at Rome. The first part of it is a compend of
the Mattins and Vespers in the Breviarie: The second is, the sum of the
Missall, the third of the Ceremonial.

Thirdly, The Mass Book, which all Protestants of whatever name do so far
abhor that they rather would die than embrace it, this abominable Mass has
three parts; The Ordinary, which is sung on any common day; The Temporal,
which is additions or changes used in all Sundays and high Festivals: The
Sanctorall, which is the forms added to the ordinary Mass on the Saints
days. These three parts of the Mass are all set down in our Book; Out of
the temporal we have above fourscore forms, out of the Sanctorall, about
twenty, what we leave out which the Mass has, may be taken in upon the same
reasons whereupon we take what we have borrowed.

Fourthly, The ordinary Mass is commonly divided in six parts; The
Preparation, The Instruction, The Offertory, The Canon, The Communion, The Post
Communion: Our Book has all these six in order.

Fifthly, The Preparation is subdivided in twelve portions, whereof we have ten
near word by word, the Pater noster, the Collect, the Gloria Patri, the Cyrie
Eleyson, the Confession, the Misereatur, the Absolution, the Angelike Hymn,
the Salutation, the Oremus. The two which remains, Ave Maria, and the Introibo
ad altar, we may not refuse upon reason. Stafford is allowed to print that it
is puritanisme to refuse to the Virgin Marie these hail Mary's which our
forbeares of old wont to sing to her; for the Introibo our prime Bishops avow,
that our Book not only has an Introibo ad Altar, but which is much worse
Adoremus altar.

Sixthly, The Instruction has eight portions, four principal, which we have
all in the same order, four of little moment, to wit, the Graduall, Halelujah,
Tractus, and Sequentia. These with the Popes good leave may all be omitted, as
Spalato shows at large, and if the Pope will not dispense therewith, we might
not refuse them on any reason according to our Bookmens grounds.

The principal are the Epistles, Gospells, Creed, Predication. In the reading
of the Epistles and Gospels, we follow punctually the misorders, the follies,
the superstitions of the Papists, we cast the Epistles ever before and the
Gospels behind, contrary to the order of Scripture, we begin at the end of one
chapter and end at the beginning of another, we course from place to place
without any reason often imaginable except the free will of some foolish Pope,
who cut Scripture in patches, and coucht it in the Missall as his fancy led
him: or some superstitious conceit of the day whereto he would apply such
Scriptures, but often with an evident impertinency. The Acts, the Revelation, the
Books of the Prophets, except the Pentateuch we call them all Epistles even as
the Mass. We are commanded to stand at the Gospells and say at their beginning
and ending the Popish sentences, but at the Epistles we may sit and keep
silence; of this soul superstition there can be no reason given, but that
wicked error of the Papists, that the doctrine of the Epistles is more base
and contemptible than the doctrine of the Evangelists, and so should be before
it as a servant goes before to make way for his Master. This wicked
superstition they much increase, when they command to stand also at the reading
of the Creed of Constantinople; by this means equalling an humane writ to the
Gospels, and preferring it much to the Epistles of the Apostles, at reading
whereof they permit to sit.

Seventhly, the Predication is urged in the old Missals, but in the late order
of Sarum it is omitted, this we follow and permit Communions to be celebrated
without any Preaching, a horrible evil, who dispense with Preaching on a
Communion day, may well want it all the days of the year, we are here worse
than the Papists, the Council of Trent urges Bishops to preach every Sabbath,
and many more days, our folks cry down preaching so far as they can, and
profess that it were good to have no more preaching then there was before the
18. year of K. Henry the eight; They teach that many Ministers should be kept
in their place, but commanded never to preach so long as they live, that some
few who are suffered to preach should do it but at some rare times, once in
the month is abundant; that the reading of the Service is the only ordinary
Preaching that God has commanded, that by this means people may be brought
back to that old simplicity, and so that ancient honesty which was among our
forefathers before Luther or Calvin was borne.

Yet there is more ill in this part of our Book, Homilies are to be framed by
our Prelates, and what ever is put in them we must believe under the pain of
excommunication. The Homilies of the Breviarie are composed for the most part
by the old Fathers, these of England by the Martyrs of that Church whose writes
are very orthodox, but our Homilies are to be made by men whose lives are not
approved, and whose doctrine is known to be both Arminian and Popish, it is
not possible but such stuff as they have vented in many Sermons will be put in
our Homilies, which notwithstanding we must without doubt simply believe,
unless we would be excommunicate.

Eighthly, The Offertory, a plain Jewish oblation going before and making way
for the unbloudy and propitiatory sacrifice, we have clearly. In the Mass it
has four parts, so in our Book; the first is Scriptures stirring up the
people to offer; the second, an Oblation of moneys; the third, an oblation of
bread and wine; the fourth, prayers upon the bread and wine to prepare it for
the ensuing sacrifice.

In the first we go beyond the Papists, they content themselves with one place
of Scripture, we have fifteen or more: many of them pointing at the Jewish
sacrifice, yea directed to countenance the Priests greid. Our Book here
patronizes that vile sacrilege of the Mass Priest, who says his Mass for
advantage, for we are permitted to take to our own use the one half of the
offering, and to employ the other half in what good use the Priest and the
Churchwarden can agree. In the second part we have a plain legal sacrifice,
a putting of the offered money in the Priests hand, who sets it on the Altar
before the Lord. In the third place, we have an offering of bread and wine on
the Table. In the fourth part likewise prayers over the bread and wine that God
would accept them for the benefit of the whole Church universal, both dead and
living; the Mass expresses particularly some dead men's names, which our men
do not insert but keep them in the general.

Ninthly, The Canon which the Papists call the heart and head of their Mass,
cor and vertex, consists of Prefaces and Prayers. Their prefaces are either
ordinary, or solemn: the ordinary we have word by word; the solemn are ten
for high times; the first five for Christ-masse, Pasce, Pentecost, Ascension,
Trinity, we have: The other five we want, but upon no necessity. The prayers
are six in number, the third and fourth they count the only principal, to
wit, the prayer of consecration, and the prayer of oblation; these two we have
avowedly. The Papists distinguish their consecration from sanctification;
consecration, especially here, they call a secret pronouncing of some holy
words on the elements for their transubstantiation, we avow such a secret
murmuring of words on the elements, for this prayer of consecration is not said
that the people may hear, but in it we are ordained to run from them so far as
the outmost wall will suffer, and then we must come to the west side of the
Altar, and so turn our back, we must be within both the rail of timber and
veil of cloth, least men should either see or hear us so we may use any
language we will, for God understands all, and the elements none. That the
secret prayers over the elements are made for their conversion into the body
and blood of Christ it is clear, for we take in these words of the Mass, Vt
fiat corpus and sanguis, whence all Papists this day conclude
transubstantiation, and which the English put out of their Book for fear to
further by them this heresy; we put out the clause which stood here in the old
Missals, Quod est figura corporis and sanguinis, which did oppose this wicked
heresy, yea some two or three golden passages of the English Liturgy which
did oppose likewise that abomination we scrape out. And to assure us more of
their mind they have put in some new Rubricks, to eat the remains by
Communicants in the holy place, to consecrate so little as can be, and to cover
all with a Corporal, which word was never here used before the corpus was
believed to be under the elements, all this our Book has gotten, as is
averred, propter Sacramentarios; such heretics must we be who believe the body
of Christ to be contained in the heavens until he come again. They tell us
that Papists, Lutherans, Calvinists are fully agreed on all that is material
in that question, to wit, Christ's real presence, that the only difference is
about the mode and manner of presence, which is but an unnecessary, curious,
and undecidable question, about the which none will contend, did not the Devil
foster up Puritans and Jesuits to hold in that fire, yea they are now come to
avow the Popish mode, to proclaim the body of Christ to be received by our
bodies and that corporally, and to be upon the Altar so grossly, that the
Altar as its chair of estate is to be adored with latria it self, for the
bodies presence on it, yea that the Papists when they worship the Altar or the
elements or the species that are about the body, are in no case Idolaters for
that action: yea that the Church of Rome does maintain no kind of Idolatry.
The Rubricks of this part of the Mass some we take, as the laying our hands on
the patin and challice. The Rubric of bowing before the patin and challice or
hostie, thereof we have not a word but punctually our men practice it, giving
four inclinaboes to the elements before the act of receiving: the other
Rubric for the peoples prostration at the elevation of the hosty they cannot
be against, sure their practice is to bow most lowly to the place where the
hostie uses to lie.

Tenthly, The prayer of Oblation stands at the back of the consecration in the
Mass, and so in our Book, there is in the words some changes, but what we add
or detract it is for our disadvantage, the maine words whereon the unbloudy
sacrifice is grounded we have, and if what we want of it were added, we must
not refuse it, for they defend all this part of the Mass, making no bones to
profess the offering up of Christ's body and blood in a propitiatory sacrifice
for the benefit both of quick and dead, yea in this matter of a true external
unbloody sacrifice, which the Priests in the new Testament ordained by Christ
after the order of Melchisedec in these words hoc facite, do offer: our men
within these two years have gone very near as far as any of the Romish
Writers.

Eleventhly, The other four particles of the Canon we omit, but needlessly, for
our men defend them all as good and lawful for the matter, the things most to
be stood upon are that in them the Pope is prayed for as the chief Bishop:
this now these with whom we have to do will easily digest, to count him
Antichrist is but the malicious ignorance of Puritanes, yea it is but their mad
frenzy to deny him this day the style of holiness in the very abstract, he is
Peter's successor, that order requires one to be chief and first among all
Bishops, this honor is due to him who sits in Peter's chair, that injury was
done unto him in the reformation, in taking from him not only his usurped
power but even his proper right. In these prayers also the B. of the diocese
is put before the King; this now is not strange to the faction, they print that
every B. is a true Prince, yea a Monarch, so much more excellent than a King as
the soul is more excellent than the body, that the Emperors in duty ought
to light down from their horse and give reverence to the Bishops, yea on their
knees to receive their blessing.

Twelfthly, The third scruple that might deter us from these prayers, is that
the names of the Virgin Marie, and of many Saints are reckoned up, by whose
intercessions and merits we pray to be defended this also they defend; in their
prefaces to their prayers, they delight to reckon up the names of these Saints,
they maintain the Saints to be our Mediators of intercession, as Christ is of
redemption, they avow they pray to their Angel keeper, and would be glad to
pray to all the Saints, if they were persuaded of their audience, and now many
means have they found out of getting intelligence to the Saints of men's estate
on earth, especially that glass of the Trinity. As for merit they go as
far in it as Bellarmine; their Epigrams are famous both to Papists and
Protestants, Virtutum sancta and speciosa caterva salutem, divine ex pacto quam
meruere dabunt. The last scruple which might appear in these prayers is a
supplication for case to all who have dyed in faith and sleep in peace; from
this all the Papists deduce Purgatory, yet this passage is defended by our
men; as for Purgatory they are very near it, Limbus Patrum they teach openly,
yea Christ's descent there, and lower also, for the bringing up of Aristotle,
Plato, Socrates, Theseus, Penelope, and many Pagans. The grounds of Scripture
whereby we refute Purgatory they deny, the passages of Scriptures and
antiquity whereby the Papists labor to prove Purgatory, they press on us,
an expiative Purgatory wherein by the prayers of the living the sins of the
dead are put away they profess.

Thirteenthly, After the Canon follows the Communion for better preparation
thereto, the Missall has some more prayers and ceremonies; the first prayer
after the Canon, is the Pater noster, with the Preface audemus dicere, the
Priest having once gotten Christ the Son in his hands after the muttering of
the prayers of consecration and oblation, is bold with a loud voice to say, Our
Father: It is so in our Books clearly. After the Pater noster are sundry short
prayers, the sum whereof is in our prayer of humble access; as for the
ceremonies of breaking the host in three parts, the giving the pax, and so
forth, our men will never strain at such gnattes, they maintain the Churches
power of instituting significant rites, they take in worse ceremonies than
those, to wit, surplices, rotchets, copes, candles, incense, organs, cornets,
chancells, altars, rails, vails, a reclinatorie for confession, a lavatorie, a
repositorie, also crossings, coursings, bowings, duckings, and which is worst
of all, crucifixes of massy silver, images in carved stone and bowing of the
knee before them.

Fourteenthly, Before the communion we have a direction that the Preacher shall
communicate first himself alone in both kinds, this is the Roman order, where
the Priests communion in both kinds is only required, the peoples communion
they count but accidental, this is the consumption wherein they put the chief
part of the essence of the Mass, we direct the people to communicate in their
own order, never a word of both kinds, yea we seem to make the giving of the
cup to the people no ways necessary, for our men build the peoples right to
the cup not on Gods word, but only on tradition; they approve diverse cases of
old, where the people did participate the bread alone, they have repositories
near the Altar for keeping of the consecrated bread to the use of the sick. In
the distribution, the words whereby the Priest assures the receiver that he
takes in his mouth the body of Christ, are put directly in our Book from the
Roman order, the body of Christ preserve thee to life eternal, and to persuade
the receiver the more, he is to say Amen unto it. At the receiving of the cup
the same words are borrowed from the Missall, the blood of the Lord Jesus
preserve thy Soul, and the person receiver must say his Amen. The golden
sentences of the English which here were put in as antidotes to the venom of
transubstantiation are expurged and for them a Rubric full of black venom is
put in of covering the pa^in and challice with a corporal.

Fifteenthly, The post communion is prayers of thanksgiv^ng which the Priest
sings in the end of the Service, the same in substance with our collect of
thankesgiving: nothing in any of these postcommunions which our men do refuse;
hardly will you find one sentence in the Mass, from the beginning to the end
which our Book-men will not defend as tolerable, and so what we want of the
full Mass, it needs no more but half an hours writing to the Bishops
Chaplain, that in the next Edition it may be put in for our full union in our
service with the mother Church of Rome. That the intention of our prime Bishops
is Popery in gross, it may be shown by reasons which they will not answer in
haste.

For shortness, I will point only at four other particulars, to show what
seeds of Popish impiety, idolatry, error, heresy, may be seen in our Book;
for impiety, they put the Sabbath day and other festivals of humane
institution all in one order, teaching that the fourth command of God is not
the ground of the Sundays observation, that we may lawfully without offense of
God do all these things on the Sabbath which may be done on other holy days,
that is, go to public pastimes, reap corn, fish, take journey on horse or
foot. Secondly, for idolatry, the cross in baptism will lead to it, for they
avow from the use of the sign of the cross in Baptism, does follow clearly
the lawfulness of material crosses, crucifixes, images of all kinds in the
Churches for religious use, yea that the religious use of images moves the
heart with many pious affections, especially with a deep reverence toward the
person who by the image is represented, which reverence is lawfully declared by
outward adoration before the Image. Thirdly, for gross error, the Book tells
that all baptized Infants have all things necessary to salvation, and all of
them who dye before the years of discretion are undoubtedly saved, from hence
our men conclude that all the Articles of Arminius do clearly follow the
total and final apostasy of millions from the state of regeneration and
salvation, the power of man's free will to oppose, resist, overcome and reject
efficacious regenerating and saving grace, the perseverance in grace by our
free will antecedent in Gods mind to his decree of election, the intention of
Christ to sanctify and save as well the reprobate as the elect, the conferring
of sufficient grace to reprobates, yea universally to all men, etc.

These are the avowed doctrines from the same ground of our men without
circumloquution, yea from another place may be gathered the error of
justification by the works of the Law, which all Protestants ever detested as a
damnable heresy, the Book requires the restitution of the ancient penance,
that by the afflictions of the body the soul may be saved, then bodily penance
satisfies Gods wrath for sin; See the Self-conviction.
so faith in the blood of Christ is not our sole justification; the Papists go
no farther in this point in their injurious heresy of justification, than our
men these years past have gone, and that without controlment, except
advancement to high honor and great benefices be counted a punishment.

FINIS.

