A BRIEF VINDICATION OF THE Royal Society: From the late Invectives and
Mis-representations of Mr. Henry Stubbe:

By a Well-wisher to that Noble Foundation.

DVM PREMOR ^TTOLLO

LONDON, Printed for John Martin, at the Bell without Temple-Barr. 1670.

A BRIEF VINDICATION OF THE Royal Society.
IF it were not that some worthy Persons, no better informed than Mr. Stubbe
seems to be, of the Design and Business of the Royal Society, which he has
lately endeavored in no less than four ignorant and railing Pamphlets to wound
through the sides of some particular persons, might be induced to have a
sinister Opinion of that Illustrious Body, established by his Most Excellent
Majesty that now is, for the Improvement of Noble and useful Knowledge, I
should altogether disdain even to touch such disingenuous and foul papers, as
those, which this virulent pen has of late troubled the Press with, are justly
esteemed to be by all truly Generous and Considerate men, both Domestics and
Forainers, who are acquainted with the true State of what he does most
maliciously and undeservedly labor to defame.

Since therefore it is necessary that something should be said for the sake of
those, that may, upon the reading of such Libelling Pamphlets, frame to
themselves wrong conceptions of that Royal Foundation, so immorally assailed by
this petulant writer, I shall endeavor in a short Vindication to represent the
true End and Work of that Institution, and by doing so, manifest to the World,
that this Calumniator has with all his late Scribbling done nothing but filled
a great deal of waste paper, with a lively Character of his own perverse, vain,
and turbulent Genius reviving the Memory of his former ways, and confirming
the opinion had of him before, of his discomposed and malicious nature.

I must therefore say, that, if Envy and Malice, and other cursed Motives had
not blinded him, he would have been so far from reviling one of the Noblest
Establishments that ever was erected by any Prince, that he would have found,
as well as all considering and sober men do, that the Aim and Purpose of the
Royal Society is not any thing at all of what he takes so much pains and uses
so much craft to insinuate, To espouse or reject this or that sect of
Philosophers, or to meddle with Religion, Divinity, Medical Practices; much
less to endanger the Religion established in England, the Monarchical
Government, the two famous Universities, the Received Education, and the
Profession on of Physic (all which he goes about in those vile Books, to bear
the World in hand they intend to do;) but that their desires and attempts are
to increase Knowledge, and to discover truth, wherever it be in Natural,
Mechanical and Mathematical things, to help Old Inventions, and encourage New
ones, and all for the raising and enobling the Dignity of Humane Nature, and
the serving of Mankind.

And since they are persuaded with the Excellent Lord Verulam, and many other
judicious Moderns, that hitherto all sorts of Naturalists have been too hasty
in establishing Systems of Natural Philosophy, before they had laid a solid and
comprehensive Foundation to build upon; they have esteemed it a laudable and
useful Undertaking to endeavor, that all industrious and sagacious Inquirers
of Nature every where may conjoyn their Researches, studies, and labors, to
examine what has been performed hitherto, to retain what will endure the Test,
and to add thereunto what they can, in order to the composing a faithful
History of Nature and Art, that may contain a competent stock of Observations
and Experiments, frequently and carefully made by Intelligent and Cautious men,
which may serve for a Magazeen of Materials, of which hereafter, by duly
considering the whole, and comparing all the parts together, may be raised (if
possible) such a Systeme of natural Philosophy, as may give a rational Account
of the Appearances and Effects of Nature, and enable men to infer from
confronted Causes and Effects such consequences, as may conduce to the greater
benefit and ampler accommodations of Humane life.

This then being the true Design of this Royal Establishment, and the sole
Prospect of those that are engaged therein, it alone is able to scatter that
heap of unsavory talk put together by this vain Writer; wherein it is palpable,
that he never would understand the true Ground and End of this Institution, and
that in all his Airy and Empty discourses, where he strikes at the. Royal
Society, he does but fight with his own fancy and shadow.

For whosoever is impartial, and will but give himself the leisure to consider
the Nature of such a Design, and the happy Effects which its serious
prosecution may have, such an one will soon conclude, that what ever is said in
those Fardles, as far as it tends to detract from the said Society, contains
nothing but spiteful misrepresentations and calumnies, poured out on purpose to
try whether something of it Would not stick with Credulous Men, to whom the
Actings and Design of the R. Society are not known.

O therwise who is there, I pray, that being in his right wits, can conceive,
that such an Institution, and such Studies can tend to undermine the Protestant
Religion, whose Design, Business, and Glory it is, to increase Light and
Knowledge? Or that it can (as is suggested by this pretended Champion of the
Church of England, known to be indifferent to all Religions) introduce Popery,
which wants that Latitude of pursuing the sense of the Motto, Nullius in Verba,
chosen by this R. Corporation.

Who can believe, that it endangers Monarchy (which formerly this Railer has
been shrewdly suspected to hate) without calling in question the Prudence of
one of the Wisest and most Potent Monarchs in the world; that has incorporated
it by his Royal Charter, and by doing so, increased his Renown abroad to
admiration (witness several English Ambassadors, and other public Ministers,
innumerable Travelers, and abundance of Letters, written from all parts) and
added also to his singular Luster at home among all those that know what value
to put upon Virtue and Knowledge? And how shall this be said without throwing
dirt upon those Eminent and Illustrious Prelates, Nobles, Officers of State,
and other Loyal and Learned Persons of all sorts, who have Honored the
Register of the Royal Society with the subscription of their Names, after their
Royal Founder, his Royal Highness, his Highness Prince Rupert, and one of the
Dukes of Brunswick and Luneburg.

Again, who can affirm without a front of Brass, cation of Youth? Whereas it is
evident, that they intermeddle not with any such thing; but if they should have
any influence upon it, it can be none other, but to render it more Manly, and
more Polite, in regard that this Society consists of many of the best
Extraction and Breeding, Noblemen, Gentlemen, Travelers, Persons that have
studied Men, and conversed with Things; Knowing in the most Solid and moil
Useful parts of Knowledge; such as are the mixed Mathematiques, Natural
Philosophy, Chemistry, Anatomy, Physic, Mechanical Arts, and Practices: Of
which persons there are no such Deserters, as this Malevolent Writer goes about
most falsely to persuade.

Who can truly say, that this Society is prejudicial to the two great
Universities of this Kingdom; considering that it cannot be denied, that the
aforementioned Sciences and Studies, which are the work of the Royal Society,
are both highly Noble, and exceeding necessary for the several Professions of
the World? And though perhaps they be not the chief business of those
Illustrious Nurseries of all Learning, where the Youth of the Kingdom is fitted
for the service of the Church and State, yet they are countenanced there, and
pursued within their walls by some of their most worthy Members, as far as
other Studies and Exercises, concerning Languages, Logic, History, Divinity,
Law, etc. will permit. It is evident that the Royal Society is so far from
derogating any thing from them in that Learning, which they are chiefly
addicted to, that the same is by them supposed, or rather employed, and made
good use of, as being very necessary rightly to apprehend and to compare things
that are examined, and performed amongst them. Besides that the Experimental
Operations, insisted upon by that Company, are a further improvement of some of
the Academical Studies, and an Application of them to public uses.

Again, who can rationally esteem? that that Society is detrimental to the
Profession of Physic, which is built upon, and can by no surer way be
advanced, than by good Observations and Experiments; he being certainly the
ablest Physician that has improved himself by the Noblest and Certainest of
them? And as to the Practice of Physic, that Society does not at all interfere
with it; they neither pretending to judge of Diseases, nor setting Rules for
it, nor prescribing or administering Medicines, but only doing what they may,
upon occasion, to increase the stock Medical, by discovering more and more of
the Secrets of Nature; which as it tends to enlarge the Power and Empire of Man
over other Creatures, so it may particularly contribute to suggest to
Physicians (of whom many very eminent for Learning and Practice, are of the
chief inquirers, constantly remaining in this Society) a more ample matter both
to preserve, and to recover the Health of Man; for the doing of which none will
be maligned by any but him that is an Enemy to Mankind.

And as the Fellows of the Royal Society make it their business to render
themselves, as much as in them is, serviceable to all; so they do not assume to
themselves any Discoveries or Inventions of others. And if any such should, by
this or that particular Member, perhaps less knowing in the History of such
things, be attributed to them, possibly out of an excess of Affection, which
may be accompanied even with a belief of the Truth, as to what is thus
ascribed; yet is the Society so just, as not to own any thing more than is
their due: and their Modesty is such, to my knowledge, that the Body it self
pretends hitherto to no more but this; That they have begun to remove some
rubbish; to lay in some Materials (and those yet unhewn and unapproved) and to
put some things in order for the Building, by making Trials and Observations of
several kinds in public, by encouraging and directing some of their number to
do the like in private; and by examining, improving, and carrying on of some
things, which others had set upon before them, either at home or abroad. And
therefore as none, not the very Spirit of Calumny, nay, even Mr. Stubbe
himself, can possibly have the impudence to blame their Design, as it is above
declared; so none can justly charge them with any Arrogance; since they, as a
Body, assume nothing to themselves, but what has been just now related, and
specified.

To which, I think, I have right to add, that they need nor be very solicitous
to give particular satisfaction to Impertinent and Captious Inquirers into
their proceedings, in regard they are a Body made up of meet Volunteers, that
have engaged themselves generously and freely to promote the Design
abovementioned, and therefore have no obligation at all to give an account to
any, but His Sacred Majesty their Founder and Patron, of their performances,
which they have hitherto carried on at the Expense of their own purse, and hope
to continue (notwithstanding the dismal Auguryes of this Scrich-owle) for the
increase of the Honor of this Great Nation, and the general benefit of Mankind.

And this, I think, may suffice, both to inform all Candid Men of the Truth,
and with all to shame (if he be not past shame) this Hectoring Writer, for
having so groundlessly and uncivilly attacqued many of the most Noble, and the
most Intelligent and Virtuous of his own Countrymen; who certainly will be
ashamed to own such a Ranter for an English man, for all the show he makes of
petulant wit, and scraps of crabbed learning.

If he should say, That I have passed by the Arguments, he has produced to
support his Pretenses; I shall boldly answer, that I had no reason to value
them, or to trouble the Reader with a Rehearsal and particular Refutation of
them (which perhaps will be done so as to make his heart ache, by those whom he
has particularly assailed) considering that the things, represented by me,
being only weighed, whatever he has alleged will fall to the ground of it
self, as being propped up by nothing, but Malice, Envy, Calumnies, vain
Surmises, and Crafty Mis-representations of the Undertaking and Actions of that
Society I am pleading for; which has the Applause of Discreet and Intelligent
men, both at home and abroad, as has been already represented, and can be made
out by Scores of Letters from diverse of the most eminent Persons in Learning
and those forementioned Studies, that are in Europe: Which gives me sufficient
ground to hope and ominate, that this Royal Establishment will thrive and
flourish, notwithstanding the mischievous project for its destruction, aimed at
by this Mercenary and Vile Rhapsodist. However, the rest abundantly satisfied
in their good intentions, and endeavors, stopping the mouths of all such
malignant Calumniators as himself, with that Heroic saying, Virtus repulsae
nescia sordidae
Intamina is sulget honoribus.


And that other, Virtutem videant intabescantque reticta.

FINIS.

