A Brief Collection of some Memorandums: OR, Things humbly Offered to the
Consideration of the Members of the Great Convention, and of the succeeding
Parliament.
ADVERTISEMENT. This Collection was designed for the Great Convention at their
first Sitting, but by a Miscarriage was delayed; however, the worthy Author
thought it not altogether unseasonable to offer it to the Consideration of the
Members of this present Parliament.
(1.) TOuching the Present State of the Kingdom, into which we are brought by
the most wonderful works of God lately wrought among us, The Design of this
Paper permits not to enlarge. They, who please, may peruse Psalm. 2.10, 11, 12.
Psalm. 102.15. to v. 23. Psalm. 118.23. Rev. 19.1, 2, etc.

(2.) By general consent of the late printed Papers, The two great evils lately
feared, and to be obviated, are Popery and Slavery.

(3.) What then is to be done? Quid igitur agendum? an old Athenian Question
fit in this case to be decided only by the Supreme Authority: -- But some
Particulars (among many which wiser men may suggest) are humbly propounded to
consideration. In a great Fire kindled, every one is allowed to bring his
Bucket of water.

(I.) As to Popery, and for preventing its return, may it be considered,

(1.) Whether there should not be a Bill of Exclusion, Vide 13 Eliz. c. 13.
larger than the former endeavored in Parliament, viz. to render any Papist
incapable of Reigning here? If the former Bill had passed, some think our late
and present dangers, had been in a great measure prevented. They who opposed
that Bill, do now see what have been the effects and consequents of its not
passing, and the extreme danger of the Kingdom has put them and others upon
such a course, as seems to some, to have outdone all the so often decryed
proceedings of 1641. -- One day teaches another, and the latter goes to School
to to the former.

And as a branch of such new Bill, were it not meet to provide against the
Linsey-Woolsey marriages of our Protestant Princes with Papists? The World is
wide enough; Fit Protestant Matches for them may be found.

(2.) That Papists be rendered incapable of (at least) great Offices in the
Kingdom.

(3.) That it be made very Penal for Jesuits to come upon English ground. It
may be, Castration might be a better remedy than Death. They are the known
Boutefeu's of the World; And even some Popish Governments suffer them not.

(4.) That Great endeavors be used for instructing the People in the
principles of Christian Religion, and arming them by sound Doctrine, and
especially by sincere Conversion to God, against the errors of Popery.

(5.) That to this end, a Godly Ministry be sought and encouraged. It Is a
miserable defect in the Ministry of a Nation, where any evidence of
Regeneration is not so much, as desired in the Ministers; nor made any
qualification of the Persons admitted. If with out Regeneration no man enters
into the Kingdom of God, i. e. becomes a true Christian (which seems a
considerable part of the meaning of those words of our Savior to Nicodemus,)
then surely, this should be desired in all Candidates to the Ministry: Whereas
(according to ordinary practices) a very small portion of saecular learning
procures Admission by Ordination; And we have too many Ministers, who are not
Christians in Christ's sense; Yea, who do not so much, as pretend to any
internal Regeneration but are far from the Kingdom of God, immersed in Vice,
haters of persons and things which are good. This intends no reflection upon
the worthy and good Ministers of the Church of England.

(6.) Many good men wish, with the principal Bishops in the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth's Reign (such as Jewel, Sands, Horn, Coxe, Grindal and (before them)
Hooper) That the Popish Vestments, with all the other remnants of Popery, might
be thrown out of the Churches, and out of the minds of the People; See Dr.
Burnet's Letters; First Letter pa. 42, 43, 44.

(7.) There is nothing which has a more Natural and Moral tendency to both the
evils lately complained of, ( i.e. Popery and Slavery,) than the abounding of
wickedness in the Land. It may be questioned, whether the Nation was more
vicious in the ancient times of Paganism or Popery, than it has been of late
under Protestancy (though this is the Doctrine of God our Savior) -- Vice and
sensuality prepare men to hate and desert the Gospel, (which condemns them in
all those wicked practices, that they resolve to persist in) and to embrace
Popery, which offers them so many Wise Medicines, and reliefs against sin and
its guilt, without troubling them with the harder taks of Faith, Repentance and
Reformation of Life. And it is not much to be doubted, but it has been a piece
of Modern Policy to prepare the Kingdom both for Popery and Slavery by an
industrious promoting of Vice and Immorality. That it has lately fallen out,
that the whole Nation (good and bad) as one Man has been so unanimous and
zealous for Protestant Religion in opposition to Popery, does not evince, that
Vice prepares not for Popery; but is to be considered as a Stupendous and
Extraordinary working of the Divine Providence, such as it is hard to parallel
out of History: -- And besides, this may make even the worst of men stand up
for Protestant Religion against Popery, viz. because Popery threatens the loss
of Church Lands, and other emoluments, and is a more costly Religion than
Protestancy, Priestly Absolution, admission to the Sacrament, Burial in sure
and certain hope, etc. are to be had among some Protestants upon cheaper terms,
than the undergoing of imposed Penances and Freedom from an imaginary
Purgatory, among the Papists. Popish Pardons must be well paid for; and when
purchased, what are they worth?

And then secondly; How does Vice debase men's spirits, and render a Nation
tanquam ad servitutem natam? Few generous Thoughts tending to their Country's
freedom and good, lodge in sensual breasts, or arise out of the fumes of a
constant Intemperance. The wise and good Patriots are virtuous, and read
somewhat else besides Plays, Romances, or an Observator. And as Debauchery
naturally disposes to Slavery; so also morally: For, when men give up
themselves to be slaves to their Lusts, God (if they repent not) will make them
slaves to Rulers.

It Is a Grave Observation of Dr. Burnet concerning the City of Strasburgh, See
his 4th Let. p. 222.
That before they lost their Liberty, and fell under the French Yoke,
Corruption in Morals had overspread the whole City; together with a popular
Pride, and Self-confidence. To say, We are a most vicious and sinful People, is
not, nor is intended to reproach our Nation. It Is too manifest to be denied; we
declare our sin, as Sodom. Vice has, from an Impure Fountain, overspread the
whole Nation.

(1.) I have known one of the condition but of a Day-Labourer, who with
impunity and impudence owned himself to keep a Miss in his Cottage, in
compliance with Great Examples.

(2.) Such Hellish Swearing, Cursing and Blasphemy scarce ever filled the Air
of any Climate, as here. The Devils believe and tremble, and have such presages
of the great day of Judgment, that they deprecate their being Tormented before
the time; so far are they from imprecating their own damnation.

(3.) Drinking Healths has filled all places with vomit, and sometimes with
Bloodshed, and slaughter, the effect of Drunken Quarrels. I enlarge no
farther, as were easy to do; and nothing could excuse for saying so much of
this in an intended Breviate, but that certainly, there is nothing so Necessary
to the Nations welfare, as Repentance and Reformation; see, if you please, Luke
13.3, 5. and Jer. 18. verse 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. etc.

For remedy against the Debauchery, (which has been apparently increasing
almost these Thirty years) the things next mentioned are heartily and humbly
wished.

(1.) That there may be appointed solemn humiliation, Fasting and Prayer
throughout the Kingdom. And what if the Ministers (such as are able) might in
so extraordinary a case and duty, be allowed the use of their own gifts,
without being limited by some new Collects?

(2.) That the Court may be exemplary for Sobriety and Virtue. If Whoring,
Healthing, Swearing and Cursing etc. be discountenanced there, it will be a
signal and public Blessing, Regis ad exemplum totus, etc. And so, if the
Nobility and Gentry would follow the good example of a temperate and virtuous
Prince, how happy might we be!

(3.) Good Justices of the Peace, and inferior Magistrates of all sorts. What
Heart can a Drunken, Swearing, or Whoring Justice have to punish; or with what
face can he punish those Vices in others?

(4.) Good Ministers; of which somewhat before.

(5.) Good Laws made and executed against the Vices of the times, without such
little Penaltys annexed, as rather encourage to them, than deter from them.

(6.) Some Law for ejecting Justices of Peace, and inferior Magistrates for
common Swearing, Drunkenness, Whoring and other gross Debauchery's (if commonly
practiced) upon conviction by a Jury.

(7) Some like remedy for scandalous Ministers.

(8.) Some wish for a Law against lend, profane, and lascivious Plays.

If any of these seem to any to be points of too high a Reformation for the
present season and in faece Romuli, to him, who humbly Offers them to
consideration, it shall be sufficient to have willed and wished them: And they
must be waited for, until we come nearer to the time of the new Jerusalem; for
it is hoped that by that time, or before it, The Kingdoms of this World will
become the Kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ, etc.

(8.) Laws against Protestant Dissenters as such, and the severe Execution of
them (as some think) have been and ever will be of an apparent tendency both to
Popery and Slavery, and to every thing else that is naught. Papists (as since
appears) industriously promoted some of them. The Design of this Paper allows
not long discourse about Liberty of Conscience. Books have been written Pro and
Con. Christ's Doctrine abhors Persecution for Religion; and Persecution of
Protestants by Protestants for Nonconformity to things, which the one part
confesses in their own nature indifferent, and the other believes and avows
(judging only for themselves, without censuring others) to be uninstituted and
sinful, is most unnatural, as well as Vnprotestantly. A Dog (they say) will not
eat of a Dog. -- Laws intended against Papists have been interpreted and
executed against Protestants, together with other Laws expressly made against
Dissenting Protestants. Peaceable and Religious meetings beyond all express
Laws, and, to eek them out as not sufficiently severe, have been arbitrarily
punished as Riots. Do these things please God, because they please wicked, or
superstitious men? -- Scarce any Law (as some think) has made a more direct
invasion upon Magna Charta, than those against Conventicles; as in other
respects, so in the way appointed for conviction by any one Justice without a
Jury. And who knows but Himself or his Wife may be a Dissenter before they die;
and his Children be such after him? -- The Liberties, Estates, Trades,
Dwellings, Country, yea Lives of good and peaceable Subjects are by one or
other of these Laws exposed to loss for worshipping God in the best manner they
can, because of some inconformity to the common mode. Tantum Religio potuit!
etc.

A worthy House of Commons in Parliament (I think two of them) in the latter
end of the Reign of King Charles the Second, after the Discovery of the Popish
Plot, Voted against the Execution of the Penal Laws against Protestant
Dissenters: But (alas!) they were Abhorred for it (one of the most disingenuous
actions of a people toward their own Representatives, and such wise Senators,
that have been seen.

My Lords the Bishops have (as is reported) not only by former, but later
promises put their Fellow-Protestants, the Dissenters, in Hope of a due
Liberty, which must be full and without any ensnaring Condition, or else it
will not be accounted due. For although the Dissenters thankfully receive
Liberty to worship God according to their Light, as an Alms from the
Government; yet they suppose it, in its full Latitude, their Due by Christ's
Law.

And they Hope, that this Great and Wise Prince, whose Heart God has touched
with such a Zeal for the Protestant Religion, will be (under God) a great
Instrument of breaking every Yoke, and letting the Oppressed go free, and
thereby unite all Protestants to a cheerful and unanimous Defense of their
Country, and Opposition to Popery; That no Protestant Dissenter may say; --
Wherefore were the former days better than these? -- And (alas!) that Papists
should deal better with us, than Fellow Protestants; like the old Lamentation,
-- Heu, quod praestet infidelitas quod non praestitit fides! -- If Popery give
Liberty to Protestants, is not Popery, in this, become Protestantism? and if
Protestants persecute Fellow-Protestants, is not Protestantism, in this, become
Popery? I allude to Romans 2.25, 26, 27.

Now, in this matter, there is a twofold Wish, and Petition.

(1.) To the Great Convention, which although it consists of the same Lords
which usually constitute the House of Peers in Parliament, and of the same
Commons for number and manner of Election, which usually constitute the House
of Commons in Parliament: Yet being the Representative of the whole Kingdom
gathered together in an extraordinary case and manner, and for extraordinary
ends, it seems to be something greater, and of greater power, than a
Parliament. -- If the whole Nation, thus assembled, shall deliberate about and
settle a New Government (as if they were to begin the World again) this seems
to be a Transcendent, Extraordinary and Original power, beyond what they could
exert, as a Parliament. And they who can do this, what can they not do? cui
licet quod majus est, ei id quod minus est non debet non licere. And though
this great Convention may think fit to leave the repealing or altering of
particular Statutes to the ordinary legislative power, when settled; Yet, may it
not be judged meet by this Convention in their erecting a new building to lay
such foundations, (while the sense of their danger and deliverance is upon
them) as may prevent the return of the evils complained of, and prevent them
more effectually (if God be with us) than an act of Parliament can do? -- And
the humble petition is, That it may please this great Assembly not to leave the
Protestant Dissenters bound (as Felix did Paul,) but to make Liberty in matters
of Religion for them (I meddle not with others, though I with all men well) I
say, Liberty for Protestant Dissenters;) a Stone in the Foundation of the New
Building, than which (as the petitioner believes) never will any man find a
Squarer, Fitter, Stronger, better to lay in the Foundation of a Government. And
if this great Convention shall be pleased to do this (which it may be harder to
get done in another time and way) it is already manifest by the Prince's
Declaration and otherwise, that to His Highness, it would be very acceptable.

And why should not His Government (if that shall be agreed on) be hereby
Endeared to all the Protestants? And does not the Condition and Safety of the
Nation require an Union of Protestants? (not by the harsh and impossible way of
an Enforced Uniformity, but by a Gracious Liberty.) -- Can it be reasonably
supposed, that Dissenting Protestants will be able cheerfully to Engage in
their Trades (by which the Riches of King and Kingdom are increased) while they
are liable every day to undoing Penalties Worshipping of God? -- And will it be
a fair Encouragement for them to venture their Lives in the High places of the
Field (it may be, in a Foreign Nation) to remember, that, if they escape Death,
and return Home, the next place they shall lodge in may be a Gaol for Life upon
a Capias Excommunicatum, and that their Estates may be pulled to pieces upon
the Statute of twenty pound a month, for not coming to Church, or some other
Penal Laws?

And the Petitioner adds his fear, that if care be taken only for our Civil
Liberties, and no pity showed to them, who have been so long oppressed in
their Spiritual or Religious Liberties, God's controversy will not yet be at an
end with us: And shall we provoke the Lord to jealousy? Are we stronger than
he? His late works show we are not.

(2.) To the ensuing Parliament, The humble Petition is, That the Government
would be pleased to Repeal all the Penal Laws, in so far, as concerns
Protestant Dissenters, and that none of them may hereafter suffer for not
coming to Church, or other Nonconformity; or for Worshipping God in their own
Meetings, according to their own best light and understanding of God's Word:
particularly, that the Laws against Conventicles, the Five-mile Act, the
Statute of the 35th of Queen Elizabeth, (a Repeal of which last once already
passed both Houses) with other the like, may be Repealed.

II. Thus far as to Popery: somewhat more is added as to Slavery, and the means
of preventing it.

Upon the Restoration of King Charles the Second, there seems to have been a
Bending of the Stick to the other Extreme, and that (He coming in, without
Terms) the Prerogative gained much upon the Liberties of the People, and has
been upon the gaining hand ever since.

Here is a Gracious and Magnanimous Prince, no Friend to Arbitrary and Despotic
Government: Were it not good to procure the repeal of some late Laws which
trench upon the Rights of the Subject, and the passing of some Laws for their
preservation?

I. One of the chief Fences against Arbitrary Government is the frequent
assembling of free Parliaments. There are Laws in force for this. Two Statutes
appoint a Parliament every Year; v. 4 Ed. 3.14. and 36 Ed. 3.10. There was also
a Law for a Triennial Parliament made in the time of King Charles the first,
which was repealed (if indeed it be repealed, for the matter is doubtful) and
another act for a Triennial Parliament (which some esteemed a New Nothing)
passed in its room.

(1.) Were it not good, that for the next Reign there be a Parliament once in a
Year; and afterward the old Act for a Triennial Parliament, being revived, to
take place, and be observed. Frequent Parliaments would make Ministers of
State, and Judges (if any of them should attempt to wind up the Government to
a Tyranny) afraid of a Day of Account in this World, though of that in the
next, they should be secure.

(2.) And, were it not good, that this expensive and vile way of compassing a
Seat in the House of Commons in Parliament, by Hiring the Votes of the
Country, and making people drunk, should be laid aside? And that whosoever
shall in a County spend above --, or in a City, Borough or Cinqueport above --
to procure or reward Suffrages, should be disabled to Sit, and the matter being
well proved before a Committee for Elections, the Election should be void?

(3.) We have had an Instance of purchasing the Liberties and Money of the
Nation by Pensions paid to Members in a Parliament, which Posterity will know
by a Name taken from that practice: Is it not fit, that the like be prevented,
for the future by the Highest Penalties upon the Givers and Receivers of such
Pensions?

(4.) Were it not good to appoint Penalties upon Sheriffs and other Officers,
who shall make false and undue Returns of Members of the House of Commons in
Parliament, higher than any Law has yet appointed, and more proportionable to
so grand and pernicious an Offense; with a way for the more easy Levying of
such Penalties?

(5.) And, if the Privilege of Parliament has suffered any diminution in the
Case of Fitz-Harris, or of them, who had and pleaded Pardons to defeat
impeachments made in Parliament by the Commons of England for High Treason,
Provision may be made, that such things may not for the future be drawn into
Example.

(6.) Whether something should not be done (if it shall be found needful) to
reconcile the King's Negative Voice to Bills in Parliament with his
Coronation Oath, whereby he swears to consent to, or confirm Laws, quas Vulgus
Elegerit?

(7.) What if Power were given by Law to the Speaker, or any Committee of the
House of Commons to administer an Oath in matters concerning the Privileges of
their own House?

II. Since the Restoration, there has been such a Determination of the
Question, which was disputed between King Charles the First, and the first
Long-Parliament, touching the Militia, as, in effect makes the Government in
proxima potententia, at least of becoming Arbitrary (as some think) With
respect to that, may it be considered,

(1.) Whether it be not meet by Law to Limit the number of the King's Guards?

(2.) To provide against a Standing Army within the Kingdom by Indispensable
Laws, making it High Treason for any Commanders, Officers or Soldiers (besides
the King's allowed Guards) to enter into such a Standing Army within the
Kingdom without Consent of Parliament; And that no Army be raised, or continued
without Act of Parliament.

(3.) To put the County Militia's into such hands and such a frequent exercise,
as may make them (with Gods blessing) the ordinary and sufficient guard of the
Nation; And, while the present condition of the Kingdom requires the
continuance of Standing Forces to repel a (...) Invasion, that they be
continued with the greatest caution against it is making a Praecedent, and being
drawn into future practice; and with such Discipline as may prevent their
oppressing and corrupting the People, as the late Army did.

III. In regard diverse evils were judged to have arisen from the delivering of
Petitions in Anno (...) etc. by great multitudes, another extreme seems to have
been incurred, whereby a just and reasonable Liberty of the Subject is
abridged, if not taken away, by a Statute since the Restoration against
Petitioning: And yet when it served to promote a design, how were tumultuary
Addresses and Abhorrences encouraged, to the running down of Parliaments, by
whom the mind of the Kingdom should have been made known?

In this case, were it not good to review the Statute of King Charles the
Second against Petitioning, and settle that matter according to right?

IV. It was foretold by a late great Judge (the ornament of his Profession, of
his Age and of his Nation) that Slavery would be introduced by
Westminster Hall. In this case may it be considered,

(1.) Whether it be not fit, that some public Justice be done upon the
betrayers of the Kingdoms Liberties (as of old, on Hubert de Burgh, Tresilian,
Belknap etc. more lately, on the Judges who gave their opinions for
Ship Money?) Impunity gives a License to offend.

(2.) That such persons only be hereafter made Judges, or other Dignitarys in
the Law, as are duly qualified with Knowledge in the Laws, Wisdom, Justice,
Courage, and (if it be possible) with the Fear of God; That there may not be
cause to revive the late waggish representation of twelve Puppets in the Robes
of Judges, speaking out whatsoever the manager behind the Curtain made them
speak.

(3.) That such Judges may hold their Places, quamdiu se been gesserint, as
heretofore and not durante bene-placito only.

V. Calling in the Charters by the known Methods of Quo Warranto's,
Solicitations and Threats is generally acknowledged to have been a mean of
bringing the Kingdom into a very ill condition. It were easy to dilate upon the
mischiefs. -- Upon this, two wishes are humbly propounded.

(1.) That the Charters (the foundations of many Generations) that of London
especially, may all of them of be restored to their full Vigor by an Act of
Parliament; with provision against the like Invasion in time to come.

(2.) That they, in whose Heads this evil Counsel and Device first grew, if
living, may make Atonement to the Kingdom for this, by better Counsels and
Services for the future.

VI. The dispensing Power, as used, is accounted so terrible an Engine, and so
lately Felt, and Feared; That the Limiting and Settling of that, according to
reason, will certainly not be forgotten. They who by their Judgments and
Arguments made it pass in an Extraordinary Extent for Legal Prerogative, do not
deserve well either of King or Kingdom.

VII. The Examination of the Great point, concerning the Prince of Wales,
(while things are fresh and in memory) seems to desire a Parliament. That the
truth of the matter may be found out and made apparent, to the Satisfaction of
the present and of the future Age. And, if there have been any Leagues with
France against Protestant Religion, were it not good to have them made manifest?

A few more Wishes shall put an End to these Memrandums.

(1.) That, if, in this Convention, the Nation meets in its highest Capacity
and Original Power; (i.e.) Whereby they are able to choose to themselves a
Government;) They would do all the Good they can, and not leave all to an
uncertain Success in future Parliaments. If this Convention can do any thing,
cannot it make Laws truly Fundamental, and which shall have the same Firmitude
and continuance as the Government it sets up? And, may Liberty for
Protestant-Dissenters, as before, be one of those Fundamentals! Amen.

(2.) May the Deaths of the Late Earl of Essex, and of others, whom public
Fame reports to have been Murdered, be Enquired of, and the Guilty of such
transcendent Offenses, it any, be brought to punishment, to the Glory of God,
and the Freedom or the Kingdom from such Blood-guiltiness. -- Alas! the Nation
contracts the guilt of too much Blood, almost at every Assizes, in one place or
other; it being ordinary for Voluntary Homicide, contrary to God's Law, to go
unpunished; especially where the Offenders are Persons of Quality or Estates,
or are Soldiers. And this Impunity is caused much by an ill Distinction
between Murder and Voluntary Manslaughter; And, sometimes by a Bribed Clerks
drawing the Indictment not Hanging fashion (as one of them used to say:) As for
Murder, when it ought to be upon the Statute of King James the First against
Stabbing, etc. the other having no Weapon drawn; And too often by Pardons
procured by some Courtier or Man of Interest, to the Drawing (as some fear) of
Guilt upon the Throne.

(3.) May the Subject not be overcharged with Oaths and Declarations; The use
whereof has been little, but to Entangle the Conscientious. When it was
required, that we should declare it utterly unlawful on any pretense whatsoever
to take Arms against any Commissioned by the King, some very Loyal Subjects,
who scrupled it, presaged, that it was possible Irish Papists, and such like
might be Commissioned; and that in such Case, this Declaration might be a
Renunciation of a Law of Nature, which Allows and Requires self-preservation.
And how are men enforced now to distinguish upon the Word (Commission, or
Commissioned?) I heard, a Grave man say, that he had made it his Observation,
(and produced diverse Instances to confirm it) That scarce any thing was ever
publicly sworn against by a Nation, but it afterward came in.

(4.) May the Late Lord Russels Posterity (and the Earl of Essex's if need be)
be restored in Blood and Honor by Act of Parliament!

(5.) May Dr. Oats, Mr. Joh^son, etc. Be remembered.

(6.) And, Lastly, That all these things being honestly and innocently
intended, none of them may be Offensive, or ill taken.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed in the Year 1689.


