Two Speeches, Of GEORGE Earl of Bristol With some observations upon them By
which it may appear whether or no the said Earl deserve to be involved in the
Common Calamity brought upon Roman Catholics, by the folly and presumption of
some few factious PAPISTS.

London Printed in the Year, 1674,

Reader,
BEing a Roman Catholic agreeing in principles with what George Earl of
Bristol has of late publicly declared of himself in Parliament, I could
hardly bear with patience the injurious censures and uncharitable constructions
made of a speech of the said Honorable persons, in the house of Peers, by
diverse of the same Communion, though of a differing stamp in relation to
government.

They did their best to have it understood, that the persecution which seemed
to threaten Catholics, had whetted that Earl's wit to find out specious and
plausible distinctions betwixt Catholic and Catholic, whereby to exempt
himself from the inconveniences likely to fall upon the generality of that
profession; Distinctions which in themselves they said had no solid grounds of
discrimination, and that his sentiments expressed therein, were adapted only to
the present occasion.

The publishing of the said Speech in Print I thought would be a service to the
Public, as well as a justice to that Lord, wherein his distinction of
Catholics of the Church of Rome, from Catholics of the Court of Rome, will
certainly appear a right and a reasonable one: Concerning which, if the reader
rest not satisfied, but will needs descend to particular differences, he is
referred to a dedication of a book lately published in print, and directed to
all Catholics of His Majesty's Dominions, by one Peter Walsh, a Franciscan
Friar, wherein the chief imposals of the Court of Rome upon the more orthodox
Doctrines of the Church of Rome, are faithfully and learnedly exposed.

Now as to the second part of their detraction, I thought the injuriousness of
it could not better be made appear, then by Printing also another Speech of the
said Earl's, made to the house of Commons many years since, wherein the
selfsame sentiments were eminently declared by him, at a time when Roman
Catholics were as free from alarums of any new persecution, as ever they have
been during any Session of Parliament.

A Speech of George Earl of Bristol's made in the house of Peers at the first
reading of the Bill against Popery, upon Saturday the fifteenth of March, 1673.
The King being then present.
My Lords
I am very sensible to what inconveniences a man of my persuasion exposes
himself that offers to speak (especially to break the Ice first) to a Bill of
this nature brought up to you from the great representative of the Commons of
England, a Bill which those of my own profession may possibly think so severe,
and most Protestants so necessary. If I speak for the passing of this Bill it
is likely I may give scandal to the first and if I speak against the passing of
it it is certain I shall give high provocation to the latter. And if I speak
for some parts of it and against some others, I may have cause to fear that I
may offend both sides, the usual fate of those who affect to show their
subtilty by cutting a Feather (as we say) well my Lords so be it, let what will
befall me upon this occasion I shall still have within me a consolation above
even the power of an Act of Parliament to take from me I mean the testimony of
a good Conscience, and of having discharged the duty of a Peer of this house in
so eminent a conjuncture clearly, and heartily according to the best of my
understanding. Yet still with most humble submission to the superiority of
yours.

My Lords, before I enter upon the matter give me leave to tell those Lords of
my own Profession that hear me what I think their duty as well as mine if any
of them shall think fit to speak in this house upon this occasion.

My Lords, I do understand that how different so ever our sentiments are from
your Lordships in point of Doctrine, and questions spiritual, we ought to lay
the consideration of them all aside in this place, and to speak in it not as
Roman Catholics, but as faithful members of a Protestant Parliament. And as
such give a preferrence before all temporal interests of our own to the right
interest of the State under whose protection we live, resting confident that
whatever part of our ease and conveniences in this world, we shall willingly
sacrifice to the Peace, and security of our Country will one way, or other be
recompensed unto us by Almighty* God, either in this, or in the other.

Now my Lords, as to the rest of this most honorable assembly give me leave to
remind you what kind of Catholic I told you the other day I am, that is a
Catholic of the Church of Rome, not a Catholic of the Court of Rome, A
distinction (if I am not much deceived) worthy of your memory and reflection,
when ever any severe proceeding against those whom you call Papists shall come
in question, since Catholics of the Court of Rome do only deserve that name.

My Lords, I could easily make clear unto you the reality, and the
reasonableness of this distinction by instances in matter of opinion, did I not
think it always impertinent to trouble this house with points of controversy,
but I shall only take the liberty to evidence the justness of the distinction
to you by a Personal instance, Fra. Paul my Lords who writ so shrewdly the
History of the Counsel of Trent I am sure will never pass with any body that
has read him for a Catholic of the Court of Rome, the artifices and abuses of
which he has exposed to the world in such lively colors and painted them out
in Figures (give me leave to say) even bigger then the life, and yet this Fra.
Paulo my Lords dyed piously, and devoutly a steady Catholic of the Church of
Rome, such as I trust God will give me the grace to do were I put to the
bloodiest trial, such a Catholic my Lords I am, and as such I make no doubt
but I shall live to do Roman Catholics more service, and procure them more
advantages from the comiseration of this Parliament, then all the unquiet
spirits, or rabbi-busies of the Court of Rome.

And now my Lords, I come to speak to the matter of this Bill, which I shall do
at this time generally, and at large, reserving my self as to perticulars till
it be read by Paragraphs, yet thus much I cannot forbear telling you now that
there are some particular in this Bill, as those of the Queens, and Duke of
Yorks domestic servants, which while I have a tongue to speak, and a right to
use it here I shall ever oppose until I shall find my self bound up by your
Lordships determination

In the first place my Lords, I beseech you to consider, that this Bill for the
securing of general fears, is brought up to you from the house of Commons, the
great representative of the people, and consequently the best Judges of the
true temper of the Nation; A house of Commons surpassing all that ever has
been, in the illustrious marks of their duty, loyalty, and affection to their
Sovereign* both in his Person and government. Such a house of Commons as His
Majesty ought to consider, and cherish always, with such a kind of love as is
due to a Wife, never to be parted with unkindly and not as to a Mistress, to
be turned off when our turn is served by her.

My Lords, this casual mention of a Wife, suggests to my thoughts a pursuance
of the comparison, apt enough methinks, I have observed in the course of my
life, that men who have Wives somewhat coquettes, that is a little subject to
gallantrys live easier lives with them, and freer from troublesome contentions
then those who have Wives of exact and rigid virtue, and the reason of it is
clear: For the more gamesome Dames being conscious of their failings in that
essential part are careful to disguise, and repair them by kind and tender
compliances with their Husbands humor in all other things, whereas Wives
severely punctual and exact in the chief Matrimonial duty, expect and even
exact far greater compliances from their Husbands, and think themselves as it
were privileged by the rigidness of their virtue to be sometimes troublesome in
domestic affairs; But especially if Jealousy be ( en campaign as the French
phrase is) In like manner my Lords, it is not to be much wondered at, if this
incomparable house of Commons, transcending all that ever was in the grand
essentials of duty, loyalty, and affection to their King, should be at
sometimes a little troublesome to him in lesser occurrences, especially when
once fears and jealousies are on wing. My Lords I shall not pretend to
determine whether there has been uny just grounds given or no by the
rabbi-busies aforementioned, or by the unseasonable ambition of any Roman
Catholics for such fears and jealousies, It suffices to exact the necessity of
a timely remedy that they have indeed most violently seized, and distempred the
minds of the Major part of His Majesty's Protestant subjects, which certainly
no man conversant in the world can deny. Now my Lords, in popular fears, and
apprehensions, those usually prove most dangerous that are raised upon grounds
not well understood, and may be rightly resembled to the fatal effects of
panick fears in Armies, where I have seldom seen great disorders arrive from
intelligences brought in by parties, and by scouts, or by Advertisements to
Generals, But from alarums upon groundless, and capritious fears of danger,
taken up we know not either how, or why, no man of moderate experience in
military affairs but has found at one time or other, the dangerous effects, in
the giving a stop to which mischiefs, the skill of great Commanders is best
seen. In like manner my Lords, this great and, juditious assembly of the house
of Commons rightly sensible of the dangerous effects which so general a
disturbance of men's minds in the concernments of Religion (how groundless
soever) might produce, have applied their cares to obviate them by this Bill; a
Bill in my opinion as full of moderation toward Catholics, as of prudence,
and security toward the Religion of the State.

In this Bill my Lords, notwithstanding all the alarums of the increase of
Popery and designs of Papists, here is no mention of barring them from private,
and modest exercise of their Religion; no banishing them to such a distance
from Court, no putting in execution of penal Laws in force against them, all
their precautions are reduced to this one intent natural to all societies of
men, of hindering a lesser opposite party from growing too strong for the
greater and more considerable one, and in this way of just prevention, is not
the moderation of the house of Commons to be admired; that they have restrained
it to this sole point, of debarring their adversaries from offices, and places;
and from accessions of wealth by favor of the Sovereign; They considered well
that wealth and power from public charges and employments do range the
generality of men to opinions, and parties more strongly far, then all other
arguments, according to the saying of Eneas Silvius (himself a Pope) That the
Popes superiority over general Counsels would ever find most Doctors for it,
because the Pope had so many Bishop-ricks to give, the Counsels none. I say my
Lords, that in contemplation hereof, the wisdom of the house of Commons has
wholly applied its care in this Bill to hinder (as appears most reasonable)
those of an opposite party, from a Part in the government of that State, under
whose protection they live.

It is true my Lords, some Roman Catholics may seem to be put to extraordinary
tests in this Act, and such as upon the score of Conscience as a Roman
Catholic I shall give my negative to, but speaking as a member of a Protestant
Parliament. I cannot but think prudent, and reasonable in the proposers, their
end being solidly to secure the fears of those they represent. And after all my
Lords, how few do the sharp trials, and tests of this Act regard? only a few
such Roman Catholics as would fain hold offices, and places at the price of
hypocrisy, and dissimulation of their true sentiments in Religion. My Lords I
am none of those, none of those wherry-men in Religion, who look one way and
row another. I have had the honor to exercise a great charge of state under
the last King of blessed memory, and to continue the same under our most
gracious Sovereign that is now, till it pleased Almighty God to call me (even
at the Article of death) to that Religion, wherein I trust he will give me the
grace to live and dye, what danger soever may be set before me; But after that
call my first work my Lords, was to deliver up the Seals to the King
uncomanded, as judging it unfit (though then in a Catholic Country) for any
man of a different Religion from his Prince, to exercise a charge of that
importance under him, and I am now my Lords much more of that opinion then ever.

Upon the whole matter my Lords, however the sentiments of a Catholic of the
Church of Rome (I still say not of the Court of Rome) may obliege me (upon
scruple of Conscience) in some perticulars of this Bill, to give my negative to
it when it comes to the passing, yet as a member of a Protestant Parliament my
advice prudentially cannot but go along with the main scope of it. The present
circumstances of time, and affairs considered, and the necessity of composing
the disturbed minds of the people.

It may be said my Lords, that some things in this Bill seem to trench upon His
Majesty's Prerogative, and his inherent power of pardoning and suspending
prosecutions.

My Lords, that Inherent power in our Sovereign, God forbid any body should
think this most meriting house of Commons could ever have the least design of
taking away, or invalidating, But to desire His Majesty to suspend the
application of that undeniable power, in certain particular cases, I esteem to
be far from any derogation to the essence of that royal prerogative.

My Lords, let me give you an instance to make my sentiments of this matter
more clear, His Majesty recomended unto you in a former session, the care to
provide a Bill for preventing the great mischief by duells* if your Lordships
should have thought sit in that Bill to have engaged His Majesty to have
declared that he would never pardon any duel, would it have been though a
derogation to the inherent regal powers of pardoning? when as the cure of so
great an evil could never be hoped for whilst there was room left to a Princes
pity, and generosity, to be wrought upon in favor of such gallant Persons who
are most usually involved in that crime? No my Lords, when Nations are so happy
as to have nothing more to fear then from the good nature, and debonair
inclinations of their Prince there can in my opinion no better service bed one
him, then by way of a dutiful adress, sometimes to obliege him to a binding up
of his own hands from the exercise of those indulgent virtues, which in
particular cases, may prove noxious to the Public.

A Speech of the Earl of Bristol's to the house of Commons spoken by him there,
on the fast of July, 1673.
Being a vindication of himself, and of Sir Richard Temple.
M. Speaker,
WEre I to be wrought upon by the arts or menaces of my enemies, or by the
alarums in my behalf of my friends contrary to that firmness and assurance
which a clear heart and a good conscience do always uphold in a man of honor,
I should have appeared in this place with such fear and trembling as could not
choose but disorder any man's reason and elocution.

The niceness of the subject upon which I am brought hither were enough to
discompose, but over and above that, I am not ignorant what Personal prejudices
I am under, and how industriously they have been improved among you.

But Mr. Speaker, when I look round this illustrious assembly and see above
three parts of it composed of men that wear as I do a Sword by their side, and
have drawn it so often in His Majesty's service, Gentlemen of birth integrity,
and fortune, all apprehensions vanish from a man that has served and suffered
for the King as I have done.

Mr. Speaker I know the time of this honorable house, upon whose prudent
deliberations the happiness of King and Kingdom depends, is too precious to
have any part of it spent in vindication of me; But since not only the
reputation and the innocence of one of your members depends upon what I shall
say, but even his Majesty's honor is in some sort concerned in the right
apprehension of it, I hope it will be thought no presumption in me to beg of
you, as I do in all humility, one quarter of an hours patience and attention.

Mr. Speaker, I am here exposed as the bearer of a message to His Majesty from
Sir Richard Temple, which he has thought worthy to be complaind of to this
house, and which Sir R. T. affirms that he never sent.

Lay your hands upon your hearts Gentlemen, and say truly; does not your innate
candor pity a person of my condition brought into a strait in all appearance
so inextricable? For on the one side if I avow to have carried from Sir R. T.
that message, which His Majesty has made so high and so unusual an expression
of his being offended at, and which Sir R. T. denies to have ever sent? How can
men of honor ever forgive me so ungentlemanly a proceeding toward a Person
who had trusted me as a friend with the doing him as he thought a good office
with His Majesty. On the other side Mr. Speaker should I disavow the having
delivered the message from Sir R. T. which His Majesty has thought fit to
affirm that he received from him, and by me, what subject can be strong enough
not to sink for ever under the weight of such a contradiction to his Sovereign?
I ask you again Gentlemen, does not the condition I am brought into by the arts
of mine enemies, move at the same time your pity and your indignation.

Mr, Speaker, when David was put to his choice of one of the three extreme
Calamities he made election of the Plague, and why? That he might fall into the
hand of the Lord, and not into the hands of Men. In like manner Mr. Speaker, if
one of the two extremes that threaten me be as it appears unavoidable, let me
fall into the hand of Gods Vicegerent the King.

The world would never pardon me an unworthy action, His Princely goodness I am
sure would in time pardon me a generous fault; But when you have heard me our
Gentlemen I am confident that you will find that I shall need neither the
worlds pardon, nor the Kings, but only yours.

In the first place Mr. Speaker, I am bound to clear Sir R. T. which I here do
upon my honor, that he never sent by me any message to the King that had the
least tincture in it of an undertaking of his, which I conceive to be the only
part that could give offense to His Majesty, or be a ground for the complaint
made against him.

In the next place, since the King (who the Law says can do no wrong) has
thought fit to affirm that I brought him that undertaking message from Sir R.
T. It must needs be true, and I do with all submission acknowledge whatsoever
His Majesty is pleased to affirm of me. But having discharged that duty to my
Sovereign, I hope I may be allowed to lay the fault home upon my self, and to
tell you in all truth and sincerity, that my tongue (I know not by what unhappy
distemper in delivering that message) deliverd that which was never in my
thoughts; so far was I from thinking to deliver such a message from Sir R. T.
that I protest I did not think my self charged with any thing from him by way
of message. It is true, that being much moved at an ill office which had been
done Sir R. T. I made a warm adress unto His Majesty in his behalf, wherein I
expressed his great grief that His Majesty should be offended with him, and
having joined thereunto some reasonings of his, in justification of his
Conduct, in order to His Majesty's service, I pursued his expressions with such
others of mine own upon the same subject as, all circumstances considered, any
body but the King might easily have mistaken, that to be a continuation of an
adress from Sir R. T. and an undertaking of his, which was indeed a fervorous
discourse, and a confident undertaking of my own. Sir R. Temple being thus
cleared without the least contraction to His Majesty.

If undertaking for you Gentlemen be a gailt, it is only I that stand guilty
before you, but you are too noble I am sure and too just to condemn me in your
judgments before you have heard the nature and circumstances of my
undertaking, which with your leave I shall now declare to you to the full
taking the matter a I needs must to be rightly understood, from a higher
original.

Mr Speaker, Having had the honor heretofore to di charge with approbation a
place of so high trust as that of Secretary of State to His Majesty's Father of
blessed memory, and himself, And since my quitting that place His Majesty
having had the goodness to admit me frequently to the happiness of his Princely
conversation, you cannot imagine but that sometimes he has vouchsafed to speak
with me of ousiness especially of Parliament, having the honor to be a Peer at
present, and heretofore as much versd as some of my contemporaries in the
proceedings of the honorable house of Commons.

I confess unto you Gentlemen, that before your last assembling he did it more
then once; And the thing wherein I most constantly delivered my opinion
concerning this honorable house was. That never King having been so happy in a
house of Commons as he in you; A house composed of so many Gentlemen of birth,
and fortune, eminent in their faithfulness to him, such as could never be
suspected for any sinister designs or any dependence but upon the Crown, and
upon their duty to those that chose them, and such as in the former sessions
had manifested their affections to him by such large aids and supplies, nothing
could be more important to his service then to make and preserve you still
popular with those that sent you; To which end I took the liberty to tell him
that if the necessity of his affairs (of which I that had no part in his
Council was no good Judge) could admit of it he ought not in prudence to let
you give him any money this sitting, But rather obliege you wholly to apply
your selves to the making of such Laws, as might endear both him and you to the
people, and make them think that all that had been given well bestowed, by
which means at another meeting he would be master of the hearts and purses of
his subjects; But that in case his necessities should urge him, to press you
before your rising for a new supply, That he ought by all means to let it be
accompanied if not preceded by some eminent Acts, for reformation of former
(...) and for the securing his subjects from the like for the future.

I persisted, Mr. Speaker, in pressing upon all occasions; this advice to His
Majesty till some few weeks after your meeting, when as finding my self, know
not by what misfortune, fallen under some prejudices, I thought that (...)
total forbearance from speaking to His Majesty of any business would be the
usefullest way of serving him; And I do here protest unto you Gentlemen with
all sincerity, that from that time until this business of Sir R. T. I never
once opened my lips to His Majesty concerning any public affair whatsoever.

It is true Mr. Speaker. that a ground being given me to enter again with His
Majesty upon a subject which my heart was still full of, I laid hold upon the
occasion, and in pursuance of what I had said in behalf of Sir R. T. I told His
Majesty (perhaps with more freedom and fervor then became me) th^^ ^eared his
Courtiers gave him wrong measures both of the temper of the house of Commons,
and of the means to obtain new supplies from them, whether by way of present
gift, or of such settlement in his revenue as might indeed bring him out of
necessity, since that there could be no reasonable hopes of obtaining any such
assistance, but by a concomitance at least, if not a precedence of such acts as
might be grateful and beneficial to his subjects, and secure them, that what
should be given hereafter should be better managed for his service then those
vast sums that had been formerly granted. That if His Majesty in his Princely
wisdom should think fit to drive on his business upon such solid grounds and
not upon the false and self-intrested measures of some Courtiers, he had a
house of Commons composed of members so full of affection to his person, and
zeal for his prosperity and glory, That not only Sir Richard Temple, but the
most unprejudiced and ablest men in the Kingdom as well as my If durst
undertake That such a house of Commons would neither let him want such present
supplies as the true necessities of his affairs should require, or such an
established revenue as was fit to support the greatness and honor (...) his
Crown If this has been a criminal undertaking, you have before you Gentlemen.
Confitentem reum.

But Mr. Speaker, whilst I am endeavoring to do right to Sir R. T. and to
indicate or arraign my self before you. according as you shall be pleased to
understand it by telling you what passed from me to His Majesty. I must not
omit to give the honor due to him, for the Kingly reply he made me upon that
occasion, which was this.

That he had a sense of the affection and merit of the house of Commons toward
him, even beyond what I had expressed, and that was the reason why relying so
entirely as he did upon the affections of that whole body, he was and should
ever be offended at any proposition to carry on his business there by officious
undertakings and Cabals either of his Courtiers or others. An exeression fit to
be written with the rays of the Sun that all the world may read it: An
expression which certainly cannot but inflame the affections of this noble
assembly that hears me. and carry you to make good those happy impressions of
you which are so deeply stamped in his Royal breast, such as I should think it
a crime (...) me to doubt; But that all suspicions being now vanished of His
Majesty's owing the supplies desired to any arts or contrivances of others*
your own Zeal for his service will, even in the proportion and timeliness of
that, exceed the vain proposals of all Pick-thank undertakers.

Mr, Speaker, I should here put a period to your trouble of hearing me, did not
think I might incurr the imputation of much weakness and supineness in my own
highest concernments, if valuing as I do above all earthly things the favor
and esteem of my Country, of which you are the illustrious representative: And
knowing what industry has been used by my enemies to blast me with you, I
should not lay hold on this just occasion, to remove from me unjust prejudices
with so great an object of my veneration. It Is that Mr. Speaker, which I humbly
beg leave to do in a very few words more.

I appeal Gentlemen to numbers of you that hear me, whether I have not been
represented unto you for a giver of advices of a far different tenor from what
you have heard upon this occasion; Nay whether I have not been painted out unto
you as an inflamer of His Majesty against his Parliament, As an enemy of the
Church of England, and as a most dangerous driver on of Papistical interests.

It is true Mr. Speaker, I am a Catholic of the Church of Rome, not of the
Court of Rome, no negotiator there of Cardinals Caps for His Majesty's subject
and Domestics. A true Roman Catholic as to the other world. but a true
Englishman as to this. Such a one, as had we a King inclined to that
profession (as on the contrary we have one the most firm and zealous in the
Protestant Religion that ever fare upon the Throne) should tell him as frankly
as the Duke of Sully being a Protestant did to his Grandfather Henry the
fourth, That if he meant to be King he must be a constant professor and
maintainer of the religion established in his Dominions. Believe me Gentlemen,
Roman Catholic as I am there is no man among you all more thoroughly persuaded
then I, that the two Pillars that can only uphold this Monarchy must ever be,
the maintenance of the subjects just rights and liberties, and the careful
preservation of that state ecclesiastical whereof His Majesty is the supreme
governor. And I do clearly profess that should the Pope himself invade that
established right of his, I would as readily draw my Sword against him as
against the late usurper.

Mr. Speaker, One prejudice more I am under, which ought to have great weight
indeed with this honorable house if there be a real ground for it, and that
is. That the Earl of Bristol is one of those, who by the vast things he has
got of the King, has in part contributed to the groans of the people to find
their King still in such necessity after such unexampled charges laid upon the
subject for his supply.

It is true Mr. Speaker, That though I have neither office to keep, nor office
to sell, His Majesty's gifts to me have been great in proportion to my merit
which is none; For in serving and suffering for him with faithfulness. I did
but my duty, which carries a reward with it self enough to raise comfort to me
from the very ruin of my fortune.

It is also true I have had the satisfaction from His Majesty's goodness, That
he never refused me any thing that I asked him for my self, But I hope I shall
make it appear also, That I have not only been a very modest asker, but also a
most careful one to ask nothing considerable but what carried advantage with it
as well to His Majesty's Interests as my own.

I know well Mr. Speaker, that so kind and so generous a nature as our Kings is
an ill proportioner of bounty to merit, and consequently that the largeness and
kindness of his Royal heart that way may have contributed much to the present
straits he is in.

Happy the Nation who has nothing to fear for the Public, but from the
virtues of their Prince.

It is your proper work Gentlemen to reduce the effects of them to a right
temperament by your inspection, and may you begin it with all my concernments,
which I most readily lay at your feet, humbly begging of you to appoint me a
time when I may display them all faithfully before you, in hopes that no man
who has been a partaker of His Majesty's bounty will prove himself so unworthy
of it as not to follow the example.

Mr. Speaker, If having thus powered out my soul before you I be so happy as to
have begot a right persuasion in this honorable house of the true sincerity of
my heart, I shall expect and implore two gracious effects of it.

The first, that you will be pleased to grant me your pardon, if the same zeal
for His Majesty's service, and the good of my Country, which made me presume
(being no Counselor) to press upon him my opinion in affairs of that
importance have transported me also at this time to become in some sort your
adviser.

You have heard Mr. Speaker, of the dumb man whose tongue was set free by an
iminent danger to his Fathers life, wonder not then Gentlemen if such a lover
of my King and Counnrey as I am, remembering to have seen them both, within
these three years in a Prospect of so much glory and happiness both at home and
abroad, and finding to what a sad condition things are now reduced (by what
means is more proper for your wisdom's to examine) and God in Heaven bless your
inspection, wonder not I say that a man so affected as I am, should by some
coruptions of heart let you see, that Periculum patriae ought to have a more
powerful effect upon a man of a Public soul, then Periculum patris, and is
capable if I were a mute to make me become a Counselor.

The next is Mr. Speaker, That if as I said before, I have been so happy in
what I have expressed, as to have raised in you some more favorable thoughts
concerning me, you will vouchsafe me some demonstration of it, whereby I may no
more be made by my enemies such a Bugbear as I am, as if one gracious look of
His Majesty upon me were enough to ruin all his affairs with you, I shall then
Mr. Speaker, continue the course I am in with comfort. But if I be so
unfortunate as that there still remains in this incomparable representative of
my Country the least umbrage of danger to it by my access to His Majesty. As
dear as the conversation of the most amiable Prince that ever breathd is to me,
I shall banish my self for ever from his sight into the obscurest part of his
Dominions, rather then continue upon me the jealousy of those upon whom his
prosperity depends. Or if this be not enough, I shall once more try my fortune
abroad, where trust (...) Sword, this Head, and this Heart, shall make me live
again as I have done in spite of mine enemies, with luster to my self, and
some honor to my Nation.

FINIS.

