THE CHARITY OF CHURCHMEN: OR, A VINDICATION OF Mr William Walwyn Merchant,
from the aspersions plentifully cast upon him in a Pamphlet, Entitled,
WALWYN'S WILES.

By H. B. Med. a friend to Truth, his Country and Mr Walwyn.

Prove. 29.26. Many seek the Rulers favor, but every man's judgment comes of
the Lord.

Mark 3.6. And the Pharisees departed, and straightway gathered a Council with
the Herodians against him, that they might destroy him.

Luke 23.2. And they began to accuse him, saying, we have found this man
perverting the Nation.

2 Timothy 3.9. But they shall proceed no further, for their folly shall be
manifest to all men, as theirs also was.

LONDON, Printed by H. Hills, and are to be sold by W. Larnar, at the sign of
the Blackmore, near Bishops-gate. M.DC.XLIX.

THE CHARITY OF CHVRCH-MEN.
THe world cannot choose but take notice, of a strangely malicious and
scandalous Pamphlet, Entitled, (Walwyn's Wiles, etc.) the particular slanders
whereof, though heretofore privately, yet industriously lisperst, accompanied
with many more of a lighter nature, but more easily discoverable, which are
therefore in this book left out, yet have the pollitick Authors not thought fit
to collect and publish the same, till they knew Mr Walwyn was much straightened
from the means and opportunity of Vindicating himself; and till they judged by
such slanders, they should render him odious to all Religious people, and so
fit him for that destruction, they do secretly, but most laboriously endeavor
to bring upon him.

He has been hitherto silent, and when importuned to clear himself; he has
argued, That it was not the way of Christ or his Apostles; that we read of no
Apologies of theirs, though in the same manner with himself, but in a more
plentiful measure loaded with obloquies and reproaches: That the best use he
could make of such hard speeches, was to be more circumspect in his ways, and
not to deviate from the path of righteousness, that so by the innocence of his
life, and unblamablenesse of his conversation, he might give check to such
rumors and evil reports. That he knew very well what was the root from whence
such bitter fruits proceeded: viz. his engageing for the people, and
discovering a resolution in himself to persevere in the same. Indeed neither he
nor his friends did ever think they would have proceeded so far in these
cross and rugged paths, as to prosecute him to the very death; for who could
but suppose that either the precepts of Christianity that are in direct
opposition to such courses, or at least (if nothing else is prevalent with
them) that the outward reputation of their Religion would have restrained them.
But when once the innocent and harmless path is forsaken, whether then? but
into a sea of evil, where one bad action necessarily draws on another; and one
injustice enforces the committing of another, for support and protection of the
first? When Religious men become spies, and make use of friendship to betray;
when they shall hunt their Brethren like Partriges, ransack their whole lives,
insinuate themselves into their acquaintance purposely to ensnare them, and
justify themselves in so doing: wrest men's sayings to the worst, forge and fix
upon them things of greatest antipathy to their spirits; what is this but to
blast the name of Christianity, and the profession of Religion, and to make it
evil spoken of all the world over? yet this has been the practice of the
Authors of that Pamphlet toward Mr. Walwyn, who has patiently bore all
hitherto, and is now undergoing the highest proof of his virtue (which his
Adversaries make his crime and disadvantage) and of his Christian fortitude
(with which I well know he is amply endowed) as in these latter times I think
any man has undergon. They have seasoned this project of theirs to the purpose;
took a course for restraining him* and then they revile him; knowing well that
other men, though of never so great acquaintance and intimacy with him, cannot
so clearly discover the mistakes and fallacious delivery of those speeches that
are fathered upon him, as he himself could.

However I judge my self bound to do my best (though weak) endeavor for his
Vindication; out of my hearty respects to that Innocence and real Goodness
that is so visible in his life and conversation, as one would think should
answer all objections.

Indeed I judge that Pamphlet more properly a design, then a discourse; the
politic contrivance (most of it) of other kind of adversaries then have
subscribed their names to it, for that the end cannot be out of conscience to
prevent the perversion of honest men; for then they would have published it
when those speeches are pretended to be spoken; but to fit the people to bear
his destruction patiently, and to make him (if possible) so odious as that they
may cry out for it themselves, and urge, as the deluded Jews did against Paul,
away with him, it is not fit such a man should live upon the Earth.

And that which the more confirms me therein is, because one maine drift of
the book is to take off the People from complaining of their Burdens and
pressures, and rendering all them as suspicious of some dangerous design, that
shall give advice for the doing thereof; fixing an evil sense upon all the
motions of theirs to that end, especially upon such as give them Council, or
are most able amongst them, to think of ways and means for getting relief, or
deliverance. Now because Mr. Walwyn has been always a ready friend to all
sorts of people usually suffering in any kind; and is still putting such as are
in Authority in remembrance of their duty, and has been a most unwearied
solicitour these 8. years, for the just rights and liberties of People: hence
is it that as heretofore he was made the mark of bad men's displeasure: so even
now, when we hope to see better times, is become the common Butt against which
all harsh censures are directed; and all this to overawe men's spirits, and, by
frighting him and others from doing their duties, make them submit to any yoaks
that shall be brought upon them.

Henceforward to Petition will be rendered a matter dangerous to the State, and
he that shall set himself to frame and manage such things, may in like manner
as Mr. Walwyn, be said to insinuate into, and mislead the people; to study
their tempers and complexions, the qualifications of their spirits, their
humors and passionate inclinatioins, their external quality and estate,
purposely to deceive them: he that shall urge the pressures and excessive
burdens we groan under, and insist upon the causes and remedies thereof, must
by this way of judging, be a seditious person, an incenser of the people
against Authority; a politic perverter of mankind, which is such a
machiavilian way of stopping our mouths and making us stoop under every yoke
that may be laid upon us, as no sort of men hitherto arrived unto.

It Is well the Author of that Pamphlet and his accomplices are so well pleased
with the present sad and deplorable condition of the Common wealth: the world
goes well with them it seems, so they enjoy the ear and favor of Authority;
and have fair hopes of advancing such of themselves as are not already
advanced into places of profit; what care they though the poor starve, though
all kinds of oppression be trebled and ten-coupled upon the Commonwealth: the
fish is caught and therefore away with the nets, there must be Tyranny (so they
now argue) and why not in these rather then in any else? changings are
dangerous, and in time all that is desirable shall be established; and
therefore let us as it becomes Christians, wait with patience upon Authority
and see what they will do: Thus they persuade most to a yiedling contentfull
submission to the yoke, who once taken off, are engaged for justification of
themselves, to plead and argue against those who see through the subtlety of
such deceptions, and continue notwithstanding all hazards, watchful and
industrious as well to manifest and bring to light what is behooful, as to
discover what is pernicious to their Country.

Against such as these, what means more effectual then scandals? and what
scandals more odious then Atheism and Community? By the first, all that are
religious are incensed, by the lust of all that are rich. And though the whole
progress of Mr Walwyns life and conversation does clearly evince the false
imputation both of the one and the other; yet having happily scattered in
familiar discourses, some words, that by the extremity of wresting and
mis-application, for want of observation of the coherence, by taking a piece
only, or part of his speech; all which, such as came purposely to betray, must
needs be supposed to be very much inclined unto; it is no wonder, if in so many
years watching and way-laying him, some words be not gathered, which in a
perverted sense may look that way.

Our blessed Savior, notwithstanding the Divinity of his Nature, was
frequently so mis apprehended; and though his design in this world was only to
do good, and die for mankind; yet was he rendered by the policies of the Jews, a
Subverter of the Law, an enemy to Moses and Caesar: When a liberty shall be
taken to scrutiny and comment upon other men's lines, and to judge of their ends
and intentions, what man of parts and business in the world, but may be
rendered odious? Who is there but may have such a gloss put upon his actions,
as to make him appear a man of wicked designs? It Is a course, indeed, that if
we should retaliate in the like kind, would in time heighten us to the
extremest acts of violence one toward another, and beget everlasting feuds and
enmity amongst us. If they suppose we want matter; we answer, that it is not
good for them to trust to it, for we have a Bedrole of such enormities in some
of the chief of them, that had we not great respects to peace, and reluctance
within us to discover the weaknesses of other men, we could make them ashamed
of themselves: But suppose we did want matter, we answer, so also do they; and
we, as well as they, may make it, and no less plausibly: If we would take upon
us to judge Mr John Goodwin, might we not say, he is a Time-server, and visibly
so? That his Doctrines are contradictory, not framed by the Line of Truth, but
the probability of success in each Party? That therefore when there was hopes
of the Kings Restoration, he argued him to be unaccountable to any earthly
Tribunal, and, as the consecrated corn, to be cut only by the hand of God:
That he abhorred both the Jesuiticall Doctrine and Practice of taking away
Kings; and yet afterward, when the hopes of his return was over, and that he
knew not only the prosecution of his Person, but also an abolition of the
Kingly Office intended; who then became a more stout Arguer for the same then
he? And though these things in a candid sense may be said to proceed from a
further dicussion and consideration of the point, and the appearance of light
in him, yet allowing every man the liberty that the Author of the Pamphlet
takes: how easy is it to fix such a censure upon him?

So in like manner Mr Goodwin having said, That no Translation of the Bible,
nor yet no Copy in the Original Languages, can be truly called the Word of
God: how clearly does it follow, that then we have no Word of God amongst us,
since we have nothing that can in any sense be called Gods Word, but either the
Copies or Translations, the Original being kept from us? Neither does he, when
he comes to explain himself, much mend the matter, since the spiritual sense,
and Divine interpretation, which only in his judgment deserves the name of Gods
Word, is diverse in every man; and that opinion the way to make our
apprehensions the the Judge of the Scriptures, and not the Scriptures the rule
of our apprehensions. Hereupon, if, as the Author of the Pamphlet, a man may
take liberty to assert, that when those things were spoken, it was Mr J.
Goodwins intention, to subvert the very Foundations of other Divines, and of
the Scriptures themselves, because the Liberty of Conscience was then denied
him; how obvious would the inference be? And though he has since evinced the
Divine Authority of the Scriptures in writing, yet since Mr Walwyn has done
the like, and never said so much, nor so clearly to the contrary: what reason
is there, but that he may stand as fair in the opinion of mankind, as Mr John
Goodwin in that point?

For the scandalous speeches that in the Book are Fathered upon Mr Walwyn,
though I cannot expressly and circumstantially manifest, that they are all false
and forged, yet for the chief of them, which are of the foulest savor, I
shall: For the rest, I shall either pass them over, and leave them to Mr
Walwyn's own confutation; or from my knowledge of his opposite judgment in the
particulars, evince the improbability of his ever speaking them.

For the first, it is thus far true, That Mr Walwyn, and a Member of Mr
Goodwin's Congregation, together with my self, did upon a Fast day (as it has
been the usual manner of many of his Members) (an eye witness may speak it,
and as Mr John Price's Pulpit Incendiary does abundantly evidence) go to hear
Mr Cranford, and some others, it being the time when the contests about
Conformity and Toleration were very high: It Is likewise true, that we did all
agree, coming afterward home to Mr Walwyns, that the Ministers did severally
spend their time either upon useless subjects, such as did little tend to
edification; or about advancing their own interests and reputation with the
people; and that Gentleman was as forward in such expressions as we. It Is true,
that Lucian was taken off a shelf either by me, or Mr Walwyn, I cannot say
which, and that we read one of his Dialogues, which was the Tyrant, or
Megapenthes; and afterward commended it as very useful in the time he lived;
when by setting forth the foulness and deformity of Tyranny in a third
person, he informed the people of the wickedness of such under whom they
lived: but that any comparison was made between that and the Bible, is as false
as in it self ridiculous.

It Is at least 4 or 5 years that the Gentleman has charged his memory with
this; in all which time, his hatred and enmity against Mr VValwyn being in its
growth, (for he is of the Council and Faction) it is no wonder if he be biased
thereby to find that which he came purposely to look for, whether it were
really there, or no.

Besides, Mr VValwyn preferred Lucian (as the Pamphlet says) for wit, before
the Bible: It Is well known, that Mr VValwyn has the lowest esteem of wit that
may be, counting it the lightest, volatile and superficial part of a man;
whence his observation is, that commonly those that have most wit, have most
wickedness: He distinguishes between Wit and Wisdom, and prizes only the
latter, as of real behoof and benefit to mankind; it being that, which through
the concomitant blessing of the Almighty, bears a man through all the straits
and exigencies of this life: whereas Wit is but the exuberance of light and
unsteady minds; which since he in all other matters dislikes; for the truth
whereof, I appeal to all that know him: What ground is there for the least
supposall that he should for that prefer Lucian before the Bible?

For his opinion concerning Hell, it is clearly thus: Though he judges every
wicked man to have, intus Gehennam, a Hell in his own Conscience; as on the
contrary, every good man to have the Kingdom of God within him; yet upon strict
search, which we to-gether have made into the Scripture, we have concluded,
that there is another Hell succeeding judgment, convinced by those places of
Scripture, Psalm. 6.8. Mat. 25.41. 2 Thessalonians. c. 1. So that the mistake is, that
because he said, there is a Hell within man, therefore he concludes, there is none
without him: And though it seems contrary to reason, that a man should be
punished everlastingly for a little sinning in this world, in which sense only
he spoke it: yet have we both submitted our Reasons to Gods Word, the places
fore mentioned being express for the same.

For Books of Morality and History, though Mr VValwyn gives them their do
esteem, and judges that the peoples reading them would very much advance their
knowledge, and enable them to preserve themselves in freedom, by seeing through
the policies of bad men and their many sleights by which they abuse and enslave
the people, which are plentifully described in those Books: And thus far the
Author speaks truth of him. Yet has Mr VValwyn never elevated them beyond
their proper sphere, or desert, nor made comparisons between them, and that
Book which he ever has accounted, (...), the Book of Books, and truly
deserving the name of Bible, or the Book, in comparison to which, all others,
though good and useful in themselves, do not yet deserve any esteem: This I do
as truly know to be his judgment in this particular, as I know it is day when
the Sun shines amongst us.

That he has blamed the simple practice of this Nation, in bringing up their
Children to learn Latin and Original Languages, is most false; but that he
has and does condemn the tedious and tiresome way that is taken in doing the
same, is most true; his judgment in this particular being, that Children may be
taught Latin, Greek and Hebrew, in a fourth part of the time that is now spent
therein, and that purposely for the gain of the Schoolmaster.

It is as true, that he dislikes in the education of Children, that the
Languages only are proposed, and not the principles of Divinity, and the
precepts of Morality, in such a manner, as that their understandings may be
possessed therewith, whereby they may be made both religious and true
Common-wealths-men. And that also some Art, Mechanic or Manufacture, be taught
according as their genius and disposition of body shall incline them; that so
they may be both able to provide for themselves, and serviceable to the
Commonwealth.

How easy in these particulars it is for other men to mistake him, that
continually lie upon the catch, and are ready to interpret every thing he
speaks to the worst, let the world judge. And consider likewise, how
exceedingly it does mis-become those that profess Christianity, especially a
more pure and refined way then other men, to lie lurking privily to destroy the
innocent. That the Scribes, Pharisees and Lawyers should ask questions, and
insinuate themselves into good men's company to betray them, is no wonder: but
that it should be done, and professedly done by such as would be thought of a
near relation to God, such as separate from others because they will not have a
profane person among them, does to my understanding call in question the
sincerity of their assembling, and import the end thereof to be, not the
edification one of another, but the undermining of all other men and ways,
that are in any opposition to them. I speak not this of the generality of the
Members, who questionless have good and Religious ends in congregating
together; but of that Vestry or Conclave of them, that sit as Judges of every
man's fame and reputation, and have for that purpose their Emissaries to bring
them in matter to raise Batteries against any man's good name, they would make
hateful: They have indeed too exactly learned Machiavel's rule, to spare not
to scandalize and traduce their adversaries; for that though some of the dirt
may be wiped off, yet part of it will stick, and they shall be sure not
altogether to lose their labors.

Where by the way, let every good man consider, whether their mixing with other
men, under the notion of Friends, their getting into familiar acquaintance,
eating and drinking together, and all this to betray, be not like Judas,
kissing our Savior, and in effect the dissolving of all society and
friendship: For how should I, or any man know, but that every man, though
seemingly a bosom Friend, is indeed a Traitor? How can this choose but take
away the sweetness of friendship, and make us every one jealous one of
another? Seriously I think they could not have done an action so discordant to
Religion, nor of so evil consequence to mankind.

For the Objection in the general, That Mr VValwyn labors, and makes it his
main business to bring people out of love with Religion and the Scriptures, is
a thing in it self so absurd, as I think nothing can be more; For what can be
the end of a man in doing so? And certainly every wise man's actions are
directed to some end: What would men's Athe^^^ advantage him, since it is clear
as day, and all his endeavors manifest it, that he strives to have every man
good And since he knows, that Religion does restrain men from committing those
evils, that otherwise they would rush u, on, were that necessary Tie of
Conscience taken off. Besides, I profess as in the presence of Almighty God,
that I know no man that endeavors with more exactness to square his life
according to the Rule Scripture, then Mr Walwyn does; which is the clearest
argument in the world, that they are dear and precious in his eyes; and all
those I know, that are observers of his life and conversation, will give
testimony thereunto.

The true ground of this bitterness of spirit against him may well be supposed
to be, because he cannot associate into a Church way, upon their grounds; as
not knowing any persons to be so quallified as Ministers of the Gospel ought to
be; which he thinks is essential to such an association, and is in expectance
that in time it will be so. In the mean time, he approves Congregationall
Assemblyes for instructing the people, and for the consideration and right
understanding of the Scriptures; as also, for the making every man in love with
true piety and virtue, and to loath whatsoever is evil: But because he can no
more approve the Divine Authority and Saintship of the Independent Pastors
then of others before them; and reckons, that they are such but in pretense and
show only, and is esteemed able to manifest and evince the same: Hence have
they drawn out their sharpest arrows, even bitter words, and let them fly at
him, hoping thereby to make invalid whatsoever he shall say in order thereunto.

And this indeed, appears to be the true ground of their persecuting him, and
making use of all means, direct or indirect, to blast his spotless reputation,
and which has made them gather up that heap of forgeries and calumnies which
in that Book are contained.

For these speeches which are said to be other men's whom he has perverted;
although I very much question, whether they were ever spoken by any man, they
are so abominably profane and wicked: yet it is most clear, that for Mr John
Price, or whoever is the Author of the Pamphlet, to suggest that which he
cannot know, namely, that such wicked speeches have proceeded from the man's
acquaintance with Mr Walwyn, does clearly discover the malitiousnesse of his
heart, and the Un-Christian spirit that is within him: which indeed is more
evident by these bitter expressions that are scattered through his Book, as,
English man Hunter, Factor for the Devil, Cunning and Hypocritical Jugler,
Wretched man, Journey-man, and Apprentice to the Prince of darkness,
Artificial and great Imposter, etc. all which coming from within him, do
clearly manifest the defilements of his soul, and from what rancour all the
rest has proceeded.

But the height of his bitterness is discovered in a story concerning a
Gentlewoman, whom he is said in her great pain and distemper to advise to make
away with her self: a thing so false and scandalous, as I know not what can be
more; For Mr. VValwyn hearing of her distemper, and melancholy resolutions,
did out of the respects he bore unto her (being a Woman of so much goodness,
and with whom and her husband, he had been of long intimate acquaintance)
frequenty visit her, and advised me to do the like purposely to fortify her
spirit against so harsh and sinful a resolve, which we both did; and as her
husband knows to good purpose, that she was often much more cheerful and
better disposed after our being with her then at other times: Insomuch that he
has often desired both Mr. VValwyns and my frequent visitation of her. For a
fuller testimony thereof, I intended that the Gentleman himself should have
attested so much: but he being very sick in the Country, and his Sister and
servants urging to me the danger of bringing to his remembrance his Wives sad
disaster, and telling me, that probably it might be his sudden death, I have
forborne for a time, till God shall give him more strength and health.

But forasmuch as Mr Walwyn has been often with him since his Wives death, and
been as fairly accepted as ever (as his Son and servants know) What cleerer
Argument can there be, but that he does acquit M. Walwyn of any such horrid
action, as persuading his wife to make away with her self?

Besides, if M. Walwyn had bin so wicked as to urge her, can he be supposed to
do it before I know not what stranger that told them the business; when the
Gentlewoman that was always with her, her Sisters and servants, do none of
them know any thing of the business, but are ready to attest his frequent
persuading her to the contrary.

By the falsehood of this particular slander, a man may guess at the truth of
all the rest; for they that will be so forward to divulge a Forgery so
exceedingly tending to the discredit of another, and make expostulations
thereupon, and appeals as the People; advising them to judge of the Frame,
Temper, and Spirit of the man by this action; where will they stick? Or what
will they not do to take away his life, which when a man's good name is gone is
not at all to be valued? For a good Name, what is it, but the life of a man's
life? I am very sorry for Religions sake, which I fear will very much suffer by
this demeanor of men, whom I wish I could always have accounted Religious. But
I see, it is not an habit of Speaking, gained by Study and Custom, nor an
Ability to Dispute or Discuss a point in Controversy, that truly denominates a
man such; but the inward sweetness and calmness of Spirit, that Christianity
prescribes; and which indeed, is more eminent in M. Walwyn, then I have known
it in any man; whose way has always bin, to take the injured man's part, to
diminish the aggravations of an accuser, slowly and unwillingly to hear any
thing that tends to the prejudice or dis-repute of another: as knowing well the
aptness and propension in most men, to give credence when they hear others ill
spoken of. I cannot choose but upon occasion break out into these Speeches
concerning M. Walwyn (and I question not but good men will excuse me for it)
because I am so experimentally sensible of the Truth thereof: Indeed, if I were
to choose a true Friend, a virtuous and Religious Associate, addicted to no vice
or extravagancy, the most averse from contention, the most cheerful and
pleasant (but for the disturbance of his Spirit to see the Commonwealth still
in so sad a condition) If I would choose a man to be readily assistant to his
power in any distress, and that makes Conscience of his duty to God and man: It
should be M. Walwyn: And I heartily bless God, that he has afforded me the
enjoyment of his Society for these eight years together, and upward; which I do
reckon among the prime blessings of this life, and which I would not utterly
leave, for any worldly Temptation whatsoever. God knows, I flatter not, for
what need have I to flatter? but speak the truth of my heart, being inwardly
conscious both of his innocence and goodness, of the many pressures that
undeservedly ly upon him; out of which I hope God almighty will shortly free
him, by clearing all Scruple, and false Apprehensions concerning him. But to
proceed.

What M. Walwyn has said concerning Professors, I know not; but sure there is
much to be said, and much in them to be amended; happily in this particular he
has bin more earnest than ordinary; because he sees so large a disproportion
between the Rule and their Practice: and since this is true and acknowledged so
by the Author, how uncharitable must he needs appear, in judging M. Walwyns
urging the same, to proceed from a design to disparage Religion, and the
Professors thereof? Sure I am, that if any man could be so wicked as to propose
such a design to himself, as the disparagement of Religion and its Professors,
he would not check, but countenance their wickedness; then which, nothing can
(...) discreditable to Religion.

M. Walwyns next drift^s said to be, to procure the trouble, misery, and mi^e
of this Commonwealth: A goodly work indeed, and which is likely, that a (...)
which has spent himself for the Parliament, and in endeavoring a good and
happy settlement of the Commonwealth, should ever admit into his thoughts. For
what end should he attempt any su h thing? If for wealth or greatness, was an
improbable way is that to get e there? Besides, he has hitherto bin regardless
of both: and certainly, if they had bin his end, he has brain and ability
enough to have compassed them both, by striking in with any party that has had
the dispensation thereof. But in this the calumniation of M. Walwyn is not so
principally intended, as to startle the people from finding fault with any
thing that is answer from complaining of the failings and undue management of
things, by such as (...) or may be in Authority; for this he cries out upon, as
the means to carry on his private design, which will questionless, be extended
to any who sit not down contented with whatsoever happens, but appear in never
so moderate desires for the rectification of what is amiss. How has he by this
means, fitted every man with a way how to find fault with Petitioners; to stilo
them of Walwyns gang, deceived by his Wiles and Impostures; and so to take away
that last human Refuge which good men have left them, viz. of making their
Grievances known, and desiring Redress? For the ways which he is said to use
to seduce the poor and indigent, is by telling them that virtue and ability for
discharge of a Public trust, ought to be the characteristical tokens of
fitness to bear Office, and places of Government, and that it is a most
unfiting thing that one man should have thousands to spend upon his lusts, and
another want necessaries; though neither of these I think have so much
irrationality or unchristianity in them, as to deserve to be cried down by a
Member of a Church, and are as uncharitably urged as supposed weapons M. Walwyn
fights withal, in order to an imagined design, their either weak or wicked
thoughts have invented. Yet can I truly say of M. Walwyn, as from my own
knowledge, that he has ever protest and proposed not to supply poor men by
injuring the Rich, but by reducing the Commonwealth to so good a pass, that
every man by care and easy labor, might have wherewithal to maintain himself
and his Family in some comfortable manner.

To take away from any man what is his by inheritance, or by his trade or
industry, or any other way, is so visibly contrary to the equity which he has
ever (according to his understanding) held forth, not only in the front, but
in the very heart of his designs (or what you please to call them) which makes
me think that book was compiled by somebody that knows him not, but has had a
h^^p of matter at random, gathered up and given him by such as knew him able to
make inferences, and contrive a subtle Pamphlet thereupon; not only to
calumniate M. Walwyn, but to stop the mouth, of all the aggrieved and
discontented people of the land, and for that end has he marshalled all the
several oppressions and burdens of the Commonwealth, into several ranks; as if
they were not real things, but inventions of M. Walwyn, to irritate by some of
them, the poor; by others, the rich; by some, the rash and choleric; by
others, the discreet and apprehensive; to discontent and dis-affection against
such as are in Authority. So that questionless they hope by this means to
terrify all now from opening their mouths, be they under what oppression
soever; though for my part, I think it will work a contrary effect, when men
shall see the Arts and Stratagems that are used to make them stoop under their
burdens Issachar-like; and that the private Churchmen are become the Sluggards
of their fair and lawful endeavors, to redeem themselves from those pressures
that ly upon them.

Did not in like manner the King and Bishops make the Scots odious, and the
Puritan Party in England, a byword, urging such like slanders of them, and
saying that it was the design of some discontented spirits, to alienate men's
affections from their Governors, and that by private discourses, by printing
and publish ng Books, sending into several Counties, and slinging them into
men's houses, as this Author imposes upon Mr Walwin? Nay, did not the Presbyter
Party, in particular Mr Edwards, Mr Jenkins, and others, do the like upon the
Independents, Sectaries, Seekers, etc. inventing strange Designs, like these
fathered upon Mr VValwin, and casting them upon any that they had a mind to
make odious? And did not Mr Goodwin himself bear an ample share of these
Calumnies, being styled by them, The Grand Heretic of England, a plucker up
(presumptuously) of the Fundamental Privileges of Parliament by the roots: and
is not this work of our Author the very same in effect, manner, and design? the
tide being now turned, and the stream of profit running into a new Channel; the
only difference being a more subtle contrivance in this pageant of scandals,
then has yet by any of them been produced.

It will be needless for me to run over more particulars, the Principal having
been already cleared, and the Remainder being but of the same batch and leven
with the other; and if true, as in the rankness of their expression they are
not, they cannot beget that abomination against him, which they expect.

For the Ware business, it is so base and abominable a Fiction, so apparently
the wicked offspring of a Politic brain, that little needs to be said to it,
only thus, That if there had been any such design of the Agitators at Ware of
the Outing the Lord General, destroying the Lievt. General, and forcing the
Parliament to prosecute the King, and Mr Walwin privy to it; the whole town
should certainly have rung of it before now, and not only so, but the Designers
should have been prosecuted for it, since there is Law sufficient for that;
(Civil Law I mean, without the help of Martial) and since neither Power nor
Authority has been wanting to see so plain a piece of Justice executed; what
therefore does the not doing thereof more clearly argue, then the present
forgery of this present fable, for their friend Mr Walwins sake, whose spotless
innocence leaves them without any ground to raise their batteries against him,
but with what comes out of the Mint of their own inventions.

Besides, the Author says not that Mr Walwin was of, or privy to that Design,
but only lays it upon certain Ag^tators at Ware; and yet he craftily and
maliciously inserts it amongst other things he has framed and father^ upon Mr
Walwin, of purpose to make the world believe that this is also his.

If People knew how fertile their brains have been with Fictions of this
nature, they would say all were not Christians that took that name upon them,
and seemed so zealous for the honor of God and dignity of the Scriptures: There
is indeed scarce any thing that concerns a man's life, but Mr Walwin has been
abused in, by soul Reports: to some he is said to parat his face, having heen
hitherto of a ruddy complexion; and the Reporters have been tric'd from one to
another, till one would go no further, but only told him, That he heard it of
credible men.

Others report him loose in his Life, and one Mr Woollastone meeting M^^^
Cobet, bid him beware of Mr Walwyn, for he was a dangerous man, a Jesuit, as
Anti-scripturists; and to make the last good, said, That a Woman being tempted
by him to lewd^ess, she reply^ng that it was against Gods Word which says,
that Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge: Mr Walwyn (as this bade man
reported) made answer, What telst thou me of that idle Book? Whereupon Major
Cobet told Mr Woollastone that he would tell Mr Walwyn of this, and that he
should ^o^k to be called to an account for it: Within a while after, a Meeting
being at the W^ndmill in Lothbury about a Petition, Major Cobet told Mr Walwyn
of it before six or seven other men, at which M. Walwyn wondered he should be
so abused, having no other way left to clear himself but by a denial and
abomination of the thing: But it so fell out, that imediatly after Mr
Woollastone came into the Room, and being urged by Major Cobet to make good
what he had reported to him concerning Mr Walwyn before those six that were
present; Mr Woollaston Answered, That he confessed he had injured Mr Walwyn in
the Report, and desired his Pardon, for the words were true of another, but not
of him: In Witness of the truth of what is here Related I Subscribe my name.

Notwithstand^ng all which, both this and other scandals of the like nature are
still scattered against him, so that if he would clear himself, be must be ever
writing in his own Vindication; this sinck filling with such ditch-water faster
then any one man can pumpe it out. In the mean time, what are they? or what do
they deserve? or for what end can all this be supposed to be done? but to
villifie and render contemptible a man, that in his heart abominates all unjust
ways, which they know they are deeply engaged in.

Then again, there are diverse that make it their business about the Town, to
close with such as they have any hopes will be flexible, and to advise them
that they be cautious concerning Mr Walwyn, for knowing men say he is a Jesuit,
and 'ti^ probable enough say they, for no body knows where he was born, or how
he maintains himself; and that it is verily thought he was born in Spa^n: Some
six or seven men that have been thus Accosted I know, and can produce, which
shows that these things are not Casual, but proceed from Design, and
Pre-meditation.

How many are misled into a belief hereof, and of the former Scandals already,
I know not, but that no more may, and that such as are, may be better informed:
I hope without offense to any, I may give a brief and cursory Description of Mr
Walwyns Life and Disposition, which is as follows;

Mr Walwyn was born at Newland in Worcestershire, of Mr Robert Walwyn Esquire,
a man of good Life and Repute in his Country, and of between three and four
hundred pounds Annual Estate, that his Mother is still living and was Daughter
to Doctor Westphaling Bishop of Hereford: his Brothers and Sisters are likewise
in that Country; But he being a younger Brother, was bound Apprentize in London,
and served out his Time with a Silk-man in Pater noster-Row: A while after, he
was made Free of the Merchant Adventurers Company, and has since traded as
Merchant about seventeen or eighteen years; dur^ng all which time, his aboads
have bin known and certain, and his residence in London constant, except two or
three journeys into his own Country, and one or two to the Army, before its
first coming to London. That he was never over Sea in any Country whatsoever.
That he has from the profits of his Trade, maintained his Family in a middle
and moderate, but contentful condition; having bin much wasted, but never
gained one penny by these eight years distractions, nor ever desired it; his
only end, being that the Commonwealth might be so settled, that men might with
comfort and alacrity set themselves about their particular Callings and
employments. That he is most strictly abstenious, and though of an open hand,
and a large heart to his ability, yet did I never observe in any man so
cautious and constant a Temperance.

That I never observed in him the least unseemly gesture toward women, being a
man noted by such as intimately know him, for a most precise and exemplary
modesty, naturally expressing it self (even at his years, which are almost
fifty) at any obscene word or behavior, by a blush: which is an outward
manifestation of the inward distaste and reluctance of the mind, against the
evil of the present object. That he has lived 21 years and upward with one
woman, and she a truly good one; between whom I have observed so constant, so
growing an affection, as that I have not known in my 8 years abode with them, a
hasty word pass from one to the other: By her he has had almost twenty
children; that before the Parliament, he informed himself of all the
extravagancies and oppressions of the King; and out of dislike thereof, and in
hope that his Country should by the endeavors of the Parliament be freed from
them, he engaged with them; that he has continued so doing till this day; and
though he has bin much dissuaded by his friends from crossing the stream, and
advised to swim in it; yet could he never bring his mind to it; the light of
his own Conscience guiding him otherwise. In this case, Charity (he thinks)
ought not to begin at home, but at his Country; for though a man's self may be
allowed to be deerer then another, yet not then all. For the public Liberties,
he has not only constantly appeared, but rescued most of them out of a heap
of contrary Doctrines, and Politic concealments. And for Liberty of
Conscience, there is a book (the first that was brought to light upon that
Subject, since these Troubles) does ow much to his Industry: And though he is
not so much concerned in the point as other men, especially his Adversaries (he
having never bin of any private Congregation) yet did he one of the first break
the Ice in that point, since this Parliament, and to the utmost of his power,
both by writing, and by frequent and very hazardable Addresses to Authority,
labored both to evince the equity of the thing in it self, and procure a
Liberty for the Exercise thereof; as judging it a man's duty to move not only
for those things that are of immediate concernment, but in those also, which
being good and just, conduce to the more immediate benefit of his Brethren.

If I should reckon up all the good things he has engaged in, I should happily
be too tiresome to the Reader. I will therefore say only this, that I never
knew him engage in any thing that could (except in a wrested sense) be said to
advantage a corrupt interest: He has studied the Peop es Freedoms so
radically, and has brought to light Principles so supportive thereof, and so
essential thereunto, that no other Design but their good, can with any
pretense be fixed upon him; except to the mis-leading those that know him not,
or do not well k ow him. I wish with all my heart, the necessity of writing
thus much, had not bin enforced upon me: For there is not any man I think,
which loves ^^tireme^^, and the not being seen in this kind, more then I do.

Neither does Mr Walwyn take the least pleasure in applause, or the (...) good
opinion of him, which no man has more slighted; but expects his ^^^^pense from
Gods love to him (which certainly he will amply find, if not (...) hereafter;)
from the calmness of his own Conscience, and the respects of (...) godly and
ingenuous men; who not by hearsay, a casual expression, or slip of his tongue,
do suppose they know him; but of such as are near and narrow observers of his
Discourses, Life, and Conversation.

The other pass many expressions of the lightest nature in the Book, that are
not within the reach of my knowledge to disprove. Some of them I have heard of
from them, and that 5, or 6. years ago (which shows that the Timber for this
Structure has bin long cut down, and that they have had time enough to shape it
to their own purposes) I suppose they will, if there be further need, receive
answer by M. Walwyn himself.

For the particulars that concern Levelling men's Estates, etc. M. Walwyn has
given such ample satisfaction, I conceive, in the Manifestation, which the
Author too conceives to be principally his, that I wonder old expressions in
beat of Discourses (who knows how long ago) drops from him (as who knows too
how slightly and mistakingly since reported) should be now urged upon him: But
in order to a Design, what must not be done? But it is talks abroad, they can be
proved; that is, that credible people have heard them, and will attest the
same. To that I shall say,

1. That M. Edwards had witnesses for attestation of many strange (...) he
reported of pious and honest people, and yet how deservedly were his slanders
slighted, upon this ground, that men of different spirits do very familiarly
hear with too open ears, and report with such additions as their spleen and
dis-affection suggests against him they malign? And as M. John Goodwin (whose
hap it has him to suffer much in this kind with M. Walwyn) well expresses
himself in his answer to M. Edwards Ch^^gre^^, p. 2. Sect. 3. There is no
reasonable m^n but will abate and deduct, and that to a good proportion, from
such Reckonings and Accounts, which are drawn up and given into him by the hand
of envy.

2. That in many particulars urged upon M. Walwyn, the offense lies not in the
things, but in the end for which they were done; which the Author takes upon
him to judge; and does he not thereby (as M. Goodwin says of M. Edwards in his
Innocencies Triumph, p. 3.) claim part or privilege with God himself, in his
Omniscience or heart-searching, which is (as he goes on) to magnify himself
above all that is called man, and to set himself down in Gods chair.

3. Of what credit pray is the testimony of an enemy in matters of obloquy and
reproach, tending to the disparagement of another; M. John Goodwin frequently
tells you in his Hagiomastix, and his Cretenses, or answer to M. Edwards u^^er
one Treatise, especially (I may add) when the memory is long charged therewith
and when discontent, and new enmities do in the intervalls arise.

4. Let it be considered how unlike it is to the way of Christ and his
Apostles, to have Eve-droppers, Agents, or Factors, to gather up, and furnish
themselves with the sins and infirmities of good men, who never took a report
into their lips against any man, upon loose or malicious suggestions, that
pleaded the cause even of an Adultress, and stopped the mouths of her Accusers:
yet here has our Author ransackt all corners, sifted every man's knowledge of
M. Walwyn, and then taking only the (...) or dregs of his life, has with the
unworthy addition of the slime of his brain, made up a dish for his own and his
friends eating; and hopes that by the large commendations he gives of it, it
will find acceptance among all other good people.

Whereas the Author makes a difference between Mr Walwyn and the rest of his
Fellow Prisoners, judging him to be the Principal, and they the Accessaries to
the Chimetical Crimes, our Authors brains have fancied: to this I say. That
they who do know, or do not conceal their knowledge of Lievt. Col. John
Lilburn, must needs confess him to be a man the least liable to be molded or
bowed by others, of any man in the world. Who biaz'd him I pray in all his
sufferings before in the Fleet, Oxford, Newgate, the Fleet again, the Tower,
etc? whose Counsel has he taken in writing those many Discoveries of bad men's
ways, but God and his own? But our Author writes not so much his knowledge as
his guess, and not so much his guess neither as his Design either to make
difference between these Friends, or by laying the whole burden upon Mr Walwyn,
to single him our thereby for destruction. For Mr Prince, as he is a man of a
single heart, and lamb-like innocence; so is he far from pining his Faith upon
another man's sleive, and professes himself guided in the present dislikes he
has manifested, not by other men's discourses, but by real and sensible
sufferings: By what his eyes see, his ears hear of the Peoples sad and
deplorable Condition: by apparent contradictions in actions and Engagements, by
the benefit of Law taken away, and by abundance of other instances and
experimental proofs of things, by which, and the sense of his own duty,
thereupon he is engaged, he says, to show himself as he does. But I shall
forbear to speak further to this, since I hear they both intend to write
something in Vindication of themselves: For Mr Walwyn in the supposition the
world has of him of being a Politic man; he is as much mistakes as may be;
Policy being taken in the worst sense, for an ability to do things good or bad,
just or unjust for advantage, and the accomplishment of an evil end. He is the
most precisely tied as to good in the end, so in all the means in Order to that
end, that I have often told him of the impossibillity of procuring that for the
people his honest heart intended, against powers otherways resolved; and here
upon I have often persuaded him to decline the Engaging as too difficult for
him. To which he has answered, That his thoughts did not so much insist upon
the success, as his duty: the one he was bound to perform, the other was
without him, not in his power; and therefore though he should rejoice at the
good event of things, yet should he not be dismayed, when they fall out
otherwise, for that was at the good pleasure of him, to whom he was to submit.

It Is observable that some of those that Subscribed the Epistle Dedicatory, are
his most deadly Enemies; and of those, one has very busily spread abroad that
most malicious suggestion of Mr Walwyns being a Jesuit, although I suppose he
himself know, the contrary: othersome, namely the two last, have been very
scarcely known unto him, or he of them; and yet they tell you too, that they
therein Subscribed their own experiences and observations of his general Course
in all his ways, as they are in the Book set forth. If this be the Course that
must be expected from these Churchmen, whose fame or reputation can be safe?
though never so carefully guarded by innocence, and a diligent eschewing of
evil? For as Mr Walwyn has suffered, so who may not? or who is not likely to
suffer, that stands in the way at least of their prospect? Every ^e^d must
rail, and every heart must stoop to the Glory and Sanctity of these Saintly
men, that have already sucked in large hopes of being Possessors of the Earth,
and begin (...) stretch themselves, and just^^ out other men as profane,
worldly irreligions, and what Treatise they please to defame them withal: Still
must it be that new men rise (...) and tread in the same steps of reviling with
their fore fathers. Was M. Walwyn a Traitor, Heretic, and Rebel in the Bishops
esteem? Was he the Presby^^^^ Schismatic, Atheist, Anarchist, and what not
that's bad and monstrous, beca^^ his Conscience could not stoop to them? And
must the sink of every man's ^^lice be still thrown upon him, and his render
back pressed down with all the obloquies that men of more copious and refined
imaginations can invent and throw upon him: Must he ever be the man of infamy
and disgrace? whither then shall be appeal for relief and vindication, but at
thy sacred throne, almighty God, to whose Omniscience the secret thoughts and
inmost corners of every heart are like a Text in great Letters, visible and
transparent? Thy Majesty have true and certain knowledge of every thing done
and imagined in the world, thou knew the innocence of thy servant Stephen,
and the maliciousness of the Jews that stoned him; the purpose of Tertullus in
accusing Paul, and of the forty Jews combined to destroy him. There is nothing
at present that is hid from thee, no dark purpose or design (though never so
speciously vaild over with good or Religious pretenses, but is perspicable by
the eye of thy All-seeing Wisdom.

The frailty and dimnesse of our sight cannot distinguish between things that
(...) and but seem to be, between Truth and Falsehood: insomuch that this vain
world frequently mis-calls Good, Evil; and Evil Good: and upon confidence of
this common frailty, bad men endowed with craft and vain policy, impose upon
the weak and credulous what shape, and imaginations of things their wicked end
suggest unto them Forasmuch as therefore O Lord, thou art the, protector of
all the Innocent, and detector of the false accusers, give some real
manifestation to the World, both of the one and of the other; open the breasts
of Mr Walwyn and his Accusers: Let their thoughts be manifest, the secret
purposes and designements of their hearts written as in their foreheads; that
so thy Name may have the glory in a plain and visible discovery of them both,
and the innocence of the one shine more bright by this fiery Trial it is now
undergoing; and the secret ends and contrivances of the other be no longer
concealed under the painted garment of zeal toward thee and thy Word, which
thou know O God, is by many of them put on purposely to enable them to
destroy innocent men, and to persecute thy Christ in his Members.

But if O Lord thou have decreed that bad men shall run on in the course of
their wickedness, till their measure be full, and wilt suffer them to be
chastizing instruments in thy band, for the many frailties and sins of thy
servants, thy will be done, only support us we beseech thee with the strength
of thy inward consolations, with patience to drink of that Cup thou have
provided for thy servants, and to submit all we are or have, to thy hand, thy
wisdom, thy will, our Lord, our God, our Father.

Errata.
Page 2 line 13 for usually, read unjustly. l. 37 for coupled r centupled. l.
39. for changing r changes. l 49 for lust of, r by the last, all that are rich.
p. 3 l 11 for lines r lives. p. 4 l 12 for severally r generally. p. 7 l 6 for
rule Scripture, r rule of Scripture.


