Britains KING REVIVED: Or, A Seasonable Warning To the KINGDOM of SCOTLAND
Assembled in PARLIAMENT, Upon the first of January, 1660.

By SCOTLANDS true Friend.

Josh. 22.10, etc. And when they came to the borders of Jordan that are in the
land of Canaan, the children of Reuben, and the children of Gad, and the half
tribe of Manasseh built there an altar by Jordan, a great altar to see to.

LONDON: Printed in the year 1660.

BRITAINS KING revived, etc.
OUtward Providence and Dispensations, are not the Guides and Directories of
Man's actions: but as in the bitter trouble of the one, there may be wisdom; so
in the sweet peace of the other, may be foolishness and evil; And the time of
casting off the Armor, more dangerous from within, then sometine the putting
on of the same, is hurtful from without. A victorious Army may fall in
themselves, and their own resolutions work trouble and disquietness. Laudable
intentions, and good actions in matter, may be misconstrued, and subject to
blame, through defect of form, and prudential circumstances. Coifederacies may
sometimes debord beyond their limits, and the lesser party unawares impose upon
the greater. Religion may occasion mistakes; neither does the specious luster
and beauty of it, exempt from censure. People without the counterance of
Authority, may intend well; but an harmony betwixt them, is the sure band of
all their work.

All these Aphorisms of State, and Experimental Observations, are clear here,
and plainly verified, upon the first view of the condition of this little
Israel, and review of Scotlands affairs and transactions these fatal years
past. Twenty and seven years war with Canaan, and peace in the end, through
valor and wisdom, turns into a dangerous Jealousy betwixt the greater and
the lesser Tribes: their parting of company, with joy and spoil of Enemies,
threatens parting of hearts, to further sorrow, and spilling of their own
blood; the turning of their weapons homeward beyond Jordan, ready to sheath
their swords in their own bowels at Jordan, and turn those swelling waters,
into blood of swelling hearts.

The religious intention of the lesser Tribes, to (...) to themselves the true
Religion, and not to be (...) the division of Jordan, was commendable: (...)
^ing in it, was unadvised, without the priva^ (...) ^nour Joshua, or their
other brethren the (...) ^ner of it unlawful, by an Altar out of Shiloh or
(...) the place of it, more scandalous to their Brethren, then safe (...) them
selves: an Altar upon their brethrens side of Jor^^^ (...) significant of their
right and interest in the true God as upon their own side: the border beyond
Jordan, is their (...) into Jealousy. The indiscreet extent and limits of
the^^ (...) true Worship, unto their neighbors Land, is an (...) them, beyond
the moderation of Fraternity, and occasioneth a misunderstanding. Reuben here
sees the son of (...) too hastily: Gad in his purpose advances in troops most
suriously: and Manasseh in the work, forgets too speedily all form^^ ^oyls in
the defense of Religion in Egypt and the wilderness, and his fathers house, in
the enjoyment of it; as thus by a just mistake of their brethren, to expose it
to danger by a Civil War and division.

The greatness of this Altar to see to, begets no charity to their work, nor
can plead their integrity of heart: forever Idolatry, is more expensive, costly
and painful, then true ^^re and undefiled Religion; and the golden Calf in the
wilderness, robs Israel of all their jewels and golden earrings: the sure
of Gideon's Ephod at Opbrah, did spoil his people of all their golden collars
and ornaments of prey from the Midianites and their Kings. Molech the god of
Ammon and Sidon, bereaveth his worshippers of their firstborn, and spares
them not from the cruelty of the fire. Great is Diana of the Ephesians, and her
silver-smiths very rich. And the people of Israel did dispense with their many
painful, long and wearisome journeys, to go (even to Dan) to worship the golden
calf of Jeroboam the son of Nebat who made Israel to sin. Yea, under greatest
show of Religion, and pretense of Zeal, may be acted greatest Cruelty, Fraud
and Covetousness; as witness Simeon and Levi the two sons of Jacob, in their
Circumcision to Hamor King of Shechem, and his son and people, before the
marriage with Dinah their sister: and Jehn his covetousness of the Kingdom of
Israel from the house of Ahab, by his zealous eruelty, killing all the Priests
of Baal, was acted, under his hypocrifie in the worshipping of their false God.

The two Tribes and an half meaned well in Religion, but not prudently, with
the advice of Joshua their Governor, before departing to their inheritance
(who had sufficiently directed them in the ways of God) nor dutifully, with his
consent, who was appointed by the Lord as a nursing father with Eleazar the son
of Aaron in his Church; neither in their enterprise did they enquire at the
mouth of the Lord, nor consult his wisdom, in that great important case and
hard matter: and therefore they are in trouble. Man's strength and wisdom in the
matters of God, is folly; and (when rashly handled through presumption and
spiritual pride) falls to the ground: When mixed with the impurity of his own
thoughts and ends, the building proves but stubble and hay, as daubed with
untempered mortar, and without the stability and indurance of gold and silver
sincerity, and uprightness, in all self-deniedness. But when the Ruler of the
Lords people, in his holy things or providentials, is consulted with, and by
their prayers and petitions with tears, is invited to the work; then heavens
influence and earths fruitfulness is joined together for a blessed generation
and production; heavens mediatory blessing, with the Lords sovereignty of power
in his Vicegerent upon earth does proceed. And as in all Gods works which he
sees to be good (especially in what concerns immediately his glory upon earth)
there is the power of the Father, by the grace of the Son, for the operation of
the Spirit: so in all the Spirits motions upon a people in matters of Religion,
and actings thereupon by the grace of the Son, there should be the consulting
wisdom, and consenting confirming Power and Authority of the King and Governor
(the Father's Vicegerent upon earth) if intended for success and a blessing,
with peace, profit and duration.

The building of the walls of Jerusalem, and Reformation of the Worship of God,
was much intended and sought after by the people, in the days of Ezra the
Scribe, but slowly proceeded in for the space of fifty years, till the
Governor Nehemiah came; and then also, much divided by the wicked enemy, by
opposition and conspiracy against him, as the top-stone of that work. The King
is the pillar and supporter of Religion; and therefore his place in the Temple
was always by a pillar (as the manner was) 2 King. 11.14. and 23.3. He is the
hedge and guard of the Church of God in spirituals and temporals; and therefore
the Princes portion was on the one and other side, and before the holy portion
and the possession of the city, Ezekiel. 45.7. and 48.21. In those days when every
man followed the lust of his eyes, and the abominations of his heart, there was
no King in Israel, Judge. 17.6. The Law and Testimony is given to the King, to
govern the Lords people thereby, Deuteronomy. 17.19, 20. 2 King. 11.12. And the people
in that Government, do owe to him obedience and loyalty. And the manner of his
kingdom is told to the people by Samuel the Prophet, and laid up before the
Lord as Judge, for justice and punishment in case of the peoples disloyalty and
disobedience, 1 Samuel 10.25. The King is Custos utriusque Tabulae: to Moses the
Governor of Israel were the two Tables of the Law delivered, and he only
called up to the mount of God, when Aaron and Hur and the Elders of Israel were
at a distance from him, Exodus 22.2, 14. And when the Book of the Law was found
by Hilkiah the High Priest in the days of Josiah, it was sent to the King for
observance, and government of the people by the same, 2 King. 22.8, 10.

This Religious mistake betwixt the Tribes, is reconciled and cleared, by their
candid, fair, and large declaration, That the building of their Altar great to
see to, was not done to rebel against the Lord and their Brethren, nor to
impose upon them; but for a witness of their zeal to his glory, and interest
for themselves and generations after them, in the true worship of his Name: not
to innovate and bring in a strange Religion, but rather not to estrange
themselves and posterity from the true Religion. It was not done in rebellion
against Authority, nor in transgression against the God of Israel, but with
loyalty to the Governor, (albeit not consulted with by them therein) and in
their zeal to follow the Lord: Not to debord from the Laws and Ordinances of
God, but that the border of Jordan which bounded them from the earthly Canaan
of the ten Tribes, might not divide them from the heavenly Canaan.

Now let Scotland trace the steps of this unadvised religious procedure and
mistake, and close their Tragical dispensations these many years past, in a
Comical, Loyal, Christian and peaceable Conclusion, and fair Declaration to
their Brethren of England, and all Reformed Churches in the world, and their
lawful righteous Prince and Governor; that all of them may say and perceive
this day, that the Lord is amongst them, and has delivered them out of the
hand of the Lord, because that Scotland has not committed this trespass; and
saved them from the zealous wrath and revenging hand of the Lords Anointed,
because that they have not intended rebellion against him.

These twenty years past and upwards, Scotland has helped their Brethren in
England and other Nations against the manners of the Canaanites, of suspected
Heresy, Popery, and Idolatrous Will Worship: once and again, have they gone
over Jordan to them, armed, leaving their wives, children, and flocks behind
them; and with their weapons in the one hand, and their tools in the other
hand, labored to build the walls of Jerusalem, by a just Reformation, against
their common enemy that man of sin, and the Beast of Rome, and their
Emissaries: and that work being done and settled, by the many gracious
Concessions and Indulgences of the late King, of ever-blessed memory to both
Nations; and Scotland sent home again to their tents and the land of their
possession, with a blessing of friendly assistance to their losses Anno 1641,
and resentment of their just charges and expenses Anno 1646. (albeit, to say
the truth, more then the half thereof be yet in remainder unsatisfied.) Yet
after their return, they build a great Altar to see to, by their new fears of
alteration of former transactions, Anno 1642. and 1643. and a League and
Covenant with their Brethren in England and Ireland the same year, (without the
approbation and consent of the late King, their valorous, wise and courageous
Joshua) is proposed and agreed upon; which in the judgment of many of the other
Brethren, was an imposing of the two Tribes and a half upon the ten Tribes, and
a building of that Altar upon the border of their Canaan, not so significant of
the Principles of true Religion, as occasioning a jealousy and
misunderstanding between them and their lawful Liege-Lord and King, in their
loyalty to him and his posterity; as may witness the suspicion of forsaking of
his Royal Person at Neweastle, Anno 1646. and in Anno 1648. during his
restraint at the Isle of Wight.

This Altar of League and Covenant was great to see to; great in the eyes of
God, by the fruit of his grace upon the spirits of men, (if done sincerely and
universally by all, with the approbation of the Supreme Magistrate;) terrible
in the sight of Satan and hell, and all wickedness, (if successful amongst the
Nations in life and conversation, by that grace;) specious and full of luster,
for Unity and Uniformity of Truth, Worship and Government, (if uprightly
intended with consent aforesaid, without self-interest, unbyassed ends of
covetousness and ambition, without hypocrisy.) It was long and painful in
building, with great sufferings in life and estate; and costly, with infinite
treasure of Public Faith from many honest men, in their integrity of heart,
and innocence of hands, to God, and Royal authority over them: Yet as all
these circumstances are no true characters of a good Cause, so neither are they
symptoms of a bad Cause, where sincerity and candidness of heart with the
grace of self-denial are in the work.

Now that Scotland is this day delivered out of the hands of her enemies (the
worst of men) to whom the Lord had sold her these ten years past in the
fierceness of his anger; and by her most righteous Kings return from the
wilderness (for the fins of his people) to the glory of his Throne, and
magnificence of his Kingdom, with the seeking of his Lords and Counselors unto
him, Is also by his most gracious goodness restored to her ancient Liberties
and Privileges of a free Nation; and that babes and children are no more her
Counselors and Judges, but a free Parliament granted to her of her own Nobles
and heads of Israel; and that her Prince with the advice of her brethren in
England, has sent his Commissioner to her, for her better settlement and
establishing of his Kingdom there:

Let her now plead her cause with him, in all submissive humility and
uprightness of heart, and clear to her King the cause and reason of building
this her great Altar of League and Covenant to see to, whether or not in
transgression against the Lord, and rebellion against his Anointed? Is the
suspected iniquity and jealousy of her former National Covenant, 1638, too
little in the balance of his Royal judgment, and all Reformed Churches abroad,
but at this day also by the League and Covenant, she must again bring jealousy
upon her bound loyalty to God and her Prince, and to morrow bring wrath and
dishonor on the whole Congregation of Israel? Shall yet the accursed thing of
Achans covetousness, and the error of Balaam for reward, and the gainsaying of
Core, be her suspected shame, and deep conceived and too publicly spoken of
reproach? Let the Lord God of gods, the Lord God of gods, and all the Christian
world know the truth herein: for you alone that are in present Parliament, do
not perish in this iniquity. That reproach has made Jacobs name to stink among
the Nations.

Lay open before the Lord and the King, the integrity of your hearts, and the
cleanness of your hands, and the hands of former times, in the matter of that
wedge of gold of 200000 l. at Newcastle, anno 1646, at the return of your
Armies; and the remitting of that just one, the late King, to his Kingdom of
England and both Houses of Parliament: Whether it was the price of that sacred
blood or not, (as is too publicly reviled, and cast in the teeth of all
Scotchmen, with bitterness and grief of heart to the body of the Land) or
whether it was a part of the lawful Wages and deserved Pay of your Soldiery,
for their more peaceable removing out of England by the Kings highway, without
turning into the Fields or the Vineyards, or drinking of the waters of the
Wells: And put the account thereof to the view of all men, for stopping the
mouth of iniquity in that suspected accursed thing.

Publish to the world your and former times professed faithful care at that
time, (affirmed confidently to the Soldiery and all the good people of the
Land) that honor, freedom and safety to that Royal Prince, was sufficiently
secured and provided for, from that Parliament in England. Declare how your and
their Counsels and Debates in the Painted Chamber at Westminster in October
1646, concerning his Majesty's Person, has been zealous, faithful, loyal and
upright; and where the horrid breach of that transaction did lie, for the
vindication of the ancient honor and true loyalty of your Nation.

Cleanse your and former times hearts, counsels and ways, of that unparalled
and never the like heard of before, seizing upon the Lords Anointed at
Holmby-House, and carrying him about all the Cities of the wicked Philistims,
with bloody hearts and hands, and closing him up at last in the Isle of Wight,
which was (as the Isle of Patmos to S. John the Divine) the place of heavens
Revelations to his holy soul, against the farther evil day, and the weight and
strength of his consolations by the ministering of Angels, against the day of
his sufferings by the hand of men through Divine permission.

Make good Answer to that Objection, of suspected disloyalty, and uncharitable
forsaking of your Churches prayers and concurrence, for the better
encouragement of that Expedition and Army, anno 1648, for relief of his late
Majesty's Person out of the aforesaid Isle of Wight.

Moreover, put in yours and former times plea in the Court of heaven, and
declare before God and his holy Angels, and the children of men, your and their
innocence, in those deep plottings, and contrivings, and Cabinet-counsels at
the Lady Humes house at Edinburgh and elsewhere (as is generally reported and
affirmed) with that Lucifer and Tyrant from hell for a scourge to the Nations,
concerning that abominable Regicide, and horrid bloody murder of the late King;
and the sincerity of yours and their Protestations against the same, the day of
his suffering, in token of your detestation thereof.

And lastly, vindicate or condemn former times deportments to your present Lord
and King, in those two Battles at Dunbar and Worcester, in withdrawing his
Princely care and command, wisdom and courage from the first, (whether upon the
terms that David's Captains and Army did to him at Mahanaim, in their marching
against his rebellious son Absalom, (because that he was the light of his
people, and his life worth ten thousand of theirs) or upon the account of
suspected disloyalty by the usurpation of his Government, and Command of his
Militia and Forces, contrary to the Royal Prerogative and essential right of
his Crown;) And in weakening his Armies in the last Battle of Worcester, by
withdrawing of several Forces from his Camp at Sterling before their marching
to England; albeit at that time, the common Enemy to both was then in the Land;
and if there, Scotland could not without their Head the King, encounter him in
open Battle, or flying Skirmish: yet loyalty, common wisdom and courage would
have joined to go into England with their valiant resolute Prince; if not to
defeat that wicked party there, yet to have eased their own Nation of his
consuming violence by way of diversion. And whether the unfortunate event of
those two fatal dismal days, was through want of Military skill, slothful
negligence, or otherwise; or by wilful ignorance, and gross, downright,
desperate and disloyal carelessness, which is nothing less then Treason against
King and Country, and Murder of so many precious souls. Sure it is, want of
courage and resolution in those two valiant Armies, was not the cause.

And now to speak but this once more, and let not the most honorable
Parliament be offended. Declare your deep sense of, and sympathy with the
Peoples deplorable sufferings these 22 years past, in their Fortunes and
Estates, and disbursments for you and former times: And that in your
righteousness to the Law of Nature, Nations, and Faith amongst men, and common
honesty amongst Christians without fraud or violence, and honor of Parliaments
and Parliamentary Promises and Protestations before heaven and earth, You will
resolve, before dissolving, upon the speediest effectual ways of Satisfaction
of the Debts of those, who are now utterly ruined in their former precious
esteem in the world, and plentiful condition beyond their neighbors; and by
whose sufferings, a public calamity does follow to many scores of poor Orphans
and desolate Widows, through their trust to them for the Public.

As the generality of Scotland may and can witness heaven and earth of their
innocence in all these things, and with honest hearts may comfort themselves,
in their conscientious Loyalty to God and his Vicegerents in their generations
upon earth, equally with any other People or Subject whatsoever: so in charity
it may be conceived, that other Statesmen and then Rulers for the time, and
the now present Heads of the Tribes of Israel in Parliament assembled, are
likewise so. Yet the smoking furnace of that stinking smell of the worlds
Reproach and Opprobry to Scotland in all these matters, is not to this day, nor
ever will be quenched nor dispelled, till your fair, honest, ingenuous and
large Declaration in all the premises, (after the laudable example of the two
Tribes and a half at Gilead, to their brethren the ten Tribes in Canaan)
appear, and be emitted to the world: And if guiltiness be in some, let not the
righteous be as the wicked, the clean as the unclean, the good as the sinner,
he that fears an Oath as he that swears: let the vile be separated from the
precious, and the wicked cut off from the Congregation of the Lord: Let
sentence against an evil work be speedily executed, that the heart of the sons
of men be not fully set in them to do evil: Give them according to their deeds,
and according to the wickedness of their endeavors: Let their houses be made
dung-hills, and their mothers childless, with the perpetual note of shame and
ignominy in all their remembrances, by the characters of The sons of Jeroboam
who made Israel to sin, and of Judas Iscariot who betrayed Christ and his
Anointed, and of that Dathan and Abiram, which were famous in the congregation,
and strove against Moses and Aaron in the company of Corah, and against the
Lord; and they became a sign.

And by so doing, God in his truth and justice shall be honored, the heart of
his King shall overflow in affections and zeal to the welfare of his people,
through a full persuasion of their former and future Loyalty; your Public
Faith to many honest-hearted men in that Cause (hitherto too much slighted and
neglected by former times and your selves) shall be by his goodness and consent
satisfied; The honor of Scotland shall be vindicated from lying and scandalous
reproaches of the wicked sons of Balaam; yea, the earth shall be at rest and
quiet, the Fir-trees and Cedars of Lebanon shall rejoice; and all the Tribes of
Israel in his Majesty's Dominions shall say and sing, This day we perceive that
the Lord is amongst us, because by the building of that great Altar to see to,
of the National Covenant, anno 1638. nor by the League and Covenant, anno 1643,
you and former Rulers have not committed this trespass against the Lord, in
doing wickedness under the shadow of holiness, nor done Rebellion against his
Anointed, under the said cloak of Religion; nor pillaged your Country by
covetousness and ambition, with briery Abimelah the son of the Concubine, under
color of assertors of her Christian and just Liberty in Church and State,
these fatal years last: And that now you have delivered your own people in
Scotland, and brethren in England and Ireland, out of the hand of the Lord and
his Anointed, while those Altars of Covenants, were not made by you, to the
change of Religion or Government, by unlawful Burnt-offerings of worship to any
other God, or homage to any other Governor; but for a witness of holy
emulation between you and your Brethren, for the farther propagation of the
Gospel, and just Reformation in the time of dangerous security and deadness, or
fear of backsliding from your first love to Christ your Redeemer.

And if in this day of your General Meeting, (as the Representative of your
Nation) you do not thus declare and judge as aforesaid, and that your hearts
and tongues be not valiant for truth to God and man, for the honor of God, and
your King and Nation, (which was the very fundamental of all your Covenants,
and the Motto of your displayed Banners upon every mountain and hill) and at
this time of restoring of all things, you be silent in your Countries behalf,
against those serpentine hearts of bitterness, and razers, swords, and coals of
Juniper of fiery tongues at home and abroad, in those their former and present
reproaches, scoffings, mockings, and revilings of your Nation, and thousands of
innocent honest-hearted people there, upon that their suspected account of
former times disloyalty, forsaking, and rebelling against God and his
Vicegerent your Native Prince: Then what may they say, but that you are wrapped
up with others in the same guiltiness, and that such only as keep the law
contend with the wicked?

His Majesty's gracious Indulgence to some by Pardon, in this day of the Lords
deliverance to himself, may exempt from the evil of punishment of men, but not
from the evil of sin before God, or shame amongst others in the like
transgression: yea, the Pardon presupposes their confessed Guiltiness in the
Law: for, the sick and not the whole needs the physician: And their guilt may
be thought to be of knowledge also, more then of ignorance; for the Rich only
and Ringleaders of former times, and not the Poor, are hitherto pardoned, till
the Kings heart, as an Angel of God, do forget all the conceived infirmities of
his honest-hearted people, in the way his Royal wisdom shall think fit.

In the like condition with the Pardoned, are the Heirs and Children of them
that are dead: for albeit by death, their fathers personal reproach does cease,
yet in the children of those parents, does their shame still remain with the
rest that are living in the world, till their former ways be justified by
uprightness and integrity of heart, whatever be the professed repentance, or
contrary present actings of the one, or the other, (by the changed face of
providence, in times of a new heaven and a new earth) and their undeserved
reflections, and forsakings of their first friends, of whose simplicity of
heart, and honest meaning and weakness (to their utter ruin this day) they
before made use, and served themselves by, in the time of their former
deportments for these asserted public ends.

What return can you make to your Country, who thus have assembled you at the
command of their Prince, when you clear not his countenance to them in his
persuasion of their former Loyalty, nor vindicate by Declaration, and Justice
upon the wicked, the honor of your Nation amongst men? And who knows whether
you are not met together for such a day as this, and therein to restore the
perished, and relieve the distressed by your Public Faith, and preserve the
honor of your Nation from the unjust opprobry of Fides Publica fides Punica,
and the credit of Gospel-Reformation from fraud, deceit and oppression?

Else be assured, if you altogether hold your peace at this time, enlargement
and deliverance from this unjust infamy by wicked men, and sufferings of the
simple in estate, shall rise to Scotland from another place; but you and your
fathers houses may be destroyed: And in the mean time, the uprightness of
Scotlands heart, and honest loyal meaning to God and their Sovereign Lord the
King, in their respective bounds and relations, with subordination of the one
to the other (notwithstanding of all obloquie, contradiction, calumny and
detraction by Nations or single persons) is, and shall be sealed up, firm and
sure in heaven, before the Lord the searcher of all hearts, and his holy
Angels; To the praise of his truth and righteousness, and the comfort and
rejoicing of every good Christian and Subject there, at the day of their death
and particular Judgment, before the Tribunal of Christ, and at the Great day
of the Lord, when every man shall receive his reward, according to his works
done in the flesh. And that Public Faith to the upright-hearted people in the
work, (albeit at this time also, neglected by you) shall be to their posterity,
the harvest of their faith upon earth; Peace and inward consolations shall be
sown for the righteous, whatever be their outward troubles and necessities; And
some time or other, their horn shall be exalted, for the grace of their
simplicity of heart, all along the way, for a just and discreet Reformation of
Religion, and sure establishment of Royal Authority in the house of David,
while Sun and Moon endures, upon the pillars of Truth, Justice, Righteousness
and Mercy.

FINIS.

