A BRIEF DISCOVERY OF THE TRUE CAUSES, SYMPTOMS, and EFFECTS, Of that most
reigning Disease, the SCURVY.

TOGETHER WITH The Causes, Symptoms, and Effects of several other dangerous
DISEASES. Whereunto is added, A short Account of those Incomparable and most
highly approved PILLS, CALLED PILVLAE in Omnes MORBOS: OR, PILLS against all
DISEASES.

Which are the only Famous Medicine of this Age against the abovenamed
Distemper, and all other Curable Diseases.

Prepared and set forth for the Public Benefit, By M. Bromfield, Approved
Physician.

And are to be sold At his own House at the BLUE BALLS in Plow-yard in
Fetter-Lane, LONDON.

Printed Anno Dom. 1675.

The Causes, Symptoms, and Effects of the SCURVY.
THis Disease does chiefly proceed from Melancholy, bred by distemper of the
Stomach, or Spleen; which being crude, stays in the passages of the Arteries
and Veins, and thereby does excite grievous fermentation or workings, from
whence are sent vapors which afflict the heart and brain, etc. from all which
is caused malignant and contagious putrefaction of Melancholy; and thence
proceed these Symptoms, viz. giddiness in the head, sudden flushings, heat, and
redness in the face and body, putrefaction and stinking of the mouth and gums,
toothach, stinking breath, blackness and looseness of the teeth, want of
digestion, much wind, and unsavory belchings: and by thick vapors arising
from the Hypochondria to the Midriff, is occasioned obstructions of
Respiration, or shortness of breath, and straitness of the breast, etc. The
body is dull and heavy, and in the Legs are spots, sometimes red, purple,
black or blue: There is also violent pains in the head, shoulders, arms,
fingers, belly, thighs, knees, Legs, ankles, feet and toes: Whence some who
have had the POX, (though cured) do fear the return of their old Malady. There
are many thousands have this distemper, that are persuaded they have (...)
Gout; because sometimes it has the very signs of the Gout; which (...) the
cause why the Scurvy (which by mistake is judged the Gout) is ^dom cured. For
those Medicaments pertinent in the Gout, are not the very same in the Scurvy,
and consequently cannot cure it. Other signs of the Scurvy, are bad sleep and
frightful dreams, a feverish heat, and sweats toward the morning. Some have
risings in their body, as if stung with Bees or Wasps, etc. others have dolours
in their side, imitating those of the Spleen. And in short, it does appear to a
judicious eye, with, and in the shape of most Diseases; as has been
sufficiently apparent, not only to my self, but also to several other
experienced Physicians, who with me have traced this Disease, and made exact
inspection into its variable dresses, for many years together. And we have also
observed, that it is propagated and spread abroad in these parts of the world,
more than any other Distemper whatsoever; and by its sundry shapes, has
seduced many in their judgment of the Disease. For in some it passes for a
Consumption, in others for a Dropsy, etc. and Medicines are given accordingly;
but alas, to little purpose; and all for want of true knowledge of the Original
of the Disease it self. And here observed a great Truth, viz. That there are
very few afflicted with and Distemper of long continuance, who have not annexed
with it a Scorbutic taint; which unless it be considered, and Antiscorbutick
Medicaments given, the Patient is very rarely, if ever cured. Now the
conclusion of all (if the Scurvy comes to be predominant) is sometimes
Swoonings, Apoplexies, Dropsies, great decay of the body, incurable
Consumptions, etc. Note, that in some the Scurvy is hereditary; and that there
are some few Causes thereof, besides those here set down: but these being
usually the chief, for brevity the other are omitted.

I Shall now, to oblige the Sons and Daughters of Venus, briefly discover the
true symptoms and effects of the Grand POX, and Gonorrhaea, or Running of the
Reins.

The Discourse will hardly infect any that are not already Diseased, or in the
least prejudice their reputation: And to read it heedfully, is the way to
instruct many in what before they were ignorant. Also those in these Distempers
concerned, will for what I have writ, be obliged to give me thanks. I shall
begin with the symptoms of the POX.

Which are pains in the head, shoulders, arms, back, knees, shins and Legs,
Nodes or hard knobs in the head, joints, or shin bones, Bubo's in the Groin,
Tumors in the Testicles, Scabs or breaking out in the head, neck, face, or
other parts of the body; Ulcers in the throat, mouth, palate, nose, or privy
parts, and sometimes in the Legs, with a general indisposition of body. These
are the symptoms which usually go along with this Disease.

Now rightly to distinguish the pains of the POX (from those of such other
distempers as most resemble it) please to accept and observe these following
Rules. First, the pains of the POX are very like those of the Scurvy, save that
these of the POX do usually seize the patient in the night; and when well warm
in bed, are then most violent. They frequently continue till toward day, and
then vanish almost, if not quite away, until night the come again: only
sometimes in the day, are felt some sharp pains in the head, shoulders, arms,
Legs, etc. but are quickly gone again. Moreover, the pains of the POX are ever
between the Joints, and usually (if the Disease be of very long continuance)
those pains do fix Nodes, or hard knobs on the Joints: but neither of these
symptoms are so incident to the Scurvy. It is distinguished from the Arthritas,
or Joynt-grout, by its nocturnal dolours, or pains in the night: for the pains
of the Gout, (contrary to those of the POX) are often greater in the day than
night. Many have joined with this Disease a consuming Hectic Fever, often
caused by those unlucky over hot and drying Diet-drinks, violent Purges and
Sweats rashly given to those of thin, hot and dry constitutions: such bodies
receive the same mischief from an ill-managed Salviation or Fluxing: and an
Hectic thus contracted, for the most part, ends in the grave; and others, by
unskilful Fluxing, have the pockie humors plentifully raised into their heads,
where (by their corroding quality) they too often ulcerate the throat, and
consume the palate and gums: which humors being raised, and mixed with a
venomous and ill-prepared Mercurial Medicine, do also poison and level the
Nose, and beget all those dishonorable and fatal consequences of this foul
Disease.

The Symptoms and Effects of the Gonorrhaea, or Running of the Reins.
THis Disease is known by an Issue from the privities, not of Seed, (as by some
supposed) but of a virulent matter, which often ulcerates the Urinary passage,
and causes Caruncles to grow in the Yard, from whence is sent corrupt matter;
which falling by parcels, resembles small pieces of flesh. The Patient has a
scalding heat, sharpness and pain in making Urine, which sometimes comes away
by drops; there is also a great pain in erection of the Yard. These are the
Symptoms that most frequently attend this Disease.

The Effects are many times the POX, to which it is somewhat related; but is
chiefly brought in by such as unskilfully attempt to cure the Disease; whose
practice it is (without respect to their Patients health, or their own credit)
with all speed to obstruct the issue at the Privities, from whence the virulent
matter immediately mounts into the liver, and other principal parts, where it
infallibly vitiates the Blood, and confirms a POX, that yields to no slight
cure: and sometimes from an ill managed Cure, is left resident with the Patient
an immedicable Gleeting, and many are the mischiefs brought upon the Patient by
ill-prepared Mercurial Medicaments, etc.

I thought to have given you the causes of the POX, and Gonorrhaea, or Running
of the Reins: but the chief of them being already well enough known to proceed
from Venereal embraces, it would be a kind of lost labor to insert them here.
Those who please may (from my self) have Imfallible Medicines and Directions
for perfect and speedy cure of these Distempers.

According to promise in my other Books, I am in This to give you some account
concerning Worms, which are a Vermin, though but little regarded, yet exceeding
troublesome, and very often most pernicious.

Of these creatures are several sorts; but the most usual are shapeb round and
long: these are bred in the Gouts, yet sometimes get into the Stomach. The
second sort are short, and very small, like threads; and commonly lie in the
Right-gut, and in the end of the Fundament, wherein is almost continual
itching; which worms also provoke the Patient very often to Stool. The third
sort are long and broad, of an incredidle length, but very rarely seen.

Worms are most caused from raw, gross, phlegmatic matter; and therefore youth,
and such as eat much fruit, are seldom free from them: Also all great Eaters
are very subject to them; especially those who eat meats that casily putrify
in the Stomach, and more at once then Nature can well digest; whence follow
Crudities, and thence worms; the signs of which are many. Some have unsavory
Belchings, and a stinking breath, wasting of the gums, heaviness, fainting,
great thirst, vomiting, cold sweats, and often a Fever; a short Cough, unquiet
sleep, intolerable gnawing pain in the stomach and belly, loss of appetite,
weakness and consumption of the whole body. Many times, the patient has an
insatiable appetite, caused by flat Worms, which devour the food that is eaten.
There are a few signs more of Worms: but these being the most common, and
because I would not be too tedious, shall say no more of the rest at present;
only thus much I shall add, that if worms be voided alive, without other
excrements, in the beginning of a Disease, it is dangerous, and signifies great
Crudities; and if voided dead, signifies much putrefaction that has killed
them, which probably, shortly after, kills the patient. In short, it is the
opinion of our age, grounded upon substantial proofs, that worms, and their
effects, have conducted more people to their graves, than any one Distemper
whatsoever. And therefore you that suspect them in your selves, make much of
these Infallible PILLS, as your most speedy help to prevent a Worm-eaten
carcass; and take them ere too late; by which doing, you will certainly prolong
your days in ease and health, and be obliged to thank your Adviser.

The Causes, Symptoms, and Effects of Dropsies.
THe Dropsy Ascites, is from abundance of water heaped up between the
Peritonaeum, or inner coat of the belly and bowels; which infecting the mouth
of the stomach, does bring great Thirst, and often a Fever. Sometimes it begins
in the Feet, and swells up wards to the Legs, Thighs, and Cods: but at the same
time the upper parts of the body usually consume. The cause of this Dropsy may
be from a cold distemper of the Liver, which cannot make perfect blood, but
phlegm, wind, and water. Sometimes a Dropsy may proceed from a Fever, hot
meats, and too plentiful drinking of Wine; whereby the Liver, Spleen, and
Kidneys, may lose part of their native heat, and consequently their ability to
attract the water, and eject it by the Vreters. The same may be caused from the
natural Flux in women flowing too plentifully, or from retention of the fame:
And drinking much cold water may diminish and disperse the native heat, and by
that means make way for a Dropsy. The Dropsy Tympanites is from wind shut up
in the cavitie of the Abdomen or belly, and sometimes in the cavitie of the
Gouts. This wind is bred from crude, thick, phlegmatic, or Melancholy humors,
which by heat having motion, and made thin, become gross windy vapors. This
Dropsy is never of Wind alone, but always mixed with water. But the greatest
part of this distemper proceeding from wind, it is then always called a
Tympany.

The Dropsy Anasarcais without controversy bred from a cold distemper of the
Liver, which hinders its Concoction; from whence, in stead of good blood, it
disperseth phlegmatic humors, and causes the whole body to swell. A Dropsy
may be also caused from all tumors or obstructions of the Liver, much
bleeding, great evacuation by Stool, Sweat, etc.

Note, All Dropsies are dangerous, and hardly cured. Yet the Dropsy Anasarca,
which is occasioned by Phlegm spread over the whole body, is easiest cured of
the three; but Ascites, and Tympanites, with much more difficulty.
Notwithstanding, I here promise to the world, that my Pills will perfectly cure
the most dangerous Dropsy that man can have; provided the Disease be medicable
or curable.

Note, That all the Symptoms aforementioned are seldom in all that have these
Diseases at one and the same time, (except those in Dropsies) but most are; and
some have more than these, which should have been here inserted; but brevity
being intended, and most suitable in this place; I therefore judge what has
been already said, sufficient to satisfy all reasenble persons in the true
knowledge of their Disease, if afflicted with either of these distempers. There
remains now something more to be said of those Excellent Pills before named; of
which briefly thus.

One whole Box thereof, price but 6 s. is usually enough for perfect cure of
either of the aforesaid Diseases, except the Disease be contumacious and
inveterate; and then the person does sometimes take a small quantity more,
which most certainly cures either of these Diseases, and without the least
danger of future relapse.

These Pills are also of most admirable use for such as have the POX,
Gonerrhaea, or Running of the Reins; and for such as formerly have had either
of those Diseases, and suspect an ill Cure, or dread a Relapse: And are
likewise one of the most sure and speedy medicines that is, or can be, against
the Green sickness, and for such young women as want their Monthly Visits. They
are also excellent against Fits of the Mother, and have a peculiar virtue
against Barrenness, if overloosness of the Spermatick Vessels, Foulness of the
Womb, thinness of Seed, or the White Flux be the cause. They free the body from
all lumpish Melancholy humors, and revive and cheer drooping spirits even to a
wonder; infallibly cure the Jaundies, and are most excellent against heat and
sharpness of Urine; most wonderfully expel wind, and help all preternatural
sweatings.

I shall add, that these Pills taken sometimes to prevent Diseases, or more
closely followed to cure, as need shall require, are most excellent for all
Families, but more especially those who inhabit near the Seas; for such (much
more than others) are liable to Obstructions, Agues, the Scurvy, etc. as I have
always observed in my Travels thorowout this Nation, and some other Kingdoms
besides. They are also the most precious medicine in the world for Mariners,
and such as travel much by Sea, to whom the Scurvy, and many other diseases,
are very incident; partly from bad airs, Sea-fogs, sudden heats and colds, much
salt, and bad diet; and sometimes excessive drinking of foreign and
unfrequented liquors, etc. and they are the more commodious for such to take to
Sea with them, because they retain their full virtues many years; and in the
time of taking them, none is confined to his house: nor is there any great need
of Broth or Posset Drink in their operation, as with other Physic, but every
one may walk abroad at pleasure: for indeed they exhilerate the whole body, and
make all that take them, more vigorous, and fit for employment, either at home
or abroad; and are so gentle, that they are most safely taken by all persons,
from three years old, to the greatest age; and at all times of the year, even
in the coldest or hottest seasons, and are so congruous to all Constitutions,
as gently to wait Nature in all her dictates; as is daily manifested by their
sundry and facile operations: for in some they gently move Sweat, in others
much Urine, and in others they operate effectually by Stool; and in some again,
they work both by Sweat, Urine, and Stool. So that which way soever Nature is
inclined to acquit her self, that very way they are ready to assist her. And
yet frequently they operate after they begin, by quick Stools, and chiefly upon
the peccant matter, which they attract and eject with such ease, as gives (as
well as Cure) great delight to all who take them. Many more are the virtues
might truly be added to this medicine: but the incredulity of our Age does, in
part, impede a farther account at present. Yet (by persuasion of Friends) I
shall add, That it fortifies the body, and makes it impregnable against the
assaults of all Diseases; and is also found, by daily experience, to free the
body from all malignant humors, and to resist these Diseases, viz. the violent
Headache, Palsy, Falling Sickness, Apoplexy, Lethargy or sleepy Disease,
Vertigo, Dizziness, Frenzy, Madness, Catarrhes or Defluxions, Asthma or
shortness of breath, obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and Mesentery; Agues,
Quotidian, Tertain, or Quartan; foulness, and all distempers of the Womb; all
pains and foulness of the Stomach; putrefaction of Humors; King's Evil,
Leprosy, Mange, Scurf, Running pains, Stitches, Cramps, Convulsions, Gout,
Sciatica, Cholick, Stone, Loos-ness, Fluxes, Excoriation of the Intestines, or
Griping in the Guts; Surfeits, Fevers, Pleuresies, loss of Appetite, Vomiting,
Consumptions: purges all Gross Tartarous humors from the body; frees the whole
Mass of Blood from all impuritie, and preserves the Body sound and vigorous.
And know for certain, that it does not only prevent these Diseases, but does
also Cure the most of them: And, in a word, (without Hyperbole) is one of the
most significant and Noble medicines of the world: for its sundry Virtues;
against all Curable Distempers are not to be reckoned up: which whosoever
lists to credit, and make a through Trial of, shall most assuredly never have
cause of regret for so doing.

I shall also add, that these Pills do wonderfully remedy a Stinking Breath,
if the cause be not in the Teeth; and are sufficiently known to be the only
pertinent medicament under the Sun, against those painful, watery, Phlegmatic
or Choleric Vomitings, incident to the Goodfellow, after drinking much, and
sitting up late at night. Also the Pills being taken, to the number of three,
four or five, as the body is able, the next morning after hard drinking, do
certainly prevent Surfeits, Fevers, Palsies, Gouts, Dropsies, etc. which are
often the effects of too much Wine, or strong Liquors

I shall now insert the names and dwellings of some few (of the great number
that I might) who have been restored by my Pills, out of the most dangerous
Distempers.

Edward Bell Esquire living about the middle of St. Anns-lane, behind Westminster
Abbey, being exceedingly pained and tortured with the Gout in most of his Limbs
and Joints, so that he could not go nor stand for a long time together, was,
after taking but three or four Doses of my Pills, able to walk pretty stoutly;
and before he had taken out two Boxes, did judge himself perfectly cured.

Mr. Tho. Tery, one of his Majesty's Officers belonging to the Excise for
Bewdly, Kidderminster, etc. having been many years afflicted with most grievous
sore and rheumatick Eyes, and having been also troubled with making every day
much bloody Urine for the space of two years, and thereby being brought very
weak, had the advice of several able Physicians in order to his cure; but to no
effect, until he took my Pills, wherewith he was perfectly Cured in a very
short time.

Mr. Whitway, living next the George in Seacoal lane, was exceedingly troubled
with spitting of much corrupt mattery phlegm and blood, and withal, had a most
violent Vomiting; all which continued some months, whereby he was brought
extremely weak; and in the opinion of most about him, not likely to live many
days. This man sent to my house for some of my Pills, by which, as was
acknowledged by himself, he received much good, and was in a short time after
made perfectly well; and has since resolved, not to be without some of my
Pills by him, to be ready upon any sudden sickness that might happen.

Mr. Dove, now Land-waiter of his Majesty's Custom-House, London, but lately an
Officer at Protsmouth, where going on board a ship, a Splinter struck into his
Leg, and gave him such a wound, as proved a long time incurable,
notwithstanding the best means was used by Surgeons, etc. and some pounds
spent in seeking after help, but found none until he took my Pills, by the use
whereof (although he was then ancient and much afflicted with the Scurvy) he
was made perfectly well, without external or outward application, and has
since so continued, as himself can witness.

Mr. Richard Hinton, living near the Cock, toward the upper end of Leatherlane,
being brought into such a low and dangerous condition with griping in the Guts,
as there was very little hopes of life, was however by a Friend of his advised
to my Pills, as the only medicine to be hoped in for his recovery; whereupon he
freely took them, and was thereby in a very few days perfectly recovered.

Mr. Barker, living at Capt. Stanton's next Queen-stairs near Ratcliff-Cross,
having a Son that had been a long time indisposed, weak, and thin of body, and
his Distemper not rightly known, however gave him some of my Pilis, and at the
third or fourth time taking, they brought from him several very large Worms,
one whereof was as big as a Tobacco-pipe, and above half a yard in length,
whereupon the Youth recovered perfect health.

Mr. Joseph Marshall of S. Albans had a servant, by name John White, who was
exceedingly afflicted with the yellow and Black Jaundies, had the Scurvy in a
high degree, and an exceeding dangerous Dropsy, insomuch that all that viewed
him gave him over for a dead man: but he having heard much of the excellency
of my Pills, was very desirous to make trial of them; which accordingly he did,
exactly following the directions in my Book; and was thereby in a very few
weeks perfectly recovered. Of this Cure any person may also be informed at the
Cock-Inne in Aldersgate Street, where the abovenamed Mr. Marshal and his
servant John White are very well known.

Mr. Joseph Seidon, Woodmonger on Mill-banck Westminster, being exceedingly
afflicted with a dangerous Dropsy, insomuch that the print of a singer would
have continued in his flesh at least half an hour; and in this Condition (by a
sad accident) was thrust into the Body with a Sword, and bled much inwardly:
his wounds alone were judged so dangerous, that most gave him over for a dead
man; and yet some persuaded him after all, to try what my Pills would do for
him: which he willingly assented to; and their effects were indeed most
wonderful, for they brought from him all the Coagulated or hardened Blood,
which was judged before would very much hasten his death. They caused his
Wounds quickly to heal, and perfectly Cured his Dropsy.

The Wife of Mr. Tarlton Guilder, living at the Golden Cross in Princes street,
having received a great mischief in her Labor, by mistake or unskilfulness in
her Midwife, was thereby brought into a very sad languishing condition; for
remedy whereof, much means was used, by advice of several Eminent Physicians,
but none prevailed until she took my Pills, which within a few weeks perfectly
eased her of that burden she should have been quit of on the day of her Labor,
which was almost three years before. This Cure, for good reason, is not set
down near so fully as it might; yet is very considerable, and note-worthy.

Mrs. Palmer a Wine-Coopers Wife in Crooked lane, having been above twenty
years very much distempered with the Scurvy, and for remedy whereof she spared
no cost for the best advice, and spent several years (at the seasons) in
drinking the waters of Tunbredge, Epsome, etc. but all in vain: and then, when
no other means could be thought on, she was advised to my Pills; which she
willingly took (exactly following the directions of my book given with them)
and was thereby perfectly recovered, as her self can testify.

Mris Kidderminster living near the Market-house in Shrewsbury, was desperately
diseased with griping in the Guts, the Stone, shortness of breath, the Scurvy,
intolerable gnawing pains in her stomach, and many other distempers, whereby
she was brought so extreme weak, that her death was expected every hour: and
being in this condition, she was told, that if any thing saved her life, it
must be my Pills; which she little minded, as judging her self past help,
however was peraswaded to take four of them, when in all apperance she was even
at the Gates of Death: Those four Pills wrought gently with her, by the way of
Vomit twice, and after gave several Stools. When their operation or working was
over, she found herself much eased, and the next morning was pretty well able
to rise without help, which she could not do in a long time before: And whereas
before she was not able to go two yards without being led, she was now (within
a very few days) by four or five times taking my Pills, able to walk forth, and
was perfectly cured, she being at the same time above seventy five years of age.

Mary the wife of Dennis Barnard of Butleigh in the County of Somerset, being
above three years troubled with a violent tormenting pain in the left side of
her stomach, but more especially after eating or drinking (when it was her
constant use to tumble herself on the ground, in hopes of ease thereby) had the
advice of many Physicians, and took many medicines they prescribed her; but
found no ease at all: and being brought exceeding low, even to the gates of
death, almost despairing of life, was informed of the wonderful effects of my
Pills; whereupon a Box of them was bought for her, at Yeovel in the said
County, she took of them as many and as often as her body was able to bear; and
they brought from her by Stool many hundreds of living Worms, of strange
shapes; some about an inch in length, some longer, and headed like Eels. At
last they brought from her somewhat like a bag; which was judged to be that
wherein the Worms had lain. The woman upon this recovered perfect health,
looked fresh and well, and became as able to follow her business as in all her
life; she being at the same time fifty years of age.

Mr. John Johnson, servant to Mr. Thomas Forth, Brewer in St. Giles's in the
fields, London, being so far gone in a most dangerous Dropsy, that he appeared
to all that beheld him absolutely past Cure, and not likely to live three days:
This man, to the great admiration of all that knew him, was perfectly cured
with my Pills. Of this great Cure any may be satisfied at the house of the said
Mr. Forth, as also by most of the Inhabitants thereabout.

On Monday the 19th of Fber. 1671. came to my house Mr. Higham of Barnelms
within 5 or 6 miles of London, who had been an eminent practitioner in Physic
near 30 years, he told me, that many of my pills had been made use of by his
advice: and further said, that he had given them to several of his Patients in
most Distempers; and I do declare, said he, in the presence of God, that in my
lifetime I have not met with any medicine, either in England, or my foreign
Travels comparable to your Pills, for the cure of Diseases in general.

I could, if convenient, name many (of great Quality) who by experience have
found my Pills to be the choice Physic of the world; particularly one of the
Dukes of the Kingdom, who has taken my Pills; and in his Letter (which I have
now by me) his Grace is pleased, in a very high manner, to approve them, and to
let me know they are a very Famous medicine in his Country. I could also insert
many others that have had help by them in London, and several other the
considerable parts of England, etc. where they are now to be sold: for, if
there be truth in man, I have daily tidings of their most wonderful efficacy in
curing such Diseases, as by most are judged incurable. Notwithstanding, for
urther confirmation, have been persuaded to insert the following Letters.

A Letter from Mr. Humph. Harris, Surgeon and Schoolmaster in Sandwhich in
the Isle of Purbeck.
Sir,
I Have lately bought some of your Pills of Mr. Churchil at Dorchester in the
County of Dorset; and having taken of them my self, have found them excellent
Pills: my wife also having been a long time troubled with a disease in her head
much like a Vertigo, by a few times taking them has received much ease; they
have also eased her stomach, which was very foul, and very much straightened and
obstructed, with a continual wheezing and want of breath. I have spared some to
my neighbors; who have found much benefit by them, and commend them as the
best Physic they ever took. Pray be pleased to send me about Forty or Fifty
shillings worth; and let them be delivered to the Pool-Carrier, who will pay
your Messenger for them. I have no more, but remain.

Sandwhich the 2 of April, 72. Sir, Your humble servant Humphry Harris.

A Letter from Mr. William Woodgate, Mercer and Grocer at Brenchly in Kent.
Much Honored Sir:
THe Providence of God bringing one of your Books to my hand, wherein you
discover the Causes. Symptoms, etc. of the Scurvy; with which, and Gravel, a
consumptiveness, much oppression by wind, and the Jaundice, I have been some
years past exercised: I sent for some of your Pills, and used them according to
directions; and through mercy, do find much benefit by them, praised be to
God, who has directed you in making those Excellent Pills. And Sir, I had
quite lost the Sense of Smelling, long before ever I heard of your Pills, which
is almost returned, but not fully, and do therefore desire your further Advice
in that particular; which please to send by my Carier John Austin, who Innes at
the George in Southwark. Several hereabout, observing the wonderful Cure that
your Pills have wrought upon me, have taken many of serving the wonderful Cure
that your Pills have wrought upon me, have taken many of them with admirable
success. The particulars of their effects, with testimonies of the several
Cures they have performed in these parts, you may suddenly expect from

Brenchly, the 22 of May, 72. Sir, Your most humble Servants, Will. Woodgate.

A Letter from Mr. John Bingham, at Belwood in the Parish of Belton in the Isle
of Axholm, Lincolnshire.
SIR.
I Make bold to acquaint you of a most wonderful Cure the Lord has been
pleased to work with your Pills: I have a Son about 23 years of age, that has
been very Dropsical, troubled with the Scurvy, and several other Distempers
these 5 or 6 years, and of late has been exceedingly swelled with the Dropsy
in his legs, privities and almost all parts of his body; a great dimness fell
into his eyes, and withal he had a pain in his head so violent, that he could
hardly contain himself within the bounds of patience, and by reason thereof his
head was held almost continually; be slept not in 3 or 4 days nor nights: and
in this languishing condition fell into a grievous Flux, and had in a very
short time at least 30 stools of nothing but blood, so that my self and several
others judged he could not live 6 hours, for indeed he appeared as like a dying
man as ever we saw any. And in this condition I ventured to give him some of
your Pills, and it pleased God that with 2 or 3 doses of them, his stools began
to change; and before he had taken out an half box, the violent pain in his
head and his Dropsy were much abated; and by that time he had taken out a
whole box, all his distempers were perfectly cured, to the great admiration of
all that either saw or heard of his condition: only his eyes continue weak and
dim; And for recovery thereof, I humbly entreat your advice in a line or two,
which I shall take as a very great favor, endeavor to requite, and ever remain

Belwood, Jan. 11. 1674. Sir Your most obliged Friend and Servant John Bingham.

A Letter from Mr. Nicolas Pierson, Mayor of Portsmouth.
Worth Sir:
A Servant of mine (by name John Gawler) wat most extraordinarily afflicted
with the Scurvy, and also very Dropsical, being through that distemper so
swelled, that he was hardly able to lift his hands to his head; and withal was
very much troubled with sores in his hands and legs, which did so torment him,
that indeed he was an Object of Pity. We made use of what means could be had
here for his Cure, but in vain: until at last your Pills proved so effectual,
that by his taking less then two half Boxes, I praise God, he was made in
perfect health. I had given you this account some months ago; but doubting he
might fall into the same distemper again, did forbear; but now I see his Cure
confirmed, have thought fit to acquaint you thereof. Also Mr. Fairehill
Shoemaker in Portsmouth, being exceedingly prrplext with the Scurvy, and his
legs so swelled that he was hardly able to go out of his house, was, as he did
himself acknowledge, by taking one Box of your Pills, made perfectly well: And
further, I Will assure you Sir, I have heard many others most higly commend them,
but at present have not time to give a more particular account; and therefore
shall add no more, but that you will grant a line to

Portsmouth, Oct. 17. 1672. Sir Yours in all love Nicholas Pierson.

A Letter from Mr. William Higgins of Pembridge near Leominster, in the County
of Hereford.
SIR.
I Hold my self obliged to give you an account of the great benefit I have
received by the worth and excellency of your Pills. My distemper has been an
inverterate Cough, with an extraordinary straitness of my breast, and shortness
of breath much oppressed with phlegm anh melancholy, with violent stitches and
pains, so that for some years past I have been visited so sharply, and brought
so low with the violence of an incessant Cough, spitting up corrupt matter and
phlegm with frequent, long, and faint Sweatings that all that ever see me in
that condition, judged it to be the last actings of a Consumption, and that
each fit would have pakt me to the grave. And in this condition, your Pills
were proposed (by some that had experienced them) as the most likely Medicine
for my relief; whereupon I sent to Leominster for some of them, which I took as
your book directed; and finding immediate ease and comfort, I continued (as
strength would permit) until I had emptied several half boxes, with admirale
success, and am now, I praise God, hearty, strong and well, having escaped this
last Spring, the usual time of relapsing into my old distemper. This Gentleman
the bearer hereof can give you a more ample relation than I dare permit my pen
to do, unless I should transgress in exceeding the bounds of a Letter: but this
I must assure you that the whole Number of my acquaintance looks upon my
recovery with no small wonder; and Sir, for my own part, I shall ever extol
the virtues of your excellent Pills above all Medicines, for their quick,
easy, and most affectual operation upon the peccant humors; and this not only
by my own experience, but by observtion of their effects upon several of my
friends and acquaintance, of which (if requisite) I could give some instances:
but let this beg your candid acceptance, and suffice to assure you that I own
my life saved by your Pills, and am,

Pembridge vi. Junii, 1673. Sir, Your humble Servant, William Higgins.

The manner of taking my PILLS, is thus.
I. PErsons of a middle strength are to begin with taking two or three Pills at
Bedtime, three hours after a very light Supper (but no Supper is better.) If
two or three be not sufficient, add one every night, until you take five, six
or seven at once, or that you have the Dose that best agrees with your body:
take them two or three nights one after another, (or as strength will allow)
then forbear them a night, (or two nights, if the Patient be not strong) then
take them, as before, etc.

II. Those whose Bodies are weak, or that a little Physic will work with, may
begin with two Pills, taken after their first sleep, or very early in the
morning fasting, and lie in bed an hour, or 2 or 3 hours after them, if
conveniently they can, and if they sleep upon them, it will be the better.

III. Note, If the Pills work much in the night, it will afterward be best to
take them very early in the morning, and to lie in bed as before directed; or
two, or three, more or less, may be taken at night, and as many in the morning.
Women with-childe, and those that give Suck, should begin with taking but one
or two Pills; and afterward may take more, as they find them convenient.

IV. To Children about three of four years old, give half or three quarters of
a Pill; to Elder Children, give a Pill, two or three, according to their age
and strength.

V. If the patient by thirsty in time of the Pills operation or working, he may
drink a draught or two of such Liqour as he best likes, except in Dropsies, in
which it is much better to drink the liquor made as follows (if conveniently
to be had.)

Take of the tops of Green-Broom six handful, of Fumitory as much;
Scurvy Grass, Wormwood, of each three handful, all cut; Bark of Elder ten
ounces Juniper Berries bruised twelve ounces, Anniseeds bruised fix ounces,
Horse-Radish-Roots three ounces, liquorish four ounces; slice the Roots, put
all into a thin Linen or Hair Bag, and put them into five Gallons of strong
Ale: when it has almost done Working, within a day or two after, the Patient
should begin to drink thereof three draughts in a day; but if the drink no
other Liquor, it will be the better: and let him sometimes eat a little Candid
or GreenGinger; and still remember, besides the drink to take my Pills as
before appointed. These directions observed, is an Infallible Remedy against
any curable Dropsy, as has been very often proved. And note, this Drink, with
my Pills, is of excellent use for such as find themselves very far gone with
the Scurvy.

VI. Such as care not to swallow Pills alone, may take them in a little of the
pap of an Apple Stewed prunes, 3 or, 4 spoonfuls of Beer, Ale or Wine, or they
may be bruised or cut small (which indeed is the best way if they be very hard)
and taken with Honey, Sugar, the pap of an Apple, Beer, Ale or Wine, etc.

VII. Against the Pox, Gonorrbaea, or Running of the Reins, let the Pills be
taken in the largest dose, so long as occasion shall require: and if in the Pox
there be many Warts, breakings out, Scabs or Ulcers, that very much molest the
patient, let him have but a little patience, and by the use of my pills, they
will all infallibly vanish: but if the patient be in extraordinary haste to
have such Scabs, Crust or Ulcers disappear, then let him continue my pills as
above-directed, and to his sores, apply this medicine following.

Take Unguentum Basilicum half an ounce, Red precipitate twenty granes,
Mercurius Dulcis, in most fine Powder, one dram; mix all well together, and
apply some of it upon Lint, every day fresh, to your sores, etc.

VIII. Note, My pills sometimes give an easy Vomit or two; that is, when the
dose is large, the stomach foul, or nature much inclined that way: which still
proves very well for the patient; for they always carry forth such Choleric,
Phlegmatic, and other noxious Excrements, as Nature could not evacuate any
other way, and by that means often complete the Cure. And if in their working
the patient chance to be much Stomach-sick (which seldom happens) then let him
drink a glass of Sack, or burnt White Wind; or if Wine be too costly, a draught
of strong Ale warmed, either of which usually gives speedy ease.

IX. I advise all, in the time of taking my pills, from old Cheese, and meats
very salt and windy,

X. Note, That in any sudden sickness or infection, (against which they are
excellently good) with all speed that may be, the patient should take a full
dose of my pills, viz. 4, 5, or 6, according to Age and strength, and the next
day take the medicine following.

Take mithridate one dram and half, (or two drams) Salt of Wormwood one
scruple, Diaphoretick Antimony sixteen grains, Spirit of Sulphur fifteen drops,
Carduus-Water four ounces: mix them. An Apothecary can make up the medicine for
you, or it may be had faithfully made up at my own house. Take it in bed in the
morning fasting: be covered warm, and sweat as strength will allow.

This potion is for a person of middle strength. When you come out of your
Sweat, be careful that you catch no Cold. A day or two after, you may take
another dose of my Pills: but if the disease be no Infection, and seem not to
be extraordinary dangerous, the Cordial Sweating medicine need not be taken,
for my Pills alone will complete the Cure, (in which you may confide against
most Diseases curable by Physic.) But here, by the way, you should consider,
that when Nature is so oppressed by an inverterate disease, as that some of the
internal principal parts are ulcerated and perished, (which often happens) that
then it is impossible to make new ones instead of those consumed: In all such
cases we have just cause to judge the Patient immedicable, or incurable: Also
we know, it is appointed for man once to die, Heb. 9.27. and when that time is
come, it is not the best Physic in the world shall protract it one minute; in
such cases my Pills can do no good: and therefore every one ought to consider
what has been said, and to expect accordingly; and remember, that a small
matter will resist a disease in its beginning, but when once radicated or
rooted, it is with much difficulty cured: and therefore to oppugn or resist a
disease in its Minority, is no small point of wisdom.

XI. Note, The Cordinal Sweating potion above prescribed, is also of admirable
use for such as have the Pox, to be taken once or twice in a week; also against
pains of the Body, Limbs or Joints; the Gout, Scurvy, Dropsy, etc. but the
Patient should continue taking my Pills, save on the Sweating days, as
above-directed.

XII. Note, That in the preparation of these most excellent Pills, is not only
much pains, care and watching, but also vast expense: Notwithstanding, that the
meaner sort might have help hereby, as well as the rich, I have set a very low
rate upon them; the half Box whereof, Forty Pills in number, (or within one or
two more or less) being but Three shillings; and the whole Box, containing
Eighty Pills, (or within two or three more or less) Six shillings.

But because of Dangers, and extraordinary Charge of Freight by Sea, and great
Cost of Returns from many parts out of England, the half Box of Pills in
Ireland is sold for Three shillings six pence, and the whole box for Seven
shillings, and not under.

They are sealed up in Tin-boxes, with my own Seal at Arms, being A Lion
passant guardant; and are also to be sold by

Mr. Henry Brom Bookseller, at the Gun near the West End of St. Paul's Chruch.
Mr. Francis Ashborne, at the Bodies and Sleeves in Cheapside near
Friday-street. Mr. Daniel Bennet, Cutler in Exchange-alley in Cornhil. Mr.
Robert Boulter Bookseller, at the Turks head against the Royal Exchange in
Cornhil. Mr. John Painter Coffee-man, at his house commonly called John's
Coffee-house, above the Royal exchange in Cornhil. Mr. Alkin Confectioner, at
the Lion and Ball against Cree-church in Leadenhal street. Mr. Tuthil
Bookseller, at the Surgeons Sign near the Armitage-Bridge. Mr. Butther
Distiller, at the Plow and Still against the George Inn in Southwark. Mr.
Stevens Confectioner, at the Sugar Loaf against White-cross-street, joining to
Cripplegate-Church. Mr. Tho. Chew Distiller, at the Green-man near Smithfield
bars. Mr. George Lion Grocer, at the Tobacco-roll at little Queen street-end in
High-Holborn. Mr. John Baynes Tin-man at the Bird cage at Cock-lane end,
against Holborn-Conduit. Mrs. Firby Stationer, under Grays-Inne-gate in
Holborn. Mr. John Starkey Bookseller, at the Mitre in Fleetstreet near Temple
bar. Mr. Preston Bookseller, at the Rose and Crown in Great Turnstile-ally in
Holborn. Mr. Magnes Bookseller, at the Posthouse in Russel Street
Covent Garden. Mrs. Duke Coffee-seller, against the Star-Inn in the Strand near
Charing Cross. Mr. Pierson Distiller, at the Golden Still against the Miter
tavern in Kings-street Westminster. Mr. Milward at Westminster-Hall-gate. Mr.
Simon Wood, Mercer in Bewdley. Mr. Hugh Keate, Bookseller in Evesham. Mr.
Stephen Dagnal, Bookseller in Alisbury, and at his shop in Layton. Mr. John
Philips, Bookseller and Postmaster in Worcester. Mr. John Broughton,
Barber-Chirurgeon in Welling borrow. Mr. John Ball, Stationer, against the
Shambles in Banbury. Mr. Richard Hunt, Bookseller, in Hereford. Mr. Obed Smith,
Bookseller in Daventry. Mr. John Morris, mercer in Wickham. Mr. Edward Milward,
Bookseller, near the George in Litchfield, and at his Shop in Tamworth. Mr.
Joshua Simmons, Mercer in Alderston. Mr. Tho, Yate, Grocer in Whitchurch in
Shropshire. Mris. Ruth Tompson, Bookseller in Harborough, and at her Shops in
Lutterworth and Kettering. Mris. Elizabeth Lincoln, Bookseller in
Saturday-market-place in Leicester, and at her Shop next the Crown-Inn in
Loughborough. Mr. Jethro Thornton, Bookseller in Derby. Mr. Jeremiah Tomlinson,
Bookseller in Warrington and at his Shop in Leverpool. Mr. Thomas Green,
Bookseller in Lancaster. Mr. Ralph Shelmerdin, Stationer in Manchester. Mr.
Christopher Lee, Bookseller in Maidston. Mr. Allen Sartan, Grocer, against the
Colledge-Gate in Rochester. Mr. Rest Fenner, Bookseller in Canterbury. Mr.
Thomas Heaviside, Scrivener near the Sun in Chatham. mr. John Hall, Chandler in
Dover. Mr. William Baily, Bookseller in Wolverhampton. Mr. Griffith Davies,
Mercer in Oswaldstry. Mrs. Martha Tubb, Confectioner, at her shop at Mris. Mary
Corbets, in Mardol in Shrewsbury. Mr. Richard Clifford, Chandler in
Northampton. Mr. John Jervis, Barber-Chirurgion at the Grate-house in Warwick.
Mr. Richard Graygooss, Grocer in Epping. Mr. Richard Monck, mercer in
Mansfield. Mr. William Williams, at the Red Lion Inn in Brackley. Mr. Henry
Howard, barber-chirurgion in Buckingham. Mr. Daniel May, at the Cock in
Watford. Mr. Thomas Slator Mercer in Sturbridge in Worcester shire. Mr. Thomas
Loxam Mercer in Preston. Mr. Kichard Waldron Barber-chirurgion near the market
place in Ludlow. Mr. Jaws Wills, Barber in Hinckly. Mr. Hierom Gregory,
Bookseller in Brimigham. Mr. Jacob Watson Mercer in Them. Mr. Henry Tomlin
Mercer in Stratford upon Avon. Mr. Thomas Radford Merc et in Chesterfield. Mr.
John Punter Grocer in Luton. Mr. Thomas Wicksled Bookseller in Bridgnorth. Mr.
Stephen Waring Barber-chirurgion in Chippingnorion. Mr. Thomas Wright mercer
near the Cross in Coventry. Mr. John Warner, Barber-Chirurgion at the Nagsheed
in Dunstable Mr. John Battisson, Iroum Oager in Newport Pagnel. Mr. Samuel
Fenn, Hatter in Bedford. Mr. James Lem, Distiller, at the Still near the Cross
in Chester. Mr. Thomas Pitts Barber-chyrurgeon in Lyme. Mr. William Wells,
Grocer in Peterborough. Mr. John Cairnes, Bookseller at the entrance into the
Parliamentyard in Edinburgh. Mr. John North, Bookseller against the Tolsel in
Dublin.
And all other the usual places appointed for Sale of them.

ADVERTISEMENT.
BEcause I would be as plain as it is possible, and would have no mistake, pray
observe, That those whose Distempers are of long continuance, cannot in reason
expect perfect cure with six or seven times taking my Pills; such should
therefore take them in a Doss as large as they can conveniently bear, (but not
to weaken Nature too much) and continue them 15, or 20 days, or longer, if need
require; omitting them a day or two sometimes, as before-directed, or as the
Patient shall see cause. And that my Pills may as far as is possible answer
every ones expectation, I do advise all persons that shall ^^e them (whole,)
and not find them operate by Stools, or other ways by Sweat, Urine, etc. as
may be expected from the number taken, that they would afterward cut of bruise
them pretty small, and so take them in the pap of an Apple, stewed Prunes, or
drink them in half a dozen spoonfuls of Ale, Beer, or what best likes them;
which is a sure way to make them operate to content, though seven years old.
They being really not at all the worse (but only harder) by long keeping: and
in such case of their not working to content, also, to drink a good draught on
two in the forenoon of Posset Drink thin Broth, or Ale, will be very
significant to forward and quicken their operation. But withal note, that when
not only my Pills, but any other Cathartique Medicine has been taken three or
four days succeffively, there cannot be matter the third and fourth times to
work on, as there was the first and second takings. And as it is most Certain,
that they do not always perform the Cure by giving Stools only, but as well by
strengthening the faculties of the Stomach, provoking Urine, Sweat, opening all
stuborn Obstructions, purifying the Blood, etc. So is it also most true, that
half so many Stools, when they have been taken three or four days as above
mentioned, are as significant to the cure of a Distemper, as so many more were
at first taking. All which rightly weighed, will I presume be full Satisfaction
to all Considering Men.

FINIS.

