LETTERS BETWEEN The Ld GEORGE DIGBY, AND Sr KENELM DIGBY knight, CONCERNING
Religion.

London, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the
sign of the Prince's Arms in St Paul's Churchyard, 1651.

To the Reader.
IT is no EXCUSE (though too often it is made one) to tell Thee these LETTERS
are now made public to prevent false Copies: for really, if you have not
these, you will be abused with others, so imperfect and mangled, that we may
justly pronounce them to be none of the Authors own. In Matters of Religion
there ought to be greatest care to publish nothing but what is genuine, which
here (without more words) thou will soon find is faithfully offered thee.

Farewell.
LETTERS BETWEEN The Ld GEORGE DIGBY AND Sr KENELM DIGBY knight, CONCERNING
RELIGION.
My noblest Cousin and dearest friend.
I Ever thought my self a Rich man in the many testimonies of your favor,
being persuaded that the authority of your esteeming me, may work more upon the
World to my advantage, then many personal defects of mine own to my prejudice.
Among my best titles to valuation with Worthy men, I treasure up your last
Letter, expecting to receive thereby as much Credit hereafter, as I do now
obligation; when those that find it, (knowing your eminence and only my name)
shall happily misconceive my praises there to have bin of your judgment, which
I must refer merely to your love and civility. Persist I beseech you in the
former of these, and restrain your self in the excess of the latter, permitting
and owning me to be your friend, without making me mine own flatterer; of which
I can never come in danger, but by your Commendations. I think my self as happy
to bear the name of your friend, and promise to my self as much eternity by
the relation, as he who ingraved Sir Philip Sydnie's friendship on his Monument.

But I must tell you, I aspire yet to a far greater felicity, that is, to be
made worthy of so brave an appellation, to which you can best contribute, if
you please to impart freely to me your own rare abilities, and my weaknesses,
rather then to darken these unto me, in exercising but the slightest part that
you excel in, Courtliness. To take you off from this, and to engage you in the
other, give me leave to lay hold on that part of your Letter which concerns my
Studies. Wherein, as your example and advice have ever been my prime directory
in the way of them, so in the several judgments of what I read, yours must be
ever with me of singular Authority:

Yet in the particular concerning the Fathers, I must confess, as I came unto
them, perhaps with different preparations, so I have likewise perused many of
them with reflections upon their usefulness, far differing from those you
specify. I am so far from receiving them as Judges, that in many cases I
cannot admit them as witnesses Authentic enough, whereon to pass a Verdict in
Religion. I discover methinks too prone a byas in most of their evidence,
either to the establishing of their own private opinions, or to the destruction
of their adversaries. And this even in the most Primitive of them faction it
seems, and a kind of Sectary passion, having had as strong, though not so
various a Current, even near to the very springs of verity, as afterward in the
remoter Channels, as you can much better instance (if you please) then I, out
of Eusebius, Epiphanius, and St Augustine; who themselves also, as they seem to
adhere to the Catholic Church, and as the Roman glories in them, may well be
by both sides allowed an Expurgator.

For that which you say, Secondly, that you rely more upon the Fathers, for
what they tell us they were taught, then upon what they teach, I profess I
should do so too, could I be but half so well assured of the first part of your
reason; namely, that the former was derived from an infallible Authority, as I
am of the other, that their own reasons were liable to Error. But to tell you
true, as I can yet find no reason to make me acknowledge that there is any
infallible Authority, but only the Scriptures (which I conceive is not that you
mean;) so do I find as little that the Fathers (especially those before the
first Nicene Council) were persuaded of any such. And grant they were, I can
least of all discern which of the various doctrins they deliver, were rightly
delivered to them from that unerring authority. Since it is apparent, methinks,
that they do teach many uncertainties and errors, as Dogmatically, and with as
solemn confirmations, as they do the most authentic truths. Hardly shall you
find Scripture alleged more frankly by them, or the Church tradition
proclaimed more lowdly in any point of Faith, then by Justin and Tertullian, in
the rigid censure of the use of Images, and in the same Tertullian in affirming
Christ's descent to free the Patriarks; and in these two, and diverse others, the
gross assertion of the Angels copulation with women: and lastly, then in all
the Millenaries most confident authorizing of their Judaick doctrine. These are
perhaps of the slighter instances, such as flow easiest into a Letter from a
bad memory, and yet I pray you resolve me which of them I shall let pass, as
derived from infallibility? whether that which our Church approves, and the
Roman condemns, as the first; or that which the Roman agrees to, and we
disallow, as the second; or the second last, which both sides reject? I profess
I am as yet to distinguish which of them these Fathers meant we should swallow
as delivered to them, and which chew and consider as only delivered by them.
These and many more irreconcilable passages in them, have rendered me much
alike affected both to what you say they tell us they were taught, and to what
they teach; that is, to have my reason, as much as I can cleared and
enlightened by both, but to suffer it to be hoodwinkt and lead implicitly by
neither. I reverence those holy Fathers, as divine establishers of Faith in
things where they all concur, and where not, as happy aides of the
understanding, and as it were sacred bellows of the soul whether to make it
glow unto contrition, and fervor of zeal, or to subtilize and exalt it into
flames of contemplation.

It is now high time for me to beg your pardon, for having licensed my self so
much to your trouble. It is an inconvenience drawn upon you by your excess of
favor and obligingness, that have encouraged me freely to express to your self
my ill-digested opinions; wherein toward any other I should have been
restrained by shame and the consciousness of mine own incapacities, but from
you I ever promise my self rectifying, where from another I might look for
contempt: All your just censures, I am sure will be sweetened instantly by this
one consideration, that this penance has been laid upon you by

Noblest Cousin, Your faithful Servant
SHERBURN, November. 2. 1638. G. D.

My Noblest Lord, and most honored Friend;
MY unsteady abode in the town, and frequent sudden excursions out of it of
late, have cast me so far behindehand with your Lordship, not only for what
civility requires of me, but for what duty binds me unto, as I was grown to
a belief that I could make no other amends for my long silence, but by coming
on purpose to Sherburn to you to excuse it. And therefore out of an ill
bashfulness I forbore acknowledging my fault by Letter, referring that till I
was in state to repair it by mine own personal attendance. But that being not
likely to fall out so soon, I being to go to morrow to my Mothers, and thence
to my own house for some weeks; and I having lately received a picture from my
Lord Russel, with command to send it as soon as I could to your Lordship, I
durst not make that a prisoner till I got liberty my self to wait upon you. By
which means I am engaged, without being able to defer it any longer, to give
you humble thanks for your letter of the second of November, and to crave your
pardon that I came thus late to do it. So sudden and distracted an hour as I
have now to write in, would deter me from offering at any return to so
obliging and judicious a Letter, till I had a greater freedom both of time and
thoughts. But I can never be taken unprovided for the first part, my sincere
affection to your Lordship, and sense of your favors ever outweighing any
other humane object that may busy my mind: and for the second, of answering
your judicious objections, I shall confide more for the solution of them in
your own calm and impartial reflections upon them, then in ought I shall be
able to reply. Therefore had I never so much time, I would for this intent
employ it only in reducing the matters into your remembrance, and entreating
you to commit the appearances on both sides fairly one against another into the
balances, and let your own Reason hold the Scale, which I must acknowledge
with excess of joy, to be the strongest and most sincere that I know in any
man. I should begin the performance of this task with complaining to your
Lordship in the Fathers behalf, and representing their grievances to your
Lordship, that you are so rigorous to them, as to exclude them from being
witnesses in matters of Religion. Their humility, as well of understanding, as
of manners, will not let them be troubled when they are recused as Judges: They
never pronounce any thing out of their own breasts unto which they will confine
other men's assents. But when they tell you plainly what they were taught, and
what they sinde believed and practiced generally throughout the whole Church,
have they not reason to take it unkindly to be rejected. If you will examine
their veracity by all those circumstances that are usually considered in taking
men's depositions, you will find them strong on their side. They were right
honest men, not only believed, but known to be such by all the world. They are
acknowledged on all hands to be so judicious, as would more blemish ones own
judgment then theirs, but to call it in question. What they wrote of, are
matters belonging to their own Art and Trade, in which surely they would have
great care and attention not to mistake, since their own and their posterities
eternal salvation depended on it: Since then there is will and ability to
inform us of truth, why should we suspect them? What can appear stronger to us
in opposition of what they deliver as witnesses, to make us doubt their
evidence? and consequently to brand them with the imputation of falsehood and
ignorance, flattering our selves that new and clearer lights shine to us, and
that we know more then they? Their private opinions (for the establishing of
which your Lordship says, you discover too prone a Bias in most of their
evidence) do not interest our beliefs; in such points we are as free as they.
Nor can I believe so ill of any of them, as to make those to pass for current,
they would stamp upon them the seal of being taught from hand to hand, and of
tradition from Christ and his Apostles, and of the general and uncontrouled
belief and practice of the Church; or if they did, certainly their numerous
adversaries would not have let such foul play escape their note. It is true,
they were ever, as your Lordship observes, earnest and severe against them who
were such, as if they had been mild against their Heresies, they would never
have gained the name of Fathers and Pillars of the Church, nor have been
reverenced as Saints by succeeding Ages. The faction and sectary-passion that
your Lordship remarketh even near the springs of verity, belongs only to
their adversaries; their warmth is just and due zeal: And for those three
Fathers of whom your Lordship says, that we as well as you may allow them an
Expurgator; I profess my slender reading never met, to my best remembrance,
with any doctrine of faith in them, that I do not entirely assent unto. In the
next place, my Lord, I must clear what I mean by the infallible Authority from
whence the Fathers derived what they were taught, which I distinguished against
what of themselves they teach. Of this later sort are the reflections that they
make upon the Scriptures, when in their Comments or Sermons they deliver to us
what occurred to them in the interpretation of the Texts of it. And when they
are but barely such, I conceive they are to have no more weight with those that
have ability to examine them, then the reasons wherewith they are accompanied
do give them. But the other points of Doctrine I take to have been taught by
Christ to his Apostles, and by them preached through the world, and then again
delivered to the ensuing age by them that had these points inculcated into
their hearts by the Apostles, and in this manner with care (and every where)
handed over from age to age; which upon particular occasions the Fathers used
to sum up and produce against Innovators that would make breaches upon the
ancient and generally received Faith of the Church. Doctrines thus delivered, I
conceive, to be derived from infallible Authority, as well as the Scriptures,
and withal, that it is so safely conveyed to us, as we are as deeply obliged
to believe it, as what the Scriptures teach us, and in governing the tenor of
our Faith, to give them much the precedence: Because by such Tradition, we are
fully, plainly, and practically taught how to understand it, and the business
and errand of it is, to deliver it so unto us; whereas the causes of writing
the particular Books of Scripture, were for other particular ends, and not to
give us a complete body of Faith. And those Articles of it that they do deliver
us, are not so plainly expressed, that every body can understand them. So that
if it be once admitted, that by such tradition, there can be had in all ages a
complete and true knowledge of what Christ taught, it cannot be denied, but that
it is an easier and better rule to guide our understanding in the affairs of
Religion, then to resort for that end to the Scripture alone. And that such
tradition is infallible, I have endeavored to prove in another discourse which
your Lordship has, so that I will not trouble you here with any repetitions
upon that Subject. Now when I wrote to your Lordship my opinion of the use to
be made of reading the Fathers, relying upon them more for what they were
taught, then for what they teach; it was as taking them for faithful Collectors
of the tradition that they found general through the Church in their times, and
sincere conveyers of them to us: And this course you shall find even among the
ancientest of them. When St. Austin will establish the doctrine of praying for
the dead, he tells that it has been the practice of the whole Church from
the Apostles time. The like he does against the Pelagians, and upon several
other occasions; and directs us to enquire what faith is professed in the
Churches established by the Apostles; from whom he reckons on the
uninterrupted succession of Pastors unto his time: And by them he deriveth the
present Doctrine from the first preachers, who had it immediately from Christ.
Tertullian, when he prescribes against Heresy, gives you a Catalogue of the
Bishops of several Churches, from the several Apostles that planted them; and
with the successions of the persons urges the succession in those Churches of
the Doctrine he seeks to establish. Irenaeus does the like, and generally all
of them; which they do not only when they use those formal positive words that
the whole Church has received from the Apostles, and holds generally such
and such a Doctrine: but at other times also when they do but intimate it in
their discourses, which intimation is such as is easily perceptible to
whosoever of judgment shall read them impartially. Therefore to summon up as
short and as plainly as I can, the use, as I conceive is to be made of reading
the Fathers; I say that letting pass what they writ as Commentors upon the
Scriptures, and as Phliosophers, and all which is but as Divines and Scholars,
we are generally to take hold of what they deliver us as Pastors of the Church,
which appears chiefly by what they writ against those they brand with
Heresy, which they could not do, were not those points which they censure,
against the known and general tradition of the Church: And next when they
deliver us dogmatically and professedly any doctrine, in such sort as we may
reasonably conceive they intended we should take it as matter of faith, not
giving it as conceptions of their own, which they bring only learned arguments
on texts of Scripture to maintain: In all which a free and good judgment will
easily discern by reading them, which way to incline; which I knowing your
Lordship to be, do beseech you to apply it a little industriously, to collect
throughout their sense, and by what they say to frame a model of the
Government, Belief, and practice of the Church wherein they lived, and then
tell me whether it be like yours or ours: It is worth the while; Critics
labor to get some knowledge of the manners and customs of Ages long since
past by little fragments of antiquity that have hardly escaped into their hands.
And Lawyers get a knowledge of the Government and frame of the State in Kings
raigns long ago, by broken and disjoynted Records, that they meet with
scattered in several Files. And these maimed evidences by chance fallen into
their Hands, do serve to beget a fairer body of knowledge, when they know how
to make a right use of them, and such as will convince an indifferent and equal
hearer: much more certainly the Fathers works that handle professedly and at
large the affairs of the Church and Religion, and whereof we have such plenty,
will fairly inform a rational and discoursing man of the true state of them in
their times, and what they conceived and had been taught, imported Heaven or
Hell in man's belief and practice; which I am sure your Lordship will allow to
carry a great stroke in ours, and from which it is madness, if not impiety, to
depart upon less grounds then a demonstration to convince the contrary. Though
I have already too much trespassed upon your Lordships patience by my tedious
Letter, yet I may not conclude it, till I have said a word or two to the four
instances your Lordship gives toward the latter end of yours. First, for the
use of Images, I do not conceive it to be a precept given by Christ, but since
introduced by the Governors of the Church, as a thing convenient to raise
devotion in the people.

Now things of that nature may be convenient at one time, and unfit at another.
When I dolatry was fresh in the memory and practice of the world, it was
dangerous to admit it, therefore in the primitive times Justin and Tertullian
might have reason to cry it down. But because there was no precept of Christ in
that behalf conserved in the Church, you see they urge not the authority of
Tradition of the Church to beat down their use, but arguments of their own, and
Texts of Scripture produced by them; whereas now in times secured from that
danger, and a great good appearing in them (they being as a Father said, the
books of unlettered persons to beget knowledge and stir up devotion in them)
as strong arguments, and as pregnant Texts of Scripture are produced for their
use, and to justify the Governors of the Church in recommending them to the
people. Your second instance is of Tertullians affirming Christ's descent to
free the Patriarchs; which I conceive not only he, but all the Fathers that
ever spoke of that particular, deliver it in a matter of faith, and so it has
been ever held by the Church: which word of Descent I take it is to be
understood, as we all do, the Article of the Creed, He descended into Hell,
that is, by his power and operation at least, by which he confounded the
damned, comforted the souls in Purgatory, and brought to the sight of God,
those in Abraham's bosom, that is, a place of rest, where yet they enjoyed not
the beatificall vision. For to give other motion and place to a soul, is a
question in Philosophy, and concerns not faith; and such was the assertion of
the Angels copulation with women; for many, or rather most of the Fathers were
of opinion, that they were not pure Spirits, but had very subtle and immortal
bodies (the contrary of which was never yet delivered as matter of faith,
howbeit by force of Argument now the corporiety of Angels is exploded out of
the Schools) and thus supposing that opinion, the way is obvious enough in
commenting some Texts of Scripture, to fall into that error, which so becomes
an error in Philosophy, and in no wise concerning faith. And that other of the
Millenaries, which is the last your Lordship urges, appears plainly to have
grown among some of the Fathers, (with whom the authority of Papias weighed
much) by literally interpreting a Text of the Apocalypse; but never any of them
urged the generally received opinion of the Church, nor public Tradition from
Christ and the Apostles. And besides, the Church has never yet to this day
condemned as an heresy, that part of the Millenaries belief, which some of
the Fathers held (which is, of the Saints reigning with Christ a thousand
years upon earth after their resurrection, and enjoying only spiritual
delights) but only other foul enormities which went under the name of the
Millenaries heresies. Now by what I have said to those instances in particular,
and bringing that spirit that I said before was required to the reading of the
Fathers, I conceive it will be no hard matter to determine which of them, as
your Lordship says, we are to swallow as delivered to them, and which to chaw
and consider as only delivered by them. One thing more I shall add in
general, which is, That a large and great soul, like yours, expresses it
self more to its advantage in weighing in the powerful scale of reason, that
it has the main bulk of what it is to judge of, rather than to dwell with too
scrupulous a diligence upon little quillets and niceties, which admit arguments
on both sides, and in the mean time let slide away unnoted, that great deal
which is uncontrollable and plain, as though one were but to declame in
School to exercise ones wit, and therefore he makes choice of some ingenious
Paradox against a known and received truth; and to impugn it, can bring but
against the skirts of it arguments or rather cavils of wit, without being able
to grapple with the main body of it, and seeks rather to puzzle and embroyle
his adversary, then weightily to establish the solid truth. This is a subject
that is deeply to be considered for use, (the importantest that we can have,
not argued upon for ostentation) and that a wise man ought to seek a settlement
in, and not aim at the applause of being sharpsighted, by reducing all things
to uncertainty. Therefore, good my Lord, apply that great understanding you are
so excellently endowed withal, to build as well as to pull down, and read not
the Fathers with a fore-laid design to enerve their authority; but with an
indifferency to yield your assent to what upon the whole matter you shall judge
reasonable for you so to do. And since I know that your judgment must in all
things that are controverted before it, of this nature, tend to a settlement
one way or other, (for only sciolous wits float only in uncertainty, as
delighting to make objections, and raise a dust which afterward their weak eyes
cannot look through) let me recommend to you not only to examine whether the
opinion you meet with in your reading, repugnant to what you were formerly
imbued with, be concludingly demonstrated or no, but likewise examine as
strictly the reason you have for your own, and where the scale weighes
heaviest, give your assent. For since of contradictory propositions one must
necessarily be true, and the other false, a man proceeds upon safe grounds,
if he take for a firm truth what is opposite to an assertion that betrays its
own weakness; whereas if you look only upon the true, you may happily at the
instant not find a full resolution to every objection that may be raised
against it; which proceeds not from the weakness of the thing, but from
ours, that cannot at the first sight look into the bottom of it.

You see, my Lord, how confident I am with you, to tell you what upon the
present in such shortness and distraction of time occurreth to me upon this
subject, which your goodness has invited me unto, and I beg the continuance
of it, first in pardoning me; and next, in imparting to me your reflections
upon them, which I profess sincerely, I value beyond any man's, and most of
all, in loving me as you have ever done, which is the happiest condition that
can give a blessing unto

London December. 29. 1638. My Lord, your Lordships most humble and most faithful
servant, K. D.

My dear Lord,
WHen I wrote my Letter, I intended to review and copy it; but it held me much
longer time then I designed to it. It should not have been with my dull head
and hand, an after-suppers work, and after coming home from vain entertainment
with some impertinent she-wits that most tyrannically had seized upon me: They
had tuned my brains to so cross a Key, as afterward all serious Images came so
lamely into my fancy, as I may be ashamed to send you this rough draught of
them, and so slowly halting, as I was in good faith three hours about those
blotted and interlined sheets. For it was an hour past midnight before I had
done, which was not one to enter upon so tedious a task, as to lick this
abortive and misshapen Embrion into form. And now this morning my company calls
upon me to be gone, so that I am in a strait to appear before your Lordship,
either extremely negligent if I defer till my return to town, the answering
of your Letter, and the sending my Lord Russels Picture; or extremely
indiscreet, if I send you so rude and indigested reflections upon your so
judicious and strong discourse, wherein the instances, though your Lordship be
pleased to call them slight ones, and such as flow easiest into a Letter from a
bad memory, yet you must give me leave to believe them the strongest and
sharpest that can be urged upon this subject, and the flower and Quintessence
of what Mr. Chillingworth and the best wits have produced against the tradition
of the Church, and the authority of the Fathers. But I will choose rather to
fall into your hands for the latter, then under your censure for the first; and
so asking you a thousand pardons, I send you this, by which, all I can hope,
is, that you will at least discern in me a great willingness to come out of your
debt in this kind (for all other I know impossible) though I am but a flow and
imperfect paymaster: and that you will in some measure, guess at what I would
say if I had time to digest and range it as it should be. I shall here only by
way of supplement, add this more concerning the Millenaries (because I would
not render my Letters more illegible by new interlining it) that as I remember
Justin Martyr himself, says it is an opinion not generally believed in the
Church, but that many of the Orthodox reject it; howbeit he professes to hold
it for true, and accordingly endeavors to prove it by authority of
Scripture; all which manifestly declares, that it was no avowed tradition of
the Church from Christ; it is true, Papias seems to intimate as though it
were in some obscure manner derived from Christ, but not as a thing commanded
to be preached and taught. He tells it as a mystery or secret, whispered by
him to some of the Apostles, whom he would oblige more then their fellows, by
imparting some thing to them for their knowledge, that the rest should be
ignorant of. But no such by-rivolet (though it should come from the true
fountain) can ever fall into the main and avowed Channel of Ecclesiastical
tradition; Indeed it is likely that Cerinthus the Heretic to justify his new
device in that particular, fathered it on Saint John as whispered to him by
Christ in confidence; and from him Papias that was an easy and simple man,
taking it, passed by his name, and vouched only the Apostles, which some
believed as a private truth, and others denied, as is apparent.

December 26, 1638. Your Lordships most humble and faithful Servant K. D.

My Noblest Cousin, and best friend,
I Beg your pardon, for making you so slow a return of my humble thanks for
your excellent Letter of the 26 of December; and I should have needed your
pardon much more, if your favors in it had been lesser. The excess of them in
such variety of obligations, justifies me in the leisure I take to taste and
enjoy each endearing circumstance apart; weighing and comparing with one
another the several delights I ow you, whilst every where I find my self
either courted by him I love most, or applauded by him I emulate most, or
instructed by the person whose abilities I admire most; and all this by you
dear Cousin, the prime object of my noblest affections. My heart is so much
affected with these favors, that were this Letter (or rather Volumne, whose
bulk may well affright you with the trouble it threatens) filled with nothing
but acknowledgments, it would fall as short of satisfaction to my self in the
thankful part, a^ I fear it will of giving it you in the rest that it treats
of. But as in the first it is impossible for me to utter the hundredth part of
my thoughts, so in the other could I express all and more then ever I can think
of, I should yet despair of efficacy to convince you by any thing that can flow
from a Pen animated with such dull reflections as mine, which here
notwithstanding I venture to set down chiefly in obedience to your commands in
the close of your Letter, and partly through fear that I might else in some
kind incurr the tax, either of Hypocrisy if I should by silence confess an
assent in matters of Religion where I am not convinced, or of perverseness,
should I d ssent without showing cause for it; which I shall here endeavor to
manifest, but still with this protestation, that could I admit of such a
doctrine, that in the affair of our faith I ought to be swayed by any humane
authority, either of one or many, I should at this instant publish a
valediction to my opinions, what great wits soever may sustain them, as
willingly as I do here grant you the pre-eminence above the highest that I have
known.

And here in the first place I do most heartily wish I could concur with you
in all the rest, as I do in the Introduction of your discourse, that so I might
be united to you in opinion, as I am most entirely in affection. I join with
you in full admiration of the Piety, Learning, and Integrity of those reverend
Fathers of the Church, whose Lives, whose Zeales, whose Deaths abundantly
merited that title with everlasting celebrations of their memories; theit
veracity I attribute infinitely unto, from a due consideration of all those
happy circumstances wherewith your eloquence authorizes it. You cannot
aggravate their impieties enough, who would offer to exclude such sages from
being witnesses in the most important matters of Religion: If any former slip
of my pen can be but wrested to such an injustice, let me purge my self by a
solemn Recantation. But I hope my words imported not any such sense, I am sure
my sense intended not any such words; those of my Letter were as I remember,
that I could not admit them for witnesses Authentic enough, whereon to pass a
Verdict in many cases of Religion: Wherein by two restrictions, I am safely
protected from any just imputation of so unjust a negative, since the one by
the very exception of many cases, attributes to their testimony a validity in
many, the other allows it an inducing power in the very denying it a convincing
one, and tends no way to an exclusion, but only to a qualification of their
evidence. Many indeed are the cases wherein I hold their Testimonials most
sacred and unquestionable; such are the grand Fundamentals of Christianity, the
doctrine of believing in one God, of the incarnation, the Passion, the
Resurrection, and some other the constitutive Articles of Christian Faith.
These (to use your own terms) were matters indeed that concerned their Art and
Trade, matters indeed whereon their own and their posterities Salvation
undoubtedly depended, matters indeed that challenged their whole care and
attention, both to receive them rightly, and transferr them faithfully. In
these, when they tell us (as they often do plainly and unanimously) what they
were taught, and what they found believed generally through the whole Church:
Let their affirmation be as definitive as Pythagoras's to his Disciples, in
these it is too mild a word to say, have they not reason to take it unkindly to
be rejected? Be it sacrilege but to question their veracity; but on the other
side many cases too there are wherein I can in no wise venture to give sentence
upon their evidence; Such are most, if not all the now controverted points,
between the Romish Church and ours, and as in my former Letter, levelling at
these, I could not admit the Fathers for witnesses authentical enough, whereon
to pass a Verdict in many cases of Religion; so likewise I must again profess
in this, that I am as far as ever from allowing them in these such a
determining or convincing Authority; witnesses of such an over ruling
testimony, though they bear the name of witnesses, are judges in effect, and
they do give the Law, though another pronounce it. Now to be Judges, I could
cite you many passages wherein they themselves do utterly renounce the
pretension; and you say your self, that their modesty will not let them be
troubled when they are recused for such. Neither will I wrong that virtue of
theirs so much, as to embrace their testimonies with any closer adherence then
it self desires. For be they what they will in point of interpreting to us the
Doctrins of Church and Scripture, I am sure they are the best declarers and
limiters of their own, both for their proper sense, and the degrees of our
receiving them. Now that I have explained the sense of my former Letter, let me
tell you the design both of that and this; It was to express unto you in the
general (industriously avoiding particular questions) how little certainty or
satisfaction, I think, can be found on either side, that shall rely on the
Fathers testimonies for a clear determination of our differences. I confess I
lancht into the Ocean of them with eager hopes of such a discovery, and from
them at length can draw just as certain conclusions as Seamen of the Soil and
dimensions of old Brasill.

The reasons prevalent with me of the uncertainty, or rather in my conceit
impossibility of drawing out of the Fathers any such proofs either way in our
controversies, whereon an inquiring and judicious person should be obliged to
rely and acquiesce, are so amply and so learnedly set down by Mr. Dailby in
Emploides peers, that I think little of material or weighty can be said on this
Subject, that his rare and pierceing observation has not anticipated: But
because you will expect from me somewhat more then a bare reverence, take in
short the chief inducements I will set down as briefly and perspicuously as I
can; not to insist upon the more frequent ones, namely, the few writings extant
of the Primitive Doctors of the first, second, and third ages after Christ; The
many supposititious, children that bear the name of Fathers, they do not so
much as Ore refer; the alterations, rasures, and insertions which through
ignorance, fraud, or maliciousness, have defaced, maimed, and corrupted even
those few monuments that remain of venerable antiquity; I say, (not to dwell
upon these, supposing that in your fair and noble way of ratiocination, you
will not draw arguments from any, but such as are on both sides received for
entire and ligitimate pieces, differences being rightly reconcilable only by
such mediums as both parties consent in) those which seem of greatest force
with me to invalidate their authority in our questions, are these Four.

First, Their contradictions to one another.

Secondly, their variance from themselves.

Thirdly, their repugnances both to Papists and Protestants.

Fourthly, and lastly, Their want of ability in many points of our
controversies; in most, of will to decide them.

Their thwartings of one another both in their writings, and votes in Councels,
will easily appear to any man that shall but with indifferent observation
survey their works; and this in matters of government, of practice, and of
belief, which are the three particulars, wherein you advise me out of the
Fathers to judge the conformity of your Church, or ours to antiquity.

For their Clashings in point of government, to name the superiority of the Sea
of Rome, will be enough to call to your memory the Epistles of Epist. 53. ad
Anatol. 54. ad Martian. 55. ad Pul^her. 59. ad Martian. 61. ad Juvenal.
Leo contrary to the 28. Canon of the Fathers of the Council of Calcedon, who
had elevated that of Constantinople to an equal height with the other: And
likewise those Epistles of Gregory the great, 32. ad Maurit. 34. Constant. L.
4. wherein he enveighs in sharp terms against whosoever should take upon him
the title of Universal Bishop; hardly reconcilable with those passages of the
Fathers that the Roman Doctors cite for the Popes supremacy, and least of all
with the practice of Boniface the 3d, that soon after assumed the Appellation.

To name the question of Appeals to Rome will suffice to draw an acknowledgment
from you, of the great contestations between the Affrican Bishops and the
Roman, condemning that point; which was likewise oppositely decreed by the
Synods of Sardis and Calcedon. Council. Sard. Can. 3. 2 Council. Calced. Can. 9.

To name the election of Bishops, will be sufficient to recall to your thoughts
the direct opposition in that point of the Fathers, of the eighth General
Council, in their two and twentieth Canon, against what Epist. 68. p. 166
Cyprian taught at large to be Apostolic tradition; to wit, that the people
should have their votes also in the choice of Bishops.

And lastly, not to dwell too long upon the least material point, you will
easily be put in mind, how that which is delivered by many, and particularly
by Epiphanius, p. 908. against Arrius for a received sense of the Church,
touching the preeminence of a Bishop above a Presbyter, is flatly impugned by
S. Jerome. Ep. ad Occan. 83. p. 614. and others.

Their clashings about matters of practice are altogether as obvious.

Call but to mind Victors heats against the Bishops of Asia, touching the
observance of Easter day. Tatianus and Tertullian's tenants concerning
marriage, against the opinion of so many Fathers as would be endless to name:
But because the first was declared an Heretic for holding all marriage
pollution, and the last for esteeming the second unlawful; I beseech you turn
over S. Jerome's Epistles to Furia, to Agerachia, and weigh some passages in his
first book against Jovinian; And then tell me not how far he is from making
Marriage a Sacrament of the Church; but how far his words are from importing
the others Heresy.

Cast but your Eye upon that passage of Origin Cont. Cells. l. 5. to p. 479.
Where speaking of Angels, he says, that in consideration of their divine
nature, they are sometimes in the Scriptures called gods, but not so as that we
should be commanded to adore them, or worship them with divine honors, although
they be the conveyers of Gods gifts unto us: for all desires, al prayers, al
deprecations, al thanksgivings, are to be sent up to God the Lord of all
things, by the high Priest who is above all Angels, who is the living word and
God. Be pleased likewise to consider the 394. page of Athanasius in his first
Oration against the Arrians, where he teaches that God only is to be
worshipped, etc. And inform me how I shall comprimise the matter betwixt them
and those passages of other Fathers alleged by Bellarmine, for the worship and
invocation of Saints. L. de Beatitudine sanctorum. c. 13. Where those which he
cites out of Justine and Augustine are not like the rest so impertinent, but
they may stand in some opposition with the two above mentioned.

Let me but remember you of the opinion that Heretics ought to be baptized, so
contradicted by Optatus, by Austine, and generally by all that impugn the
Donatists, which was notwithstanding most peremtorily maintained by Tertullian,
Cyprian, Ep. ad Pompeium and Firmilian, so far as that Cyprian for this cause
brake into most notorious heats against Stephanus Bishop of Rome; (both
Stephanus and Cyprian, urging tradition for contrary Doctrines) and Firmilian
against all the Roman Church in general, saying, in an Epistle of his, which is
the seventy fifth among Cyprian's works; that Rome did not in all things
observe the tradition of the Apostles, and in vain boasted of their Authority.
Accord I beseech you that passage of S. Austin, Sermon. 17. de verbis Apost.
(Injuria est pro Martyr orare) with the practice of the Church in that point,
which appears to have been general, and is recorded in diverse of the Fathers;
as Clemens, Cyprian, Austin 17. Sermon. de verbo Apost. and particularly by
Epiphanius against Aerius, p. 911. Lastly, in point of confession and penitence
be pleased to confront those passages of Chrysostom: Homil. de poenit. and
confess. It is not necessary (says he) that thou should confess in the
presence of witnesses, let the inquiry of thy offenses be made in thy thought,
let this Judgment be without a witness, let God only see thee confessing. And
again, in Epist. ad Heb. c. 12. Hom. 31. I do not say to thee bring thy self
upon the Stage, nor accuse thy self unto others; and likewise that of St.
Augustine, Confess. lib. 10. cap. 3. What have I to do with men, that they
should hear my Confessions, as though they could heal my diseases? Be pleased.
I say to confront these with some passages of other Fathers cited by Arcudius
upon that subject; and likewise by Bellarmine, l. 3. c. 2. de Poenitentia. and
confess the Fathers in matter of practice, as well as of government,
irreconcilable.

Their contradictions in matters of Belief, are infinite; I shall only sum up
such as I esteem most important, either in the points themselves which they
concern, or in relation to our controversies in the Doctrine of the Trinity:
That of Justine Martyr, p. 357. against Tryphon, which cannot be solved from
making a distinction of nature betwixt the Father and the Son: That of
Tertullian, advers. Prax. c. 9.10. Pater tota substantia est, Filius vero
derivatio totius et portio; and many other passages in the same book: That of
Origin tract. in Joan. tom. 3. where he implies little less, as Genebrard
observes, then that the Father is as much above the Son and the Holy Ghost, as
they above the Creatures. That of Theodoret, part 3. council. Ephesians. p. 496.
where refuting Cyrils ninth Anathema, he says, that in it Cyril does
anathematise all the Apostles, and the Archangel Gabriel himself, whilst
impiously and blasphemously, (they are his words) he curses such as do not
believe the Holy Ghost to proceed from the Son: I can easilyer accord these
Doctors which Arrius, then with Athanasius, or the three hundred and eighteenth
Fathers of the first Nicene Council: Of the state of the Soul after death, in
point of reward and punishment; and likewise concerning Christ's descent into
Hell. I could here cite you multitudes of oppositions; but I shall have
occasion to speak of these in another place.

Lastly, touching the Eucharist, in my opinion, the most important Article of
any we differ in, let me marshall up the Fathers oppositions somewhat more at
large; That of Justin in Apol. 2. The sanctified food (says he) wherewith our
flesh and blood by conversion, are nourished, we are taught to be the flesh and
blood of Jesus incarnate, being made such by the word of prayer, after the same
manner as Jesus Christ our Savior by the Word of God took on him flesh and
blood for our salvation. How will it suit with the latter part of the fortieth
Chap. of Tertull lib. 4. against Marcion, where his whole Argument runs upon
this, That in the Eucharist, the Bread and Wine are the figure and
representation of Christ's body, (for it would have been a very extravagant
argument to one that denied, as Marcion did, Christ himself to have a body of
flesh, to allege that bread was the flesh of his body) his words are, Having
professed (says he speaking of our Savior) a desire to eat the Passover, he
took bread, and having distributed it to his Disciples, he made it his body,
saying, This is my Body, that is, the Figure of my Body; of which it could not
have been the Figure, if he had not in truth a body. And again, with that other
passage of the same Author, lib. de anima, chap. 14. The taste of the Wine
which he consecrated for a memorial of his blood: and also with that, lib. 1.
against Marcion, cap. 14. The bread by which he represents his body; I dare not
translate the rest, Etiam in Sacramentis propriis egens mendicitatibus
creatoris. Survey that passage of Cyrillus Hierosol. Catech. cap. 4. under the
form of bread his body is given thee, and under the form of Wine his blood, And
again, knowing and holding this for a certainty, that the bread which we see is
not bread, though our taste find it to be so: So how this will sound with that
place of St. Austin upon the 98. Psalm, where he brings in our Savior
speaking of this matter after this manner: You shall not eat of this body which
you see, nor drink that blood which they shall shed which will crucify me, I
have commended a certain Sacrament unto you, that being spiritually understood
will quicken you.

Next, consider those passages of Gregory Nissene quoted by Bellarmin, we
believe (says he) the bread rightly sanctified by the word of God, to be
changed into the body of God the word. And again a little after, This does the
virtue of the benediction effect, changing the nature of what we see (bread and
wine) into the body of the Lord: To which I oppose that of Theodoret Dialog 2.
The mystical Symboles are not removed from their own nature after
sanctification, but remain in their former substance, form and figure; And
Dialog 1. Our Lord, says he, in delivering those mysteries, called the bread,
body; and the mixture in the Cup, blood; And soon after says he, our Savior
inverted the names, giving to his body the name of Symbol, and to the Symbol
the name of his body; so having named himself Vine, he called the Symbol
Blood. Next let us confront that of Chrysostom Hom. de Encoeniis; Is it bread
that you see? is it wine? do they go into the privy like other meats? away
with such a thought, for as wax being put into the fire, unites it self so in
substance to it, that nothing thereof remains; so imagine here that the
mysteries are swallowed up in the substance of the body: Therefore when you
approach thereunto, think not that you receive the divine body as from man, but
fire from the pincers of the Seraphime which Esau saw; so think that you
partake of the divine body, as if you joined your lips to his pure and
spotless side.

Confront this with that of Origin in Caep. 15. Matthew. As nothing (says he) is
impure in it self, but is made so to the polluted and incredulous, by his own
uncleanness and unbelief; so, neither does that which is sanctified by the
Word of God and Prayer, in its own nature sanctify him that uses it. And for
as much as belongs to that eating, we are neither defrauded of any good by the
not eating, nor enricht with any good by the eating of the sanctified bread,
which for as much as it has of materials, goes into the belly, and the privy,
but becomes useful and effectual according to the proportion of faith, making
the soul perspicatious and considerate of what is profitable.

Lastly to conclude this point, let me set before you, Macarius Homil. 17. and
Theophylact, more remote from one another in this article of faith, then in the
times wherein they lived: Macarius telling us that we offer bread and wine the
(...) of his flesh and blood, and they which are partakers of the visible
bread, do eat the flesh of the Lord spiritually. And Theophylact teaching the
directly contrary doctrine upon the 6. of Saint John: Note here (says he) that
the bread which we eat in the mysteries, is not (...) of the Lords flesh, but
the very flesh of the Lord; and let no body be troubled, that the bread should
be believed flesh, since the bread which he did eat when he walked here, was
altered into his body, and made the same with his holy flesh; so would the
wafer be turned into his flesh, if Christ as man did eat it, will the veryest
Sacramentary say.

I have insisted the longer upon this particular, as conceiving it the highest
point of all our controversies, and wherein the Fathers should have most
obliged us, had they left to posterity a right and unanimous intelligence, of
that great mystery of the Eucharist: But the certainest conclusion I can draw
from them in this and the rest, is of the uncertainty of concluding any thing
in our differences, from those that differ so much amongst themselves. Justin
Martyr in Orat. cohort. ad Gent. (...). He should have my vote for a rare
Musician that could contrive those their discords into a Harmony, fit to be the
measure either of our practice or belief.

My next Reason is, the Fathers variance from themselves, a quality of much
more prejudice to them then the other: for upon contradiction of testimonies,
how point blank soever a Judge may fall to examine the fame and reputed
integrity of the witnesses, in which if he find a difference, he will not stick
many times to pronounce a sentence according to the entire credit of the men;
but who will ever give judgment upon ones evidence who in the same business
is found in contrary tales? And here I could run over most of the materialest
points wherein I made my former instances, and produce almost out of every
Father pro and con examples, not only of variance, but almost of as eminent
contradiction as that of St. Augustine concerning Purgatory, in Sermon. 232. de
Tempore, where he flatly denies that there is any third place besides Heaven
and Hell, calling them deceivers that teach it. And likewise in his 21. Book de
Civitate Dei, cap. 16. where he absolutely rejects the opinion of any Purgatory
flames before the day of Judgment, to another passage in Cap. 24. of Lib. 21.
de Civitate Dei, where he seems positively to affirm i^ himself: but I
forbear, in regard it would be tedious, and likewise for that I am unwilling to
press a point of derogation from those holy Fathers (whom I reverence) further
then I needs must, it being sufficient for what I intend to infer, that they
appear oftentimes to vary from their own positions in diverse Articles that we
dispute of, and others fully as important; in which I may be well excused from
the trouble to us both of alleging examples, since Genebrard and Pamelius
thought it their best course to purge, the one (Origin) the other (Tertullian)
from gross and impious error in many places, by showing how they teach the
clean contrary in others, though by the way I must needs say, that Pamelius
his manner appears to be very extravagant; for as to some poisonous doctrines
of Tertullian, a Montanist, he rightly applies a cure from some other passage
of Tertullian a Catholic; so at other times, to what he thought venomous in
Tertullian a Catholic; he preposterously prescribes an Antitidote out of
Tertullian an Heretic, as you may see in the eighth of his Paradoxes, where he
confutes an error in his Apologetique, and de Testimonio Animae, Books which
that Father wrote being a Catholic, with a passage of his Book de Anima,
composed when he was turned Cataphrygian; and yet who so forward as Pamelius,
when any passage in such books makes for us to cry, out away with it, 'twas a
saying of Tertullian a Montanist: I may well help my cause the best I can, by
this unsetlednesse of the Fathers, since the noblest pillar of the Roman
Church, Cardinal Peron, so often wrests their variance from themselves so much
to the advantage of his. See how in his reply to King James, p. 374. he makes
bold with Gregory the Great, with Ruffinus, with Jerome touching the Maccabees
reception into the Canon; wherein I do not think him more in the wrong in the
particular, then I believe him right in the general, (to wit) that the Fathers
did often vary their opinions, according to their several greenness or
maturity of studies, from whence Vincentius Lyrenensis his directions will
follow, cont. haeres. c. 39. That the Fathers depositions are only to be taken
who living in the Catholic Faith and Communion holily and wisely, did
constantly teach and persist even until their death in Christ, and further
such only as did receive, preserve, and deliver their doctrines all or the
greatest part, manifestly, and in one and the same sense; wherein what use
soever some Papists make of that passage, I profess I think we are somewhat
less beholding to him for the certainty of a rule and evidence to guide our
faith by, then to Archimedes for his Engine to remove the World: For the
Mathematitian disabuses us, and declares that there is not a solid place to be
found whereon to fix his instrument, but the other leaves us to that vain search
of an impossibility; for truly as the case stands, I cannot think it less then
an impossibility to know (with any competent assurance) what (in all or almost
any of our debated questions) the Fathers hold with all those solid
circumstances whereon Vincentius his rule is grounded, of holiness, wisdom,
catholickness, immutability of the teachers, and perpetual identitie of the
doctrins sense, if with years they all improved, I might be comforted a little
by relying on their last dictamens; but as I find a S. Augustine that with age
retracted his errors, so on the other side I meet with a Tertullian that going
forward in years and experience, went less in his judgment; how happy should
we both be in one, that could assure us in the Legion of Fathers, when was the
verticle point of each their erudition, whether at their summer or winter
solstice; if I give you the notes of it, and tell you then only you have it
certain, when they are in a perfect and palpable conjunction with Scripture,
you will think it but an imperfect indication; if you say that then they were
ariv'd to the high point of their perfection, when they were once exactly
instructed in the full sense of the Church, I must not admit of that mark
whilst you are proving the Churches receptions by theirs; and therefore if you
please, let us both agree, that for either of us there is no resolving evidence
to be taken from the Fathers, that are so irresolute themselves; when you meet
with a passage in any of them that stands not with your belief, conceive their
judgment not ripe, or rotten, when they writ it, or that their recantations
are lost, the same liberty shall I take in mine; for truly had Saint Austins
admirable monument of humble ingenuity (as well as high erudition) his
Retractations perished as Origens, which as Saint Jerome says, he had made in
an Epistle to Fabian Bishop of Rome, Epist. 65. ad Pamach, et Occan.
did before him, Saint Austin might perhaps have had a place in some others
Catalogue of heretics, as well as Saint Origin in his; And truly who can
secure us that the like mishap has not befallen others of the Fathers, now
taxable with erroneous doctrins, by the loss perhaps of some after-survey of
their own works?

My Third consideration is of the Fathers variousness and repugnancies to the
Government, practice, and belief, of both the Romish Church and ours: In which
I have prevented the need of examples by many of the instances, both of my
former Letter and this, as that of the equality of Bishops and Presbyters,
that of rebaptizing, that of Angels, that of the Millenaries, etc. to which I
will lonly add, that which so many, and most particularly S. Austin delivers
of the necessity of childrens partaking of the Eucharist, and his rigor against
infants unbaptized; some of which I take to be beams, all more then motes, fit
to be removed out of their eyes, before we can with reason resign up our own
senses to their guidance and manuduction.

My Fourth concluding reason, is, the want of ability in many of the Fathers,
in most of will to determine the points of controversy, and this I hope I may
safely affirm without wrong, either to their abilities or good wills. A general
and potential ability to resolve difficulties every strong reason includes, if
in the particulars wherein it should be brought forth unto act, there concur
(upon proposal) means of informing ones self, and a will to use it: Such an
ability those learned Fathers (rich in all the choice endowments of soul) had
in most singular eminence, and as it were madness to rob them of those, so I
think it is neither Logical, nor prudential, because they were knowing in the
general, to attribute to them an actual ability to discern such particular
questions, wherein it is so far from appearing that they had the means of
informing themselves, or the will to use them, that I see no signs that in
their ages they were ever in proposal; such and so far from agitation or
controversy (the parents that give life and act to particular abilities) were,
as I am persuaded, in the primitive times the doctrins of infallibility annexed
to a Church of any one denomination, of adoring the Eucharist for God, of
Purgatory with its complements, of Indulgences, and many other choice points of
our controversies; All which I profess appear to me as unthought of for the
first 500. years after Christ, as the Antipodes, or the Antartique pole to
Lactantius, or Justin Martyr, that took the heavens to be to the earth but as
the flat cover of a box; In these I take it to be of no more derogation from
them to deny their deciding abilities, then to say that they were not able to
leave to posterity, an exact Mapp of America, which was not discovered in so
many hundred years, after: so far is it from an injurious detraction, that to
imagine them studious, definitive, or active in questions hardly ever moved,
that had neither professed maintainers or impugners, were to imagine them idle,
and Ayre-beaters, No marvail that to decide such, they should want wills,
having neither means nor occasion to actuate their abilities, or that they
should want abilities, having no provocations that might stimulate their wills.
Those primitive Champions of the Gospel, the Fathers of the first 400. years,
who in this business are most to be consulted with, had their time, their
industry, their pens so incessantly exercised against the common enemy of
Christ, the Jews and Gentiles, or else against those heinous heretics, that
pretended the name of Christianity, but tended to the utter subversion of it,
as the Ebionites, the Samosaterians Gnostiques, the Marcionists, and diverse
other blasphemous or Chimerical innovators, that they had little leisure to
raise to themselves imaginary enemies to combat with in such slight and
trivial points as these we dispute of; or if perchance any such were presented,
little care to subdue them. But that I may not be thought to frame a discourse
upon two false suppositions: The one that our controverted points are of
articles of Religion, little material; the other, that in the primitive times
there were few of them in agitation, or neglected, if they were, let me tell
you what induces me to think so.

For the first, that they were in themselves little material, or at least
thought so by the Fathers (which is all one for our purpose) though now I
confess grown highly important by being enjoined many of them under the pain
of Anathema's, to be believed as essential to salvation) I collect out of a
survey of all those Ancient, yea and more modern rolls (where it is likely all
necessary points of faith or practice would be recorded) where finding no news
at all of them, I think I may safely conclude them but slight in comparison of
what I find there registered.

The first and prime inducement to me is, that I meet with them no where in
Scripture; but this is none to you who do not allow that to be the perfect
reconditory of all necessary Doctrines The next is, that in the Fathers several
Catalogues of Heretics, as that of Philastrius, Epiphanius, and S. Austin, I
find none branded with Heresy, for not holding those Articles imposed on men's
beliefs by the Church of Rome, and rejected by ours, whose note it is not
likely such would have escaped, as had impugned any doctrines believed by them
necessary to savlation: But to this perhaps you will say, that the denomination
of Heretic was not incurred by the opinions that men held, but by their
obstinate persisting in such after the Churches manifests against them, and
that upon this reason diverse who believed not all things necessary, might well
miss a place in their denumeration of Heretics; wherefore setting these two
aside, because though of much force with me, yet likely to be invalide with
you, I only press upon your consideration my last, and I think, undeniable
reason, taken from the nonappearance of such articles in those several pieces;
wherein the Fathers of set purpose and design professedly do set down all the
essential doctrines of Christianity agreed upon throughout the Church
universal: Such were their Symboles, such Irenaeus his unity of Faith, in lib.
1. cap. 2. such Origens introduction to his book de principiis, such
Tertullians rule of Faith in his prescription against Heretics, such
Epiphanius his conclusion of his work, which he calls the settlement of truth
and assurance of immortality; such likewise (to fit you with some of all ages)
was that work of Gennadius (written within these two hundred years) De recta
Christianorum Fide: I will not say in some of which, but in all which together,
there is not one Article of Faith received by the Church of Rome, and rejected
by us, so much as mentioned, save only in Epiphanius of Christ's descent into
Hell; a Point variously and uncertainly understood among the Fathers; as shall
in another place be demonstrated.

Now for farther proof of the little agitation or great neglect of our
controverted points in the Primitive times (although it will follow of
consequence to what has been already alleged) yet I beseech you let me
appeal to your own observation: Do you know of any of the Fathers for the first
four hundred years that has purposely and of design composed the least
Treatise of any one of our questions? or in some other tract handled them so
much as in a formal digestion? Inform me I beseech you; for I profess all the
works that ever I have met with of them, appear to have been wholly directed
either to deride the Pagans, to confute Philosophers, to convince the Jews, to
confound prodigious Heresies, or deliver precepts of good life, or else to
expound some passages of Scripture most useful to the same ends: These appear
to me to have been the sole objects both of their wills and abilities to
combat: And shall we venture to give sentence in our intricate disputes upon
words or passages, that by the by may seem to concern them, either casually let
fall, or directed to other purposes, in most of which in my conscience we find
our own opinions as rationally, as Whittington his turn Lord Major of London in
the ring of bells, or some melancholy Lover his Mistrisses picture in the
grain of Wainscote, and their intentions as rightly as Eudocia, Homers, and
another Virgils, when they made him Evangelize; so little do I regard what they
say in this our case; but to their silence I attribute much, and think it
strongly expressive, but nothing to the advantage of those that impose for
necessary Articles of Faith, Doctrines that those renowned Oracles of the
Church, either never heard of, or thought not worth their mentioning.

Thus noble Cousin, I have laid before you the principal reasons that led me to
deny the Fathers Testimonies to have such a validity whereon we may justly pass
a verdict in our questions of Religion; which I beseech you, not to take as
meant in a way of further derogation from them then in those very particulars;
for there is no man living that in the general pays them more reverence then
my self in the highest admiration of their erudition and piety. And therefore
where I have marked out their heates against one another, and contradictions;
let them be understood to have sprung from holy fervor and zeal in whatsoever
they were for the time persuaded was good and true: when I note their variance
from themselves, let it recommend their ingenuity that would so clearly avow
their own fallibility: when I tax them for dissenting from us all in this age,
(although S. Austin when the Donatists press him with antiquity, sticks not to
say that the younger Doctors are sharper sighted) yet let not my words be
driven farther then this modest (since you so call it) flattery to our selves,
not of seeing clearer or sharper then they, but only (by their helps) further,
as dwarfs upon Giants shoulders: And lastly, when I deny them the ability to
determine our points of controversies let it be of no more derogation from
their learning and judgment, then it were of lessening to an Ambassador, or of
flattery to his followers, to say, that at a public audience some of them
could give a good account of the things in the lower end of the room, when he
himself could say little or nothing of them, having only past them by, with
his attentions entirely fixed upon the higher and more noble objects.

These were the Considerations that possessed me when I wrote my former Letter;
although I had then the leisure but to point at a few of them, (and since I
cannot speak to you but with truth and freedom) I must here profess they remain
in full force with me still, your Letter having given me great contentment, but
little satisfaction; for I can by no means yield, that there is any Assurance,
much less infallibility in the Rule which you at the first prescribed, and
still insist on, of judging our Controversies by the Fathers; namely, to use
our liberty of reason only in what they teach of themselves, with confirmations
out of Scripture, or probable Arguments; but to resign it up in an entire and
implicit Assent, to what they tell us they were taught, and deliver to us as
delivered to them for the received sense of the Church; which is to be
understood (you say) not only when they use these formal positive Words, That
the Church has received from the Apostles, and holds generally such and such
a Doctrine; but at other times also, when they do but intimate it in their
Discourses, (where by the way I must needs tell you, I ever thought intimations
likelyer to beget Disputes then to end them.) If in this positive Rule you
reserve a Liberty to except some particulars so delivered, or some Catholic
Fathers so delivering them; Then without more ado it is evident that this Way,
nothing can be decided; for your Adversaries will claim (in what thwarts them)
the like liberty of excepting. If you lay the Rule absolutely general, to wit,
that what Article soever is delivered directly, or by imtimation from the
Fathers, to have been a received Doctrine of the Church, ought to be swallowed
for an infallible verity, it will easily be made appear, that this method must
betray you, not only into some Protestant Tenants, but also into Beliefs on
both sides confessed to be erroneous: It must draw you to be a Millenary, it
must draw you to hold a necessity of Childrens partaking the Eucharist; it must
draw you to abhor that use of Images as Idolatrous; and finally, it must force
you to reject out of the Canon those Books which we esteem Apochryphall; for
all these do the Fathers deliver, with somewhat more then intimations that
they were taught to them, as derived from the Apostles, and from general
receptions of the Catholic Church.

First, for the doctrine of the Millenaries, I conceive you make a right
judgment of the original thereof from Papias, whom St. Jerome (the best
Critic in Ecclesiastical Antiquity) says to have been the first Author of
it; which error it is probable the said Papias ran into, either by a flattery
to win upon the Jews, or else, as you say, by the gross understanding of a
Text in the twentieth of the Apocalypse, himself being one but of a dull and
easy spirit, which being taken from him by those that reverenced the antiquity
and piety of the man, was delivered with recommendation to their successors,
and so took possession of most of the Doctors of the following Ages. As for
that of Cerinthus, I believe with Sextus Senensis, that it was a distinct
heresy, which fed carnal men with hopes of beastly and sensual delights: for
it is not likely that a doctrine taken from such an arch Heretic as Cerinthus,
could have found such reception among the Catholic Fathers; and least of all
is it probable, that Cerinthus could have fathered it upon St. John, whom the
Apostle is said to have detested so much, that Iraeneus, lib. 3. cap. 3.
advers. haeres. (a chief Champion of the Millenaries) in that very Chapter
where (as you say) he reckons up the successions of Bishops in diverse Churches,
relates, that when St. John was entering into a Bath where Cerinthus washed
himself, St. John no sooner saw him, but he stepped back, crying out, Let us
forsake the place, lest that enemy of truth draw down the house upon our heads:
a fit Author for so foul a Doctrine, but one very unlikely to be believed
acquainted with Christ's whispers to St. John. But as this enormous part which
passes also with most under the name of Millenaries heresy, was generally
condemned: so the other more spiritual of Papias, was and is far from being
approved at this day, either by your Church or ours, much more from finding so
firm and entire assent as you will be obliged to give it by your rule of
swallowing for unquestionable and infallible what doctrine soever the Fathers
deliver as taught unto them, and to be the general sense of the Christian
Church in their times: And for proof that it was delivered for such by Papias
(who gloried in nothing more then in being a careful collector of the
doctrines taught by the Apostles viva voce) I refer you nlyto Nicephorus
Calistus Hist. Eccles. lib. 3. c. 20.

That Justine Martyr p. 307. delivered it for such a passage in his Dial. with
Tryphon, will easily testify, where he says, that he, and all in all parts
orthodox Christians held it, and calls them Christians only in name, with many
other circumstances of aggravation, that denied it. It is true (as you say) he
confesses a little before, that some good and honest Christians did not
acknowledge it; but this may be an argument how careless, and oftentimes
repugnant to themselves some of the Fathers were in their writings, or else how
little scrupulous of setting to doubtful doctrines that seal which you
account so sacred; but it can no way salve him from having taught it with those
circumstances which you esteem the notes of infallibility. That Iraeneus took
it and taught it to be of tradition from Christ, I think is so manifest, that
it were superfluous to insist upon particular passages in that Author.

And lastly, to omit Tertullian, and others, who clearly (me thinks) imply as
much, though not in the very terms. What can express more a doctrine rightly
delivered, and generally received, then Lactantius, lib. 7. Institut. c. 26.
his conclusion of his long discourse upon this subject; haec est doctrina
sanctorum Prophetarum, quam Christiani sequimur, hoc est Christiana sapientia.

Secondly, For the necessity of childrens partaking of the Eucharist, although
the evident practice of the Church for the first six hundred years, according
to all our records of antiquity, might excuse me from proving by any particular
instance, that some of the Fathers taught the necessity of it for a received
tradition; yet take this of St. Austin lib. 1. de peccat. mer. and remiss. c.
24. rightly (says he) do the Punick Christians call Baptism by no other names
but health and safety; nor the Sacraments of Christ's body by no other then
life, unde nisi ex antiqua, ut existimo, et Apostolica traditione qua Ecclesiae
Christi insitum tenent praeter Baptismum et participationem Dominicae mensae,
non solum non ad Regnum Dei sed nec ad salutem et vitam aeternam posse quemquam
hominum pervenire. So direct a passage, that I see not how in this point you
can avoid the necessity either of retracting your rule of assurance, or of
incurring an Anathema of the Council of Trent, Sess. 21. cap. 4. Can. 4.
against any that should hold this very opinion which you find so delivered,
and so Majestically sealed by Saint Austin.

Tertul. lib. de Idololatria, Orig. lib. 7. Cont. Cells. Arnob. lib. 6. Lactan.
lib. 2. cap. ult. Epihan. Ep. ad Johan. Hierosol. inter oper. Hier. Epist. 60.
Ambr. de suga. Secul. cap. 5. August. de fide cap. 7.
Thirdly, for the use of Images (a point likewise of my former letter) to which
you say that the Fathers do not use the Authority or Tradition of the Church to
beat it down, I am confident you will confess that affirmation a slip of
observation or memory, when you shall but cast your Eyes upon those passages of
the Fathers for brevity sake quoted only in the Margin; where doubtless in
some at least you will find the interdiction of them so deeply stamped with
your supposed great seal of Christianity, that if you stick to your own rule,
it will not be enough to speak indifferently of the matter with the Moderator
on your side, but you must be as rigid and severe against them as you can
imagine any warm brother would be at Edenbourgh; for I do not think any Zealot
of them all can be more invective in this point then most of those Fathers
were, many to the abhorring of the very Trade of Imagery; but because you do
insist somewhat upon justification of the contrary practice at this day in the
Romish Church, I must beg leave to run over your Allegations, and to acquaint
you freely how unsatisfied I am in the particulars.

In the first place you evade the Authority of the Primitive Fathers, voucht
formerly by me, namely, of Justine and Tertullian, by saying, In regard that
Idolatry was then fresh in the memory and practice of the world, they might
well think it dangerous to admit that which the following Governors of the
Church might afterward introduce upon a good ground of raising devotion in the
people, since things of that nature, you say, may be convenient at one time,
and unfit at another.

And in the next, you labor to justify the use of Images now, by saying,
First, that as strong Arguments, and as pregnant passages of Scripture are
produced for it, as formerly against it. Secondly, by alleging that these
times are secure from the danger of Idolatry, And lastly, by affirming that a
great good appears in them.

To your infirming of those Ancient Authorities in this point, it will be
sufficient to put you in mind, that diverse of the more modern Fathers far
enough removed from the vicinity of Paganism after Christianity had taken
possession of the world, were as peremptory Iconoclasts as those two I pitched
upon. And for the variance of practice upon variance of times, your reason
might hold, had they condemned the Religious use of Images only as
inconvenient, and not as in its own Nature unlawful, but what is simply
unlawful at one time, cannot be lawful at another, without a precept from God
(which you say) in your first words upon this subject, You did not believe to
have been given herein.

To your first justification of this Practice, I must needs say, that for the
strong Arguments for it, to which I am yet a stranger, I should be glad to be
acquainted with them, but for the Texts of Scripture so pregnant as you speak
of, truly I should be sorry to meet with them, for although where I find in
holy Writ appearing repugnances, and difficult intricacies, I am as apt as any
body (having perhaps most reason for it of any) to accuse my own ignorance, and
to preserve all veneration to what I find there; yet I confess it would
trouble me much, and be of dangerous temptation, should I meet with a passage
in the sacred volumne, as palpably direct for the use of Images, as I am sure
the second Commandment is against it.

For your Second Allegation, that these times are secure from the danger of
Idolatry, some proofs would be necessary, since I am far from understanding
them to be so; were that sin committed then only when the outward or inward
act of veneration accompanied with that belief, and reliance which belongs to
the Creator is exhibited to, and terminated in the creature, I should then be
of your opinion, and pronounce these times in little danger of Idolatry; but
withal, my vote should also go to acquit all ages from the Crime, as well as
the present. For I do not think that the fowlest Idolaters of the Heathen ever
arrived to that height of stupidity, as to take those low and material objects
of their devotion for God Almighty: Nay, the more bestiall their Idolatry was,
as of the Egyptians and Romans, in worshipping the vilest creatures, the less
probability is there that they conceived the essence of the Deity to dwell
under those contemptible forms that they adored; as I think the Jews little
guilty of believing that the Calfe which they had made of their earrings,
though seemingly deified by their veneration, was the great God that has
wrought his wonders among them: but since it is as formal idolatry to frame to
ones self, out of low, limited and corruptible forms, resemblances of the
incomprehensible Deity, and to impart to them any kind of divine honor,
whether you please to call them of adoration, of service, or of pious religion,
since to worship the true God after an unfitting manner, involves men as well
in this sin, as the service of a false God: since (I say) these practices as
well as the other, amount to Idolatry; yea such, as for my part, I believe the
Jews and Pagans were rarely guilty of any greater amidst their highest
abominations. I must profess I think the world at present extremely liable to
the sin; yea, many of the Romish Church deeply plunged therein by the easy
abuse, if not by the single use of Images in their prayers: and this not only
the simpler sort, but even the learned Doctors themselves, if one may believe
them of themselves. Thomas of Aquine says, Sum. part. 3. quaest. 25. Art. 3.
and has many followers in it, That the same reverence is to be given to the
Image of Christ, that is to Christ himself; and seeing Christ is adored with
the adoration of Latria, that his Image also is to be adored with the adoration
of Latria; so far is that great Doctor and his Sectators transported, whom I
do choose much rather to brand with the imputation of Idolatry, then many
others of his own side, as learned, that impugn his doctrine with sacrilege;
there being, as I conceive, no medium between those two impieties, where one
denies adoration of the highest kind, to that unto which another pays it.

Thirdly, for the great good which you say appears in the use of Images; I am
persuaded it does but appear: it is pretended they help the memory, and excite
devotion in the people. If by aids of memory, be understood only in the
general, that the lively representation of some holy History, is likely to
call better thoughts into our minds then a prophaner; I like it well; by the
same reason that the coursest picture of CHRIST crucified, ought in a good
Christians Cabinet to take the wall of a Venus of Titian; the one being apt to
mortify us through the same sense whereby the other may inflame us: but if by
the help of memory any thing be meant of more particular assistance in the
directing of our prayers, I think Images do just as much good in that point,
as the art of memory would do to your excellent natural one, that is, help to
dizzy and distract it: Or if by excitement to devotion, be meant any particular
stimulation and guidance to the rightest way of true devotion, or furnishing us
with a proper means of addressing it to the right and original object, I
conceive them then so far from being of good use in this kind, that I hold
their very stimulations to devotion dangerous, they excite, they warm the zeal
of the ignorant, it is true, but with those strange fires that caused such
combustions in Israel, whilst so many (as Gul. Pariensis de Legibus cap. 23.
confesses) not distinguishing between the Image and the thing, adore the
picture in stead of what it represents; wherein far less sinful were a
lukewarm piety rightly applied, then the ardentest devotion misdirected, by
how much sins of omission are more pardonable then of act, and to worship the
true God less intensly, then to serve a false one zealously. Of this danger
there cannot be a better witness, for all his mincing of the matter, then
Gregory the great (in his Epistle to Cirenus Bishop of Marcelles, in which that
passage is which you cite) who there advises the Bishop to excuse to his flock
the breaking down of Images in the Church, by alleging that he was forced to
that Act by the peoples abusing that to adoration, which was erected only for
instruction of the ignorant and illiterate in matter of history. The Bishop
truly was beholding unto him, for furnishing him with such an excuse, which
might serve to justify all the fiercest Iconoclasts, since all the good that
imagination can present in the use of Images throughout the whole Universe,
cannot amount to recompense the mischief of one poor souls betraying to
Idolatry.

For my part I do conceive, that good use might be made of holy pictures, but
hardly by the vulgar, which makes me wonder at that saying of Gregory which you
glance at, wherein he seems to adapt them to the ignorant, stiling them the
books of the unlettered: For besides the small Divinity (me thinks there is so
little Philosophy) in the saying; Books truly they may be for such Ignoramuses
as cannot read and will not hear, wherein they may perhaps learn matters of
fact (as some children that have an aversion from their books, are taught
their letters in Dice) but are very unlikely to profit in any right devotion;
had he appropriated the use of Images solely to the most knowing and
speculative, it would have been more tolerable: such perhaps one might believe
likely from material and sensible representments to raise spiritual
meditations surpassing sense; and by the greater livelihood and glory of the
object, to perfect the more, and purify their abstraction from all servile
dependence on materiality; some such extaticall Contemplator as Dionysius that
bears the name of the Areopagite (a notable Disciple I am sure of Plato's,
what ever he was of Paul's) might perchance have an Art of erecting his soul by
Images, to some admirable intelligence of the true one only to be adored. If
they were hideous and deformed, he could inform you that the properest
presentation of invisible things to sense, is by the unlikeliest
representations; and that in their con^emplation our soul is more elevated by
Dionys Arcop. de Caelest. Hierarch. cap. 2.
disagreeing Images, then by resembling ones. And therefore that the Celestial
natures are expressed unto us usually in Scriptures by such Images as are
irreconcilable with the Originals they signify, as of Eagles, Lions, Bulls,
etc. to which I will be bold only to say this, that I believe more would have
assented to his speculatio^, I am sure more would have understood it, had he
inferred, that since God was pleased to paint out himself and his ministering
spirits in such incompatible Images, we should not attempt the making such
representations as we do of those incomprehensible forms. If the Images were
of sweet proportion and luster, he would find perchance a way in his negative
Divinity, the more beauteous they were, to attribute the more to those
celestial natures, by Dionys. Arcop. de Div. nom. c. 13. and de Mist. Theolog.
c. 2.
removing from the splendidst glories of the sense, all capacity of proportion
with their spiritual perfection; such uses as these of Images, might perhaps
be credible with the Pere Golu of a Dionysius in his raptures, who could fancy
to himself all the ceremonies of the Church, and the formal and majestic
divisions of our Temples, after the manner of that at Jerusalem, before that
our religion had any but private houses, or barnes; who could perform religious
visits to the body of the virgin Mary, either four years after she was dead,
or as many before himself was a Christian, for else his Ecclesiastical
Hierarchy, and his Epistle to Policarp cannot stand with Chronology. But to
conceive that the vulgar, the ignorant, such whose souls are immerst (as you
say) in the saeculence of matter, such as Mahomet fitted his law to, the
multitude, to whom as Avicenna says in his book de Almahad their Prophet, was
fain to promise a heaven proportionable to their souls, all of sensuality,
sweets to be tasted, beauties visible, delights palpable, such who to abstract
from matter, and to conceive any thing of incorporeall natures, had need be
raised by some rarer Art then Amphibions Mathematickes, which because they
partake of both Natures, of the one in their inherence, of the other in
consideration; are called by Proclus, the bridge and ladder to pure and
complete abstractions; such in whom Tertullians saying erroneous in the
general, is verified in their particular, Anima animae sensus est. To
prescribe I say, that such should be taught, as Gregory says the ignorant
ought to be by Images, whom to adore (he being infinite and invisible) or how
to adore (since that must be free and spiritually) by fixing and fastening them
upon visible, finite, corporeal and engaging objects of the sense, appears to
me as judicious a course, as if a Pilot should cast an Anchor that his ship
might sail the faster. Let me period this question with a much more divine, as
well as more Platonicke sentence of Clemens of Alexandria, All sorts of Images
(says he) are directly forbidden by Moses, (...).

Now lastly, for conclusion of this part of my discourse, to show, that
according to your Rule, you must reject out of the Canon those books which we
esteem Apocryphal, I need no other proofs then that of Praef. in lib. Solo.
Epist. 115.
Jerome, Judith (says he) Tobiae and Maccabaeorum libros legit quidem Ecclesia,
sed inter Canonicas Scripturas non recipit, added unto that of Ruffinus (his
great adversary in other things) in his exposition of the Apostles Creed, so
solemn a passage, and alone so sufficient, as being most eminently signalized
with all your circumstances of infallibility, that I cannot forbear setting it
down at large: Ideo (says he) quae sunt novi and veteris Testamenti volumina
quae secundum majorem traditionem per ipsum Spiritum sanctum inspirata
creduntur, and Ecclesiae Christi tradita, competens videtur, in hoc loco
evidenti numero sicut ex patrum monumentis accepimus designare. And accordingly
he denumerates only those books received by us for Canonical, and goes on,
Haec sunt quae Patres intra Canonem concluserunt ex quibus Fidei nostrae
assertiones constare voluerunt: sciendum tamen est quod and alii qui non
Canonici, sed Ecclesiastici a majoribus appellati sunt: and reckons up all
those which we reject; and thus concludes, Haec nobis a patribus, ut dixi,
tradita opportunum visum est hoc in loco designare ad instructionem eorum qui
prima sibi Ecclesiae ac Fidei elementa suscipiunt, ut sciant ex quibus sibi
fontibus verbi Dei haurienda sint pocula. Should I meet with any Article of the
Romish Church signalized, as I said before, so eminently as this of ours, with
all the circumstances, which you count the notes of infallibility; as little as
I agree with you in the general, I confess it would stagger me in the
particular: and therefore I do not see how you can avoid either, the
retracting your rule of assurance, or by concurring in this point with us to
incurr another heavy Anathema of the Council of TRENT, Sessione quarta. To
these several instances I could add many more as considerable in other points
both of Government, Practice, and Belief, but that so redious a recitation
would seem a design to weary as well as convince you: besides that, to destroy
the universality of your maxim, and to bring you to exceptions, one pregnant
objection is as good as a thousand, and that is all I need to do: For as I said
before, if in your positive rule you once take the liberty to except against
particular Doctrines, or particular Fathers delivering them, I may then with
out any further proof flatly conclude, that nothing can be this way concluded,
since your adversaries will likewise claim in whatsoever shall thwart them, an
equal liberty of excepting.

Now Cousin, give me leave to examine a little nearer, the three grounds
whereon you build the pretended certainty of this Method, in resolving your
differences out of the Fathers declarations; as I collect your sense they are
these. First, That they were faithful Collectors of the general traditions of
the Church in their times. Secondly, that they are sincere conveyers of them to
us: And Thirdly, that the traditions collected and conveyed by them are
infallible. Should I grant them all to be true, it would not follow that they
were sufficient, till it did appear (which I think never will, though for the
present we will suppose it) that there were general traditions preserved in the
Church concerning all those points which we dispute of; but unless they appear
to be true, I am sure they cannot pass for sufficient.

First, That they were faithful Collectors of all the traditions of the Church;
where, in faithful, I suppose, you comprise careful and able for in the other
single sense of fidelity, faithful has most proper relation to the following
condition of Conveyers; industry and ability being as fully requisite in this
the Collecting part as integrity: To this I say, that as in one place I have
formerly professed how I believe them such faithful Collectors of the Churches
receptions, that is, careful and able, as well as sincere in many things of
greatest importance; so in another, I think, I have said enough whereby to
prove it unlikely that in things of less moment, such as our controversies, the
Primitive Fathers did apply their care and abilities to sound the bottom of
them; whether in this way of collecting the traditions of the Church concerning
them or any other. Industry requiring always stimulations in the particular
businesses, where we are to expect it; and likewise some leisure and remission
from other pressing occupations. Both which the Primitive Fathers totally
wanted, by little provocation in our cases, and incessant allarms in more
weighty ones. So that to your first ground, I will only make of new this
demand: Was the knowledge and Collection of the Churches traditions and
receptions easy and evident to all careful investigators, or hard and
difficult? If the latter, which I believe, since so many circumstances are
requisite to the exact knowledge of the Churches traditions; as first certain
evidence, what is that Church universal whose traditions are so sacred.
Secondly, a clear and unconfus'd delivery of the same unto them; and lastly,
not only an exquisite apprehension of the substance of all the doctrines, but a
perfect intelligence of the degrees and necessities either of belief or
practice wherein the Church did hold them: if thus hard, I say, and intricate,
the Fathers being men, and liable (as you confess) to error, how can we be
secured that they did not oftentimes mistake them, since it is evident that
sometimes they did? If facill and obvious which is likelyest you take them to
be, since you prefer them before Scriptures, because that you say is difficult;
how comes it that they disagree having a plain easy and infallible Directory,
whereby to regulate and conform their judgments? And truly Cousin, supposing it
such, I know not how to free diverse of them that dissent from one another in
matters where tradition is vouched from the imputation of stupidity, either in
not understanding the common and manifest tenants of the Church; or of
perverseness and malice, that knowing them would not own them; but by arguing
from their variances that they were not all in all matters of Religion careful
Collectors of the Churches traditions; Which, if you once admit, we cannot
think to conclude any thing from the Fathers till some third authority assure
us, which of the many (for ought appears to us) of equal abilities and zeal
were the careful Collectors, which not; and in what particulars they were so,
and in what not.

To your second ground, that they are sincere Conveyers unto us of the
traditions of the Church, I say, that to the just title of sincere Conveyers,
two conditions are requisite: the one affirmative, that they should deliver to
us (with all their rights that is, clearness, perspicauity and identitie of
sense as they received them) all the right traditions of the Church. And that
the Fathers are not likely to have done this, may be inferred from what has
been said before of their want of care and industry in collecting the Churches
seen concerning our affairs, matters being seldom right in the second
digestion which were not good in the first. The other is negative, that they
should not deliver any thing for a tradition of the Church universal, that was
not rightly and evidently such. That the Fathers were not Scrupulous in this
point, my former instances I conceive have sufficiently evinced. Wherein it is
evident with what confidence, to doubtful, yea, and erroneous doctrines that
themselves effected, they set this pretended great seal of infallibility.
Believe me, Cousin, that saying of St. Hierom, Ingenium suum facit Ecclesiae
Sacramenta, belongs not only unto Origin; it may without wrong be extended to
most of the Fathers that I have been acquainted with. And no marvel that they
should sometimes in heat of dispute be transported to vouch for tradition what
was not, when so often they swerve from what was apparently the universal
receptions of the Church, as has been made evident by many examples. From
which I do not infer that the Fathers had always such erroneous beliefs as
their words would many times import, but only that it is likely that they (who
in heat of dispute, or for some ends which they thought very important, would
recede in their expressions from the confessed tradition of the Church in such
high constitutive points of Christian Religion) would not be scrupulous in the
like heats, or upon the like ends to misapply the seal of tradition to some
points of lesser importance. For though it appear a greater falsehood to set a
seal surreptitiously where it belongs not, yet it is nearer to Rebellion not to
conform to that Authority where the Royal seal is manifestly stamped. There
has enough been said to maniest that the Fathers (that would sometimes thus
license themselves, be the occasion what it will, and the end how pious soever)
cannot pass for Candid or sincere conveyers of all the Churches receptions unto
us: and if less punctual in any, sure likeliest in our controverted doctrines,
which rarely had they the occasion to mention: but as serving to greater ends,
there were so many circumstances that might tempt and lead them from the exact
punctuallities of a sincere conveyer, that I am not much scandalized at their
prevarication.

You shall find that where Gregory Neoces, Ariensis, said, that the Father and
the Son, according to our conceptions were two, but but one in Hypostasis; St.
Basil, Ep. 64. p. 849. Tom. 2. excuses him, saying, that it was spoken (...),
and that being to persuade a Gentile, he thought it not necessary to be exact
in his expressions; and that it may be convenient sometimes to indulge a
little, to the use and manner of those one would persuade, that they may not
fly back from what is more necessary and seasonable; by which means Gregory,
says he, may have let slip many expressions that Heretics perhaps will lay
hold of for their advantage: likewise where Dionysius Alexandrinus had styled
the Son the workmanship of the Father, as the ship to the ship-wright, and many
other expressions that no Arian could mend; Athanasius is ready with an
Apology for him, p. 551.552. Tom. 1. de Sent. Dyonis. They were says he,
(...), and are not to be taken maliciously.

If that Thaumaturgus, and that other great pillar of the Church Dionysius did
license themselves so far as to let their expressions (by which we are to judge
of them, not by what they reserved in their hearts) swerve in so notorious a
manner from the most eminent tradition of the Church, in such a grand
fundamental, were it not irrational in us to expect from them and the rest a
punctual transmission of the Churches traditions in all such petty points as
most of ours, scarce ever touched upon by them, but in the way of those
important disputes, which you see warmed them even to such great oversights? If
those two excellent and most zealous of the Fathers, Athanasius and Basil were
so forward in their excuse, allowing them a liberty both for their policy and
passion in dispute to dally with a main tradition, were it not too unjust a
rigor in us to brand them with the imputation of falsehood and ignorance;
because, forsooth, they deliver us not with an exact fidelity the tradition of
the Church in our questions, concerning which it is to be doubted, whether
there was any general tradition in the Church or no? I profess I am as far from
laying so heavy an imputation upon them, either for their negligence herein or
falsity, as I am from expecting such a sincere punctuallity, as you promise
your self from them. Furthermore, besides the heats, the artifice of Disputes,
and desire of victory, which in contestations of great moment might easily
through their humane frailty make them strain a Point by the by in some article
less dangerous, when from it they may draw conclusions of great advantage in
the main. And besides that, as a great Arch. Bishop of Canterb. Epist. dedic.
Prelate lately made the Observation, Men are apt to think that they can never
run far enough from what they hate; and so by a very natural motion run upon
the other extreme, as a Father that in detestation of Nestorius would confound
that heresy by the receptions of the Church, might easily overshoot himself so
far, as to make the Church speak for Eutiches in aversion from Arianism, make
the Church speak for Sabellius, and in profligation of the Maniches to shake
hands with Pelagius, and so much more because the danger could hardlier be
foreseen, they are likely to have tuned the voice of the Church, either to the
Romish or Protestant Key, according as either was at the time most opposite to
the Adversary they combated; Besides all these, I am persuaded that many of
the Fathers held it a pious fraud to gain the subversion of a great error by
sowing a little one, not foreseeing how process of time might improve that to
as considerable a magnitude: Yea further I believe, and Saint Jerome implies
little less, Ep. 50. ad Pamach. Com. 2. p. 136. that in the general the Fathers
when they were in the Lists, held it no matter of conscience, either to affirm
for the Churches receptions, some things that they did not think to be so, yea
contrary to their knowledge; and to reject others that at another time they
would have admitted, so it were conducible to their victory: And although this
be a greater, as being a more wilful unfaithfulness then any other that I have
remarked in them, yet neither for this nor the rest, dare I brand them with
those heavy imputations which you seem Jealouss that I tend to: But since I
find that those reverend and holy men do not stick to set the seal of
tradition to conceits of their own, and other uncurrent doctrines, I do not
fall presently, as you implie one must do of consequence, to lay to their
charge impiety and profanation of the divinest Averments. But rather since they
make so bold with that seal, to believe that they did not repute it so sacred
as you imagine, but far inferior to proofs out of Scripture, and to be used
freely as a Topic Argument only when they wanted demonstrations from thence;
and indeed, throughout my slender reading, I have observed that when they can
produce the written word for their opinion, they do rarely insist upon
prescription, as pleading Lawyers fly then to presidents chiefly when they want
a text for their cause; But whereas you say, the foul play would not have
escaped their numerous adversaries note, had they set the sacred Character to
counterfeit Coin; I think so too. But what are we the wiser if their notes
escape ours, as needs they must, since of the numerous writings of their
numerous adversaries, this age I think has scarce a number. The Governors of
the Church in all times have made it one of their chief cares to smother their
impious Libells, dictated, as Saint Jerome says by the spirit of the devil:
And however some do allege, that such suppressions make a cause suspected, for
my part I think it (if not abused) both a wise and Religious course, since the
scandal and weakening of the weakers faith, which are so many, is much more to
be considered and regarded, then the satisfying of the curiosity of the
learned, which are so few; it fares with Sabellius, with Manicheus, with
Porphirie and the rest of the Heretics, or enemies of Christ, that live only
in the works of their Antagonists, as with Celsus in Origin, and with Arius in
Athanasius, and others whose confutations we are to thank; for all we know of
their Arguments our Libraries are just as well furnished with them as you may
imagine some good Fraters closet in Spain, that has the Inquisitor for his
neighbor, is with the works of Calvin, or Luther, or as the world is likely
to be provided of those passages in the Fathers that make for them some ages
hence, when time shall have worn out all Editions that are not according to the
Index expurgatoricis, of which those I mentioned in my former Letter, Eusebius,
Epiphanius, and Saint. Austin have not mist their gentle wipe, though you say
you have not met in either of them with any Article of Faith that you do not
most entirely assent unto. For my part, I do not know what you understand by
an Article of Faith; but I am sure I have cited out of St. Austin [of the
necessity of Childrens partaking of the Eucharist] an Article in this
discourse, which it is evident he held as an Article both of necessary faith and
practice, wherein I believe you will refuse to join with him. As for
Epiphanius his over-sights, I refer you only to the Jesuit Petavius, and for
Eusebius to Cardinal Perron, who casts upon him a trifling aspersion but of
Arrianism: or if his authority suffice not, let Jerome ( Ep. 65. ad Pamach. and
Oc.) be heard, who gives him this good testimony, Impietatis Arrii apertissimus
propugnator est.

Now to your third and last ground, That the traditions of the Church are
infallible: I say, that in part we agree in this point; for I am persuaded that
no man in his right wits will ever deny the firmest assent he has about him to
traditions of the nature which you Character doctrines taught by Christ to his
Apostles, and by them preached through the world, and then again delivered to
the ensuing ages by them that had these points inculcated in their hearts by
the Apostles, and in this manner with care, and every where handed over from
age to age, which upon particular occasions the Fathers used to sum up and
produce against innovators that would make breaches upon the ancient and
generally received faith of the Church-Traditions of this nature: Doctrines
thus delivered, I say, we agree to be derived from infallible Authority as well
as the Scriptures; and it is indifferent unto me, whether I receive the waters
of life from the Springs themselves, from the original cisternes and conserves
into which they did immediarly flow, or else conveyed through Aquiducts at
sixteen hundred years distance, so I be certain of the stanchnesse and purity
of the pipes. That such traditions, and so exactly conveyed there are in the
Church, and to which is due, as to the Scripture, from every prudent man (how
ever a Sophister may cavil) the strongest assent of his soul; we likewise
both agree, such are those forenamed grand fundamentals of Christianity; we
agree further, that by tradition we are (as you say) plainly, fully, and
practifically taught how to understand Scripture, I mean, in those
Fundamentals. And much more must I agree with you, that the business and
errand of tradition is to deliver it so unto us, since for my part I hold, that
those dignifying circumstances (by which tradition may rightly pretend to be
infallible) belong only to such doctrines as are either plainly, or by
necessary consequences deducibly coucht in Scripture: in regard of which
deductions we agree further, that it cannot be denied, but that it is (as you
say) an easier and better rule to guide our understandings in the affairs of
religion, to use the help of such traditions, then to resort for that end unto
Scriptures alone: as to read a book wherein there are difficulties, with a
judicious comment, is likely to be more profitable, then only to peruse the
single Text. And this last I assent unto, without admitting of the supposition
upon which you infer it, to wit, that there can by tradition be had a
complete knowledge of all that Christ taught. All this we are of accord in; but
what can you infer from hence to the advantage of the Romish cause, since I
peremptorily deny that there is such a qualified tradition really belonging to
any Tenent of the Church of Rome disapproved by us, or that seal with those
quarterings and dignifyings wherewith you blazon it, set by any of the
primitive Fathers (which yet were no sufficient warrant) to any doctrine that
does so much as border upon our disputes; since then I am sure you directed
that part of your Letter to the same purpose that the rest, I must answer what
I conceive it tends to, as well as what directly your words bear. And as I
have professed wherein we agree; so now I must set down in what and why we
differ; concerning these particulars of Tradition and Scripture, There are two
principal points wherein I dissent from you: First, that in the general you
conceive all Traditions of the Church whatsoever infallible. Secondly, that you
hold the Scripture to be no complete body of Faith, and therefore that we are
to give tradition much the preheminency in governing the tenor of ours. For
the first, namely, that all the traditions of the Church are infallible, I
could by one demand (of which is that Church whose traditions are infallible)
either bring you to our confession that the true Church is to be known merely
by its conformity to Scripture in belief and practice, or else into a circle
whilst you are forced to prove the truth and infallibility of the Church, by
her constant reception of those true and infallible traditions, whose truth and
infallibility you are at the same time proving by the Churches constant
receiving them. But I pass it by, because I would not seem to argue in any
wise captiously; and also for that Mr. Chillingworth has already excellently
laid open all the intricasies of this labyrinth. And therefore taking the
present Romish Church for that you mean, I proceed to answer your Arguments,
whereby in your Letter to the Vicountesse of P. to which you refer me, you
endeavor to prove all doctrines of the Church received or delivered by way of
tradition, infallible: the chief that I find are in the 12, and 13.
conclusions, as you call them, of that treatise; where first, for proof of your
assertions, that no false doctrine of Faith whatsoever can be admitted or creep
into the Catholic Church, you say, that whatsoever the present Church
believes, as a proposition of faith, is upon this ground, that Christ taught
it as such unto the Church he planted himself; a special good ground, and that
will soon end all controversies in this matter, if the ground appear to be well
grounded; and that the Church of Rome, which you suppose the present Catholic,
do never admit any doctrine of Faith but upon that ground. But first, the
ground can never be made good, that whatsoever of Faith the Church of Rome
teaches was ab initio so taught by Christ himself. And secondly, I believe
that the Church of Rome her self does not always in all that she teaches for a
tradition of Faith, suppose that Christ himself did teach the same; for this
latter part, I am better persuaded of the modesty of the Church of Rome, then
to think that she will so much as pretend it, for all her doctrines, as for
example, that of communicating only in the bread, is a tradition, for you will
not I suppose vouch Scripture for it, unless you mean to apply to it Christ's
prayer that the Cup might be removed; it is a tradition of Faith, yea, and I
think I may say of necessary faith, for unless the Communicants believe their
partaking sufficient, it must needs make that great Sacrament of the Church
ineffectual; and yet I do not think that the Church of Rome, or scarce any
Jesuit for her, will have the confidence to pretend that Christ himself taught
the mutilation, or the belief of one Elements sufficiency, since the contrary
practice and belief is so evident for many ages after Christ; and it is so
easy to discover the very dry root it self, of the custom to withold the
cup from the people; The like may be said of other doctrines; Now for proof of
the ground it self, that all doctrines of Faith whatsoever admitted in the
present Church, were so taught by Christ to the Church which he planted
himself; you Allege this argument: The reason why the present Church believes
any proposition to be of Faith, is, because the immediate preceding Church of
the age before delivered it unto her for such, and so you may drive it on (say
you) from age to age until you come to the Apostles and Christ; an easy
progress; and which, if you remember Mr. White much insisted upon at that time
when Mr. Chillingworth did me the favor to give him a meeting for conference
at your lodging; although I set a great value upon that Gentleman's learning and
fair way of disputation; yet I confess his argument has often made me smile;
it did so bring into my head that gallant consequence of Charles Thynnes,
wherewith all you once made me very merry, by which he undertook to
demonstrate, that surely in the world there might be a man so disposed as
(having a good rise, and with a convenient career) to leap at once from England
to Rome; for (said he) Bring me the best Jumper you know, and is it not likely
that there may be another that you know not, so active as to outjump him a
foot; let him be brought, I hope you will not deny but he may be out-jumpt an
Inch: and so by inches and straws-breadths of outleaping one another, why not
to a thousand miles? I dare say, that Mr. Hooper was better satisfied of the
corruption of times in his pedigree from King Peppin, then I was by that logic
of the incorruption of times in his deduction of all Romish Doctrines from
Christ; nor am I yet better satisfied, though I confess by your dwelling on the
same Argument, I see plainly, that what may be liable to much slighting,
proposed by one man, may be delivered with such weight and authority from
another, as though it convince not, yet to require a serious pondering and
discussion; the scope of your reasoning, as I understand it, is this deduction
ad Impossible: If the present Church (say you) hold a Doctrine of Tradition,
it is because all they of the precedent so held it and delivered it; and the
reason of the preceding Churches holding it so, is the same relative to all
those of the next before, and so on till you come to the first Age of the
Church: Now this being so, there cannot be admitted (say you) unto the avowed
channel of the Church, any corrupt Rivolet of erroneous Doctrine, unless all
they of one Age conspire in an untruth to deceive posterity, which is
impossible. This latter Assertion, which I must confess to be strangely jarring
to my sense, is built upon a supposition of the former, which is it self of
great ambiguity: For, besides that as I said formerly, I do not think but that
the Church of Rome does receive some unwritten doctrines for which she dares
not pretend to so ancient a pedigree, as to have been handed down to her from
the Primitive Church that Christ himself has planted; I would fain know when
the present Church, as you say, holds a thing for such, because (all they) of
the precedent age in Christ's Church delivered it to them for such, what is
understood by Your (all they) of the Catholic Church in the age precedent; by
(all they) cannot be intended here, what you say in your eleventh conclusion,
namely, that you mean the whole Congregation of the faithful, spread throughout
the whole world, for it is a far more evident impossibility, then what you
drive unto, that the whole congregation of the faithful throughout the world in
one age should confer with and teach the whole congregation of the faithful
throughout the world in another: If it be understood by (all they) all the
Doctors and Governors of one age, to all the faithful throughout the whole
world of another; I think you will find that likewise to border upon
impossibility.

By, All they, then, as I conceive must be understood all the Doctors and
Governors of the Church in one age, to all the Doctors and Governors of the
Church in another; and from them the Doctrines spread among the whole multitudes
of the faithful, are said to be the traditions of the Catholic Church: Now
this is so narrow a confinement of universallity to the mouths of the Doctors
or Governors of a present Church, that I think it no impossility for all those
that have declared themselves in some point, in some age, to have agreed
together on the teaching of somewhat more then was true, or at least such a
major part of them, as the dissentors may well have bin overborn or suppressed;
so that the doctrine may with a succeeding age, have past for a tradition
generally agreed on; and to such a conspiracy, methinks, they might have been
drawn by appearances of good, as well as through ill ends: As for Example. The
Doctors conceiving that a great restraint might be laid upon ill-livers by
Auricular confession (the apprehension of a sensible witness being most lively
unto them) might have complotted to teach the necessity of it to the multitude
for an universal tradition, which perhaps they knew not to have been such: and
so in other points, as the good or danger might appear more or less to the
Governors of the Church: so likewise for worse ends, in point of the Popes
Supremacy, it being a Doctrine so essential to the Monarchy of the Church; I
believe it far from impossible, that in some age all the Doctors of the Church
of Rome, that shall be heard, may resolve to teach it to their several
Congregations, for universal tradition, since the major part, as a Pope (
Aeneas Sylvius) himself confesses, affirms that the Pope is above Councels;
because he has so many Bishoprics to bestow, the Councels have none; besides,
if your (All they) of a precedent Church of Christ, instructing the present, be
reduced to so few as the Doctors, that are heard deliver their minds in any
one age, The natural Argument by which you would prove the impossibility of a
conspiracy in an untruth, will fall to the ground, since that is built upon a
supposition, that those general traditions which cannot be erroneous, because
of Humane natures, love of truth are delivered by such a multitude of men as
contain in them all the variety of dispositions and affections incident to the
nature of man, which I doubt much whether it can truly be affirmed of all the
Christians of the world; I am sure it cannot of the poor number of Doctors and
Governors in any one age among them: But to let this supposition pass,
supposing that the present Church understands what is meant by (All they) of
the preceding, though I do not; and that all the present receives, she receives
as delivered to her by all those of the preceding age: let us examine a little
that which you infer upon it, to wit, That this being so, no false proposition
of faith, nay (as you say afterward) no false doctrine whatsoever can be
admitted into the Church in any age, unless they of that age do unanimously
conspire to deceive their children and youngers, in telling them they were
taught by their Fathers, what indeed they were not; That this is not
impossible, since only the Doctors and Pastors of the Church are to be
understood by (All they) has been already shown: But is there no other way,
say you, but this for falsehood to creep into the Church? Truly (methinks) on
the contrary it is with error and necessary truths, in the body Ecclesiastic,
as with life and death in the body natural; And as there is only one way for
life to enter at, but a thousand gates for death, so for necessary truths there
is but one ordinary avenne to the Church, namely by Scripture read or taught,
but for error to get in at a thousand passages, without supposing such a
general conspiracy: For though many times when an error has had a long
Current, we cannot point directly at the spring, yet are we never a whit less
certain that it had an entrance, because we know not at which door; Nilus has
a head, though Geographers cannot say directly where it is: And lines many
times that at first appear parallels to the eye, by that time they have been
lengthned a great while, prove apparently uneven, though no man can assign the
point whereat the deflexion began. The doctrine of the Chiliasts, a doctrine
which if any other surely that may well be said to have been a generally
received tenent of the Church universal for some ages, since in the whole
Church for above 250. years after Christ, there appears not in that point one
dissenting vote, till Dionysius of Alexandria opposed it; An error it is true,
and yet I hope you will not be so uncharitable, as to accuse all the ancient
Fathers of the second Centenary that they complotted to deceive posterity by
teaching them a falsehood for Apostolic tradition, you are more favorable to
them then so, in the last part of the Letter, where you your self discover a
way how without conspiracy, this error, and so another, may have overspread the
Church by the Authority of one man delivering it for a whisper of the Apostles;
And truly Cousin, what ever else may be said more probable in the particular, I
am confident it is most true in the general, that the work is easy from one
man of credits Asseveration, to possess vast Multitudes with firm persuasions
of a falsehood; and more in matters of Religion then in civil things, since in
those this pium credere prevails much, and most will rather take upon trust
what many affirm, and they discern no ill in, then put themselves to the
oft-times endless troubles of examining: Credulity being so easy and natural,
Disproving so difficult.

I warrant you the Common Faith of Romulus Ascent into Heaven, would have had
upon your grounds as rational assertours in the State of Rome, as any tradition
by us questioned at this day in the sea of Rome: See in that politic
invention of Julius Proclus, what power the imagined piety of one man has to
make a fiction pass for an Epidemicall verity, which as Tertullian says,
Apol. cap. 8. Ab uno aliquando principe exorta, exinde in traduces linguarum,
and aurium serpat, and ita modici seminis vitium, caetera rumoris obscurat, ut
nemo recogitet number primum illud os mendatium seminaverit.

The Jews, a much more numerous multitude heretofore, and still I think equal
in number to any Christian Church of one denomination, were the most Religious,
the most scrupulous conservators of unwritten truths in their Cabala. And yet
what an error posfesses the whole Nation, and did so long before the curse fell
upon them, concerning their Messiah; whose coming long before Christ, and
since, they all expected and do expect in a temporal kingdom, of which they
did derive, and do continue to posterity the hopes by Universal tradition; or
if you will say that they build the doctrine, not upon tradition but Scripture;
yet I am sure you cannot deny but that they continue the interpretation of
Scripture that way by tradition, which comes all to one.

Did you grant the possibility of a Multitudes Conspiracy, I am sure you would
deny it in this, which is confestly the point upon which all of them agree,
that their supreme felicity depended.

It would pass for a very fallacious reasoning to drive up this belief to the
Patriarchs, and so conclude it infallible, because the present age received it
for a tradition from the preceding; and that from the Antepenultime and so
forward: Or because the instant where the error was admitted amongst them
cannot Digito monstrari and dicere hic est. For truly Cousin, partly through a
natural desire in all men, that others should think as they do, or do what they
think convenient (from whence there springs an aptness in the teachers, to
apply to their opinions the strongest Authorities they can devise, whether
they do justly belong unto them or no) and partly through an aptness of the
ignorant (which are the greatest part of Auditors) to swallow more, and retain
better the words, and the outward literal part of what is taught them, then
either to examine or hold fast the precise and inward sense; It may well happen
that multitudes may mumble the shell, when a few have the kernel; and looking
superficially only upon the outward stamp, toss up and down for current among
them counterfeit oft-times and Adulterate Coin; The mistake is ordinary, and
the propagation of the error easy; for instance sake, in the doctrine of
praying for the dead, many of the Doctors of the Church, who believed that all
the souls of the departed were kept in certain receptacles until the general
resurrection, conceiving that prayer for the beatitude of the dead, came all to
one with praying for the hastening of Christ's Kingdom, might teach it others,
thinking, it no profanation of prayer to employ that holy Act even where we
know it cannot avail, since Christ himself prayed to have the bitter Cup of
his passion removed; and all the Doctors generally holding such prayers a
convenient testimony of charity in the living, whether they were Commemorative,
Eucharisticall, or supplicatorie, easily might the practice pass into a common
doctrine.

Now the word Necessary being often used for Convenient (as it had need) since
under a less pretension then Necessary, it is hard imposing new duties upon
the multitude; And the step being so easy, though so great from necessary to
absolutely necessary, it is no marvel that all or most of the Pastors should
have delivered it for such to their Flocks, and applied to it the seal of
most Authority with the multitudes, Tradition; and so they have swallowed that
according to the expression for a necessary duty, and given it the general
voague of such in the Church, which was far from being truly so in its first,
and after so long a progress untraceable originals.

So likewise of Christ's descent into Hell, concerning which I suppose all
antiquity agrees in the shell of the Article, Descendit ad Inferos (though
Ruffinus [ in Symb.] says it was left out of the Symbol of the Church of Rome)
few of the Fathers in the kernel, or inward sense, that is, what was
understood by Inferi, and how, and why Christ descended thither. Some taking
the Inferi to be a part of Hell, others understanding it with a little more
color of reason, that resting place called Abraham's Bosom, and a part of
Heaven. Some thinking, and rightly, as I conceive, that he descended virtually
only to triumph over the damned. Others, that locally, yea so far as to
preach in hell, and convert there; such was the extravagant opinion of Clemens
of Alexandria [ Strom. lib. 6. p: 639.] one of the learnedest of the pack, but
all agreeing I say, in this outside, Descendit ad Inferos, or (...). No marvel
that the more gross and literal sense should be swallowed by the multitude,
and gain the name (though an error) of common reception, handed to them from
their Forefathers: so that it may be collected out of what has been said, that
falsehoods may creep into the Church either by want of exact fidelity in the
Teachers (which want may be general when the collateral considerations are
general, and the points themselves not thought so important as others they
serve to:) Or by the frequent misapprehension of the teached, the matter often
taking possession of them, when the manner of the doctrine usually most
considerable, is either let slip or supplanted, or else by leisurable, yea and
at first insensible mistakes either in Teachers or Learners, which
notwithstanding in long progress of time grow manifest and vast, like the
ebbings and flowings of the Sea, which at the end of some hours make so great
a difference, when at the brink no man can perceive how much ground each wave
does gain or lose: What then shall those discern that look upon the several
billows at a remote and dazzeling distance? Nor can your arguments taken from
humane Natures prime appetence of Truth, serve to conclude an infallibility in
whatsoever shall be embraced for a truth by a vast multitude of men of variety
of natures, dispositions and interests.

First, because no number whatsoever of Individuals, but that which makes up
the universal, can be considered as other then a part, whereas your argument is
not colourably applied to less then the whole. It is the infrustrable
appetence of truth (an appropriate of humane nature in the general) that you
insist upon, which is not made vain by any multitudes (which how great soever
is still but a part) entertaining of a falsehood.

Secondly, because if we admit of your Argument, it will conclude for
Heretics once grown numerous, as the Arrians were, as well as for the best
Catholics, since natural Appetences are not to be supposed more frustrate in
the one then in the other: Lactantius Divin. Inst. lib. 5. cap. 13.
An boni nostri qualitas ex populi potius pendebit erroribus quam ex
conscientia nostra and judicio Dei.

Thirdly, because though I grant your Argument, I am never a whit the surer of
truth, where I find many professors of a doctrine held as by tradition, since
the prime natural appetence of truth (whence you draw your ratiocination) is
to the knowledge of truth, not the teaching of it. Now in our question this is
as much or more requisite in the deliverers, then the other in the receivers,
since they look no further then the hands they had it from, and to hold fast in
truth what they presented them for such, and for so conveyed by their preceders
to them.

And lastly, your argumentation cannot be useful, because you extend it only
to prove that multitudes cannot agree together, on an untruth to complot it;
whereas to overthrow your imagined infallibility, it is enough that they agree
in, or to an untruth to believe it; Between which two there is so great a
difference, that I think the first very improbable, the other very frequent:
Nay farther, I do conceive the very frequencie and (if I may so say) aptness in
Individuals, whether few or many (which makes a multitude) to be led into
errors, to result from man's natural affection to truth, which is such and so
transporting, that we are glad to embrace and hug the very shadows of it; And
being rarely able in our imperfect and deprest condition here, to arive to a
solid enjoyment of that prime essence of Intellectual delight, we grow fond of
the appearances, and cleave close to what is like it. Man's affection to this
transcendent, expressing it self after the same manner that it usually does to
the other prime fellow appetence of our Nature (good) which our soul here
below, interially and naturally aims at in all its pursuances: But the only
true good being too far elevated for it to ascend to a full enjoyment thereof,
whilst it bears the clogg of flesh upon it, our ardor directs it self to what
we think of nearest derivation from it. But alas, we miss even of that, and
embrace false shadows for it, easily conceiting any thing the same that is but
clad like unto what we love, whilst almost all mankind courts, pursues and
enjoyes what is ill, yet seldom or never, but sub ratione boni. And thus by
easily believing what we fain would have, by a natural passion both to good
and truth, we are betrayed to a mistaking credulity in both.

Thus Cousin, I have presumed to give you an Answer in my immethodical and
unpollisht way, to what I find repugnant to my understanding, in the discourse
to which you referred me for proof of infallibility in all the Traditions of
the Church of Rome. To discuss that learned and eloquent Discourse throughout,
in any correspondency to its weight and beauty, belongs I consesse to far
greater eminence then I have vanity to aim at. And therefore what I have
ventured upon, has been only to show you, that although I am in the highest
measure delighted, yea even ravished with that excellent piece, I am nothing a
paid therewith in this particular; which may serve for an argument, that
goodness many times delights the soul in spite of truth, and so proves a
transcendent above it. Now that the fallibility, and consequently the
insufficiency of your rule of faith, tradition, has been made appear, it will
be fit to vindicate the sufficiency of that rule which we rely upon. In which
work the first hinderance that I meet with is this objection of yours, That the
particular books of Scripture were written for other particular ends, and not
to give us a complete body of faith.

To which I answer, that if by particular books of Scripture you understand
each book a part, severed from its relation to the whole, I then agree with
you, that every particular book was no more intended for a complete body of
Faith, then every particular Chapter for a complete body of the book, or then a
Window or a Door, to be a complete body of a House; but as the one was designed
to give entrance, the other light to some room or passage of the Edisice; so
the several books of Scripture were written; some to give entrance to
Christianity; some to illustrate dark places of the whole; some to inform us of
matters of fact, that we might understand in what chiefly to praise God; some
to discipline us in matters of practice, that we might know how aptliest to
serve and please him: And others to instruct us in matter of belief, that we
might learn to rely upon him. But on the other side, if you remit the least of
this abstract and Independent consideration of the particular books of
Scripture: I must then profess that I steadfastly believe that they were all
designed to this chief and primary end of composing that complete body of
Faith, whereon Christ's perfect Church should be built as certainly as so many
several parts of a building having each a particular end, besides of their
erection, are yet in the general and main intention all destined to the making
up of one complete and entire Fabric; yea further, (without urging the
comparison till it halt) I am persuaded that as the Master Architect having an
Idaea formed of the whole, directs many a part to the perfection of that, when
the subordinate workman that frames it thinks of nothing farther then of the
piece he is in hand with: So oftentimes the Almighty Architect, when his
Ministers perhaps never looked further then that service in particular, wherein
they were employed, some perhaps in a Gospel, in an Epistle some; he by his
infinite Wisdom directed each particular to the making up of the whole and
complete body and rule of Faith, the written Word; which by his admirable
providence he has, and will I am consident ever preserve entire and incorrupt
in all parts necessary to its own perfection and harmony, and to man's eternal
safety and direction: Insomuch, that I cannot but think it at the best loss of
time, to be solicitous after any other rule; and irreverence, if not impiety,
to question the sufficiency of this. But because my opinion is little
considerable with one of so far a better Judgment, take in this Point the
Opinion of the Fathers, which you so much rely upon. To begin with Tertullian,
these are the last words of his 22. Chapter against Hermogines, Scriptum esse
doceat Hermogenis officina: If it be not written (says he) let him fear the
Woe destined to such as shall add or take away. Can any thing be inferred more
rightly then from this passage, the sufficiency of Scripture, and the
superfluity of any other rule. But take yet somewhat more direct from Oration ad
Gentiles. toward the beginning.
Athanasius. The holy, and from God inspired Scriptures (says he) are (...),
of themselves sufficient to the discovery of truth. I appeal to St Basil
himself, of all the Fathers the greatest attributer to Tradition in all things
wherein regard is justly due unto it. Hear what he says, handling a point
wherein Scripture (I think) is as dark as in any necessary one whatsoever; I
mean that of the Trinity: Believe what is written, (says Hom. 29. advers.
Calum. stan. Trin. page 623.
he) what is not written, seek not. And in another place, It is a manifest
falling from the Faith (says De vera ac Pia side, page 251.
he) and an argument of Arrogance, either to reject any of those things that
are written, or to introduce any that are not of the written. And lastly, to
sum up all that can be said by a Protestant, in one sentence of a Father of
greatest Learning and authority: Listen but to St. Augustine, De doctrina
Christian. lib. 2. cap. 9. In its quae apperte in Scriptura positasunt
inveniuntur illa omnia quae continent fidem moresque vivendi. He had need be a
confident Sophister, that would undertake to evade these Authorities; but yet
if they may not be admitted, let Scripture be heard for it self: It is a
privilege and preeminence solely peculiar to that sacred Volume to be Witness,
Advocate and Judge in its own cause. Surely the Spirit spoke in St. Paul, when
he told Timothy, That holy Writ was able to make him wise unto salvation, 2 Timothy 3. in fine. And when numbering up almost all the particular parts that can
be required to the complete Institution of a Christian, he concludes, that in
these by Scripture the man of God is made perfect, and fitted to every good
work. And I am confident by the same Spirit he spoke his own mind, when he
spoke ours so directly to the Corinthians, Vt dicsatis in nobis supra id quod
scriptum est non sapere, Epist. 1. cap. 4. Where by the way it is to be noted,
that the Apostle applies this doctrine as an Antidote to that very
inconvenience which I have heard some Papists object against the reliance on
the search and use of Scripture, namely that by it those of greater capacity
were lkely to be blown up, and to glory in their clearer discerning over
weaker, whereas the guidance of the Church and Tradition was equaller to all.
To this I say, it is worth observing what he delivers as it were by way of
reason, for the contrary Doctrine, to wit of confining our selves to Scripture,
(...).

I profess Consin, that these and many other passages of Scripture which for
brevities sake I note only in the Deuteronomy. cap. 4. and cap. 12. Epist. ad Gal.
cap. 1.
Margent, prenounce to me in as clear a sense as may be the sufficiency of
Scripture, and supersluity of relying on tradition for a rule of faith. And yet
I swear I am none of those of whom St. Basil speaks, p. 621. (...).

How they may sound, or what other sense they may bear to you I know not, since
now adays Gods Word proves to men of diverse opinions, as the Apostles
language, when the divided tongues had sat upon them in Dr. This was likewise
the fantastique opinion of the Author of the book de Spiritu sancto, fathered
upon Cyprian.
Alabasters conceit to several Nations at one and the same time, Hebrew to the
Jew, pure Greek to the Athenian, and Latin to the Roman. Lastly, if the Fathers
Testimony may not prevail, they being of an uncertain Authority, nor
Scripture swey, as being of an uncertain sense, let common reason be heard in
the cause, which for as much as I can judge of, it is as strong for the
sufficiency of Scripture (that is, its containing all points necessary to
salvation) as any prudent man need require for warrant of his belief. It is
agreed upon by all sides, that Man being ordained to a supernatural end, nature
is not sufficient to lead him thither, but that he must have some means above
it, and proportionate to the end, such as may either show him the way, if he
can discern, or lead him in it if he be blind, or which is happiest and surest
of all, both instruct and conduct him in it. This last kind of guidance, it
were presumption for man to claim, however Gods grace may afford it unto some.
The second, it were stupidity for all to expect, however some have little hopes
without it; And therefore it is the first that belongs to man in general; that
is a directory to all those paths and windings, without the knowledge of which
he cannot arrive to his primary end; And by the knowledge of which he may, and
is responsible himself if he do not follow the direction; which if God should
withhold from us, although I could not venture with some to apply to his
Justice that of Pharaoh's requiring brick where he gives no straw, nor to
pronounce it a stain to his goodness, should he condemn us for missing the
way, when he gave us no Map of the Country, since to a life actually forfeited
as all man's was in Adam, the least reprieve is a grace, a grace to be let row
in the Galleys; to him that the Gallows expected; A grace to take out of the
ditch, a man that put out his own eyes, though you leave him to grope out the
rest of his journey with perpetual hazards of falling in again: I say, though
I dare not in this case pronounce the withholding a directory from us,
inconsistent with his justice, wisdom or goodness, yet truly I think you will
yield, the man has not so fitting a belief of Gods mercy and wisdom as he
ought, who conceives that he would suffer those to perish for want of such a
necessary directory, for whose sake he gave up his own Son to death. Now to
suppose such a directory from God, and to think it defective, is again to fall
into undue thoughts, either of his mercy or of his power; nay, it is to destroy
what you do suppose, since the omission of any thing absolutely necessary in a
direction, makes the direction none.

This conclusion then I may safely draw, and I doubt not but with your consent,
that the Supernatural Directorie and rule whereby we are through Gods grace and
mercy to be instructed in the way to our supernatural end, must needs be
complete and sufficient in all parts absolutely necessary to that end. It only
remains then to show which is that rule and directory sufficient and complete
in all necessary parts: Now as in a journey, directions of the way, how
sufficient, how exact soever, will little advance you; unless you believe them,
or the knowledge of the way, unless you have legs to go, or somewhat else to
carry you: so in our Souls progress to beatitude, it must have reliance and its
instruments of gradation too, which is Faith, the strongest vehiculum of
Humanity to Divinity.

Now as I said before, that the means must be proportionate to the end, so it
is certain that the way, and the Organs by which we move in it, must be
proportionate one to another, or we shall never arrive at our end: As that let
all other things be never so well fitted, yet if our way must be through the Air
or the Sea, good legs or directions will little avail us. The Organ then of our
motion to Heaven being Faith, and that Faith the strongest assent of our souls;
the ground upon which it must march ought to be no less folid then
infallibility, since the strongest Assent cannot be given but upon the
strongest inducement: Forasmuch then as particular Tradition, that is the
unanimous testimony of any Church, of what numerous parts soever, has been
already concluded fallible and universal Tradition, is, as it were, coincident
with Scripture, being only, (as Clemens says, Strom. lib. 6. p. 679.) as it
were, an unwritten Transcript of that in men's hearts, and gives attestation to
no material Object of Faith, but what is deducible thence. It follows, That
Scripture is the ground proportioned by unquestionable infallibity to Faith, as
correspondent likewise in all things else, both to the goodness of God that
gives the directory and to our necessities that are to follow it. The
sufficiency and perfection of Scripture having been showed, and likewise the
defectibility of that kind of Tradition for whose Authority you labor; The
preferring of this latter before the first in governing the Tenure of our
Faith, is of consequence such an error as I am sorry should be countenanced by
your continuing in it. But because the precedence which you give to the
Churches Tradition before Scripture, is pretended due upon another ground also,
which I have yet spoke little unto: give me leave to say somewhat to that. You
lay Obscurity to the charge of Scripture; That Articles of Faith are not there
so plainly expressed, that every body can understand them. If it were so, truly
the Laytie of the Church of Rome is much obliged to it, for easing them of the
trouble of reading what is unintelligible unto them; but little beholding unto
S. John, for passing for a precept of Christ's, Search the Scriptures. But how
shall they take it now, forasmuch as the contrary to your Assertion, is a
manifest Corollary to the proof of Scriptures sufficiency and perfection? the
compleatness of a Rule or Directory consisting as well in its Evidence, as its
Fullness; and must need Interpretation, as little as Addition. Yet let us grant
your supposition a while. Scripture is obscure, you say. What follows?
Tradition is to be preferred. Tradition then is easier; Tradition is clear, say
you, to the Vulgar. I should rather think Tradition impossible to be learned,
since Man can speak but with a few; and millions must make up that; unless you
bring all lines that can be drawn from the Circumference, into a Centrical
point, the Pope. But you are too much a friend to the Doctors of the Sorbon, to
do that. Besides, if you do so, the difficulty will still remain: For here the
Rule in Geometry will not hold. The lines drawn back from the Center to the
Circumference, are not equal. Men are not all at an equal distance from him;
all cannot hear him: How shall the Vulgar understand him? By their Ghostly
Fathers? You will not attribute to private men a clearer, fuller, and evidenter
capacity to instruct, then the whole Body of Scripture: Or if you do, What are
Private Instructions of kin to Traditions?

Thomas of Aquine puts, in this kind, the highest complement upon Idiots,
toward the beginning of his first Book adversus Gentiles, by sinking down the
learned to their level. For he teaches us, I remember, to this effect: That
the wisest ought not to embrace by Natural Reason and Discourse any Article in
Religion, were it as manifest as that the Whole is bigger then the Part; since
there may be one so ignorant, as to have no notion of what the Whole is, or
what the Part. And Religion, that imparts all alike, must be grounded (says he)
upon some Principle common and equal to all. Herein the Doctor, I must needs
say, is rightly Angelique: for he walks to me in the clouds. If he mean, by
that Principle Faith, I understand not how that can be severed either from
Reason and Discourse, of which it is the last result; or from Grace, which is
not common. If he mean, by the Principle, that Tradition of the Church which
you rely on, I know not how that can be an easy guidance to the Ignorant,
since it is so difficult a matter to the wisest, to know which is the right
Church, whose Traditions are so sacred: for unless that appear, neither the
Ignorant, nor the Wise, are like to be much satisfied in conscience, by
governing the tenor of their Faith according unto them. If we must judge of
the Church by Bellarmine's Marks, in what mis-mazes shall the Ignorant be
guided, whilst we find the most Knowing involved in such intricacies, in the
examination of what is meant by Visibility, Succession, and Conformity with
Antiquity; and to what Society of Christians those attributes belong! If you
will have the true Church known by Scripture, which is surely the easiest and
best course, (even in the opinion of many learned Papists) what is that but to
flee back, and make Tradition clear and certain, by that Rule from which you
flee, as from what you judge obscure to Tradition, that you pretend to be
evident. And then the Protestants will have reason to take it heavily, that
they should be condemned for founding each part of their Religion upon the same
ground whereon the Papists build all theirs at once: Yea, great reason shall we
have to resent it, unless a Patent be produced from God Almighty, declaring the
Rule of Faith for such a Commodity as may be taken from Scripture in gross, but
not by retail.

Now that I have answered your Objections, I will not be nice in declaring unto
you, to the full, my sense concerning the Sufficiency and Perspicuity of
Scripture.

I believe that those Canonical Books which God by his providence has
preserved unto these Times, and which are acknowledged by all Christians to
have been Divinely dictated, do make up a complete Body of all the material
objects of Faith necessary to salvation; whether explicitly or implicitly
necessary to be believed.

I further believe, that in that blessed Sacrary there is not only an
inclusive sufficiency, to wit, a perfect comprisal of all Saving Doctrines
absolutely essential to Christianity; but an exclusive also, that is, such a
sufficiency as excludes and forbids any Doctrines should be imposed on
Christians for a necessary Article of Faith, that is not recorded there. Nobis
curiositate opus non est post Christum Jesum, nec inquisitione post Evangelium,
cum credimus; nihil desideramus ultra credere: hoc enim prius credimus, non
esse quod ultra credere debemus. Tert. de prax. advers. Haeret. cap. 8.

And lastly, I believe that all points whatsoever of Christian Religion are
there set down as perspicuously, and as clearly intelligible to all capacities,
as they are clearly necessary to be believed by all: And that God's mercy in
the merits of Christ, accepting alike the Faith resultant from the dark mists
of the Ignorant, and from the clearest intelligence of the Learned,

The Lamb may wade to his bliss through the same water through which the Elephant
may swim. Quicquid est (mihi creed) in Scripturis illis altum and divinum est,
inest omnino verit as and reficiendis instaur andisque animis accommodatissima
disciplina and plane it a modificata, ut nemo inde haurire non possit quod tibi
satis est, si modo ad hauriendum devote and pie, ut vera Religio poscit,
accedat. Here is the saying of Heraclitus most truly applicable. (...).

Nor truly do I conceive (besides God's equalizing capacities by his own
gracious acceptance) that there needs more then a very ordinary one, to
understand the Scripture in all points absolutely necessary to salvation. (...).

It may be as well understood of the Word of God, as of God the Word, to whom
Clemens (page 56. advers. Gent.) applies the saying. Magnifice igitur and
salubriter Spiritus sanctus ita Scriptur as sanctas modificavit, ut locis
apertioribus famae occurreret obscurioribus autem fastidia detergeret. Nihil
enim fere de illis obscuritatibus eruitur, quod non planissime dictum alibi
reperiatur. Aug. The great difficulties and obscurities which are there found,
I understand chiefly to be in those less material points, wherein men's
part-taking subtilties have given to God's Word many various acceptions, whilst
not seeking the doctrines of Scripture, but those that themselves are imbued
with in it, they use it not as the straight and steadfast Rule to judge of, and
avoid Obliquity by, for which it was ordained, but rather as a Lesbian Rule, to
be bent and deflected according to the several purposes of their own
Architecture.

Verifying of the heavenly food of the soul, that fantastic imagination of
Israel's heavenly food of the body, Manna, which was said to have been to all
differing palats the morsel that each one would have it, and the taste that his
mouth was made to.

Since then I am thus persuaded, that God has lodged within us a Pilot,
Reason, how weak soever, yet proportionate to the Vessel and the Voyage; and
that he has likewise laid open before us a clear and faithful Card, that
varies not for any Elevation, Scripture: you must pardon me, Cousin, if I choose
rather to steer by that Compass through the depths of Religion, to our Haven of
rest and beatitude, then like those ancient Navigators that wanted a true
Directory, to coast it from Doctors to Fathers, from Fathers to Popes, from
Popes to Councels, and from all these to (but pretended unerring) Tradition.
Quare oportet in care maxim, in qua vitae ratio versatur, sibi quemque
confidere suoque judicio ac propriis sensibus nati ad investigandam and
perpendendam Veritatem, quam credentem alienis erroribus decipi, tanquam ipsum
Rationis expertem. Dedit omnibus Deus pro virili portione sapientiam, ut and
inaudita investigare possent, and audita perpendere: nec quia nos illi
temporibus antecesserunt sapientia quoque antecesserunt, quae si omnibus
aequaliter datur occupari ab antecedentibus non potest; sed hoc eos fallit,
quod majorum nomine posito non putant fieri posse, and aut ipsi plus sapiant,
quia minores vocantur, aut illi dissipuerint, quia majores nominantur. Lactan.
Divin. Institut. lib. 1. cap. 8.

And now (noble Cousin) that I have examined your Opinions, and discussed your
Arguments, let me have your patience, or your pardon, a little further, while I
give you an account concerning those Directions wherewith you favor me in your
Letter, and in what state I am to follow some, and to excuse my self in others.

To the first, namely, The use which you conceive we are to make of reading of
the Fathers, I willingly conform my self in one part, that is, in letting pass
those things which they write as Divines and Scholars only, allowing them no
more weight with me, then the reasons wherewith they are accompanied do give
them. I am likewise very willing to let pass, for the most part, what they
write as Commentors upon the Scripture; their interpretations in that kind
being many times (if I may so say) very Chymerical. Although I must tell you,
that were I persuaded of any third Authority by whose seal the Fathers could
transmit unto us, in all things of Religion, such certain and unquestionable
resolutions as you imagine, I should not expect their aid more earnestly, nor
take the omission more unkindly of them in any thing, then in point of giving
us the right and well-handed interpretation of Scriptures. I further obey you,
in laying hold and relying on what they teach us as Pastors of the Church;
relying (I say) upon that chiefly, to wit, in the great Fundamentals of
Christianity; but not generally, that is, not in those Questions which we
disagree on; wherein they were neither willing nor able to be exact: and least
of all, when they inveigh against Heretics; their passions and transportments
being at such times greatest. As for such Opinions as they deliver
Dogmatically, without alleging texts of Scripture or learned Arguments to
maintain them; although they appear delivered with never so earnest an intent,
that they should be taken as matters of Faith, you must pardon me if they sink
no deeper into my belief, then they are driven by such Arguments as my own or
others discourse can find for them, either in Reason, Scripture, or Universal
Tradition.

Your second advice is, that I should apply my care to collect thorowout the
sense of the Fathers, and, by what they say, to frame to my self a Model of the
Practice, Government, and Belief of the Church in their times; and then to tell
you whether it be like to yours or ours. The Care and Attention you wished me, I
brought at first to the study of the Fathers: but I cannot brag of the Model I
have framed out of them; finding that truly a work hard enough for the best
Antiquary: And to me it is an improvement of the difficulty to an impossibility,
to be put to tell you which of the present Churches has most resemblance to
that of their times: I could as easily resolve you which of two men that stood
before me, were likest to an hundred differing faces. For I do not think there
is a greater variety of countenances at a Public Assembly, then there are
differences in the several Ages wherein the Fathers lived, touching those three
parts of Religion; especially these two, of Practice and Government; of which,
Tertullian, having summed up all the chief particulars of the Creed,
pronounces, Hac lege fidei manente, caetera jam disciplinae and conversationis
admittunt novitatem correctionis. Tert. de Virg. Velan. cap. 1. For matters of
Practice, it is a clear case, what liberty was taken to vary them according to
several evasions and ends, since some of the Apostles themselves, you know, did
not stick to practice Circumcision: nor do the several ages appear to me ere a
whit the more exquisite, in the imitation of their forefathers, then you will
say the Church of Rome is at this day of the Apostles in that, and of those
that followed after in administering the Eucharist to children, and yet it is she
that pretends to be the Pantomime of antiquity for matters of Government, how
Camelion-like that has been, how various, is as visible as green, and he that
would reduce the Church now to the form of Government in the most primitive
times, should not take in my opinion, the best nor wisest course, I am sure not
the safest, for he would be found pecking toward the Presbytery of Scotland,
which for my part, I believe in point of Government, has a greater resemblance
then either yours or ours, to the first age of Christ's Church, and yet is nere
a whit the better for it, since it was a form not chosen for the best, but
imposed by adversity and oppression, which in the beginning forced the Church
from what it wished, to what it might, not suffering that dignity and state
Ecclesiastical, which rightly belonged unto it, to manifest it self to the
world; and which soon afterward upon the least lucida intervalla, shone forth
so gloriously in the happier, as well as more Monarchical condition of
Episcopacy; of which way of Government I am so well persuaded, that I think it
pity 'twas not made betimes, an article of the Scottish Catechism, that
Bishops are jure divino. But as it is a true maxim in nature, Corruption optimi
pessima, so it holds likewise in Government, both civil and Ecclesiastical.
The best of all, Monarchy, festers oft-times and swells into the worst of all
Tyranny. To which after the first 500. years, Policy having or'etopt Piety,
the Church made a hasty progress, and of the following ages in this
particular, I grant the present Church of Rome, to be a copy far exceeding the
original, verifying now of the Roman, the imputation that Aristides laid by
way of reproach on all other Empires; (...). For matters of belief, the
salvation of Christians depending chiefly upon them, it is true, in the primary
and fundamental articles, they have been more constant, unanimous, and exact,
and in those comparing the Church of their times with yours and ours, I think I
may pronounce them all three alike to one another; but in points less material,
such as I esteem those, wherein we two differ, I should contradict my self to
undertake the framing out of the Fathers a certain judgment, which of the two
present Churches were most correspondent to that of their times.
Notwithstanding, if you command me to say for which side in my guess the
Fathers do make most, I will tell you truly and freely what I think, holding
then the balance as even as I can, I conceive the Fathers in some few points,
do lean somewhat more to you, as in that of Christ's descent into hell, and also
in that of free will: (those excepted that wrote in heat against Pelagius) but
in other differences, and those of greater importance, I collect, and probably,
if I am not much deceived, that their sense is much clearer for us, as in the
doctrines of Purgatory, and of the Eucharist, for as touching the first,
although you may pretend in some that the words and outward shell, wherein the
Fathers opinions were conveyed, belong more to you; yet, if the matter be
carefully picked and examined, I doubt not but the sense and kernel will prove
ours; and it will be found that when ever any of the Fathers, Origin only
excepted, and his adherents, who held the very flames of Hell but Purgatory and
Temporal; I say, those set aside, all the expressions of the Fathers this way
appear clearly to me to have been understood, not of a Purgatory, but only of
a probatory fire, whether they meant that of affliction or that of the day of
judgment; as for that place in St. Augustine formerly alleged for Purgatory,
his best commentator Lod. Vives, confesses he could never meet with it in the
ancienter copies of that Fathers admirable works, however crept into the vulgar
Editions.

In point of the Eucharist, I believe my former instances will deserve a
confession of the balances being so equally poysed in this affair, as far
forth as expression at least, that the overbearance of either scale is hardly
perceptible: but did I grant that their words weighed incomparably more on your
side, yet I should not doubt to challenge their sense for us, and that most
confidently upon this reason; That supposing the Fathers to have believed as we
do, the Sacrament to be Bread, great reason might they have notwithstanding,
to raise the majesty of it in their expressions, and to term it the body of
Christ, it being usual, and thought necessary in the primitive times to wrap
up the Sacraments of the Church in mysteries, that the Catechumens might be
possessed with a more awful reverence toward them, and be whetted and fan'd as
it were to a more keen and ardent desire of being admitted unto them;
especially the danger being much more easy for them to think too meanly of
what bore the name of Christ's body, but was palpably bread, then that they
should fall to adore that for God, which their ear only told them was the
flesh of Christ, and all their other senses assured them to be the commonest
food of mankind; whereas supposing them to have believed as the Church of Rome
does, that the Sacrament is the very Flesh and blood of our Savior, and to be
received with the same reverence that belongs to God himself, there can be no
warrantable reason why they should at any time lessen the majesty of so sacred
an object of our adoration, or give it so often the name of those ordinary
elements, whose evidence to our sense should they always have said all they
could invent, of dignifying, would still have been apt enough to give an allay
to the faith and veneration that is pretended to.

These being as I conceive, two of the most important Articles of difference
between your Church and ours, what has been said will suffice to manifest unto
you, that throughout this discourse I decline not the trial by the Fathers out
of any distrust of our cause: for truly though I will not allow their, Writings
to be the proper tribunal at which our controversies are to be judged, I
should be content to refer with you the whole matter to their arbitration,
and voluntarily to allow them that determinating power which in right they
cannot claim; so far am I from acknowledging a greater conformity in the
Church of Rome then in ours to what they teach, to have been either the
Government, Practice, or Belief of the primitive times, nor yet should I
refuse them for Arbitrators as peremptorily as I do for Judges, I would not
think my pains lost, or study of the Fathers not worth the while: For besides
the addition of knowledge and general improvement of the Soul, which one must
be a very stupid Reader of the Fathers, not to advance in, by the helps of
their great and universal learning, besides the admirable excitations to piety
and zeal; I conceive that even in the affair of directing us to a soul-saving
Religion, a Christian by searching into their ancient memorials may as you say,
reap a far greater advantage, then either Critics or Lawyers do in their
several Sciences from their worm-eaten monuments of Antiquity; for they,
Cousin, from those maimed evidences of broken and disjoynted Records, draw out
principles; it is true, so probable, as may prudentially induce a rational and
equal Surveyers assent, from which they frame perhaps some such text, whereby
indifferent men, do consent to be regulated; but we by our holy search into the
Sacraries of former ages are led to a text already divinely framed; A text
perfectly comprizing all parts requisite to the supreme Science it concerns; A
text whose very affirmation, is an uncontrollable resolution; from our Records
of antiquity, we draw not only Topical Arguments, but proofs to any
discoursing man above demonstration; such as it were madness and impiety to
reject upon any argument to the contrary; and this in all points of Religion,
mistake me not, I mean that do really and confestly on all hands import Heaven
or Hell in men's beliefs and practice: and from hence, though I should deny the
Fathers any usefulness at all in our controversies, yet, I should extremely
gratulate to my self the labor and ambition to be in some good measure skilled
in their Antiquities, and to you your great and (according to your principles)
most judicious progress in them.

Your next advice is, that I should apply my understanding and industry to
build up as well as to pull down, and to examine as strictly the reasons of my
own belief, to see whether that be well grounded; as those for the contrary
opinion, to observe whether that be concludingly demonstrated; I must confess,
I ever thought it a superfluous labor, to seek to establish one part of a
contradiction, by any further proof then the destruction of the other; and you
your self supposing our Tenants contradictory, do warrant that for a truth, (to
me) sufficiently proved, and press on me a necessity of embracing whatsoever is
contradictory to a falsehood.

It Is true that St Jerome passes upon Lactantius, a censure in a wish; Vtinam
tam nostra confirmare putuissit quam facile aliena distruxit; but his case and
ours are not alike, 'twas not so convincing an Argument; Paganism is
ridiculous, Judaism exolete; Therefore Christians are in every thing in the
right, as it is with us, the Church and tradition is not infallible in all
things, therefore fallible in some; the bread is not transubstantiated,
therefore it remains bread. There is no third place for us after death, besides
heaven and hell, and no fall from the one, and no redemption from the other,
therefore no Purgatory; In these and the like cases, one party is sure and
firm settled when ever the other falls, as certainly as in natural generation,
the decay of one thing is infallibly the parent of another: And therefore in
point of wrong and unfitting superstructures, such as most of the Romish
Tenants are, which we lay battery to, it may suffice to pull down, those being
demolisht, what is rightly built will stand fast of it self, since both suppose
a foundation.

Now for the second part of your direction, namely, that I should strictly
examine the reason of my own belief, I have obeyed you to the full; And that you
may be able to judge whether they be well weighed or no, take here a sum of my
belief; I believe the unity and Omnipotence of God, and an inexplicable Trinity
in that unity; I believe the incarnation of the second person of that Trinity,
that is Gods assumption of perfect humanity from the womb of a Virgin; And that
he humbled himself, not only to manhood, but also to mortallity; that after he
had set our practice an exact pattern by his life, and by his words imbued our
Theory with all necessary documents, he might purge our stains with his blood,
redeem our forfeitures by the price of his passion, and present a plenary
satisfaction to his Fathers Justice for all our misdeeds; I believe further,
that to make us capable of the effects of his merits, Beatitude, he illuminates
our understanding by the gift of the holy Ghost, by whom is created in us that
divine faith, by which these mysteries are to be apprehended: I believe also,
that our blessed Savior gave his Apostles commission to preach to all the
world his saving Doctrine, who did accordingly, and have left to posterity,
both written records, and living ones in successions of the faithful, that
shall preserve even to the end of the world, these and all other articles
necessary to salvation. I likewise believe that the Apostles established
Pastors in several Churches, whom we are to hearken unto with reverence, and to
receive of them the Sacraments of regeneration to Christ, and of Communion with
him, both which by Gods grace, have a divine and supernatural effect in the
cleansing us from sin; I believe that heaven shall be the reward of the good,
and hell of the wicked: and lastly in a word (to supply whatsoever may have
been omitted) I firmly believe whatsoever is evidently contained in the Creed
or Scripture, or clearly deduceable from either. I am persuaded that you will
yield that the reasons upon which these are built, will abide the strictest
examination. None of these assertions I hope betrayeth its own weakness? And
yet these are the only opinions which I have been imbued with, these are the
parts of faith that integrate my Religion, in these are comprised al points
that I think necessary to be believed; And he that believes any thing more, if
he have but his share of good works, is safe in my opinion, for he has faith
of supererrogation; my firm and resolute settlement in these verities, defends
me from being at all concerned in those several imputations which toward the
close of your letter you do most judiciously and justly lay upon Sciolous and
Sapticall wits, that floating in uncertainty, would fain reduce every thing to
that pass, seeking rather to puzle and imbroil an adversary, then weightily to
establish a solid truth. It Is that solid truth, and such as bears no dispute,
that I wish we might all stick to; and let pass those quillets, and niceties
imposed by the Church of Rome, for Articles of importance, and which her
adherents dwell upon with too scrupulous a diligence; such as admit arguments
on both sides, and are fitter for a declamation then a Catechism, in which
whilst men vainly busy themselves, they let slide away many times unnoted, as
you say, that great deal which is uncontrollable and plain points, which can be
thought at best but at the skirts, none belonging to the main body of religion;
doctrines for the most part (at the least in my judgment) so little material;
that I applaud the Fathers for spending so little time or labor on them; such,
as I am so far from delighting to make objections in, that where ever I have
touched upon particulars, it has been a Contrecoeur, and only to disperse
such dust as others raise; for I swear there is no man living has a stronger
aversion then my self from all cavils in Religion; it being justly to be
feared, as our great Prelate (Archbishop of Cant. in his Epistle to his
Majesty) says, that Atheism and irreligion gathers strength, while the truth
is thus weakened by an unworthy way of contending for it; and I am persuaded
that mo^^ men, while their thoughts are so busied in chicanes of controverted
points, grow negligent of those more weighty ones that neerlyer import
salvation, and so run out of the most essential good of their souls, as
impertinently as many a peevish freeholder that wastes a solid estate, in
endless law suits for a trifle; and as I think these points little important
for use, so I concur with you in esteeming both these, and all other matters of
Religion very unfit to be argued on for ostentation or applause, which I am
sure I am as far from aiming at in this subject, as I shall be far from
attaining it. It Is true, the condition of the knowing and ignorant, is usually
quite contrary to the Lords servants in the Gospel, there he that had least,
wrapped up his single talent in a Napkin; but amongst men now a-daies that
pretend, whoever has least, it is he longs most to show how much he has, and
so publishes how little; yet, thus far they oftentimes both agree, that neither
improve their store: and thus by my ignorance unless you be charitable, I
confess my self liable to be suspected guilty of the vain appetite of
oftentation that usually accompanies it; but as my Ignorance exposes me to the
suspicion, so my consciousness of it (the sole knowledge that I can brag of)
frees me from the Ambition suspected, and lays upon me a necessity of
concluding with a huge Apology, for presuming to give you so much trouble,
and, I fear, so little satisfaction: I confess I ought to have been restrained
from venturing at all upon this Debate, the Subject it self being so far above
the pitch of my literature; And the Person with whom I presume to argue the
difference of Opinion, confestly my superior in all advantages both of Nature
and Acquisition, beyond all hopes of comparison; Considerations either of them
able to deterr a much considenter man then my self: But Friendship, which
always finds, or makes men equal, has long since licenc't me from the
latter, and hardened me to impart my conceptions, how low so ever, as freely to
you, as I could do to any inferior Wit of mine own level: And for the first,
I have neglected it upon this persuasion, that I shall be better able to answer
to the Divines, a young, a Lay, and ignorant man's adventuring to treat of their
Business, then to you, and to my self so womanish a wrong, as not subscription
to the Dictamens of your strong and powerful Soul, without yielding my reasons
for the variance, which how light soever they may be found, when pondered by
your excellent judgment, yet being really such, as are most convincing to mine,
they will serve to excuse me to you, to justify me to my self, and I hope to
make my Errors even pardonable with God, who when by St. Peter, he bids us be
able to give a Reason of the hope that is in us; I am confident he expects it
no better then proportionable to the capacities that his goodness has endowed
us with: Answerable to them is this Discourse, weak I confess, disjoynted, and
without Nerves; and yet I doubt not but it may be so evictuated by Truth and
the goodness of my Cause, that I shall not be ashamed to have encountered a
GOLIATH with a Sling. A Straw kept in a right Line, might batter a tower; from
which right line of truth and reason, I may safely protest I have not so much
as once voluntary swarved in this Treatise, through any partaking passion, or
forelaid design, neither have I suffered my self; herein to be so far wrought
upon by civility, as to forbear a free and round expression of my sense, where
ever it differed from yours: and truly, there was no cause why I should, since
in our disputes, the strongest opposition, that I or the best wit for me can
possibly make to your opinions, will derogate no more from your unquestionable
exellency of judgment, then it would conclude either of us ill-sighted should
you affirm such a Garment to be red, and I that it were green, the object being
a changeable Taffaty, and we seated in contrary lights, or looking through
mediums diversely tincted; a like affect upon the soul, to these upon the sense,
has diversity of education, and discrepance of those principles wherewith men
are at the first imbued, and whereon all our after reasonings are founded:
Conformity and uniteness of mind, as rarely flowing from contrary Educations,
as the same River from opposite springs; sweet, happy, and I think sole, is the
self-sameness which arises from pure principles of nature, never sophisticated
by the artifices of our breeding, but little derivation from those Fountains
has this or that Sect of Religion, and so no marvel if we agree not therein to
be one, as we do in the other most true and prime Emanation of nature,
Friendship; which, on your part to me I am confident must needs spring from
thence, since my small merit affords no other motive; and for mine to you, I am
sure it is impossible without an entire concurrence of all the forces of
Sympathy, for any man to reverence, admire, and love another, with that Ardour
as I do you dearest Cousin, and which you cannot but own in

SHERBORN, March 30. 1639. Your most faithful and most Affectionate Servant. G.
D.

FINIS.

