The strength and power of God manifested [in the creatures weakness] against
the hard judgment and judgments of cruel and unreasonable minded men, (in and
of the World, and Worlds spirit, and worldly censures); whose rashness and
hastiness [therein] against the innocent, God has found out a way to overcome
and subject (even patience and endurance [of and under sufferance] in the quiet
and meek Life and Spirit of the Lamb of the Fathers Glory) the fury and rage of
man, that turns to the praise and glory of God; and returns the evil and
mischief [thereof] on their own heads (as the remainder of what more of the
rage and fury [of man's cruelty] than makes for such honor and praise of God
and his creatures good) he does (...) And
The Epistle or Preface to the Reader signifies,
That the Glory of God was and is discov^ (...) revealed [in the world] in the
suffering spirit and principle [in the Sons life] that magnifieth the power and
wisdom that sent and brought him hither (to that same end (that as he was and
is heir of his Fathers sufferance, and we have been made partakers thereof with
him;) so also we may be heirs and partakers with him [together] to Glory [for
evermore;] even with that glory the Son of God was glorified in [with the
Father of Spirits] before the World began) in the enlargement of the Seed and
Spirit of God: And that as Christ our life has or does appear [in the World,
and Worlds eye and sight of esteem] so we might appear with him in glory:
Though it is the end of such his sufferance [in spirit] that manifests and
reveals the glory [thereof] in flesh; in that until his sufferance [in
spirit] begins to draw to a period (in the flesh of his Creatures) and some end
to be put thereto; the end of the Law, nor of transgression [for which cause it
was added] is not nor cannot come up [in the world] that the ordainer of all
may be praised [in his Creature] in the beginning and end of all holy
determination (in the counsel of that will and workings of the mighty power
that exalts the wisdom of the worker and contriver of all purposes that
therein stand); nor can it be seen [in the world] to what end the Just was sent
and came hither [a sufferer for and in the Creature, in the state of the
unjust,) but as the witness of such end of his sufferance comes and appears,
in such the Creature, in the Fathers Glory: The Mystery of which has been and
is hid from the World and Worlds sense, in our life's sufferance, and also joy
and rejoicing [in that Glory] that has been hid with Christ in God, until the
salvation of God sprung up from the morning of the everlasting day of God, and
glad-tydings (to the poor and imprisoned captive of hope) to arise from the
dawning of its brightness [in the earth and world] and deliverance to the Seed
and Spirit of God, and soul and life of his Creature (that there has been a
wall of separation between (in the night of obscurity and darkness, that has
overtaken and overspread the world) whereby that glory has been veiled and
darkened) broke forth in the power of an endless life, to the dispersing and
driving back the thick cloud of the worldly mists and foggs of ignorance and
blindness of mind (wherein the understanding of the Creature has been
stupefied under gross thick darkness, and unity of spirit [between God and his
Creature] kept from,) to the astonishment of many beholders of that Glory, in
the appearance of Christ [in his Life and Spirit of truth] that works the
work [his own work that does praise him] to see what breaks forth of the work
of power and wisdom [that brakes down the wall,] and brings up the life and
spirit of reconciliation [in and to the creature] in the mind and will of his
Maker and Creator; whereby that which has been done in secret may be manifest
openly, and what was spoken in the ear, preached on the house top, and declared
abroad in the world, etc. (though if our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that
are lost; in whom the God of this world has blinded their eyes, least the
light of the glorious Gospel [which in them that perish is a mystery
unrevealed] shine in their dark hearts; and God who commanded the light to
shine out of darkness, shine [in] there, to give the knowledge of God in the
face of Jesus;) and wherein the refreshments from the presence of God (that
has been often ready to break forth (in the brightness of the Majesty of such
Glory, in which is endless praises to the highest,) has been hindered and
clouded [in the soul] by the straitning, limiting spirit and power of the
world, such gross thick darkness and blindness of mind (wherein they have been
groaping for the walls, as the blind at Noon-dayes,) in their imaginary Faith
and Doctrines (of, and concerning, God, and Christ, and Heaven, etc. in the
black night of Apostasy and backsliding from God and his Spirit of truth [in
the heart] into and after the error of the wicked, in the falsity of a misled
judgment (in their giving forth their meanings and private interpretations on
Scriptures of truth (that were spoken in and according to the motions and
risings up of that Spirit and Life, that had in honor and respect (for the
Lords sake) the thing or things contended for. For as to

The strength and power of God experienced in the Creatures weakness.
Introduct.
IT always has been and is manifested in the suffering life (of the Fathers
will and wisdom of good pleasure,) wherein the weakness and emptiness and
nothingness [of the creature] does exalt and magnify the praise and glory of
God [his Maker and Creator,] and is that in which God does delight to glory, as
what makes for his own honor (in the worthiness of that one that debaseth
himself to the dust [for the creatures good] to the bringing him back into
unity of spirit [with that one] in which is a good and glory that is
everlasting, and a rejoicing [therein] that is endless (in God over all blessed
for evermore;) that into the sense hereof the creature may come, and in that
may dwell and sit down (and count what is before them, and also what is behind)
that empties the creature of all, and brings out of all conceitedness and
exaltation and height of spirit, to see the nothingness and emptiness and
worthlessness of the creature in himself (in a state he is fallen in and under,
and into the nature of which he is degenerated, and with the spirit and life of
which he has adulterated) that God may be all in all [unto and in the
creature] and his honor and glory over all exalted [for ever and ever] that is
thus worthy; where that glory [only] can be and is prized and esteemed [that is
endless;] and without which [sence] he worth and glory and value thereof
remains unknown, or unsought-for.

Therefore, Concerning the sufferance of God [by his spirit] in the creature,
consider (in the fear of God) hat nothing is suffered to work against the
innocen^ (in this day,) but what makes for the praise and glory of God (that so
suffers it;) for the remainer (of what more than makes for his praise and
glory in sufferance) he did and does restrain; and then is praised and
glorified (in that work of restraint) over the Elements, and other unsensible
creatures, that are more obedient to the work of his Spirit and Powers
requirings, than his creature Mankind, against whom the Ox and Ass are called
witnesses, and the Sea (that keeps its bounds (when to the proud swelling waves
it is said, Ye shall not surpass your limit; for hitherto shall ye go, and no
further) and every creature in like manner, and in their place, testifies
against man (in the fall and transgression against God;) as was seen of old,
when the waters witnessed against the world they overtook (in the oldness of
that state [of sinning and rebelling against God,]) and against Pharaoh and his
Host (as did the fire against Sodom and Gomorrah;)

And always did the creatures resistance of, and striving against Gods Spirit
and Judgment, strengthen it against himself, and Gods Glory appeared in the
deliverance of his own Seed (in his own way and time) the more glorious and
excellent (for the sake of the patience of his Saints and children (in his
Spirit and Spirits work) he suffered the enemy and enemies work to come forth
and exalt self in,) that over all glory and excellency that might be exalted
(that was and is worthy of endless praise and glory,) which should be
satisfaction to all the upright in heart (whose cause is Gods, and left with
him to plead) that they may be kept from fretting under the same (the fret of
the wicked) in envying their prosperity; but in the midst thereof may rejoice,
that for righteousness sake they are found worthy so to do; and if it be not
for that, the less cause have they to be angry and discontented and offended;)
for God is praised and glorified (by and in his own works (on his creature) in
his and their spirits sufferance (that thereby manifests the patience of such
his Spirits work, and of his Saints in whom it thus works (in Gods forbearance
of executing tht fierceness of judgment on the world, and unreasonable minded
in their cruelty;) who by sufferance and endurance, is now come forth to
conquer that, which by the strength of desire of that life (the glory of God
was first concerned in) once awakened the fury of such Gods judgment (in what
was the pain and death of the creature;) Mark, the prayer and desire of the
righteous [in all ages and generations] moved and awakened God [in judgment]
against the world (in that state of wickedness it lies;) and that ministration
was glorious, to the awakening a witness for God [in his creature] against what
Gods Judgments were bent, and over which they were exalted (which made Christ
say to the Pharisees [of old] he could pray the Father, and he would send more
than twelve Legions of Angels to deliver him; and to his Disciples (that would
have had fire come down from Heaven, and consume their enemies) they knew not
what spirits they were of;) for he came not to destroy men's lives; but to save
it; and God was in him [mark that,] before the world began, reconciling it to
himself.
which he suffered to work and come forth (in the world) in enmity against his
Spirit, to honor and praise and exalt his Judgment, and the justice and
justness thereof (against the offenders, that refused to be warned by gentle
and light corrections and afflictions (that are the chastisements of Gods
children, and is it which makes chaste to God, where a virgin state and birth
(thereof) is known and witnessed (in the world) in his Spirits leading and
guidance (that learned obedience by the things he suffered.)

And all these things were written for our admonition and instruction)on whom
the ends of the earth are come,) that have believed the report of such that
gave testimony concerning the work of that Spirit (or of God who is a Spirit):
And though by their faith mighty works and things (of old) were done, even
Lions mouths stopped, and the rage of devouring fire quenched, etc. and they all
dyed in the faith of the work of God (by and in that Spirit,) yet the work was
Gods (even that of the restraining power and wisdom of the worker,) and he
only was worthy of, and had the praise thereof, that flesh might not glory;
therefore had not they received the promise of God (in the glory of what he
determined to rejoice in) he having provided some better thing for us, that
they without us should not be made perfect (mark, without us should not; and a
more better thing and glorious day (that they desired to see, and saw not, no
not one of those days we see) has appeared, and is manifest (in the world,)
and yet the world are under-valuing the glorious appearance of God (in our day
and age,) because of their own blindness and hardness of heart, and would make
it less or the least of and in any Age and Generation of the world; and think
the work of God perfected in their faith and belief of something already done
(without them) many years past, as the work of a body without a spirit (as is
their faith (therein) without the work of that Spirit) dead.

This therefore is my advice unto the world and all people (therein), to return
to the Lord (in that suffering spirit (which of old carried many through great
trials and cruel sufferance;) and conquered the power and pain of death, and
other grievous afflictions they were called to, and passed through (who were
faithful to the requirings thereof;) and they had the joy thereof, as well in
sufferance and endurance (of what thereby they were called to (for the trial of
their faith) ^s in experience of deliverance (by the work of the same (Spirit)
through their faith;) wherein was and is deliverance witnessed (under
sufferance and endurance of whatever makes for the exalting the judgment of
God;) though the thing be suffered and endured (in obedience to the call and
requirings of God (by his Spirit) the world and self are taking occation at:)
Therefore, haste, haste, to meet the Lord by repentance, that into the
suffering life of God all may come to be bended (that has been exalted over
the same) and in it may have a sense and feeling of the work of truth (by the
Spirit of God wrought and working in the heart;) and of its sufferance, by what
has darkened the Judgment (of Creatures) and mis-lead their minds (in the
spirit of the World, and error of mis-lead Judgments.)

R. B.


