In the Eleaventh Month, on the Nineth Day of the Month, as I was waiting
upon the Lord in the Land of my Nativity, the Spirit of the Lord then signified
unto me the second time, saying, Arise and take up a Lamentation over
NEW ENGLAND; and being made willing, have writ as follows.
O New England, New England! thou whose Rulers have persecuted the Lord's
Prophets, and have caused some to be slain that he sent into thee, to warn thy
Inhabitants of the Judgments of the Lord due unto them by reason of their Sins
and Transgressions, as also to declare unto them of the Everlasting Way of
God's Salvation to the end that they might have repented, and so been turned to
it, and then would the Lord have gathered them together, as a Hen gathers her
Chickens together under her Wings, but they would not, but slighted the Lord's
Counsel, and would have none of his Reproofs, O New England! that thy
Inhabitants would have labored in that their Day of Visitation to have
understood the things that did belong to their Souls Peace, then would it have
been well with them; for then would the Lord have withheld his Judgments from
coming upon thee, so as to Destroy thy Inhabitants; and surely he would not
have suffered the Heathen to have made so many Widows and Fatherless Children
among them, but that Cruel Hands and Hard Hearts of many of thy Rulers and
People has the Lord found guilty of persecuting and shedding the Blood of his
Servants, who sought their Good; therefore has he suffered the Blood of many
of thy Inhabitants to be shed, O New England, by a Nation, who by outward
appearance were much inferior to them, yet the Lord suffered the Heathen for a
time to be a Rod in his Hand to correct thy Inhabitants: and as thy Rulers have
had no Mercy upon an Honest and True-hearted People, when the Lord has
suffered them to come under the Power of their cruel Laws, but have Whipped,
Imprisoned and Cruelly Used them; so have thy Inhabitants found no Mercy from
their Enemies, but have been cruelly slain by them whenever the Lord has
suffered them to get the upper hand: and thus have they received the Reward of
their Doings; and the Cup which they have filled to others, has been filled to
themselves double, by which the Day of Repentence is now hid from their Eyes;
for in the Grave they cannot find it. And there are many yet behind in thee, O
New England, which labor to fill up the measure of their Iniquity, by
Persecuting the Lord's People, Whipping, and Halling to Prison for Worshipping
of the Lord; yet themselves will proclaim Fast Days, and call them, Days of
Humiliation, thinking that way to appease the Lord's Anger that is kindled
against them; But I will not as yet smell, says the Lord, in their Assemblies,
until they break off their Sins by speedy and unfeigned Repentance: Therefore O
ye Inhabitants of New England, both Rulers, Priests and People, who have had
your hands in Persecuting the Innocent, behold and look on him whom your Sins
have pierced, that so you may come to Weep and Mourn bitterly, for the Lord is
risen to Avenge himself of his Enemies.

Therefore, O New England, New England! A Lamentation is taken up over thee to
whose Inhabitants the Lord has called, but they gave him no answer, he has
stretched forth his hand for their help, but they have not regarded it;
therefore thus says the Lord, A Day is coming and the time draws nigh to
many of them, wherein they shall call, but I will not answe^; then shall they
stretch forth their hand, but I will not regard; for their Sins make a
separation between me and them, and their Iniquities withold good things from
them. Yet in thee, O New England, in thee has the Lord a Seed to gather Home
to himself, for whose sake he has born long, and does still bear with thy
Rulers, Priests and People for in the midst of Trials has the Cry of this
Righteous Seed, seeking their good entered into his Ears, and he being moved
with Compassion for his own Seed sake ^ath born long, and in his Undeclarable
Mercy has spread many of thy Inhabitants until this Day.

Therefore O ye Magistrates and Rulers, Priests and People in Boston, or
elsewhere in New England, who have had either Hand or Heart in making,
consenting to, or exe^ing your wicked and cruel Laws against the Lord's People,
who are in Scorn called Quakers, The Lord has beheld your Doings, by which his
Anger is kindled against ^ou; so as that he will not always bear with you,
neither will he suffer you always to boast your selves against his People,
whose Cause he will plead with you; For the Rod (...) the Wicked shall not
always rest upon the Back of the Righteous: Though your Hands may be lifted
(up, and your Stroke may be heavy) upon them for a time, yet its but a little
while that such shall remain, who seek to hinder or let the Work of the Lord
from going on; for surely as a mighty Man of War is the Lord arisen, whose
Sword is in his ^and ready furbished for the Battle, and all of you that will
not be removed out of your Cain-like spirits by his gentle Drawings, you will
assuredly feel the Stroke of his Arm, by which he will remove you: for the Lord
is a jealous God, and will not give his Glory to another, but his own Work he
will carry on, no^ by the Might or Power of Man, ^ot by his own Spirit; for he
brings to pass whatsoever he pleases, who overturns the Powers of Men by
throwing down one, and setting up another, when he will, and whom he will, and
there is nothing too hard for him to do.

Therefore unto you, in Love to your Souls, O ye Magistrates and Rulers,
Priests and People, my Counsel and Advice is, in the Fear of the Lord, That you
put from among you that wicked thing (to wit, Persecution) which has sorely
displeased the Lord, and kindled his Anger against you; therefore cease
persecuting the Innocent by re^ling all your Laws and Decrees that have been
made against them, and no longer seek to build up your Profession to Religion
by Blood, or Force of Outward Strength, but (...) the Lord be worshipped by his
people in your Towns and Villages, when and where he pleases, and seek not to
limit the Holy One by your Laws or Outward Power, ei^er to place or time; for
he is not to be limited.

Therefore O ye Magistrates and Rulers, Let all have their Liberties in things
appertaining to Conscience; for it is the Lord's Right to rule and govern
there: so consider ^hese things in Coolness, I desire you, and let the Spirit
of Love bear rule in you, so will Moderation be in all your Ways and Doings,
and you will come to learn the Coun^ of Gamaliel, who was a Ruler, and in
letting all alone you will come to see, that all that are of God will stand,
grow and flourish, when all other Professions will fall, wither and dye, so
they will come to nothing in time without the help of any Carnal Weapon.
Therefore let all the Beasts power of Forcing and Compelling be put aside; for
it ^th made many Hypocrites, but Experience never did show us, either in this
Age or any other, that ever it made one Christian; and seeing it is so, then
surely there is a great necessity that all Professions should have their
Liberties in things appertaining to Conscience, and where any matter of
Difference lies between them in matters of Worship, or any other thing, I say,
in such a Case, let them labor to convince one the other by sound Arguments,
and let them bring forth their spiritual Weapons against spiritual Wickedness,
and this is according to the Practice of the Apostles and primitive Christians,
the Weapons of whose Warfare were not Carnal (as said the Apostle Paul) but
mighty through God to the pulling down of Strong Holds, as you may read in 2
Cor. 10. 4. and with those Weapons they warred against spiritual Wickedness,
though it was in high places; read Ephesians. 6. 12. and thus were Men and Women in
the Apostles day brought to and established in the pure and undefiled Religion,
in which they were kept from the Spots of the World, and this the force of Laws
and outward Weapons could never do: Therefore mind the gentle Leadings and
tender Drawings of the Lord's good Spirit, that by it you may be removed out of
the Evil Way, so will you escape the Stroke of his Arm, and be preserved from
the force of his Blow, which otherwise will assuredly come upon you.

This, in Obedience to the Requirings of the Lord through his blessed Spirit,
have I written unto you in true Love to your Souls, not knowing at present
whether ever I may see your Faces, yea or nay; so bidding you farewell, I Rest,
who am a true Lover of your Souls, but do hate that persecuting spirit by which
you have been led.

I am known to many by the Name of John Brown of Nevis.

A Warning from the great God of Heaven and Earth, to the Rulers and
Magistrates of Boston in New England, that they put not in practice that cruel
Law, that they have made concerning Swearing. Now this is the Word of the Lord
unto you all, thus says the Lord God of Israel, provoke not, nor cause not my
People to break nor violate my holy Law, Recorded in the holy Scriptures of
Truth, that says, Swear not at all: For thus says the Lord, My Spirit shall
not always strive with man, whose Breath is in his Nostrils, but I will arise,
says the Lord, and will case my self of mine Enemies, and be avenged of mine
Adversaries; they shall know that I the Lord will Rule, and does hear Rule in
the Consciences of a tender hearted People, that dare not Break nor Violate
that holy Law and Command of Christ, that says, Swear not at all. These few
words were laid upon me from the Lord to write unto you, and whether you will
hear or forbear I shall be clear of your Blood thus far.

This is from one who is a Lover of your Souls, and am known by the Name of
MARGARET BRAISTER.

Printed in the Year 1678.


