A Model of the Fire-workes to be presented in Lincolnes-Inne Fields on the
5th. of November. 1647. Before the Lords and Commons of PARLIAMENT, and the
Militia of London, in commemoration of Gods great Mercy in delivering this
Kingdom from the hellish Plots of Papists, acted in the damnable Gunpowder
treason.
With their perfect Statues and Proportions.

The Actors good will to this Kingdom, and City of LONDON.

JN a Description of his Fire-workes to be performed Novem the 5th. 1647, in
commemoration of the great deliverance from the Powder plot by Popish
conspiracy against Englands then King and Parliament, and by consequence, the
enslaving the whole Kingdom to Popery.

1 Fire-Bals burning in the water, and rising out of the water burning, showing
the Papists conjuration and consultation with infernal Spirits, for the
destruction of Englands King and Parliament.

2 Fire-Boxes like Meteors, sending forth many dozen of Rockets out of the
water, intimating the Popish (...) coming from below to act their treasonous
Plots against Englands King and Parliament.

3 Faux with his dark Lantern, and many fire-boxes, lights, and Lamps,
ushering the Pope into England, intimating the full Plot to destroy Englands
King and Parliament.

4 Pluto with his fiery Club, presenting himself maliciously bent to destroy
all that have hindered the Pope from destroying Englands King and Parliament.

5 Hercules with his fiery Club, who discomfiteth Pluto, and suffers him not,
nor any of his infernal Spirits to hurt Englands King and Parliament.

6 Runners on a line, intimating the Papists sending to all parts of the world,
for subtle, cunning, and malicious Plotters of mischief against Englands King
and Parliament.

7 A Fire wheel, intimating the display of a flag of victory over the enemies
that would have destroyed Englands King and Parliament, in the time of which
motion, a pair of Virginals musically playing of themselves.

8 Rockets in the air, showing the thankfulness of all well willers to true
Religion, for the deliverance of Englands King and Parliament

9 Balloones breaking in the air, with many streams of fire, showing Gods
large and bounteous goodness toward Englands King and Parliament.

10 Chambers of lights, showing Englands willingness to cherish the light of
the glorious Gospel therein to be continued.

11 A great Bumber-ball breaking in pieces, and discharging it self of other
its lights, holding forth the cruelty of Papists to Englands King and
Parliament.

12 Fire boxes among the spectators, to warn them to take heed for the future
that they cherish none that are enemies to Englands King and Parliament.

Per GEORGE BROWN Gunner, to be performed in Lincolns-Inne fields before the
Lords and Commons of Parliament, and the Militia of London.

LONDON, Printed for George Lindsey, and are to be sold at his Shop over
against London-stone, 1647.


