TO THE SUPREME AUTHORITY OF ENGLAND, the PARLIAMENT assembled, The SCOPE of
the humble REMEMBRANCE Of that Prodigious CONSPIRACY, CALLED The BLOODY
PETITION, To be Humbly presented By DAVID BROWN and his Family, as Discoverers
thereof, BESIDES, Many other Discoveries and faithful Services:

Whereunto is annexed, Their humble Petition for Assistance toward the
Repairing of certain Wrongs, done unto them by Lieutenanant Colonel John
Lilborn, Samuel Chidley, John Musgrave, and some others.

London, Printed by John Field, Printer to the Parliament of ENGLAND, 1652.

TO THE SUPREME AUTHORITY OF ENGLAND, the Parliament assembled:
The Scope of the humble Remembrance of that most prodigious Conspiracy, called
the Bloody-Petition, to be humbly presented by David Brown Gent. and his
family, as discoverers thereof, besides many other discoveries and faithful
services; whereunto is annexed, their humble Petition for assistance, toward
the repairing of certain Wrongs done unto them by Lieutenant Colonel John
Lilburn, Samuel Chidley, John Musgrave, and some others,

SHOW,
THat in consideration of the manifold unexpected Victories which it has
pleased the Lord of Hosts (in his undeserved mercy) to vouchsafe upon this
Nation, and chiefly upon your Honors, whom He has so highly advanced as to
represent the Face and Authority thereof against all Opposers, during all these
cruel and destructive Wars, in reference to the Recovery and Defense of all our
just Freedoms.

Which days of so great troubles, though they were the Seed-time of Tears and
Sorrows in their dark evening, yet now in regard of the happy Harvest thereof,
reaping so great fruits of Joy and Comfort in this bright morning, as our
blessed Redeemer said to the Jews in another case, Many of the best Prophets
and most righteous of our predecessors (who only for his Cause have been
driven to wildernesses) would have much rejoiced to see, but could not see
them, and to hear the things which we hear, but could not hear them.

And also in consideration of your Honors dutiful Remembrance of every special
Victory and Delivery, at least, which God has been pleased to give you
throughout all these Wars, by an appointed day of Thanksgiving to that purpose;
and now of late by a commendable Act, Ordaining a constant day every year to be
kept in commemoration of the last; but yet still (through the multiplicity of
your weighty and urgent affairs) seeming to forget, or (at least) not so
effectually to remember the first.

In order therefore, to the reviving of that prime and original Victory and
Delivery out of the grave of oblivion, as the chief terrestrial fountain from
which all the rest have flowed, and that it may have as durable a continuance
(at least) as the last, which is now so recent and in most men's esteem so
excellent; though neither it, nor any other, for many hundreds of years (as we
humbly conceive) was so dangerous, imminent, and inevitable as the former,
which (God willing) in the Remembrance it self, by comparing thereof with any
of the greatest, shall be made to appear.

We your Honors humble servants, by whose instrumental means of Discovery by
word and writing, your Honors had that matchless Victory and Delivery, which
the great God of Battles (out of the ocean of his infinite compassions) was
graciously pleased to give you, and this long enslaved Nation by his Almighty
power, without any weapons of War; even when ye had neither Strength,
Instruments, nor Means to resist your numerous and mighty Adversaries, nor so
much as the least apprehension of your own dangers; do in all due respect,
humbly beseech your Honors, that ye will be pleased never to let slip out of
your memories, whiles ye enjoy your natural lives, this so gracious and special
a favor, which both is still to many thousands so conspicuous and remarkable,
and was then to your selves and all your adherents so joyful and acceptable,
that ye sent Sir Henry Vane junior, to give us the Thanks of the House; even
when all was finished, and the chief Conspirators imprisoned: saving only ye
were so over-acted, that no Conspiracies yet durst be so entitled, until
afterward that upon their miscarriage (through discovery of this their main
hope) they break out first into bold Insurrections, and then into bloody Wars,
which have continued to this day.

But that unanimously according as ye see your own duties, and wish a further
increase of blessings from heaven upon all your earthly endeavors, your Honors
will be pleased with all the convenient speed that may be (in this so happy an
opportunity, which so many years with so great patience we have expected)
first, to search your own Records of Parliament for the true Relation thereof,
beginning on the 28. day of the first month (called March) in the year of
Christ, 1642. and continuing all the second Month following, as it was by word
and writing faithfully discovered by us unto you, upon diverse occasions in
public when ye were assembled in the House: next, to search those of the late
House of Lords; and last, of the general Committee of both Lords and Commons.

All which being likewise truly extracted, read, considered, and compared with
any other Victory or Delivery, either over a mighty Army by foreign Invasion,
dangerous Insurrection, or treacherous Conspiracy that has been since that
time (of which most probably none had been at all, but both ye and all your
truest friends and well-willers suddenly destroyed, without any the least means
used either of Defense or Resistance, if that infernal Conspiracy had not been
so timely discovered and happily prevented) yea, and notice being likewise
taken of what is here in brief, and of what will follow in the Remembrance it
self at large, then we doubt not but your Honors shall find as great cause, at
least, to make an Act for keeping a certain day of Thanksgiving every year most
solemnly unto the Infinite Majesty of our good and gracious God, for that great
Victory and Delivery, as ever ye had for any Victory or Delivery since these
Wars began, yea, or your Predecessors before you, since England was a Nation.

But for some further Information at present, unto such of your Honors as were
not then chosen Members of the House, then the bare title of the
Bloody-Petition (which though discovered and burned, yet a rectified Copy
thereof (to face out the matter with some show of goodness) was presented by
three hundred men, upon delivery of their Swords and drawing up of London
Bridge, lest the number had multiplied) this Conspiracy should have been acted
(if God had permitted) both upon the Parliament and Well-affected People
throughout all the three Nations, even when it would have been accounted
Treason for them in the highest degree, to call either Army or Guard for their
own Defense; and that by forty thousand armed Malignants out of Kent, with the
assistance of all their numerous and mighty Confederates both in the City and
Country, under pretense of presenting a just Petition to the Parliament, which
(in reference to the matter and end) was forged by the Popish Faction then at
York, and presented by Sir Edward Deering (who then had been lately expelled
the Parliament) even in a dissembled imitation of those five thousand men who
brought a just Petition indeed out of Buckinghamshire, on that glorious
Sunshine day (to all persecuted and well-principled people) that the Parliament
was honourabl^ released from their unnatural Exile at Grocers-Hall, London, (as
they had justly released both the Exiled and Captivated ^^fore) and returned
home to sit in their wonted place, it being the very next day after the late
king went from the Parliament, and slighted that presumptuous Court of Guard
at White Hall, which was so unjustly set up (when Sin was ripe for the sickle)
to make all honest Petitioners who brought just Petitions to your Honors for
redress of their Grievances, stand.

And for your Honors better receiving both of what Truth is here declared, and
will be more at large (with Gods assistance) upon further occasion manifested,
we humbly desire (among other things) it may be seriously considered, that we
your humble Remembrancers are not merely Discoverers of this one Business, as
some have been of one particular, or other, since that time, and have willingly
done no more, neither before nor after in reference to the Public good; which
notwithstanding was no small service, more then that of Mordecai, concerning
the saving of one life, which king Ahashuerus, though both he a Heathen and the
other a stranger, was so far from sleighting or despising, like that poor wise
Man's service spoken of by the wisest of men, who by his wisdom delivered a
little Cith wherein there was but few men, from all the Forces of a great King;
that he out of his ingenuity and noble disposition for his own honor and
crecit, so respected that worthy instrument of his safety, that he without the
least request of any, both naturalized him, and eternized his favor toward him
and all of his Nation, as well as Religion for his sake unto all posterities, so
far as lay in his power: But we have made many other Discoveries, and done
abundance of other Services, which although they were never published in Books,
at least under any of our names, always choosing rather to advance the Public
Cause in secret, then to be eminent either for popular applause, or private
respect; yet now being forced by the manifold Caluminations, corrupt Practices
and unjust Dealings of some Deceitful, Ambitious and Covetous people, to make
some Vindications of our own Integrity, Actings and Sufferings, even in the
worst of times, and greatest of dangers, both for the Public good of these
Nations in general, and even of the same men, and others of the like
principles, as well at least, as of our selves in particular; which being more
grievous to us (in regard those men were as near and dear to us, almost as
Jonathan was to David) then thrice so many afflictions for the Public, like
those which David suffered of his own son Absalom, and of Achitophel with whom
he conversed, being worse then man of the rest; All which (we hope) shall be
made at large to appear, as they are only mentioned in the Frontispiece and
Contents of a Book, here following briefly in order.

Seventy years Memorial of a resolute Soldiers warfare, both in England, and
Scotland, first against Corruptions, Delusions and Frailties, and next against
the Abominations of Churches, and Iniquities of States, showing to the great
praise of Gods rich Grace; In order to the one, His manifold happy Victories
after diverse sad surprizals; and to the other, His and his Families matchless
Discoveries, mighty Attempts, grievous Sufferings, manifold Losses, great
Hindrances, and excessive Charges, (besides their unavoidable share of all the
general Calamities, even death it self; some of their children being stoned in
the streets for their Cause, and others left for death, yea, and above a
hundred times driven from their Habitations and Possessions; some whereof, were
Three hundred miles by Land with small Children a whole Month on the way
diverse times) all in relation to the Recovery and Defense both of Spiritual and
Temporal Freedoms, and that throughout all Dangers and Difficulties in the
Revolution of States, Necessities and Extremities in the alteration of times.

And likewise, through the same Grace, with what Fidelity, Magnanimity and
Constancy (yea, and resolved Perseverance also to the end) both during all
these cruel Wars, and thrice so many years before (even when the very word
[Parliament] durst not be so much as mentioned) they have not only assisted,
encouraged and incited other Actors and Sufferers, yea, and helped to defend
the Parliament both day and night when they could have none others, but a few
such free Volunteers, against multitudes of strong cruel Enemies; but likewise,
by means of Printing, both informed the generality of the people, who were
always readier to be deceived then recovered, and vindicated the Parliament and
Army, when they were unjustly opposed, traduced, and in great danger to be
deluded by fair pretenses of Covenant, known Laws, Protestant Religion and
Reformation, even when no other means, either of the Word or Sword could avail,
far less prevail in the prosecution of the Public Cause; for which all the
Millions of Lives, Treasures and Estates have been spent.

Though always with little earthly encouragement, less Maintenance or
Assistance, and not any the least measure of reparation or degree of
satisfaction; nor in reference to either, any kind of due or competent
consideration, but large addition of trouble and affliction, by the indirect
means of false Brethren, and policy of self-seeking, crafty and deceitful
People, one of whose lives we have preserved, another to a great Estate
preferred, and of the third to the last great kindness have deserved, but with
many evils have been rewarded, howbeit, none of them (saving one woman) be so
old in years as we have been sufferers, in order to that long expected Freedom,
which is now (by Divine Providence) in Agitation, Gal. 5.1. Acts 22.28. Esther
6.3. 2 Samuel 2.5. Solemn Declaration of both Nations, January 30. 1643.

Moreover, we in all due humility beseech your Honors to bear with our
Prolixity, because it is the first Suit in writing that ever we made to your
Honors (either since the aforesaid discovery, or before, for that deliverance
of a Pastor and Church then in Prison, was granted by your Honors only upon my
word, at Mr. Lilborns Request to me, he seeing me able to be heard, though it
had been in a greater matter) and likewise, That your Honors will be pleased
the rather to vouchsafe your Audience and Patience to hear and consider these
few other needful Particulars.

As your Honors (to your endless Fame) upon the Victory at Dunbar, were moved
so thankfully to acknowledge Gods inestimable and unexpected Mercy then
(amongst multitudes of his tender Compassions before) as to grant unto his
Church and People under your Authority, so happy a Deliverance from all
Spiritual Slavery, that scarce the like is any where without your Dominions,
even that worthy Act for tender Consciences: so we humbly beseech your Honors
to proceed and persevere in all the Particulars of well-doing, both concerning
Religion and Prosperity of the Nation, especially the abolishing of Tithes and
all Popish Innovations, with all corrupt, unjust and tedious Laws; as also the
subjecting of all Intailed Lands, to the payment of all the owners just Debts,
beginning at the decease of Queen Elizabeth, and establishing that Office of
General Remembrance, both which being already Voted; and doing of whatsoever
things else which may best and spediest bring this Nation to a happy condition
of Ereedom, Trading, Prosperity and Tranquillity, that the adjoining Nations may
reap the like benefit, chiefly the poor Commons of Scotland, who have been
enslaved, blindfolded and impoverished for many hundreds of years, by means of
their cruel Taskmasters, and that ye may gain the Peoples Affections of all the
three Nations; which with some other matters of public concernment, I sum up
and refer unto another Remembrance; likewise, even of that remarkable Passage
in his Excellencies the Lord Generals Letter from Dunbar, as it is printed on
the Tenth page, beginning at the third line, and ending at the One and
thirtieth: The words are these,

It is in your hands, and by these eminent Mercies, God puts more into your
hands to give glory to him, to improve your Power and his Blessings to his
Praise; we that serve you beg of you, not to own us but God alone; we pray own
his People more and more, for they are the Chariots and Horsemen of Israel;
disown your selves, but own your Authority, and improve it to curb the Proud
and Insolent, such as would disturb the Tranquillity of England, though under
what specious Pretenses soever, relieve the Oppressed, hear the Groans of your
poor Prisoners in England; Be pleased to reform the abuses of all Professions,
and if there be any one that makes many poor to make a few rich, that suits not
a Commonwealth. If he that strengthens your Servants to fight, pleases to give
you hearts to set upon these things in order to his glory, and the glory of
your Commonwealth, besides the benefit that England shall feel thereby, ye
shall shine forth to other Nations, who shall emulate the glory of such a
pattern, and through the Power of God turn into the like. These are our
desires, and that ye may have liberty and opportunity to do these things, and
not be hindered, we have been and shall be (by Gods assistance) willing to
venture our lives, and not desire ye should be precipitated by importunity from
your care of Safety and Preservation, but that the doing of these good things
may have their place amongst those which concern wel-being, and so be wrought
in their due time and order.


The premises being seriously read and considered, our humble and earnest
Desires are, That as your Honors out of your discretion and ingenuity shall see
just cause, the same may be accordingly acted, answered or referred; and
withal, That as we have (to our utmost abilities) faithfully and constantly
adhered to your Honors in all your Extremities, so ye will be pleased in much
compassion (because of our greater affliction now then ever heretofore, by the
indirect means of the aforementioned People; and being out of breath also by
multitudes of former afflictions for the Public) to vouchsafe your best
assistance in protecting us, not only from all such further Arrests for such
Debts in reference to the Commonwealths, which may be justly called theirs,
because they and their Associates did unjustly dispose of the privy
Contributions of many well-affected People (chiefly those whereof the second
party above specified was Treasurer) on Printing some idle Projects when the
Army lay at Putney, and when the Parliament was called a Juncto, which should
have paid those former Debts, with our Disbursments and Engagements above our
power, to Printers, Stationers and others, upon that account, for Printing
abundantly to the Vindication of both Parliament and Army against all railing
Pamphlets; as also to the inciting of the People to adhere unto them, when no
other means was so forcible, but likewise from all other Indempnities, Troubles
and Dangers, in the prosecution of this our just Cause, both for these and
other matters, especially, because they count us Strangers; although they
themselves (by those and the like fruits) shall appear much more to be both
Strangers and Enemies to all goodness; for as in a spiritual sense, Egyptians
and Ethiopians walking faithfully, are esteemed in the word of God to be born
in Sion; so in a temporal sense, all Scots or others, who have been all along
these Troubles (at least) true and faithful to this Commonwealth; chiefly such
as have both adventured their Lives and spent their Estates in defense thereof,
may be justly esteemed in all respects, as if they had been born in England,
yea in the chiefest and best place of London it self.

And because Printing has been their chiefest Weapon, and by that occasion
they having great correspondency with the Printers; and some of them ready
enough to Print what they please against us, even with the same Moneys which
shall be made appear they unjustly detain from us. We humbly beseech your
Honors to give Order, either to your own Printer or any other in our behalf, to
Print both by way of Quere and otherwise, such things as we have against the
aforesaid persons, and other their Associates; which with their positive
Answers may be an effectual means, not only to procure us Justice and
Reparations of their deceitful and wrongous dealings, but to undeceive the
people who had some further conceit of those men's love to the Public, then
merely obtaining their own private ends; and it may be, bring some truth to
light for the good of the Public, which has been long obscure or doubtful.
Humbly protesting here, before your Honors, against them, That whatsoever
Queres we propound, shall not by them in sufficient time (not exceeding Three
Months) be punctually answered, shall be holden thence-forth as confessed;
promising hereby unto them the like condition against our selves, we having the
equal benefit of the Press, competent means of Subsistence and Moneys to
Printers.

By which means their manifold deceitful dealings and unjust Levelings, chiefly
of the second Party abovementioned, not only in spiritual Matters against me,
though he was preferred to an Office at Worcester-house by my procurement, but
likewise in Civil matters there, against many both poor and rich; for which he
was most justly, by direction of the Trustees, expulsed both from his Office
and Lodgings, shall in short time be made to appear; yea, and whether he with
the rest above specified, or we, have acted and suffered most, sought their own
profit least, of walked according to their principles best, in relation to the
Public, both before and during all these troubles; and so by consequence of
such trying of Titles, it will likewise appear, Whether they or we deserve
best, to be called True, Constant, Faithful and Honest.

So by this Your Honors just assisting and protecting the Weak in their just
cause against the strong, chiefly in that they are made weak by the others
strength obtained by their means; both we and all others will be the more
encouraged still to adventure our lives, and all that's either nearest or
dearest to us in advancing the Commonwealth; and pray for your Honors whiles we
enjoy life or breath.

DAVID BRVVON.

For himself, and in the behalf of his Family, viz. His Wife, Daughters and
Servants, whereof Francis Jones (who deceased about Seven years ago) was one at
that time.
This was delivered (closely and curiously Written on a quarter sheet) to a
Honorable Member of the Parliament, to be presented unto them upon the 19th day
of the Tenth month (called December) 1651. Without soliciting of any, both the
Matter and Desire being so equitable.

FINIS.

