Plain, brief, and pertinent RVLES, For the Judicious and Artificial
SYLLABICATION OF ALL ENGLISH WORDS, According to Art, and the Institution of
the same Tongue.

WITH Directions for the use of the English Syllabary, and the English
Monosyllabary, and the said Rules of Syllabication.

By Jo. Brooksbank.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1654.

To the Right Honourabl Sir Tho. Vyner Knight, Lord Mayor of the City of
London, all Health and Happiness external, internal, and eternal.
My Lord,
YOur at this time being the great Parent and Father of this large and populous
City, causes me to acquaint your Honor with my present Intention to make
public, these brief and short rules for the Syllabication of our English
Tongue, they being a preparation to an Art by me invented, for a speedy,
certain, and judicious facilitating, and perfecting of the Orthography thereof.
In this first divulging whereof, I apprehend none more fit, (considering their
Occasions to make use thereof) whereunto to commit the same for Patronage, than
the Prentices of your City of London, they being the lowest estate and rank,
under your Lordships great care and charge, whose right welfare and propriety
is determined, stated, and secured, by your Authority and Fatherly care;
Wherefore in my thoughts hereon, I conceived it a foul piece of Impudence, and
disorderly boldness in me, to let such an attempt appear in the world, before
I had made an Address to your Honor for Allowance and approbation thereof: I
humbly therefore prostrate both my self, and these my Endeavors, at your
Lordships feet, in all humbl wise craving your good leav in, and favourabl
acceptance of this my clear intention in this enterprise, for the unspeakable
benefit of my Nativ Country; which if your Lordship will pleas to further, I
shall ever remain,

Your Honors thankful Servant in the work of our Lord Jesus. Jo: Brooksbank.
March 1654.
To the right Worshipful the Aldermen of the City of London, all peace and
true happiness in this life, and that which is to come.
Right Worshipful,
THe Government and wel-being of this City lying under your care and charge,
and Gods providence having lead me to an Invention for the unspeakabl good of
my Nativ Country comprehended in a brief and judicious Art of teaching to
spell, read, and write our English tongue, which I call Syllabication; the
Profit whereof you may easily discern by the perusal of the succeeding R^les
and Directions, dedicated to the Prentices of your City, who are under your
rule and governance; wherefore I conceiv it my duty humbly as it is, to present
it and my self to your Worships allowance and approbation, in all humbl manner
craving your favor and furtherance therein; and I shall ever remain,

March 1654. Yours in the Lord Jesus, Jo: Brooksbank.

To the hopeful, and renowned Estate of Apprentices, in the great, famous, and
ancient City of London, the glorious Mother, and Metropolis of the admired Isle
of Great Britain, all Success and Prosperity in this World, and that which is
to come.
Hopeful Gentlemen, and Apprentices,
THis Dedication may seem strange, but the nature of this business is such,
that I know not where more fitly to desire shelter, than from your selves, you
generally abov all others having learning and ingenuity to apprehend, leisure
to peruse, and occasion to use all these present pieces, as the best remedy yet
extant to perfect the Orthography of our English Tongue, with Judgment, Art,
and Experience. Your universal and unanimous complaints of your wants herein,
and the view of your Shop-books, Receipts, Bills, and Letters to your best and
dearest Friends, and not only am^^gst you, but indeed usually amongst most of
men, there being few able rationally and artificially to write our Mother
tongue, has prevailed with me to make an offer of my earnest desire of your
favor to patronize and protect these rules of Syllabication, and directions
for the use of these two Tracts, contrived and composed for the speedy profit,
and perfecting of all first Learners to spell, read, and write our English
Tongue; An Art, the Mystery whereof you may well find out, with that Trade you
are set apart to learn to live by: which being don, I know you may thereby, not
only unspeakably profit, and benefit your selves, but also vent the Mystery
thereof, as far, or farther than your Wares, which to all well disposed youth
will be a glory, a delight, and a profit; but knowing that long ago you have
learned what this means, Verbum sapienti, relying upon your Candor, and
Ingenuity herein, I am,

March, 1654. Yours, in the service of our Lord Jesus, Io: Brooksbank.

Plain, brief, and pertinent Rules, for a Judicious and artificial
Syllabication of all English Words according to Art, and the Institution of the
same Tongue.
IN a true, regular, and Artificial Syllabication, of English words, it must be
noted, and observed, that A syllabl is a full and perfect sound, made of so
many letters as we spell together; wherein the numeration of syllabls must be
first known, and then their right, and regular Division, according to the Rules
ensuing, as follows.

Rules for the Numeration of syllabls in any word.
Rule. FOr the most part, there is the same number of Syllabls, in a word, that
there is of of Vowels, as in most, one Vowel, [o] and therefore but one
Syllabl: utmost, two Vowels, [u] and [o] and therefore two Syllabls, etc.
Herein are three Exceptions.

Except. 1. When there is a Diphthong in a word, as [oy] in boy, [ou] in four,
[ee] in heed, [ea] in earth.

2. When [i] [u] or [y] are made Consonants, there may seem to be a Vowel more
than Syllabls, as [j] in jar, [v] in vent, and both in Iavan, [y] in yet.

3. When there is a Vowel, in a word not sounded, as [a] in beauty, [e] in
George, [i] in field, [o] in peopl, [u] in guide.

In this Exception it must be known, when, and where any of the vowels are not
sounded; which may be by the Rules, Exceptions, and Limitations following.

Rule 1. [a] Is not sounded in steward, coward, beauty, creature, Sabbath,
Pharaoh, Baal, Canaan, Isaac, Beaumont, Beawley, Beauchamp.

Rule 2. [e] Is not sounded in George, nor till of late in Geometry; nor in
words that end in [en] as taken; or in [e] as bare, hide; or in [es] as bones,
stones, etc. Here we are to note these Exceptions.

Except. 1. Foreign proper names, ending in [e] may have as many vowels, as
syllabls; as Der-be two syllabls, not Derbe one syllable: Pe-ne-lo-pe four
syllabls, not Pene-lope three syllabls; as also certain Monosyllabls that end
in [e] as be, he, etc.

Lim. Yet we say Mamre and Tire Monosyllabls, and Eustace two syllabls.

Except. 2. All proper names ending in [es] have as many syllabls as vowels
when they end in [es] as Azores, Antipodes, etc.

3. There are six English Terminations ending in [es] which may have as many
syllabls as vowels, when they end in 1 ges, as cages 2 ces, with [c] as faces 3
ses, with [s] as roses a xes 4 zes, as Mazes, 5 ches, as riches, 6 shes, as
rushes.


Rule 3. Words ending in [e] or [es] derived, or compounded, have the vowel [e]
more than syllabls; as in lameness, therefore, hateful, etc.

4. [i] Is not sounded in neither, chariot, medicin, nor betwixt [u] and [t] as
in fruit, suit, etc.

Except in recruit, circuit, conduit, subtle.

Rule 4. [i] Is not sounded after a Consonant, and before [e] as in Priest,
pieces, etc.

Except in dier, diet, quiet. And all words ending in [y] made derivativs by
changing [y] into [i] adding [ed] thereunto, as tied, died, espied, yet they
are doubtless more truly written tied, dyed. espied, etc.

Rule 5. [o] Is not sounded in Polysyllabls ending in [ous] as furious,
vicious, etc. Nor in these words, Leopard, Tortois, Gaol, Ieoffery, infeoff,
iron, peopl, yeoman, jeopardy, damosel, oeconomick, soloecism, blood, flood,
courtesy, country, touch, troubl. doubl, enough, cough, coupl.

Rule 6. [u] Is not sounded after [q] as in quart, qu^lt.

Rule 7. [u] Is never sounded after [g] before a vowel, as in guard, guide.

Rule 8. [u] Is not sounded in words ending in [our] as labor, honor; Except
in our, your.

Rule 9. [u] Is not sounded in these words following, buy, victuals, brought,
bought, naught, ought, build, conduit, circuit.

Rules for the Division of Pollysabls.
Rule 1. When two Vowels com together not making a Diphthong; then they must
be divided, and the former must end the former syllabl, and the latter must
begin the latter, as [i] [a] in tri-^l [^] [^] in tri-umph [ay] [i] in
stay-ing, [e] [ai] in re aid. [oy] [ou] in joy-ous.

2. When one Consonant coms betwixt two vowels, it must begin the following
syllabl, as [n] in any [v] in e-ver. [l] in failing

Except. 1. In words ending in [e] or [es] with one Consonant before them,
derived, or compounded, as in hate, bated, hateful.

2. In some compound words, as [s] in dis-esteem, [p] in up on.

3 When [x] coms betwixt two vowels, as in exampl^ ex-ercise, etc.

3. When more consonants than one, come in the middl of a word, then so many as
may begin a word, must begin the following Syllabl, and the rest must end the
former, as [cr] in de-creas, [fr] in re fringe, [str] in re-strain, [spr] in
de-sprinkl, [str] in con-strain. Here it is to be observed, that no word can
begin with abov three Consonants; so that the main business of Division in
Syllabication, lies in the Consideration of two, and three Consonants which may
begin words.

The two Consonants which may begin a word, are thirty, viz.
Bl: as in blame Br: as in brave Ch: as in chair Cl: as in clap Cr: as in cramp
Dr: as in draw Dw: as in dwell Fl: as in flame Fr: as in frame Gl: as in glad
Gn: as in gnat Gr: as in grant Kn: as in know Pl: as in plow Pr: as in prate
Qu: as in quart Sc: as in scant Sk: as in skill Sh: as in sharp Sl: as in slip
Sm: as in smart Sn: as in snow Sp: as in speed St: as in stab Sw: as in swine
Th: as in think Tr: as in tree Tw: as in two Wh: as in which Wr: as in wrench.
The three Consonants which may begin a word, are eleven, viz.
Sch: as in school Scr: as in scrape Skr: as in skreek Shr: as in shrew Spl: as
in splint Spr: as in sprint Squ: as in squint Str: as in strength Thr: as in
throw Thw: as in thwait Chr: as in Christ.
Excep. In these two last rules, this exception is to be well known, that
Derivativ and Compound words, do not always keep that order in their Division,
by reason they often take their first Primitiv and Derivativ words for their
first Syllabl, as state-ly, shame-full, dis-esteem, trans-pose.

That the Syllabication of our Language, may be Artificial; words may be known
by these Terms of Art following.

A word of one letter, is a Monogram A word of two letters, is a Digram A word
of three letters, is a Trigram A word of four letters, is a Tetragram A word of
five letters, is a Pentegram A word of six letters is an Hexagram A word of
seven letters, is an Heptagram A word of eight letters, is an Octogram A word
of nine letters, is an Eneagram A word of many letters, is a Polygram A word of
one syllabl, is a Monosyllabl A word of two syllabls, is a Dissyllabl A word of
three syllabls, is a Tryssyllabl A word of four syllabls, is a Tetrasyllabl A
word of five syllabls, is a Pentesyllabl A word of six syllabls, is an
Hexasyllabl A word of seven syllabls, is an Heptasyllabl A word of many
syllabls, is a Polysyllabl.
Instructions and Directions; how and in what manner to use the two praeceding
Books, and the Rules of Syllabication.
IT has now (for many years) been my greatest care and thoughts to perfect an
English Abcedary, whereby to complete any one in the Artificial. Grammatical,
and judicious spelling, reading, and Orthographical writing of our English
Tongue; the first parts whereof I have herewith made public; the reasons
whereof are too many, and for some considerations unfit to be here inserted,
only this their coming abroad in this bare and naked condition, inforces me
hereby to unlock and unfold, their manifold, great, and profitabl use, for the
Benefit of all, but especially the first enterers, to learn to spell, and read;
wherein I must take leav to speak a litl unto three sorts of peopl.

1 All Family Masters whom it may concern. 2 The Learners thereof. 3 All
Teachers thereof.
1. All Family Masters that commit their Children, Servants, Appren^ices, or
others, to the learning of the English Tongue, it is their parts and duties, 1.
To provide honest and able Teachers: Honest, to take pains therein with care,
and Conscience: able, because person unabl for such a purpose, though very
honest, and conscientious in other matcers, whilst unabl, can never bring any
to spelling, reading, and writing, with reason and judgment. 2. Having
provided such a Schoolmaster, or School-mistris, they must leav the main
business of their Childrens teaching, to their care and discretion, providing
such Books and necessaries for them, as their said Master or Mistress shall
think fit: keeping their Children mannerly, civilly, and orderly at home; for a
School-teacher shall find more eas and content, to himself, with greater profit
to all Parties concerned therein, in teaching twenty Children well nurtured,
and tutored at home, than in two or three, whose Parents or Masters suffer them
to be at home, without Order or Government. It is also a silly, Nonsensical
conceit amongst the vulgar, That the Scholars Manners and Carriage depends
solely upon the School-teachers care, and heed; whether their carriage be
expected from them at home or at School; a tax too great for any singl man's
performance; How may any man think? whilst he himself rules not his few at
home, any Schoolmaster can govern his great number, according to his desire,
both at School, and at home; their Children being so disordered by them whilst
they are with them, frequently occasioning more troubl, and vexattion at School
than all the rest. 3. Masters, or Parents having thus committed their charge,
to fitting Teachers, they must likewise have a care to send them constantly at
all School-hours, which in all well ordered Schools, is seven in the morning,
and one in the afternoon, at the farthest; and what they have learned in the
School every day, to hear them repeat it every night, as they were taught it;
not desiring to change their School teacher, except upon very good cause, nor
their Books, without the Advice of the Teachers, therein not wishing too hasty
or speedy a progress, but to giv time and leisure, and they will learn with
much more judgment, and certainty, in far less time than Parents can expect;
for Parents neglect in these things causes great delay, and hinderance in
their Childrens learning.

2. There are four things required in Learners, 1. Lov of Parent^, Teachers,
and learning. 2. Obedience and Submission unto all. 3. Attention and heed to
what is taught. 4. Study and Industry in their Books.

3. All Teachers, especially those who first enter the learners of our English
Tongue, are to giv heed unto four things, 1 That they be painful and diligent
therein, 2 That they have skill and ability to perform the same. 3 Discipline,
and Government. 4 A right way and Method in teaching.

1. That they be painful, and diligent; in the performance of their charge,
without which no desired end can be attained in pursuance, whereof they are to
be very zealous for the glory of God, the edification of his Church, and a
laudabl education of youth, for which purpose they must follow their School
attentivly, without the least remissness therein, and that continually all
School-hours, not taking the least time, either to study any other thing, or to
read other books, than in the careful hearing of their Scholars Lessons or
exercise, not omitting any form, or any Scholar, hearing them all with leisure,
care, and heed.

2. Skill, it is besides my business, and mine Intentions, herein to giv
directions to the great and learned professed Grammar-Schoolmasters of our
Nation; that they may gain skill by my help: my aim and undertaking herein,
being only at an Instruction of those who undertake the teaching of English,
and are willing to be persuaded to make use of this my way, wherein it is as
yet impossibl, for any Man to be as apprehensiv as my self, it being an
Invention, which I have made my main business, this last eleven years, and
upwards, those therefore that are willing to be so acquainted herein: as to
make use thereof, in teaching others; first they must carefully read over, and
seriously study, all these several pieces, so as they may fully understand the
Method, and discern the scope thereof, but especially in the Rules of
Syllabication, and these present Directions, all which will easily be done by
diligent observation, and must be had before they venture upon teaching the^ to
others; after which they may find therein abundance of profit, and delightful
recreation and thereby be fully enabled for so laudabl an undertaking, as the
teaching thereof.

3. Discipline and Government; All things, without this, are various, fickl,
and unsteady, without which no School can ever be ordered aright; therefore
when the Teacher hereof has got skill, if he purpose to make use of this way
in teaching, his next care must be orderly to govern and rule his Scholars; as
much as in him lies, keeping them in a knowledge; of themselves and their
business, with fitting Reverence and respect to all their betters, and
Superiors; but especially unto all those, under whose care and charge they
stand, and more particularly their Teachers. But to speak more home, who ever
you be that are willing to entertain, and make use of this course, your next
buisiness will be, if your number of Scholars will bear it, to divide them all
into four Forms, which for brevities sake, I call the highest, higher, lower,
and lowest Forms, wherein (hearing, and teaching them, in a Grammar School way)
you have but (if your number will amount to so many) four lessons to hear in
your whole English School, matching them in their forms and places therein,
according to their several strengths and abilityes to take, and conceiv
Learning; which you shall see more plainly and fully, in the manner and Method
of Teaching: Having thus placed them in their proper Classes, therein draw them
on by Emulation, Privileges, and Immunities; but in case these (as in some they
will not) cannot prevail, then by punishments.

1 By Emulation setting those that learn best, and labor hardest, highest in
their Form; by this you shall oftentimes have one form turned, and changed up
and down in one Lesson saying; Children taking more delight in nothing, than in
winning places.

2. By Privileges and Immunities; let that Boy, that coms first to School in
the Morning, bear the name of Captain of the School that day, and every boy
that coms first of his Form, Captain of his Form for that day, none having
power to win the Capts. place for his day, except he miss twice for his once,
that strives for his place. It will also be an excellent thing, to have for
each Form a Ferular provided, which every Capt. is to take at his first coming
in the morning, and ever after so long as he keeps it, to observe diligently,
who amongst his Form-fellows first plays, talks, makes a nois, loiters, or
otherwise neglects his Book, and to giv it to him with a smart clap on the
hand, he that receivs it doing the like, and so the rest; but if at any time
any one shall observe the Custos of his Form to neglect his duty herein, let him
take the ferular from him, giving to the Custos two smart claps on the hand for
his so mis-doing; But here note, that it will breed an iaconvenience to suffer
the same Boy to be Capt. two days together, though he come first both days;
Let also that Boy that comes to School first, if unwash't, uncomb'd, or
undress't, be denied the privilege of being Cap. whether it be in the School,
or in his Form, without power to win places, before he be washed, combed, and
dress't: Your Scholars being thus marshalled, disciplined, and ordered, keep
them constantly and continually laboring their books, saying their Lessons, or
performing their exercise till they depart School; and in their going out, let
every Boy stand in his place, repeat a full point, or claus in the Elements of
the English tongue, wherein when any one makes too long a stay or paus before
he begin to go on where his Foreman left, let him that takes it up first, go
out in his place, and thus in order through all the rest, every Scholar going
out of the School in his Order, with Civility and Manners. 4. The Manner and
Method of teaching these books, wherein it must be understood, that they are
contrived, and composed only for the perfecting of the lowest, and lower
Forms, and a competent entrance of the higher Form, and herein, though it will
be your best order in hearing of Lessons or Exercise, to begin with the highest
Form, and to end with the lowest, yet in this my Direction, my Method must be
to begin with the lowest Form.

Directions for the Manner and Method in teaching the Lowest Form.
THey of your Lowest Form, are all to be the first Learners to know their
L^tters, and to spell, for whom all the English Syllabary (except the last
Chapter,) is made in that Order you see; Having all your Scholars in this form
disciplined and marshalled, as was but now said, when they are to say their
Lessons, let them all stand out each in his place and order, with his book in
his left hand, open, at the first Chapter, and his feskew on the foremost
finger of his right hand, then bid sometimes the highest, sometimes the
midlmost, and sometimes the lowest in that Form, or which you pleas, begin to
name the first Letter [a] in a English Letter, he and all the rest in the Form
pointing at the same with their feskews: then let the next name the next
letter, which is also [a] in a Roman letter, all the rest likewise looking upon
the same, and pointing thereat with their feskews; and the next [e] and so
every one in order, thorough the Form, till they all perfectly know their six
vowels, where ever they see them in those two Characters; but if your Scholars
be very young, or dull, then let some Boy of the Form next abov, stand behind
each such, teaching them how to hold their books, and feskews, and how therein
to direct their eyes and feskews, whereby in few days they will know what to
do; When they have thus learned their vowels, let them proceed to the next
Chapter, there to learn their Consonants, and to spell: where let them begin
with those seven lines in the two first Columns, which teach only 7 Consonants
by two and two of the nearest affinity together, as d and t, b and p, etc.
wherein when they perfectly know them in any place, let them proceed to
spelling, till they can spell, and tell all the Letters and Syllabls in the
first three Sections perfectly without let, or stop, then let them take a new
Lesson, learning the three next Sections in the same manner they learned the
three former, till they are well able to take all the six at one Lesson; which
when they can do, let them go on to the seventh Section, learning the same as
they did the former, till they can perfectly spell them also. But here it must
be noted, that in all these Nine Sections, and every where else, that you must
not suffer your Scholars to call these six Letters h, g, j, v, w, z, as they
are usually, but most ignorantly, and unfittingly called here in England, but
to giv them names according to the Analogy of the names of the rest of our
Consonants, and their own proper powers, as not to call [h] [ache,] but [eh,]
^or [g] [jee,] but [guee;] nor to call [j] [i] but [jee;] nor [v] [u,] but
[ev;] nor [w] doubl [u] but woo] nor [z] zed, nor zad, nor ez t, nor uzet, nor
uzz^rd, but [ez] the eas whereof in their learning, and the benefit thereby in
their proceeding, (this way being but once tried, and sufficiently proved) will
be found to be the only way to smooth the greatest roughness in this their
first entrance to learning, by the observation and practice of these ensuing
Rules in all spelling whatever.

Rules to be observed in spelling.
Rule 1. [a] before [l] has usually in English words the sound of [au] as in
tall, ball, etc. except in shall.

2. [o] after [w] or before [m] or [n] has usually the sound of] (...) as in
w^^t, some, son, etc. before [ld] it has often the sound of [^u] as in old,
bold, etc.

3. [g] after [d] or before [ e, i, or y,] has the sound of [j] ever else it
keeps its own sound.

4. [c] after [e] [i] or [y,] or before [r] after an Apostrophus, has ever the
sound of [s,] as (...), ci^^, cytron, lac't, faced, ever else it has the (...)
[k] as in cap, cope, cup, lack, crack; Ex^^^^ English words when it comes
before [h] and (...) ha^^ a sound proper to it self, as in chap, chi^^^, (...)

5 [s] In verbs, betwixt two vowels, and in the end of a word, has usually the
sound of [z] as in use, Jesus, cause, etc. The Limitations and Exceptions of
these Rules, and many more, are reserved to mine English Abcedary.

All which considered aright, will direct you to teach your Scholars to begin
to learn to spell thus: ( h, calling it ch) i, h^, (v, calling it ev) a, va: in
the fourth section, and w (calling it woo) y (wy) in the same section. So z,
(calling it ez) o, zo in the seventh section; and in the same section to spell
thus, c, a, for k a, ka: c, e, for s, e, sc: c, i, for s, i, si: c, o, for k o,
ko: etc. g, a, ga: g, e, for jee, e, je: g, i, for j, i, ji: g, o, go, etc. j
(calling it jee) j. a, ja, j, e, je, etc. All which you may conceiv from the
foresaid rules, and that spelling of s, c, k, g, and j, may be discerned by the
braces: Also, when your Scholars can, according to these Rules, and Directions,
readily and perfectly spell all the first 9 Sections, (All which Sections, as
these so the rest through the Book, may be known by their lines drawn for that
purpose) in the second Chapter, at one Lesson, then let them at the next
Lesson, take the two last Sections at another Lesson, which they must needs do
very perfectly (if taught as before directed) in once or twice saying over;
After which, let them proceed on in the Book, learning to spell it in order, as
it lies, following all the foresaid directions, never going back, till they
have learned to spell the twelv first Chapters, never taking a new Lesson till
they be perfect in the old; teaching them to observe these following directions
more, that in all the last sections of each Chapter, beginning with the third,
what Digrams soever they meet with ending in e, in their spelling to say thus,
e, for ee, as w, e, for we, we; but in all other words ending in e, with a
singl Consonant after another vowel, that e, is not sounded, but draws the
Syllabl long, or changes the sound of c, or g; as bar, short, by putting to e,
is made bare, long: bit, short, by putting to e, is made bite, long: and fac by
putting to e, is made face, changing c, from the sound of k, to the sound of s:
rag, by putting to e, is made rage, changing the sound of g, into j, etc. And
that when two th's com together, they must learn to sound the one hard, as th,
in thy the Pronoun, the other soft, as th in thigh, the Member of a Man's body;
when in this manner they have spelled over the twelv first Chapters, and are
perfect therein, then that what they have learned may be deeply rooted, and
firmly digested, let them go back again, and spell over the four first Chapters
again, as formerly, and all the places after them, marked with hands, and stars,
so far as therein they find the practice of any of the aforesaid Rules. When
this Lowest Form has gone over all them places in all the twelv first Chapters,
let them in the next place proceed to the 13th Chapter, and there learn the
Diphthongs, variously placed, as were the vowels in the first Chapter, first
teaching them to learn their names, by spelling a, i, ai, a, y, for a, i, ay,
etc. Which when they can do smoothly and readily, let them learn to name them
by their sound, and to do so ever after when they spell, where ever they meet
with them; as in the next Section in their spelling, not to say b, a, i, bai,
but b, ai bai, d, ay day, not d, a, y, day, etc. And when they can, according
to these, and all former directions therein useful, spell the 13th and 14th
Chapters perfectly, then let them proceed to the learning of all their Capital
Letters, which are there set down, in three Characters, 1 English, 2 Roman, and
3 Italian, which when they have learned, they will know all their Letters,
capital and small, in all three Characters; for they had learned all their
small Letters in English, and Roman before; and so let them spell on thorough
the Book, according to all the former directions, and Instructions, till they
shall in a competent manner have spelled over the twenty two Chapters of the
English Syllabary, which when they have don, let them spell over again all the
four first Chapters, and all places thorough the Book marked with a hand, or a
scar; spelling them so often over as will make them pretty nimbl, and ready,
then let them spell over again only those places marked with hands; all which
places so marked with hands, or stars, are to be spelled so far in their last
going over, as you shall discern therein the practice of any of the former
Rules, especially for the sonnding of c, and g. At which places marked with
hands and stars, are not abov a line, or two, wherein the force of those rules
ly: Except in the seventh page, where it begins with gab, and ends with gux:
And in the ninth, beginning with cab, and ending with cuze; but if your
Scholars in their spelling or Syllabls seem to be bogl'd at words ending in
many Consonants, let them spell to the vowel, or diphthong first, and then take
the rest, Consonant by Consonant, thus: As suppose the syllabl were crafts, or
strangld: then let them learn to find them, or the like words or syllabls out
thus, c, r, a, cra, c, r, a, f, craf, c, r, a, f, t, craft, c, r, a, f, t, s,
crafts; s, t, r, a, stra, st, r, a, n, stran, st, r, a, n, g, strange, st, r, a,
n, g, l, strangl. st, r, a, n, g, l, d, strangld. Thus when your Lowest Form
are according to these Instructions, Rules, and Directions, perfected in
spelling the two and twenty first Chapters of the English Syllabary, they are
fitted to enter into the next form, which is the Lower Form.

Directions for Exercising the Lowest Form.
Whilst your Lowest Form, is learning to spell the twelv first Chapters, when
you think fit, or can best, let them take what place you think fittest in their
Books, and show which be Vowels, and which be Consonants, as in the last
Section of the first Chapter, in this manner: [h] is a consonant, [o] is a
vowel, [v] is a consonant, made of [u] vowel; [a] is a vowel, and so on, till
they perfectly know which be Vowels, and which be Consonants, using this for
their exercise in the twelv first Chapters; till they have learned the
thirteenth and fourteenth Chapters, which when they have learned, let them
learn to be skillful also in knowing which be proper Diphthongs, and which be
improper, exercising them thus: [oi] is a proper Diphthong, made of [o] the
prepositiv vowel, and [o] the subjunctiv; [ay] is a proper Diphthong, made of
[a] the prepositiv vowel, and [y] for [i] the subjunctiv; [ow] is a proper
Diphthong, made of [o] the prepositiv vowel, and [w] for [u] the subjunctiv,
[ee] is an improper Diphthong, made of [e] and [e] and so on in the rest,
where, and when you pleas, till they readily know, which be Vowels, which
Consonants, and which Diphthongs, whether proper, or improper, which when they
know perfectly, let them learn to spell all Monosyllabls of all sorts without
book, according to the directions hereafter, for the use of the Spelling-table;
but here it is requisite that you know, what be the grounds, and Elements of
our English Tongue; which your Scholars are to repeat over, in Order, at their
going out, which are as follows.

The Elements of our English Tongue.
The twenty four Letters. a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z.
The six vowels. a, e, i, o, u y.
The twelv proper Diphthongs. ai ei oi ay ey oy au eu ou aw ew ow
The four improper Diphthongs. ee oo ea oa
The eighteen Consonants. b c d f g h k l m n p q r s t w x z. j v y.
Consonants to be reformed in their names. g j h v w z.

A Syllabl is a full and perfect sound, etc. as before in the Rules of
Syllabication throughout.

Directions for teaching the Lower Form.
YOur lowest Form being thus perfected in spelling, you must now enter them in
the next, which I call the lower form, wherein they are to learn to read, what
they formerly spelled, which you must do in this manner; When that Form are to
read their Lesson, call them all out together, and let them all stand with
their Books and feskews in order, as they did in spelling, then bidding the
highest, midlmost, or lowest, or whom you pleas, read the first syllabl in the
first Chapter, all the rest looking on, and pointing thereat with their
feskews, be ready to read the syllabl, if bid, and when it is their turn; and
thus let them read every Scholar his syllabl by turn, till they have learned
over the 7 first Pages: then let them read them over again, every one his two,
three, or four syllabls a piece, til they have in the same manner read over the
same 7 first Pages; after that beginning to read the same again every Scholar
reading his line, in order, through the twenty two Chapters: and over the
places marked with hands, and stars, as was directed in spelling, til they are
able to read all the said Chapters very readily, and perfectly; but especially
the four first Chapters, and all places marked with hands, and stars, and every
last Section of every Chapter.

Directions for the Exercize of the Lower Form.
When your lower Form has perfectly read the the three first Chapters of
their Syllabary for their Exercise, let them take three, or four lines, in each
last Section of every Chapter, in order, thorough the Book; as in the last
Section of the third Chapter, saying thus: be is a digram, with its vowel in
the second place: eb is a digram, with its vowel in the first place etc. So
likewise in the fourth Chapter: eb is a digram, with its vowel in the first
place: ad, is a digram, with its vowel in the first place: i would is a trigram,
with one Consonant in the second place. In the fifth Chapter: by is a digram,
with its vowel in the second place: try is a digram, with its vowel in the
third place, etc. In the sixth Chapter: bab is a trigram, with its vowel in the
second place, etc. Thus thorough the 22 Chapters, til they are prompt and ready
therein, and have learned their Rules for Syllabication, and then let them take
any last Section in the said Chapters: Except the three first, and learn to
syllabicate Monosyllabls in thi^ manner following: Chap. 19. Section the last:
brewed, is a Mosyllabl, though there be two vowels, because ew is a proper
diphthong made of e the prepositiv vowel, and w, for u, the subjunctiv;
therefore there is a vowel more than syllabls, according to the first
Exception: breed is a Monosyllabl, though there be two vowels, because ee is an
improper diphthong, made of e, and e, and therefore there is a vowel more than
Syllabls, according to the first Exception. And in the tenth Chapter thus:
dive, is a Monosyllabl, though there may seem to be three vowels, because v, is
u vowel turned into ev consonant, and therefore there may seem to be a vowel
more than Syllabls, according to the second Exception; and e in the end of an
English word is not sounded, according to the 2d rule for vowels, not sounded;
and therefore there is a vowel more than syllabls, according to the third
Exception, and so on through the Book.

Directions for teaching of the Higher Form.
When you have brought your Scholars into the Higher Form, let them take their
Lessons in the forenoon in the twenty third Chapter of the Syllabary, learning
to spell all the Polysyllabls therein, as shall be here directed, and read the
Monosyllabary, every boy his line in the afternoons, as before in the
Syllabary, till they can read it readily, and perfectly, after that let them
read what part of the Bible, in the afternoons you shall think fit; in the
forenoons teaching them first to spel every Syllabl in order, as you see them
there divided, and putting them together, as he spells them in this manner, c,
h, a, p-chap, t, e, r, s ters chapters u, u, m, number- b, e, r, s bers, numbers,
etc. as in the first Section G, e for J, e; je, n, e, ne Gene- s, i, s sis
Genesis E, x Ex, o per se, o, Exo, d, u, s dus, Exodus, etc. as in the second
Section, til they can spell the whole Chapter readily, and perfectly, without
stop or stay, and then put them to learn to read the same, as they formerly
learned to read Syllabls, and Monosyllabls, which when they can read well, let
them leav, and learn to read all the Rules of Syllabication, laboring to bring
them to the understanding thereof, along as they learn them; which when they
read readily, and understand competently, put them to learn by heart, which
being don, put them continually to the Practice of their Rules, in
Syllabication; as they read either these Directions, or their Bibles, or both;
for after they have learned them, they must learn these Directions in the
forenoons, til they read them perfectly also, and after that the Bible in both
ends of the day, except the Teacher conceiv of some other Book fit to be taught
therewith the one part of the day.

Directions for the Exercise of the Higher Form.
WHen your Higher Form has read their Rules of Syllabication, and somewhat
understands them, let them learn to Syllabicate, which is to find out a word by
its syllabls, which that they may do of themselves when they have occasion, let
them exercise as follows; for an instance herein, I will take 2 verses, of
the 4th Chapter of Proverbs, 13. Take fast hold of Instruction, let her not go;
keep her, for she is thy life.

23. Keep thy heart with all diligence: for out of it are the issues of life.

Which is syllabicated in this manner, Take is a Monosyllabl, though there be
two vowels, because e in the end of a word is not sounded, according to the 2
rule for vowels not sounded; and therefore there is a vowel more than Syllabls,
according to the third exception, fast is a tetragram, hold is a tetragram,
hold, not hold, because o before ld, has the souud of ou, according to the 2d
rule for spelling, Direct. p. 16. Instruction is a tetrasyllabl, because it
has four vowels, and no Exception: In- is the first syllabl, because n and s
are two Consonants coming together, which cannot begin a word, and therefore
cannot begin a syllabl, but must be divided, and the former must begin the
former syllabl and the latter must begin the latter, according to the third
rule of Divisio^; struc- is the second syllabl, because c, and t, are two
consonants coming together, which cannot begin a word, and therefore cannot
begin a syllabl, but must be divided, according to the same third Rule of
Division, struck, not strus. because c, before e, i, or y, etc. as in the third
Rule for spelling, Direc. p. 16. instruc: ti- is the third syllabl, because i,
and o, are two vowels coming together, and no Diphthong, therefore they must
be divided, and the former must end the former syllabl, and the latter must
begin the latter, according to the first Rule of Division: shi, not ti, because
ti, before a vowel, has usually the sound of shi, instructi on, is the last
syllabl, Instruction, all the following Monosyllabls as before, Diligence is a
Trissyllabl, though there are four vowels, because e, in the end of an English
word is not sounded, according to the Rule for vowels not sounded; therefore
there must be a vowel more than syllabls, according to the third Exception: di,
is the first Syllabl, because l is one consonant coming betwixt two vowels;
therefore it must begin the following syllabl, according to the second rule of
Division, dili-gence is the last syllabl: jence, not guence, because g, after d,
and before e, i, and y, etc. gense, not genke because c, before e, i, or y, etc.
diligence, and so the rest. These are all the Directions I can as yet give, by
reason mine Abcedary is not yet made public, wherein this form and the highest
are to be perfected in reading the hardest English can be gathered out of
History, Divine, or Profane, and all other Learning; as also to be taught the
first part of Arithmetic, with the Derivations and Compositions in our Mother
Tongue and learning to write the same: only there is one Exercise more to be
generally used amongst all your Scholars, at such time as you shall find fit,
which is to hear all your Scholars spell all Monosyllabls, by the help of the
Table of spelling; which Table, and the use thereof follows.

The use of the Spelling-Table.
THe main Scope and Intent of this ensuing Table, is an help and directi^n to
the Teacher of these Books, in exercising their Scholars to spell any English
Monosyllabl, which will be best for them to do every day, more or less; for
which purpose the Table you see is divided into Nine columns: in the fourth
whereof are the six vowels, without which no Articulate sound can be made,
before which there are three Columns, wherein are all Consonants which may
begin a word, in the first whereof are all the three Consonants which may begin
a word; in the second all the two; and in the third all the singl; after which
are five Columns, in the fifth whereof are all Diphthongs, proper and improper,
all which may begin or end a word; after which are four Columes, wherein are
all Consonants, which may end a word; the sixth Column containing all singl
Consonants; the seventh all the two Consonants; the eight all three; and the
ninth all four which may end a word; whereby exercise them in spelling all
words or syllabls, beginning with them of two letters, then proceeding to them
of three, and so in order, till you have gone thorough all sorts of syllabls,
and monosyllabls, ending with them of nine letters, which is done in this
manner, at the first set all your Scholars in order, then ask one what spells
ba, he will answer b, a, the second what spells [be] he will answer b, e, then
answer him, that is be the syllabl, but how spell you be, to which teach him to
answer b, e, for b, ee; th n say this is [be] the verb, but how spell you the
be, that makes Honey; to which let him answer b, ee; then demand whereof is ee
made; to which teach him to answer, e, and e; and so in every word wherein you
may observe difference of signification, distinguished by difference in spelling
or writing as in due, and dew: too and two; so black and blake; star and stare,
and such like: from which few the least of capacity and ingenuity, may gather
the use, and practice of the whole Table. Only here it may be remembered, that I
conceiv it best (especially at the first) to make this a daily exercise for
your whole School, and afterward for every Form their part and portion,
according to their learning and ability, and the discretion of the Teacher; and
every Form to perform their several exercise in knowing their Vowels,
Diphthongs, and Consonants: by Syllabycation, (according to their learning and
ability,) them two hours they learn in a Thursday in the afternoon, and the
Saturday in the forenoon, except they be able to learn their Catechism, or
Precepts of Manners.

FINIS
ERRATA.
Courteous Well-wishers, you who are pleased to make use of these several
Tracts; amongst many, I beseech you correct these following faults with your
Pen, as most Material. In the Syllabary, page 2. line the last, lm, make la, p.
3. l. 15. oo, m. oc. p. 14. l. 20. dtoss, m. dross. p. 17. l. 11. wive, make
wive. p. 18. col. 2. l. 2. nncl, m. uncl. p. 19. col. 1. l. 2. uskc, m. usk't.
p. 20. l. 2. uow, m. now. p. 32. l. 3. Eng-lish, m. En-glish. l. 20.
da-mo-sell, m. damo-sell, l. 22. vic-tu-alls, m. victu-alls. l. 25. hated, m.
ha-ted.

In the Epistl to the Teachers of the Monosyllabary, there is this claus, You
must have skill, in those Rules, I have set out before my Syllabary, which
Rules are now in the 16 page of these Directions. In which Monosyllabary are
some faults, the chief whereof I wish you to correct thus: Chap. 4. l. 8. tu,
m. to. c. 8. l. 70. begets, m. ^^ts, l. 73. dele one. l. 79. ever, m. e're, c.
9. l. 28. before, m. e're. l. 39. over, m. over. c. 11. dele lines 6, and 7: l.
8. judg's, m. judge. l. 9. ledg's, m. ledg. ib. wedg's, m. wedg. c. 13. l. 23.
His, m. As. c. 16. dele l. 6. c. 18. l. 1. These siegs, m. This siege.

In the Directions, p. 2. l. 11. in, m. in, p. 3. l. 17. put subtle after
Medicin. l. 18. dele subtle. p. 4. l. 12. Polysabls, m. Polysyllabls. p. 8. l.
7. Appren^ices, m. Apprentices. p. 10. l. 19. business, m. buisiness. p. 13. l.
6. jaconvenience, m. Inconvenience. p. 16. l. 22. after, m. before. p. 24. l.
16. Digram, m. Trigram.


