A TRUE RELATION OF The prosperous success, and proceedings of the Parliaments
Forces in the Counties of Somerset and Devon, against the Malignants Army in
those parts:

From the 19. of May to the 23. 1643.

Sent in a Letter from M. Tho. Brown, a Gentleman in Cornwall, to a Gentleman
a friend of his in LONDON.

LONDON, Printed for Philip Smith. 1643.

The Proceedings of the Parliaments Forces in Somersetshire, Devonshire, and
Cornwall, from the 19. of May to the 23.
SIR, I received your letter and the printed paper ^ou sent me of the
proceedings of the Parliament, and other passages occurring at London, for
which I return you thanks, and in part of recompense of your favor I sent you
the proceedings of both Armies in this part of the Kingdom, which you may
report for certain to your friends, and cause thankfulness to God by all
persons well-affected to the public good, for our happy success against the
Delinquents Army, not doubting but if it please God to prosper our succeeding
endeavors as hitherto, a period of these Western combustions will in short
time be happily obtained.

Friday Colonel Norcot in whose Regiment I serve, consisting of about 1200.
horse and foot, sent about 500. horse and foot toward Ruberdowne, there to be
quartered, to hinder the Cornish Forces at Saltash under the conduct of Sir
Nicolas Slaning, who lies there with about 1000. horse and foot, Sir William
Courtney being Governor of the town, into Devonshire, but the forces sent
thither by our Colonel being not sufficient to oppose the Malignants in those
parts, he resolved himself with his whole Regiment to march thitherward, to
give battle to Sir Nicholas Slaning: during the consideration of this matter,
we were informed that our men had had some bickering with some of the
Delinquents that were scattered in the Country, plundering the same, and
driving away from diverse villages about five or six miles from Saltash, many
oxen and sheep, which were rescued by our men, and proved a good booty for
them: about twenty of the malignants were slain, and the ringleader or chief of
these robbers was taken, whose name was Bl^ght: we sent him and 15. of his
company prisoners to Plymouth, where they remain, the said Blight being since
offered to our Colonel in exchange for Sir Shilston Colemandy a worthy
Gentleman and Commander under Sir George Ch^dleigh, who was taken in the late
fight at Lanceston by the L. Hopton, but he would not be accepted, because the
said Blight was the first that raised the rebellion in Corrwall by framing a
seditious Petition to the King in behalf of the Malignants there.

It being determined by our Colonel and the Captains and Officers under him for
their march to Ruberdowne, we marehed away this evening toward Saltash, and
came within two miles thereof on Saturday about eight of the clock in the
morning, where having joined our whole forces together, and set them in good
order of battle, we were charged by the Cornish men, and answered them again
with like courage, the forces on each side being equalized, and the fight
continuing most part of the day with like advantage, but at last the enemies
horses being not well exercised, disordered their own ranks, and bred much
confusion amongst themselves, which was great advantage to us, and caused a
speedy retreat, which we pursued with eagerness, and did great execution upon
our adversaries, in this fight were slain of the Cornubians about four hundred
men, whereof about twenty were men of note and Officers, Sir Nicolas Slaning
himself is sorely wounded, if not mortally, of them that were slain were
Serjeant-Maior Deroy, Captain Escot, Captain Cook, Capt. Smallacomb, and the
rest inferior Officers: seven Colors taken, and 500. arms, with good store of
powder: the rest escaped to the town, against which we intend, God willing, to
lay siege as soon as we have refreshed our Army, we lost not above 40. men,
whereof none of note, we expect more aid and assistance from Colonel
Chudleigh, whose forces are quartered about Plymouth, Plimton, and Stoke, and
then we doubt not but in short time to regain that town to the obedience of
King and Parliament: many fall from the malignant party, and some men of
eminency and command in the Army are weary of the service, and would feign
shake of the employment if they could with safety be accepted by the
Parliament, and though it were to the loss of most of their estates, being
touched with remorse of conscience for their by past evil actions in defending
so bad a cause.

The L. Mohun with his Regiment is quartered as yet at Liscard, whitherward as
we are informed, is marching Colonel Chudleigh with his forces, intending to
give the said Lord battle, his forces consisting of about 1000 horse and foot
at Liscard, the L. Hopton being joined as is reported, with him, the whole
strength of the malignants Army in those parts consists not of above 6000.
horse and foot that receive pay, besides such of the countries as have no
fortunes or means of subsistence, that follow the camp, and live only upon
robbery and pillage, and what they cannot wast themselves, they bring to the
common soldiers of the army.

This day was sent to a town called Bridgerule, where Sir Francis Haley
quartereth his Forces, Captain Tompson with his Troop, and a Foot-company of
Captain Luttrels to keep the Malignants within their bounds, that they may not
go out to plunder and ^illage, and to keep any provision from coming to them
from the countrey-delinquents, there being many who privately have left their
habitations, and joined themselves to the Hoptonians, and there to remain till
convenient forces may be joined to them for subduing the town in obedience to
the King and Parliament.

We have certain information of a great division lately fallen out between the
horse and foot under command of Sir Bevill Greenvile, which caused much
mischief, many of them having slain each other in the quarrel, so that the
said Sir Bevill is in a straight, and cannot safely trust himself amongst his
own soldiers, by reason of their private jars and mutinies, and it is reported
he is resolved to leave his soldiers, and join himself to the L. Hopton, or
privately go to the King; for certain there begins to be great contentions
among most of the Malignants forces in these parts, which will prove of great
advantage to the Parliaments forces, and cause quick dispatch of the war here,
which God grant.

Monday we received certain information that Colonel Chudleigh and his Forces
have joined battle with the Lord Mohun and his Forces near Liscard, and the
same continued with great fury on either side about two hours, and then came in
to assist the Malignants some of M. Trevanians Regiment which were quartered at
Launceston, about 300 horse and foot, and upon the information thereof we sent
two troops of horse and a Company of foot to the Assistance of Colonel
Chudleigh, upon the joining of which Forces on either side the battle
continued with great courage and doubtful success, the Malignants having the
advantage of ground very much, yet it pleased God, for whose cause we fight, to
give a great overthrow to our enemy in the end and make us victors of the
field: in this fight was slain Captain Lambert and Captain Mannington, and
about 14 inferior Officers, of the common soldiers about 600. were wounded
and slain, Serjeant-Maior Parrey, Captain Glyn, and about eightscore common
soldiers were taken prisoners, which were committed to several goales in the
County: The Lord Mohun and Sir Ralph Hopton retreated into the town for the
safeguard of themselves and the rest of their soldiers. The Parliaments Eorces
intend to beleagre that town, if convenient assistance of more men may in time
be sent them, before the Delinquents Army recover their loss again: little
ammunition was taken in this fight in respect it was so near the town, only one
culvering piece, and one Drake. Of our side not above 150. were slain and
wounded in this fight, most of which were Troupers and common soldiers.

It was reported that provision of Ammunition was brought to Pendennis Castle
from the island of Gersey, for the assistance of the Cornish Delinquents in
those parts, but since we have certain intelligence that the same was not
landed, but intercepted by two ships that went out from Dartsmouth, and is now
to be employed for the use of King and Parliament, there was about 200 muskets
and as many swords and pikes, two barrels of powder and twenty carbines, with
some Pistols, a reasonable booty; for our forces and want ammunition: these
passages you may report for truth, and the next Post I shall send you the
further proceedings at Saltash, and Liscard, they are the strongest garronized
of any towns in these parts by the Malignants, Exceter we hear is well
fortified for the Parliament, and no probability of any attempts that will be
made against it by the Delinquents Army; but we hear that many Carriers are
intercepted, their carriages taken away by the Cavaliers that pass to and fro
from the Counties both of Somerset, Dorset, Cornwall to that City, which will
we hope be suddenly remedied, and their free intercourse secured. And thus
kind Sir having naught else worth your observation to present you with at this
time, I take my leave.

Ruberdown May 22. 1643. Yours in mutual and cordial affection, T. B.


