A true Copy of a Letter sent from Mr WILLIAM BVLWARKE, a Grand Recusant in
his Majesty's Arms, to a friend of his, one Mr. John Greenall in Drury Lane.
Which letter on the 16. of this Month of November was intercepted, and in
which is manifestly expressed the horrible designs of the Papists and
Cavaliers for the surprising of the City of London, and the destruction of the
Parliament.
SIR, I had well hoped, there should not have been any need of sending any more
letters to our friends in London, but in the stead of your enjoying me by
paper, that we should have enjoyed one another in person, where our loves
should have feared neither interception nor suspicion; how soever I have
ventured this last by the safest hand I could, and I hope it will arrive as
safe as it is meant. What success our designs had on last Saturday, being the
12. of November, you well understand: all the hopes and promises from you, and
the failings of them, we know not which way to impute either to your fear, or
to the misreport of what had happened in our Army. This for a certain, that
the Catholic cause could never find a better opportunity to advance it self,
had you but the spirits to conceive it. The best Regiment that the Parliament
had, and stoutest, was that day sorely distressed, they had fire and water
enough; and from the fury of one element, they plunged themselves into the
mercy of the other. The other Regiments that came in to their rescue, were
quickly weary of their task. In the mean time the City was in a tumult, their
Generals distracted, their Forces scattered, neither could there have been a
greater advantage, had we then but hands and hearts to follow it. This bearer
can truly possess you how sensible we are what a loss by your neglect, the
Catholic cause then received. Let us understand by this bearer, the reason of
it: and because his memory is but weak, let us partake it in some letter. We
are sorry to understand of the Captivity of our friend who was taken at
Mile-End, and do much lame at his ^ni fortune, that so great a head should be
overtaken by so weak agents. Remember me kindly to your brother Nicol^s, and if
no further good can be done with you, advise him to haste to the army. Our army
is not so weak either in number or in courage, as it is reported in the City,
and some three hundred of the Parliaments Forces are reported this day to be
united to ours. It is commonly reported, that all the vaults and close ways
under ground, from S. Paul's unto Westminster, are discovered unto the
inhabitants, who have made it known unto the Parliament. I pray be careful to
send direct word of it: for upon that (as you sufficiently know) the chiefest
of our designs depend. Let me not fail to hear of you by the return of
honest Thomas: for though we are so near unto intelligence, yet we hear
nothing certain, some affirming one thing, some another; and oftentimes we
have more news from a Roundhead then a Catholic. I have no good news from
York, if you hear any, I pray impart it. We are now at Kingstone, where we
believe we shall reside a while. Some of our Cavaliers did wear the Earl of
Essex his colors, and by that means we found an easier admittance into the
town. Remember to fend me true word what is become of our friends in
Summersetshire. We hope within these few days to kiss the hand of the good
Queen again, whose presence will be a great encouragement to the whole Army;
but especially to him who is

Your most affectionate friend who prays for the happiness of your soul and
body, William Bulwark.

This Letter was intercepted by one Thomas Harland, and delivered to Mr.
Greenall as from the abovesaid Messenger, who although (it seems) he something
did suspect him, did give unto it this reply as follows.
SIR, I am most sorry in hope to receive you, to receive your Letter: And I
more wonder, that you should write now to me by such a Messenger in so
dangerous a time, whose face before I never saw, nor ever heard of his name;
but because that you are p^eased to repose so much trust in him, I have done so
too, and as necre as I can, to give you satisfaction to the materials of your
Letter. If you knew in earnest, how thin our numbers are here, how much we are
of late discountananced and cried down, there would remain no further ground
for your wonder of our neglect. For my part, the Catholic and our cause are
grown so odiou unto the Cirie, with the most narrow eye they are so much
sought after, and sentenced, that we scarce dare hold any commerce in private,
our numbers are every day grown less and less, and I am almost afraid to see
my own face in the glass. What could be expected where there is so little to
be done; and where, if that little was done, it would put the whole cause into
a greater distress and ieopardy then as yet it is. The Forces of the
Parliament were that night most careful that no opportunity should be
neglected, the fields and the City were filled witharmed men; and there wanted,
I believe, no resolution to their numbers: even their women (forsooth) were so
full of courage, that in that tumult and alarm, they would seem to put new
courage into the men, and were as busy in arming their friends, as they were
of late in assisting their works against us. To confirm your belief in this
truth, the other night there was a false an alarm raised, I believe on purpose
in the City, and it is a wonder to consider, what multitudes in every street
were immediately gathered together, whereby their resolution, by those who
raised the coil, might easily be observed. The day following, our friends
house on Clarkenwell Green, who belonged sometimes to the Spanish Ambassador,
was plundered by their Soldiers. You would wonder to see how all his movables
were torn from him, and made a prey to the violence and greediness of the
Soldiers. I much lament the taking of our brave friend at Mile-End, and justly
partake in his sufferings with you. I hear nothing of the discovery of any
vaults, and I much wonder that you would entrust so great a secrer unto paper,
and from such a bearer, who although he told me his name was Thomas, yet is
not that Thomas I expected from you. Our affairs at York do move but slowly
forward, neither do I believe are there those Heroicke spirits which was
conceived there had been. If I be not much mistaken in your brother Nicolas,
who has been lately there, and last night intended to be with you, can give
you a true and exact rel^tion of all things that have happened there, and the
Countries thereabouts. I am glad with you to partake of the good news of her
Ma^esties return to England, which in these manifold afflictions and daily
fears which do surround me, brings some ease and comfort to

Your true distressed friend, John Greenall.

Printed for Francis Wright, 1642.


