A DISCOURSE Concerning the Qualifications OF PRAYER.

By J. BVERDSELL, M. A. late Fellow of Brase-nose College. Oxon.

The Third Edition.



London: Printed for J. Smith, on London Bridge.

A Discourse concerning the Qualifications of Prayer.
Ephesians. Chap. VI. ver. 18. Praying always with all Prayer and Suplication in
the Spirit.
AS Religion is the Life of the Soul, so is Prayer the vital Spirit of
Religion, without which it can neither live nor move, nor have its Being. This
is the chief Branch of the worship of God, required of all who acknowledge Him
to be, and most reasonable for all who own the World to be governed by his
Providence, and themselves to stand in need either of his Grace or his Pardon,
or who hope for his Rewards, or fear his Punishments in a future State. And as
it is thus a very necessary Duty, so (if exactly practiced) is it a difficult
one too. For it is a Discoursing with God; and for Man, who is but of
yesterday, to correspond with the Almighty, who inhabits Eternity, must emply
the utmost force of all his powers and Faculties. For if the Cherubim and
Seraphim, who were always without Spot or Blemish, and in whom was never found
any Guile, cover their Faces while they are Praising and Adoring the infinite
Perfections of God; what Gesture can be humble enough for Man, who composes
himself to Pray to him laden with his Sins, and whose Iniquities have gone over
his Head? If those glorious Spirits are described in Scripture, as shifting
from place to place while they are worshipping their Creator, as conquered and
overpowered by the Purity of his Nature; with what Confusion must Man appear
before Him, who was conceived in Sin and born in Iniquity? What attention and
application of Thought? What modesty of Expression? What submissiveness of
Behavior? What Love and Admiration? What warmth of Affection must be used to
make our Sacrifices acceptable to our Maker? And certainly as it had been the
highest Presumption, to have offered to have entertained any intercourse with
the Almighty, had not He Himself encouraged it; so since he has vouchsafed to
do it, it is our most excellent Glory, that we can address our supplications to
Him. But still the Obligation abides, to put them up with all the Devotion and
Fervency of Spirit, which our Imperfections are capable of; to prepare our
selves with the nicest diligence, that we may Pray always with all Prayer and
Suplication in the Spirit.

By Praying always, is not meant a constant or continued exercise of the Act of
Prayer, so as to be alwas invoking the Name of God. For this would be
inconsistent with our other relative Duties: For there are Virtues to be
practiced, which more immediately regard our Neighbor and our selves, as well
as those which solely respect God; and we are oblieg'd to Justice, Charity and
Humanity, as well as to Pray, Praise and Adore. But by Praying always, is to be
understood such a Godlike Frame and Temper of Spirit, accompanied with such an
Innocence of Life, and relish of Heavenly Things, that we may be ever disposed
for this Duty, when fit Opportunities shall call for it. By Praying in the
Spirit (whatsoever the Enthusiasts pretend) seems to be only implied, that our
Prayers ought to have the Qualifications beforementioned; so that they ought
to be put up rather for things Spiritual, than Temporal; for God's Assistance
to enable us to persevere in Goodness, for the removal or averting of
Temptations, for all Graces needful for us, and Means for the securing or
increasing of them; which are styled the Gifts, or Privileges of the Holy
Spirit: And this too falls under the former Head, and is a Qualification
necessary to make us Pray aright; since there can be no better Argument that we
are well qualified for Prayer, than that we pray for Blessings of the most
noble Importance, the most momentous Concern. So that in the Text are couched
the Qualifications required to make us successful Petitioners at the Throne of
Grace. For the reason why so many Prayers are not heard by Heaven, after those
Promises which are annexed to the Performance of this Duty, is, because we are
not duly accomplished to be Candidates for its Mercies. And it is easy for us
in this Case, to vindicate the Faithfulness of God, and to make an Apology for
our Maker, in our Maker's own Words, which are, that We ask and receive not,
because we ask amiss. In order therefore to make us fit Supplicants to the God
of Glory, and to put our Souls into such a Temper, that they may be constantly
and habitually fitted for the Discharge of this Duty, there are several
Qualifications needful. I shall therefore consider.

First, What Qualifications are necessary to prepare us for Prayer, or before
we pray, and in order to it.

Secondly, What is required in the very time, or act of our Praying, when our
Devotions are on the Wing, and our Lips are touched with a Coal from the Alter.

Thirdly, What must be done after we have Prayed, to make our attecedent
Prayers duly effectual.

Fourthly, What Acts are to be continued and extended through each of these,
both before, in, and after our Prayers.

First, therefore, what Qualifications are necessary to prepare us for Prayer,
or before we Pray, and in order to it.

Now the First Qualification necessary to prepare us for Prayer, is the Purity
of our Hearts, or the direction of our Lives by the Commandments of God. For if
our Affections are impure, or our ways unrighteous, it is invain to make our
Applications to God: For we know that God hears not Sinners, but if any Man
is a worshiper of God, and does his Will, him he hears. For the Eyes of the
Lord are over the Righteous, and his Ears are open to their Prayers alone. For
without Godliness, what soever Antinomian Schemes some Persons may draw,
whether it consists in Innocence, or sincere Repentance, our Prayers can never
mount up to the presence of God; because the Burden of our Sins will certainly
keep them from ascending to that Holy Place, where nothing but what is
completely, so can appear. And it would be Presumption, to hope that our
spotless Savior should present so unacceptable a Sacrifice to his Father, as
the Petitions of a Supplicant, who declares himself to be in a state of
Hostility against both of them, by an avowed complying with what they most
abhor. Nay, it is the most unwarrantable Insolence, for him who still retains a
Love for his Sins and yields to them upon the general returns of Temptation, to
approach his Maker in any Holy Office. For it is only an honoring Him with his
Lips, while his Heart is far from Him; and seems to be what the Apostle calls a
Lying to God, a professing himself his most devoted, most obedient Servant,
while his own Conscience, by a reflection on his Actions, will tell him that he
is his open and inveterate Enemy. It Is a colluding with him, who tries the
Heart and the Reigns, and to whose Eyes all things are naked and open: as if
Omniscience could be imposed on by Pretenses, or a Religious Pageantry was
tantamount to Solid Virtue and Piety; or saying of Lord, Lord, would excuse for
the not doing the Will of our Father which is in Heaven. So that tell we are
free from all known and wilful Sin, it is no purpose to make any Supplication to
God. He will not hear, will not regard our Prayers. They are like unhallowed
Fire offered to Him, and are an abomination in his sight; for of him who is not
resolved to part with his Sins, the very Prayers are sinful. That Duty which
draws other nigher to God cast him at a greater distance from him. That
Ordinance which sanctifies others, serves only to aggravate his deplorable
State, and to render his Condition more insufferable. But neither, on the other
hand, is he less criminal, if he does not Pray at all: For he is not excused
from this Duty, by being unqualify'd for it, but he becomes guilty, not only of
those Sins which are the hindrances of his Devotion, but of that Inability to
Devotion, which they have caused; and so hard are his Circumstances, that he is
likely to suffer, not only for making his Duty impossible by sinning, but even
for not discharging it, while it is thus impossible. And this justly enough
too, because this Impossibility was wlfully superinduced; an act of his own
choice and free election, and for which he has none to blame besides himself,
and his own wild Passions. So that while his Case continues thus, he is on all
accounts unqualify'd for Prayer, and yet is guilty too if he does not pray,
till by hearty Repentance he has freed himself from his Sins. So indispensibly
necessary is Purity from Sin, to prepare us for Prayer. But as there are
different kind of Sins, so is there the greatest necessity that we should be
innocent of those Sins, which are most opposed to the Spirit of Prayer; for
they are not all of them equally destructive of it. But these are malice, ill
will, or hatred of our Brother. Now as these Vices commence two manner of ways,
either by Injuring our Brother, or by receiving an Injury from him; so we may
be supposed in either Case to be guilty of them, and therefore on all Regards
unqualify'd for Prayer, if we do not contribute our utmost toward the
suppressing of them. As for Instance: If I have injured my Brother, and given
him any umbrage to hate me, I am in a great measure guilty of the Sin, and
therefore am unqualify'd for Prayer, if I do not endeavor a speedy
Reconcilement with him. For if my Gift is before the Altar, and I there
remember that my Brother has ought against me, (any just cause of complaining
that I have injured him,) I am obliged to leave my Gift before the Altar, and
go, and first be reconciled to my Brother. So on the other hand, when we are
injured by our Brother we are guilty of the Malicc, and the Sin lies at our
door, and so our Prayers become ineffectual, if we express an eager Desire to
revenge our selves; if we show an Aversion and Unwillingness to forgive him; if
we neglect his Proposals of Peace and Accommodation. For how can we expect that
God should pardon our Sins of the blackest Character, if we will not forgive
our Fellow Servants the least Offense? And has not our Blessed Lord taught us,
that we cannot pray to God to forgive us our Trespasses, unless we forgive them
that trespass against us? And as often as we use this sacred Prayer of our
Savior's, if we do not forgive those who have offended us from the bottom of
our Hearts, we desire that God would not forgive us; that He would remember and
revenge our Sins against Him, as we purpose to revenge those which our Brother
has committed against us. So that in effect we turn the best Prayer, that ever
was, into Sin, and use the Words of our Savior, who spoke as never man spoke,
to our own Damnation. So that Purity from Sin, especially from Malice, Hatred
or Ill Will, is the first Qualification in order to prepare us for Prayer.

The Second preparatory Qulafication for Prayer, is a Consideration of the
Nature of our own Wants, and of the Manner by which God has promised to supply
them, that we may know what to pray for, and what Method to take to have our
Prayers answered. And in taking an Estimate of our own Wants, we are to
consider our selves as Creatures whose chief Interest depends on a future
State, whose greatest Necessities are those which regard the Soul. As to what
concerns this Life, we are to resign that over to our heavenly Father's good
Providence, with a Father, not my Will, but thine be done. But as to spiritual
Wants, concerning these we are to sue with the greatest and most unconditionate
Importunity, and a pious Violence is to be done to Heaven, till we find our
selves successful in what we pray for. But then, Secondly, we must reflect on
the Terms on which God has undertaken to assist these Wants, and to resolve to
comply with them, are they never so uneasy. Thus do we ask for a Pardon for
Sins: we know the Terms on which this must be granted are, provided we repent
and forsake them. We are therefore to resolve to set our selves about this
Repentance and Amendment, before we pray for the Pardon. Thus because Grace and
Virtue cannot be compast without the use of good and wise endeavors, we are to
resolve on these, before we petition for those. For the Promises of God, though
infallible in regard to any Grace, ought nevertheless to encourage us to travel
with more Ardour and Fidelity, to merit the Effects of them. And if we ask
after this manner, it shall be given us; for every one who asks in this wise,
receives.

The Third Qualification prepatory to Prayer, is Faith or a Trust in God, that
he will grant us what we pray for, according to our Savior's Promise: All
things whatsoever ye ask in Prayer, believing ye shall receive. Now we may be
said to be qualified with this Grace, when sensible of our own Wants, we
commend our selves to God by Prayer, relying on his Divine Goodness and Power,
that he will give us what we sue for: that is, (as was before hinted) if we are
careful of performing the Conditions on which he stipulated to give; if we ask
for Pardon for Sins, in reforming them; for virtuous Endowments, in
industriously seeking after them; for the Assistance of God's Spirit, in
concurring with it, and making good use of it; for Health, or Ease, or any
other prosperous Turns of Providence and outward things, with a due Submission
to God's will, joined with the use of lawful Means to attain them. For to trust
that God will hear us without these, is not Faith, but an unwarrantable
Confidence; not Hope, but presumption.

Fourth Qualification preparatory for Prayer, is a good Intention to use what
God shall bless us with, to excellent Ends and Designs; to the glory of God,
and the Advancement of our own, and Brother's Salvation. Otherwise, if we only
ask for God's Blessings, to consume them on our Lusts, we petition Heaven to
contribute to our Undoing, and beg of the Almighty materials for our Sins, and
for Occasions to provoke him. God is obliged to deny us out of Love and
Compassion; for should he hear us, it would be the greatest Indication that he
is displeased with us, and that he is about to ruin us by so cruel an
Indulgence.

So that Freedom from Sin, either by Innocence, or sincere Repentance,
especially from Malice or Ill Will; a Resolution to perform the Terms, on which
Success is promised to our Prayers; a Trust that God will grant us what we thus
ask for; and a Good Intention to use what God blesses our Prayers with to his
Glory, are Qualifications antecedently necessary to Prayer, and preparatory for
it. Without these, an Address to the Throne of Grace, is to no purpose. The
most artful and elaborate Petition can meet with no welcome there; but like the
Dove, when she was first sent out of the Ark, after it has in vain roam'd about
the Heavens, without finding any admission, must return to its disappointed
owner empty. And if these Qualifications are needful for us before we apply our
selves to God in Prayer, while we are yet at a distance from him, what will be
sufficient for us to do in the time and act of Praying, when we are before the
very Presence of the living God, and the pure Eyes of the Eternal are fixed upon
us? how dreadful must that place be, which by God's being more immediately
resident in it, is none other but she House of God, and the Gate of Heaven? so
that we shall enquire.

Secondly, What is required in the very time and act of our Praying, while our
Devotions are on the Wing, and our Lips are touched with a Coal from the Altar.
Now the first Qualification, necessary for us in the time of Prayer, is
Humility; because Prayer is a talking with God. And this Humility ought to be
formed in as, First, by the Consideration of the Majesty of that God, with whom
we have to do: That He is the highest far above all, who has Heaven for his
Throne, and the Earth for his Footstool. Who measures the Sea in the palm of
his Hands, In whose Hand is the Soul of every living thing, and the Breath of
all Mankind. Hell is naked before him, and Destruction has no covering. He
streicheth out the North over the empty place, and hangs the Earth upon
nothing. And, Secondly, this Humility ought to be raised by the sense of our
own Vileness. First, as we are Men and the Creatures of God, over whom he has
an absolute Power and Authority. As we are nothing but a little breathing Dust
and Ashes, which after a short time, but very full of trouble, must return to
that out of which we were formed. If the most glorious of his Creatures are so
despicable before Him, that he puts no trust in his Servants, and charges even
his Angels with Folly; how shall they come before Him, who dwell in Houses of
Clay, whose Foundation is in the Dust? But, Secondly, much more ought we to be
humble in our Prayers, as we are Sinners, and worthy (if God should reward as
after our Sins) of Eternal Death. We have affronted Infinite Majesty, and
therefore deserve Infinite Punishment. And though through the Mercies of God, and
the Merrits of our Blessed Savior, our severe Repentance may hinder the
execution of this Sentance; yet we must remember, that Humility is a part even
of Repentance it self. And the consideration that it is the Goodness of God
alone, which makes our Misery less, ought to make our Sin greater, and heighten
our Humility for having offended so gracious a Creator, when we pray for
Remission for those Offenses.

The Second Qualification, in the time of Praying, is a due fixedness and
attention of Mind. For God is an Object so noble, that he demands the utmost
Intension of our Thoughts. They ought all to be collected, and fixed on him,
directed as the Faces of the Cherubim in the Ark wholly toward the Mercy-seat.
And in order to this our Minds ought to be disengaged from whatsoever may
occasion their straggling; as from an overviolent love of the World, its
pleasures and interests, and to be possessed with whatsoever may raise a just
Attention; as with an awful sense of the Dignity and Excellence of this Duty,
the inestimable worth of those Mercies for which we petition, the greatness of
our wants and necessities. Nor is it enough, (as the Schoolmen loosely determine
in this matter,) that this Attention is purposed and intended, though it is not
executed. Nor is it sufficient, that we come with a Resolution to be attentive,
if we do not vigorously practice it. For is a Resolution a competent Discharge
of any other Duty? Or was the Son in the Gospel Justified for resolving to go
and work in the Vineyard, and yet not doing it? A Resolution to pray in
general, might as well absolve us from not praying at all, as a Resolution to
be attentive, from not being so. Not: though God will make abatement for the
Imperfection of our Attention, resulting from the unavoidable weakness of our
Natures, or our being disused to think or reflect; yet will not he dispense
with the total want of it. And if we are sorry for this Imperfection of our
Attention, and endeavor effectively to correct it, God will concur with us,
and by drawing nigher to us, and discovering his Perfections with a greater
luster, will make our Attention not only easy and natural, but even also
pleasant and delightful. The Third Qualification of Prayer, in the act of
Praying, is a good measure of desire, and fervency of affection. For a lukewarm
Petitioner bespeaks a denial, and he himself contributes to his own repulse. He
seems unconcerned in making his Suit, and so less expect God to be less
concerned to grant it. He seems to slight the Mercy, while he asks it. Can it
therefore be imagined, that he should think himself much obliged by it, or be
thankful for it? while a fervent Prayer shows how ardently we desire a Mercy,
and how thankfully we are like to receive it. And this is a strong Inducement
for God to bestow it on us; for He is so tender and indulgent, that He cannot
deny us any thing which is fit for us, when he sees us wrought up to a due
Valuation of it, and our Hearts earnestly bent upon it. For it is the fervent
Prayer of the righteous man, which prevails much. The Fourth Qualification of
Prayer, in the act of Praying, is a general love for Mankind, and a concern for
their happiness* For the compass of our Prayers ought to be as Iarge as that of
our Charity, and with its open Arms embrace all mankind: extended even to
those, who are perhaps contriving to lay our Honors and Bodies in the Dust,
while we are mounting their Souls, in our Devotions, up to the Heavens. For we
are obliged by our Holy Religion, to bless them which curse us, and to pray for
them which despitefully use us. And in persuit of this universal Charity, our
Savior, (according to St. Cyprian's pious Observation,) has taught us to say,
Our, and not My Father, only, which art in Heaven, that mindful of our divine
and common Original, and of that glorious dependence on which we stand related
to God, we might unite our Prayers for all those, who bear the same illustrious
Character of the Sons of God. The Fifth Qualification of Prayer is, that our
Prayers ought to be short, not abounding with an excess of Words. For Prayer is
the Language of the Heart, rather than of the Tongue; of the affections, more
than of the lips; and great and raised Passions, such as make up the most
perfect Devotion, are seldom attended with a copious fluency of Words. For the
Soul is too much employed within, to have leisure to exercise it self about
Flourish, or tedious Harangue. Of this concise Nature are most of the sacred
Hymns and Prayers which are extant, suitable to the Majesty of God: for the
most short, is also the most solemn and stately method of address, and
agreeable to Mankind's Infirmities, which hinders us from enlivening, with a
due Spirit, a long and tedious Prayer. Of this Nature are our Savior's own
Prayers; one of the last of which, in his Agony, is so short, and yet so
pathetical, that it seems ( according to the History) to be accompanied with
more drops of Blood than Words. The Last Qualification in the act of praying,
is perseverance, not as the Messallians, from the Apostle's Command in the
Words, of Praying always thought, by an unbroken continuation of the acts of
Prayer; but by a constant Preparation, for and exercise of them, as
opportunities, and freedom from other Duties demand. For this is the
perfection, not only of Prayer, but of all Virtues. Without this they are only
faint efforts, and attempts to please God, which shall never be accepted of,
nor rewarded by Him. But it has a most especial force in Prayer: for if the
unjust Judge in the Gospel, who neither feared God, nor regarded Man, yet
granted the Widow's Petition, moved purely by her resolute Perseverance; how
much more shall God who is the just Judge of all Mankind, and whose Goodness
inclines him to be kind and beneficent to his Creatures, grant our Requests, if
we cry day and night to Him? I tell you, (as the Gospel has it) He will grant
them speedily. Humillity, therefore Attention, Fervor, Charity and
Perseverance, are Qualifications necessary in the time of Prayer. But there
are, Thirdly, Qualifications, necessary after we have prayed, to make our
antecedent Prayers duly effectual. As First, an observation of God's returns to
our Prayers; and eyeing the tendency of his Providence, whether he does grant
our Petitions or not; especially as to spiritual concerns. And there is an
infallible Mark to measure our success by: for we may assuredly conclude, That
God has heard our Prayers, as to pardon of sins, (for instance) if we find our
selves free from voluntary Transgressions But if after our prayers we are as
much sinners as ever, this is a sign that God has not heard our Petitions, and
that our sins are not pardoned; and the fault must be our own, because we did
not truly repent of them, before we prayed for their Remission. So that we must
renew our Repentance, as well as our prayers; and if the former is sincere, and
the latter duly qualified, we shall certainly be successful. Thus we may know
that God has granted our prayers as to spiritual Graces, if we find our selves
improved in Virtue after our prayers: otherwise the fault is our own; we have
not endeavored vigorously after Grace. So that we must reinforce our
Endeavors as well as our prayers; and if there is no deficiency on our part*
it is certain there will be none on God's: for He is always more ready to give,
then we to pray. He is prepared to prevent with his Blessings even our first
Wishes for them, and to reward our pious desires, even before they have time to
cloth themselves with words. The second Qualification after prayer, is a
returning God thanks for his grants and denials: that is, His denials of
temporal Advantages For this is often as great a proof of his Fatherly Goodness
and Concern for us, as any of His most merciful Indulgences. It Is a Mysterious
Method of Kindness, which obliges us against our Wills, and makes us happy in
contradiction to our most passionate desires; depriving us of what would prove
to us only a more agreeable Ruin, a more pleasant and beautiful destruction.
And how severe so ever disappointments may appear to us at first, yet the event
and close of Things will show, that we had good reason to be thankful to God,
for His crossing us in our Wishes, and for visibly frustrating us in the
success of our prayers; and we shall at last find the satisfaction of
consigning our choice over to Omniscience, and that God, (to use our Savior's
familiar but expressive Words with some alteration) when we prayed for a
Serpent, has given us a Fish, and when we petitioned for a Stone, has blessed us
with Bread. The Third Qualification after prayer, is a due value of our great
Privilege, that we may pray to God. For how great is the Perogative of a
Christian* that he may discourse, and converse, and prevail with God? That
there is no difficulty of Access, no doubt of Acceptance, that there is is no
hinderance of his Intercourse with the Almighty, but his own Sins which are no
longer impediments, but as far as they are persisted in, and not broken off by
true Repentance. The Fourth Qualification, is a learning by God's denials to
make fitter Addresses for the future* for if my prayers are not granted, there
must be some fault in me. Till that is amended, Heaven will be deaf to my
Petitions, and neglect my most solemn Address, Either I do not pray for what I
ought, or not after that manner which I ought, therefore, in the Language of
the Psalmist, my Words are only like the Chaff before the Wind, and the Angel
of the Lord will certainly scatter them The Fifth Qualification is Almsgiving
For it is meet that we should express our gratitude for God's Mercies, by
bounty to our Brethren, which ask of us, and need our relief. This is all the
return we can make to providence, for the innumerable Bounties which it
scatters upon us with open hands. This is a kind of relieving our Savior in
his suffering Members, and he tells us, that he will look on it, as if done to
himself. And there can be no greater inducement for God to bestow temporal good
things on us, than if we consecrate a part of them to him by our Alms We render
him, if I may so speak, our Debtor, and (pardon the boldness of the Expression)
we may, in some measure, according to the promises made to this Duty, appeal to
his Justice, as well as to his Goodness, to make suitable Requitals; which he
will most ceatainly perform, though not in kind, yet in what will be much more
for our Advantage; and will consult, though not our present satisfaction, yet our
lasting Benefit. On Observation therefore of God's returns to our Prayers,
Thanksgiving for his Grants and Denials, a due Value of the privilege of
Prayer, a correcting our prayers for the future by our past disappointments,
and lastly Almsgiving, are necessary after we have prayed, to make our
antecedent Prayers duly effectual. So that I shall proceed to enquire into.
Lastly, what Acts are to be continued and extended through each of these, both
before in, and after our prayers. And First, we ought to be possessed with a
great sense of our Imperfections, in the discharge of this weighty Duty. This
must run through all the parts of it, but ought more particularly to be expressed
both before, and after our Devotions. At both these times we ought solemnly to
entreat God's pardon for the Errors that we have, or may commit; for the
straggling of our Thoughts, which the best of Men can more easily bewail, than
prevent, since the most watchful and steady Mind cannot hinder all the
disorders of roving Fancy, in the midst of our most serious devotions, for our
earnest begging of Blessings of a trival nature, or for our want of any of the
former Qualification, in that Measure which is expedient. The next
Qualification is a very comprehensive one, and which takes in all the rest, and
yet withal a very necessary one too and that is universal Holiness and
Sanctity. For our praying in a short time will make us leave off our Sins, or
our Sins our prayers. So that this will be an effect, as well as a
Qualification of our Devotion. For though the former Qualifications may be
sufficient for a new Convert, and for one who has but lately had the sense and
conviction of Religion upon his mind; yet from a proficient in this Duty
nothing will be accepted less than a general, a complete and uniform Obedience
to all God's Commands. For though the prayers of one who begins to leave his
Sins, and yet sometimes upon the prevalency of Custom* or the surprise of a
violent Temptation, relapses into ^em, may be heard upon his Repentence; yet
this state of Sinning and Repenting must not continue long. A general piety
must be superinduced or else it is a sign that his prayers have not had their
due efficacy: if they do not conquer all sin, at least so that it may not reign
in us; if they do not give us some sort of foretast of the Joys of that place,
to which they are directed, and make our Souls sympathize and conform
themselves with the Virtue and Innocence of its blessed Inhabitants. So that
the sum of all is: That Purity, a Consideration of our Wants, a Trust in God,
a good Intention are necessary to prepare us for Prayer* Humility, Attention,
Fervor, Charity, Brevity and Perseverance in the time of praying. On
Observation of God's providence, a Vain of our privilege to pray a Reforming
of our prayers by our Disappointments, and Almsgiving are required after we
have prayed. And a sense of our own Imperfections, and an Universal piety are
to run through all the periods of this Duty. A prayer which is put up to Heaven
after this Method, is surely more suitable for a reasonable Creature to present
before his Almighty Maker, than what is uttered by, or rather impressed upon a
Soul, cast into a purely passive state or posture; into a State of expectation
of the Divine Exmanations to enlighten the Mind, as that Duty has been modeled
by some late Enthusiasts. Which is but what had been before advanced by
Enthusiasts of our own Nation: for thus an Author of great Character, amongst
the most irregular Sect which ever opposed this Church, allows of no use of our
own Intellectual powers, of our passions, Imaginations, or Wills, in the
exercise of this Duty: Because (says he) God will be served with his own alone,
and not with any thing in Man, which is come in since the fail; so the
Imaginations, Thinkings and Conceivings are shut out. And these Qualifications
before hinted at, seem much more intelligible, James Naylor's Love to the Lost,
page 13. more adapted to the Economy of our Devotion, that the taking hold of
essential Truth nakedly* as it is in it self; than the applying the Mind to the
intelligible World, the World of Truth, than the addressing to the Ideal World;
than the Union with God, the seeing of all things in God: Terms in some measure
invented by two refined and curious Thinkers, the one of our own, the other of
a Neighboring Kingdom. And here I cannot but

See Norris 's Reflections on the Conduct of Hamane life, etc. Sect 11. reflect
on a dangerous Error of a Mystic Writer of note, who seems to exclude Virtue
from the state of transformed Souls, (as he styles them) and those wrapped up in
the highest Transports of Devotion. But that Virtue is not only a preparation
for Devotion, but also a completing of it, has been shown in this Discourse:
and not only so, but that it is practiced by the blessed, by whom Devotion is
exercised in its most exalted flights, was made out (though far below the Majesty
of the Subject,) in another Effay. But to close all: Furnished with the former
Qualifications, we may be justly said to pray always, and in the Spirit. Yet
such Prayers as were before described, will never fail of success, till God
shall cease from being true, and our Almighty's strength from being Merciful.
Such prayers as these will be acceptable Sacrifices to the Heavenly Altar, will
procure pardon for Sin, and Increase of Grace, and at length Eternal Life, and
will at last expire into everlasting Thanksgiving. When we shall need to pray
no more, but this Duty (as some fancy of Faith and Hope) shall cease, and we
shall have nothing to do for ever, but to give Thanks, Adore and Praise.

A Prayer to be used in secret.
O Lord look down from Heaven with an Eye of Favor and come passion upon me
thy poor Creature, who in and through Jesus Christ do look up unto thee for
Mercy. I am a Sinner by Nature and by practice, who deserve to be cast into
everlasting Fire: But do thou deliver me from all my Sins. Give me thy grace,
that I may not harbor any vain or wicked thoughts in my Heart, that I may not
lie or swear or take thy holy Name in vain, or any other way offend thee with
my Tongue suffer me not to be guilty of stealing or any deceit: but grant that
I may be true and faithful and diligent in the place where thou art pleased to
set me: knowing thine All seeing Eye observes me in the most secret Corner, and
that my own Conscience is more than a Thousand Witnesses Enable me to flee
Youthful Lusts, and to follow after Godliness, and suffer me not to be a Lover
of pleasures more than of God* prepare me for Death and Judgment: and cause me
so to live in thy Fear and favor while I am here, that whenever it shall
please thee to remove me hence, I may be received into a Mansion in Heaven, and
the full Enjoyment of that Glory: which neither Eye has seen, nor Ear heard,
nor has ever entered into the Heart of Man to conceive. Bless these Nations our
King and all that are in Authority. Bless all thy Ministers, all my Friends and
Relations, and all thy people. Bless this Family and make me a blessing in it.
Comfort those that mourn, and suppyly their wants.

And now O Lord, as thou have been good unto me this Day (or Night) past, so
bless me this Night, (or Day) continue thy Mercies unto my Soul and Body, and
give me thy Grace, that i may be truly thankful for them, and careful to make a
good use of them. Above all i bless thy glorious Name for Jesus Christ. Grant
that i may embrace him in a right manner, and for his sake do thou accept of me
and my poor prayers which I conclude, as he himself has taught me to pray unto
thee, Our Father which art in Heaven* hallowed be thy Name, thy Kingdom come,
thy Will be done on Eatth as it is in Heaven, Give us this day our daily Bread,
and forgive us our Trespasses as we forgive them that Trespass against us, lead
us not into Temptation, but deliver us from Evil* for thine is the Kingdom the
power and the Glory for ever and ever.

FINIS

