A PUBLIC DISPUTATION SUNDRY DAYS At Killingworth in Warwickshire, betwixt
JOHN BRYAN, Doctor in Divinity (Minister at Coventry) and JOHN ONLEY, Pastor of
a Church at Lawford.

Upon this Question, Whether the Parishes of this Nation generally be true
Churches.

Wherein are Nine Arguments alleged in proof of the Affirmative of the Question,
with the Answer of 1. 0. thereunto, together with Doctor B. Reply.

Also an Addition of ten Arguments more in further proof of the Question, with
an Answer adjoined in disproof thereof.

Try all things, hold fast that which is good. 1 These. 5. 21.

Published by both their consents, as appears by the ensuing Epistles.

LONDON, Printed for W. Larnar and are to be Sold at the Black-Mores-Head at
Fleet-Bridge. 1655.

The Epistle to the Reader.
SInce the everlasting God, of the inflnit riches of his grace, has been
pleased to discover what Babylon is;

The Hearts, Pens, Tongues of many have been exercised, in discovering what
they conceived Sion to be.

Amongst which Doctor Bryan has been one who has endeavored in several
Lectures to prove, that the Parochial Assemblies are true Churches, her
Ministry true Ministers, and that none may publicly Preach, but such as are
Ministers in Office; all which being contrary, to truth in my apprehension, I
thought my self bound in conscience (especially many giving out, that it we had
any thing to say for our selves, why did we not speak) both to vindicate what I
apprehended to be truth (that was there cried down as error) as also to
testify against that which was false, (that was there Preached up as truth.)

And in the close of the second days disputation, it was desired by the Doctor,
that I would state some questions, and appoint a Day only to dispute, and
accordingly I did, and stated two, viz.

1. Whether the Parishes of this Nation generally be true Churches?

2. Whether every Brother (though no Elder) that has received abilities from
God, whereby he is in abled to Preach, may publicly Preach, which was
consented to, I being Respondent in the first, and Opponent in the second;
which Day being come, Nine Arguments were brought by the Doctor in vindication
of the affirmative of the first question, which when half our time was spent in
debate of the two first, I moved for the rest of the time to oppose in the
second, which was granted, only with a motion for the reading of the other
seven to the Congregation, to which I consented, only desiring a Copy of the
Arguments undisputed of, to return an answer to be likewise publicly read the
next meeting Day, which was granted, according to which I drew up a Reply, and
read it to the Congregation (that very same that is here Printed, not once
thinking that ever it should appear in Print) immediately after the reading of
which, a Gentleman then present desired it might be Printed, and desired me to
motion it to the Doctor, which I did; to which he replied, if he might reply he
was willing, but he had twelve Arguments more in proof of the question, to
which I replied, I was contented, he should reply to my answer to the Nine
first without my Rejoinder, provided, I might answer to the Twelve last without
his Reply, only till they were Printed, and then each should be at liberty to
write what he pleased; which was consented to, which when I had finished my
Answer to the Ten last, and the Doctor his Reply to my answer to the Nine
first, we joined them together, to be Printed in one volumn, so that this work
is published by both our consents; and this is the occasion of this Treatise,
thus unwontedly coming forth, which I thought necessary to inform thee of.

Now that the Parishes of this Nation are false Churches, and that they never
had a Gospel Constitution, that her Ministry is a false Ministry, and that they
are not that Mountain that shall be established on the top of all Mountains, to
which the desire of all Nations shall come, I beg not thy consent to concur
with my judgment therein; but whether the Nineteen Arguments be sufficient to
prove it, or the Answers thereto to overthrow it, I humbly refer to the
judicious to Judge.

JOHN ONLEY.

Mr. JOHN ONLY,
THe end of our Monthly meeting at Killingworth (begun in December last) was
well known to be the setting up, and settling of a Gospel order in our Parochial
Congregations; and because I well knew, that some in our County were not
satisfied in Conscience concerning the truth of our Churches and Ministry, my
resolution was (being put upon it by my reverend Brethren) to endeavor in the
first place a vindication of both: I did therefore publicly desire all that
had any thing to except against what I should deliver, to send to me their
exceptions in writing, which with my answer to them should (if they pleased) be
read before the people at the next meeting, professing withal, my readiness to
receive back any Gold, that should be found counterfeit or light, by the
touchstone and balance of Scripture.

Accordingly a Godly Brother of the Congregational way (Lieutenant Fox by name)
sent in sundry objections to my third discourse (upon that text in Col. 2. 5.
joining and beholding your Order) and some Letters passed between us, whereof
he desired not any publication, though for parts, and piety, he is judged no
whit inferior to you, who the next Day openly declared your dissent, and
declared your self desirous to dispute with me publicly upon these two
questions. 1. Whether the Parish Assemblies of England generally be true
visible Churches? (which you denied, 2. Whether every Brother) though no Elder,
that has received abilities from God, whereby he is enabled to Preach, may
publicly Preach? (which you affirmed) appointing me to be Opponent in the
first, and Respondent in the second, the next Monthly Day.

I need not tell you how many disswasions I had from entering the Lists with an
illiterate Adversary, (such you were taken for by many) among others this, that
I should in so doing disparage my self, nor was there any probability of good
to come of it; but those words of Job came into my mind, Chap. 31. 13. 14. If I
did despise the cause of my man servant, or of my maid servant, when they
contended with me: What then shall I do, when God rises up? and when he
visits, what shall I answer him? whence I gathered, how displeasing it might
be to God, should I despise a dissenting Brother, protesting that the end of
his contention, was to receive satisfaction to his conscience, which doubted of
the doctrine I had dispensed; besides, I knew God often reveals his mind to Babes
in humane learning, which he hides from the greatest Clerks Matthew. 11. 25. 26.
1 Cor. 1. 20. moreover, the ablest Preachers know but in part, and prophecy in
part, 1 Cor 13. 9. and therefore may err, and Aquila and Priscilla may expound
to Apollos the way of God more perfectly, Acts 18. 26. a little Child may show
an erring Man his way; finally the Apostle Peter commands us all, to be ready
always to give an answer to every Man, that asks us a reason of the hope
that is in us, with meekness and fear, if Gods honor, and the good of those
who ask, require it; both which I apprehended were concerned in my yielding to
your motion, and therefore embraced it, le^ving the issue to God; and for the
same reason have I yielded to your second motion made in the close of the third
or fourth days disputation, viz. that your Arguments and Answers, and Replies,
and Rejoynders upon the first question, might be put in Print; and to your
Proviso, that at present I should make no Reply unto your answer to the Ten
last Arguments, as you would no Rejoinder to my Reply upon your Answers to the
Nine first; and if you have a mind, you may rejoin (your engagement to the
contrary I free you from, yea and give you liberty (which you have already
taken all along without check) to oppose what you please, and to take in also
the help of Master Morley, and those other seven who assisted you in
disputation, that the utmost you and they can object further against our Parish
Churches may come under our view only; (for your Readers sake) I could wish
you would forbear instead of arguing, to make any more excursions by tedious
impertinent Declamations against our Ministers and Members, wherein all your
Answers for the most part spend themselves; which yet the Men of your own way
will admire seriously, but all others of any competent understanding
ironically; using Jobs words to Bildad, Chap. 26. 3. How have thou plentifully
declared the thing as it is? suffer me to speak my thoughts and hopes; when all
is that can be said by their self or any other to overthrow the Parochial
Assemblies of this Nation, they will stand like Mount Sion; which though it may
be moved in its place, cannot be removed out of its place; and the Presbyterian
Government which we are endeavoring to settle in our Congregations, will prove
like the Palm tree, quae non cedit ponderi, sed surgit adversum pondus. Nor do
I doub, but when Christ our King has turned his hand upon us, and purely
purged away our dross, and taken away all our tin, he will set up his throne,
and keep a standing Majesty in the midst of these golden Candle-sticks; then
they that are our enemies shall see, and shame shall cover them which said unto
us, where is the Lord your God? mean time we will bear the indignation of the
Lord, because we have sinned against him, until he plead our cause, and
execute judgment for us: yea though he suffer you to kill us, after three days
and a half we shall revive and stand upon our feet: and many out of all
languages (separate Societies) shall relinquish their dividing principles and
practices, and take hold of the skirt of a Gospel Presbyterian, saying, we will
go with you, for we have heard that God is with you; this is the hope, and
shall be the Prayer of

Your loving friend and servant in the Lord, JOHN BRYAN.

That the National Congregations of England are the true Churches of Christ,
says Dr. John Bryan, Minister in Coventry; and these are his Arguments to
prove it, as follows.
Denied by Mr. JOHN ONLY, with the grounds of his dissent, in Answers to his
Arguments.
WHether the Parishes of this Nation generally be true Quest.
Churches?

Those Societies which the true Churches of Christ Argument. 1. Dr. B.
generally throughout the world own and acknowledge to be true Churches, they
are true Churches; but the Parish Assemblies of England are so owned and
acknowledged; therefore the Parish Assemblies of England are true Churches.

The Minor is undeniable, for all the Reformed Churches of Europe gave us the
right hand of Fellowship when we were much more corrupt then now, and so have
all the Churches of New England done in their Treatise of Church Covenant, and
Answer to 32. Questions. I put you to name one Church in the world that does
not acknowledge the Church of England to be the Spouse of Christ.

The Major is thus proved; if the Judgment of the Churches See the joint
consent of sundry godly and learned Ministers, published by W. Rathbad. p. 7.
of Christ ought to be taken for the Judgment of God, then those Societies
which they own and acknowledge to be true Churches, are so; but the former is
true, therefore the latter; of the first Proposition there can be no doubt. The
second Proposition is evident from Matthew 18. 17. 18. He that will not regard
the Judgment of that particular Church whereof he is a Member, is to be
esteemed as a Heathen, or Publican. Of how much sorer censure shall he be
thought worthy, that despises the Judgment of all the known Churches in the
world? Again, Christ has given his Church power to judge and pronounce of a
particular man, that he is in the Estate of salvation, and that infallibly:
therefore he has made it much more able to pronounce of a Congregation or
people that is a true Church, which is a matter of no such difficulty as the
other, 1 Timothy 3. 15. the Church is the Pillar and Ground of Truth; but this it
could not be if it should be ignorant of a Truth so necessary as this, viz.
what people are to be accounted a true Church.

That these societies by you mentioned may bear Testimony to yours to be true,
may be undeniable, but then the Que^^ion will Answ. I. O.
be, whether these by you mentioned be true Churches rightly co^^ituted
according to Gospel order, that which is the very question betwixt us is by you
taken for granted before it be proved, and brought in by you as an Argument to
prove it self; the Question you are to prove is, that the Parishes of that
Nation be generally true Churches; which I deny, and so consequently all other
that be of the same Matter and Form: Now those Churches which you bring to
prove yours to be true, are of the same Matter and Form with you; and if you be
false, then they also; and if they should differ either in Matter of Form from
you, they could not possibly confess you to be true: Now to say you are true
Churches, because other societies who are one for matter of substance with you
(say so) is as much (as if you should say) we are true Churches, therefore we
are true Churches.

That the Testimony of such a Church as is by you mentioned, Mat. 18. 1 Timothy 3.
is to be taken according to the intent of those Scriptures, I grant, but then
you must first prove that those Churches by you mentioned are such (not so
confidently beg the question) till that be first done, these Scriptures will
not support your Conclusion.

Whereas you desire me to name one true Church in the world, that does not
acknowledge the Churches of England to be the Spouse of Christ; that I shall
do in its proper place, where I shall have occasion to vindicate the truth of
those Churches, which you deny to be true.

The sum of your Answer is, st fir by way of Concession, that all the
Churches mentioned by me (which are all the known Churches Reply. Dr. B.
in the world) own and acknowledge our Parochial Assemblies to be true
Churches; this savours of Ingenuity.

2. By way of Exception against the validity of the Testimony of these
Churches, because they are the same for Matter and Formwith ours (according to
the Proverb, ask my Brother if I be a Thief) this seems to savor of Arrogance.
The Testimony of two or three men was wont to be taken for truth by Warrant,
both of Law and Gospel, John 8. 17. Mat. 18. 16. 2 Cor. 13. 1. Heb. 10. 28. Now
put the Case you were accused of these or two known Enemies by one and were
able to bring the Testimony of two hundred honest men to assert your Integrity,
I presume you would not take it well that their witness should be slighted upon
no other ground but this, because they consisted of the same Matter and Form
with you; It is just our Case, a very inconsiderable number (for so are all the
Anti-paedo-Baptistical societies Comparatively) and our professed Adversaries
draw up a Charge against us, that we are false Churches; we being for
Justification of our truth more then a million of men, approved unto God and
all good men, in whose Approbation we do, yea and will rejoice, because we
believe and are sure that they are the true Churches of Christ, and the
Judgment of such you deny not to be the judgment of God himself; but all
Churches besides those of your way, (which are but of yesterday) you plainly
(though implicitly in the Close of your Answer) deny to be true Churches,
whereby you proclaim M. Mar shall unity of Saints.
your selves to be the greatest Schismatics in the world, if the Scripture
reason, that a burning and shining Light in our Church has given be of any
weight, which I refer to your serious Consideration; as also the weight of this
inartificial Argument to the judgment of the people.

Our Parish Assemblies have a true Church Constitution, therefore Argu. 2.
they are true Churches.

The Consequence is granted by you all, for this is the Main. if not only
Reason, why you deny the Truth of our Churches, because they want a right
Constitution.

The Antecedent I thus prove; Those societies that have the true Matter and
Form of Gospel Churches have a right Constitution, Matter and Form being the
only constitutive Principles, and making up the Essence of every Body, both
natural and Political.

But our Parish Assemblies have the true Matter and Form of Gospel Churches,
therefore they have a true Church Constitution.

The Minor I make good from your own definition of a visible Church, viz. A
company of visible Saints combined or conjoined in special bond, consent or
Covenant to partake of all Gods Ordinances, and to perform all duties which
they owe to God, and each to other.

I argue thus, those Societies that consist of visible Saints so combined, are
true Churches, ours are such, therefore:

The Major is your own, the Minor is thus proved in both branches, our Parish
Assemblies are Societies of visible Saints.

Those societies where some are Real Saints, the worser sort Brethren in a
Gospel Account, and the worst, Professors of the true Faith, they are Societies
of visible Saints.

But such are our Assemblies; therefore.

The Minor you cannot deny, there are with us many that are men of
understanding, and not only blameless, but pious also in their Conversations.
The Apostle commands us to account men ignorant and wicked (if they be not
wilfully and obstinately so) Brethren 2 These. 3. 14, 15. and you grant that
the worst among us profess in word the true Faith, viz. That Jesus Christ is
the Son of God, that we are justified by faith alone, etc.

The Major is thus proved. The Apostolical Church Societies, were Societies of
visible Saints; but they had in them some real Saints, the worser sort
Brethren the worst visible Professors: therefore, Societies that consist of
such are true visible Churches.

That Christ owns for his Church such a Society where all profess the Faith,
though the greater part be wicked, if there be a few names that are Real
Saints, is evident by the example of the Church of Sardis, Revel. 3. 1. 4. the
like may be said of the Church of Corinth, etc. We have therefore true Church
Matter.

2. They have a right Form, for they are conjoined in a Church Covenant; this
is manifest by their constant meeting every Lords Day to worship God together,
which is an implicit Covenant, our Adversaries being Judges.

That which was to be proved, was, that the Parishes of this Nation Answ. J. O.
in their first Constitution consisted of visible Saints, and all that you have
here said is void the mark; for notwithstanding any thing that you have said,
the greatest part of the men in the Parishes of this Nation in their first
constitution might consist of visible wicked men, and so all that you have said
is to no purpose, for if ever you say any thing to purpose, you must first
prove that which you have undertaken, viz. That you consisted at the first
constitution of visible Saints, and of this you have not spoken one word, you
rake back into the degenerated Estate and Condition of Churches, striving to
equalize and shroud your selves under the sins of others, which are degenerated
from what they were at first, which is nothing to the purpose, for I utterly
deny that ever any of those Churches in their first forming did consist of such
disobedient Persons as the Apostle speaks of, 2 These. 3. 14. For such with whom
the Godly in that Church were forbidden to keep company with, were (sure) unfit
to be joined with them as one Body, if they appeared such at first, and the
like may be said of the Church of Sardis, Corinth, etc. Now because these
Churches were called Saints, and that they had such among them as bad as any in
yours, you would infer that you may be called so too. I grant that these were
called Saints, but it was not as they were disobedient Persons, these never
received the name of Saints as they were disobedient, but as they being once
visibly holy, and Saint-like, and not so far degenerated, but in a capacity
of Recovering their former Estate, they bore among others the name of such. Now
except you first prove that you in your first constitution were Saints visible
(which in the least measure you have not done) there can be no Argument drawn
from the Name of them to you. I desire if you can to produce one Scripture
where in the constitution of an Apostolical Church, there was any such
distinction made of best and worst, and worst of all, as you make, though there
might be a difference in the measures of Grace and Knowledge, and the word
plainly shows that they did all at first appear to be Saints, though they
afterward degenerated and fell to disobedience; yet they retained the Name
till actually excommunicated.

Now more particularly to your Argument.

The Antecedent of your first Syllogism I deny.

The Minor also of the 2d. if you add (as you must, or else you do nothing) in
their first constitution.

The Major in the 3d. I own in the first branch, but deny the Minor in both
branches.

To your Minor in the 4th (which you say cannot be denied) I have these things
to say to the former branch of it; first, That there may be some truly in Gods
favor (in your Parishes) I grant, but this does not prove those societies,
wheresoever they are visible Saints, (except those others had formerly visibly
been in that condition) for some of Gods people have been and may be in
Babylon. Rev. 18. 4. and yet Babylon no society of Saints. 2ly, You say the
Apostle bids ns, account men ignorant and wicked, if they be not obstinately
and wilfully so; brethren it is true, but whether were they to be accounted
brethren as ignorant and wicked, or as having been first visibly holy, and
still in hopes of recovery, this latter is evident: Now these in your Parishes,
who are ignorant and wicked, though not wilfully obstinate, never were visible
Saints, as these Thessalonians were; such who were in God the Father, ver. 1.
Elect of God. ver. 4. Followers of the Apostles, ver. 6. and of the Lord such
as had received the word of God, Chap. 2. 13. Followers of the Church of God,
ver. 14. such whose faith grew exceedingly and charity of every one to each
other abounded. 2. Epist. 1. 3. etc. Now of these worser sort of your Members
there could never be any such thing affirmed, they never being in that
condition; therefore this Scripture does not prove the worser sort brethren.
3ly. Far wide is it to say the worst of all be Professors of the true faith,
because they profess in words that Christ is the Son of God, etc. for that
profession with the Mouth, joined with denial in practice, is a lie, 1 John 2.
3. A man cannot serve two Masters, but his servants they are to whom they obey,
now the worst of your members following the works of the Devil, he is their
Master.

I wonder that you wander so far about, keeping such a coyl about the Churches,
that were fallen from what they were at the first, when you well know, that
before ever you can apply any of these Scriptures rightly to your purpose, you
must make your Parishes in the first forming like those, viz. visible Saints
either resolve to speak home to your question, or say nothing. Either you must
say that a Church may be formed up in its first Constitution of visible Saints,
and visible wicked, or else of visible Saints; the former I think you will
never affirm, if you own the latter, as I think you do.

I earnestly entreat you to show and prove that all the Parishes of this Nation
in their first division into Parishes were visible Saints, except you do this,
all parallels between you and Sardis, Corinth, etc. will never help you; if you
say they were all Professors of the true faith, at their first constitution,
and so fit matter, which I think is all that can be said. I answer, those that
at their first constitution were for the most part abominable, disobedient,
and to every good work reprobate, they were not all Professors of the true
faith, but the 8432. (as I think) Parishes of this Nation, at their first
constitution were for the most part such. Ergo; the Major is undeniable, for
works and words are to be joined together, to the making up of a true
profession. The Minor I prove thus, If the greatest part of the men in the
mentioned Parishes, did at their first constitution only profess to know God,
and in works deny him, then they were abominable, etc. but they did so, Ergo
the Minor is manifest; the consequent is the Apostles, Titus 1. 16. more shall
be said of this in answer to the next Argument.

Now to the latter branch touching the Parochial Assembly, being conjoined in
Covenant, which is evinced by their constant meeting every Lords Day to worship
God together, which is an implicit Covenant.

Though I might well let this pass, for I deny a Covenant to be the form of the
Church, and therefore you have little reason to say this is our definition of a
Church, for though I own it in the first branch, yet not in the second; yet
notwithstanding, seeing you undertake to prove your Churches by this to be true
in form, they fall short of what they who make this definition intend by it,
and what it holds forth, I shall speak something to it, thus; This combining or
conjoining, etc. is by them who are called (though falsely) independently; the
form of the Church whereby first they know themselves from all other societies
in the world, and 2ly, whereby they are engaged to a special watch over each
other: Now this which you speak of, that you have, viz. A constant meeting
every Lords Day, etc. is neither of these: for first this meeting thus together
carries with it no note of the Church from the world at all; for seeing that
all may come to hear, and many in the world (that are not of the Church) may
come to one place constantly to serve God; how is this possible to distinguish
the Church and the world asunder they can never be known either by others or
themselves; and 2ly, this combining, conjoining, etc. ingages them together, as
members of one body to a special watch over each other, etc. Now to meet
together every Lords Day, etc. is no such thing, for if that be an
incorporating into the Church, if that be the form of the Church there needs no
more to enter a man into the Church, but coming to worship God every Lords
Day, which is ridiculous, for then a man may make himself a Member of any
Church whether they will or no; neither does this engage them to any watch at
all over each other, for if it engage one, then all that so come, and then a
man merely of the world out of the Church is engaged to watch over the Church,
and they over him, which is not true. Thus it appears, that for ought that you
have said, you have not had at the constitution of your Churches a right
matter, viz. visible Saints, neither such a form as you endeavored to prove.

You teach me what I should have proved, as if my argument concluded not the
question, not considering, that it is our Churches present, not Reply. Dr. B.
Primitive estate, which I undertake to vindicate what the men in the Parishes
of this Nation, were in their first forming, I have not now to say, you say
they might consist, yea you rise higher, and positively affirm they did consist
for the most part of visible wicked men, abominable, disobedient, and to every
good work reprobate; for which you give no proof but your own conjecture, yet
thereupon pass sentence upon all my discourse, that it is not at all to the
purpose, but I presume every unprejudiced man will judge you have clearly lost
your cause, if it can be made good that the member; of our Parishes are such as
the Apostolical Churches were, even in their state of degeneration, which you
so much harp upon, you deny, not but they were true Churchrs, and their Members
called Saints notwithstanding, and therefore if our Members appear to be as
good Saints as they were, their matter then is undoubtedly right, let them come
into comparison, there were amongst them very many (and in some of these
Churches by far the greater number) Schismatical, Heretical, Carnal, Proud,
Lovers of Pre-eminence, Supercilious, Censurers, Contentious Abusers of
Christian Liberty, Prophaners of the Lords Supper, Gluttons, Drunkards,
Pelly-Gods, disorderly Walkers, Idle, Busybodies, such as had not repented of
the Uncleanness, and Fornication and Lasciviousness, which they had committed,
Enemies to the Cross of Christ, Minders of earthly things, Contemners of the
holy Apostle their spiritual Father, having a Form of Godliness but denying the
power of it, prof^ssing to know God, but in their works denying him,
Abominable, Luke warm, etc. you cannot I suppose find worse then these in our
Assemblies, What they were at their first forming it makes no matter to me at
present; yet some being really Saints, such as you describe the whole Churches
are acknowledged Societies of Saints, the denomination being taken not from the
greater, but better part: so a Field where good Corn has been sown and some
grows, is called a Corn field, a Wheat heap though most Chaff, Gold Oar
though, more Dross than Gold; You say, there may be some in Gods favor in our
Congregations, but if an Holy, Humble, Wise, Exact Gracious conversation argue
men to be in the favor of God, an impartial Eye may easily discern more such in
a few of our Assemblies than in most of the Separate Societies. Yea, if you be
ingenious, you will acknowleage that the Holiness which m^st of all your
Members have (saving in two or three new Opinions) they learnt it in, and had
it from our Parechial Congregations; a little Practical holiness serves the
turn of too many when they have forsaken us and joined with you, you spend, but
might as well have spared a multitude of words in declaiming against our
peoples profession of the true Faith without works; the stress of the Argument
is not laid upon verbal profession: though let me tell you, if it were, it
might sink your Cause; for as true Faith gives being to the invisible Church:
so does prefession of the true Faith and not Moral Obedience give being to the
visible. Do you no read of many who upon their verbal Prosession were Baptized
by the Apostles themselves, and incorporated into the Church? Did not Obedience
of Faith make the Gentiles Churches? Romans 1. 5. 8. And if Obedience to the
Commandments be so necessary to the life and first being of a true Gospel
Church, that question would be resolved, What difference there is between the
Covenant of Grace and of Works? That which I affirm stands firm upon a sure
foundation, that where a whole Society professes all fundamental Truths though
the greater part be naught; yet if soms of them be Saints indeed, Christ owns
it for his Church; for their sake the Church of Sardis had a name to live, i.
e. consisted of verbal Professors, but it was dead; The generality were void of
Grace, and wicked Members; yet for the sakes of a few names that had not
defiled their Garments, Christ owns it for his Church, You say, God had some
such thing in Babylon. If you will say Babylon profosseth the true Faith, I
will say and prove it a true Church for the sakes of Gods People in it; the
reason of whose Evocation may easily appear, to be their devilish Doctrins
pertinaciously held, for which their damnation was at the door.

But you frequently urge the wicked ones in Sardis, and other Gospel-Churches
were visible Saints at first, and yet you bring no proof at all besides your
own presumption, that they brought more than a verbal profession to make them
so; or if you could evince they did, no prejudice would come thereby to my
Argument, which proceeds not upon that which you call first constitution; that
our 8432. Parishes (as you number them) were at their first constitution for
the most part abominable, etc. is also void of proof. I might moreover add that
our members may be called visible Saints because they bear the badge of holy
Baptism, and so are sacramentally holy every one of them as Je^usalem when it
was worser than Sodom, was called the holy Ci^^^; bu^ I forbear to press this
because you hold our baptism a null^^ie (I may happily ere long prove yours to
be so:) besides, the sanct^^y of that doctrine which we profess, may give us
the name of S^ints, comparatively or in respect of Heathens, in opposition to
whom the Apostle calls those to whom he writes Saints.

I perceive the name of Pa^ish is extreme distasteful to you, and all of your
way, which yet is nothing else in signification, but the confining of Churches
within convenient local limits: were is not that I find sundry learned godly
men whose treatises are, or may be in your hands, abundantly vindicating both
the name and thing: among others Mr. Hollingworth in his rejoinder to Mr.
Eaton, and Mr. Taylers Reply, chap 2. showing how Parishes are jure divino, and
how not, and Mr. Cawdin in his Review of Mr. Hookers survey, who gives six
satis^actory Answers to that first Negative Conclusion, viz. That Parish
precincts do not give a man Right, or make him more fit for a visible
Congregation, Chap. 2. p. 87. etc. I should spend some pains and time to stop
your mouth from quarrelling with the term, and make it appear that there is no
reason why the number of these bounds by whomsoever measured should offend any:
to their writings I refer you, and follow you from the matter to the form of a
visible Church, viz. Combination or Conjunction in Covenant which is in our
Assemblies, and is manifested by their constant meeting every Lords day* etc.
You say you denied a Covenant to be the form of a Church, which I remember not.
I am sure some of the seven that took your part in the dispu^ation who were
Anti-pedo baptists (and were looked upon by many hearers as Herod's taking part
with Pilate against Christ) did expressly own it* and the Argument proceeded
with your Approbation: and you now show your gratefulness to them by a tender
touch of their name, and justify their mutual Covenanting and consederating in
the fellowship of the Faith, as that which gives being and constitution to a
Visible Church. From the two ends of it, neither of which you say are attained
by our Peoples constant meeting, etc. which is untrue; for first our Assemblies
are hereby known from all other Societies in the world, Heathenish, jewish.
Mabometan, Popish, etc. who join not together in Gods true Worship. 2. The
Godly of our Congregations declare themselves hereby engaged to watch over each
other, and actually do so, yea the whole Body come to be instructed, reproved
and watched ever by their Pastors, and are admonished of their duty (which they
yield, assent unto, and are convinced, though the most fail in performance.)
But let our Brethren, whose cause you manage, speak, and they readily
acknowledge that we have the same Covenant for substance which themselves have,
and consequently are as true Churches. Read reverend Mr. Hookers survey, Chap.
4. thus the People of England in their Parishes constantly hold them to the
fellow ship of the People in such a place attend all the Ordinances, submit
thereto, etc. by such actions, etc. they declare by their practices, which
others by open profission, an implicit Covenant preserves the true Nature of
the Church because it carries the formalis ratio in it, by which a Church is
constituted* animplicite Covenant in some cases may be fully sufficient, as if
it consist of such who were children to parents confederate deceased, etc. The
like and fuller acknowledgement you shall find of all the Elders of New
England in their Treatise of Church Covenant, where they give the same Reason
which you so slight. Quoting Mr. Parker, whose words in his third Beck of
Ecclesiastical policy, are these, Non abest ea r^alis, Et substantialis*
quamquam Magis quam par erat implicita) Coitio in foe tus, eaque professio
fidei substantialis quae (Deo grata) essentialis Ecclesiae, idque visibilis huc
usque sartam rectam in Anglis conservavit. You see how little you have gained
by undertaking another Cause: which though you disclaim as yours in this, yet
you seem clearly to own in your Answer to the next Argument, whichas to
gratify you who cry out sovehemently against the gathering of our Churches
concluding that we are no true Churches, because we cannot prove that we were
at first rightly gathered; whereas it is clear enough that we might be true
Churches, though it could not appear that we were at first rightly gathered, as
men may be true Christians, of whose Baptism and first conversion there can no
clear accempt be given, and some socities may be named who were doubtless true
Churches of whose first gathering nothing can be found in Scripture.

The Argument proceeds thus.

Our Churches had a right gathering, both out of Heathenism and out of Popery;
therefore they are true Churches. Argu. 3:


1. Out of Heathenism, we were gathered 500. years before Austin the Monk, by
the preaching of the Gospel (and not at all Dr. B.
by compulsion) this is proved out of approved Antiquaries.

2. Out of Popery. I thus reason, If the Churches of this Nation were gathered,
or rather recalled out of Popery into the true Religion by the means that are
approved and appointed in the word of God, then they were rightly gathered out
of Popery. But the former is true, which is thus made good; the means approved
and appointed by God to gather or recall a back slided People, are preaching
and the command of the Civil Magistrate, this latter is evident by sundry
examples of good Kings, 2 Chronicles. 14. 4. 15, 12, 13, 30, 34, 32, 33. that these
were the means of recalling our people out of Popery, is acknowledged by all.

Answ: Its true, I say you are no true Churches, because you cannot prove you
were at first rightly gathered, and I say its also Answ.
as true some may be true Churches, of whose first gathering nothing can be
found; but what is this to your purpose? the question I. O.
is not, whether they be true Churches, whose first original cannot be known;
but whether those be true, who can know and find it, and yet are unable to
prove it true, I question not but was it to your advantage you could quickly
tell us of the first original of your Parishes.

To the first branch of your Argument, that these 8432. Parishes (of which the
whole land is) were gatheted by the preaching of the Gospel, I desire to see
proved. I deny not but here might be Churches gathered, but I desire to see it
proved, that they were gathered as now they stand, a whole Nation divided into
Parish Churches generally. If they were thus gathered by the Preaching of the
Gospel, then they were called from the World, after a sort from themselves, and
united together as one body, as all the Churches in the Gospel were. Now this
whole Nation was never called out of the World (visibly) what was the World out
of which they were called, when they were all accounted Members? And for others
in other Nations they were never amongst. 2. The World (the lusts thereof) they
retained in their hearts, coveteousness, pride, malice, every evil work visibly
seen in many of them. 3 So far were they from being united as one Man, as that
they were many of them deadly enemies one to another; sure if the Gospel did
gather, its effects would be seen.

To the second branch. This Argument is the same with your former, only you
alter the term from constituting to gathering, which in effect, is all one; for
you apply it to your first gathering out of Heathenism, which might be
understood of constitution, so that I do not well know whether it be added as a
proof of the former, or as an Argument of it self; but to follow you in your
scope.

First, I cannot see that you have had any constitution at your coming from
Popery: for there was no alteration of either matter or form, which are the
essential constitutive principles, and if you had any constitution, you had it
from Papists, for before you had none as now you stand; or if you had, it could
do you no good, as I shall show, Popery had so deeply infected those that had
been true Churches (and this among the rest which was one with Rome) that the
name and nature of your Church was lost, yea past recalling; for where the
Church was called the Spouse, the wife, the body, the house, the garden, the
Temple, the Zion of Christ; they come to be called* A whore, a mother of
harlots, a Babylon an habitation of Devils. an hold of every foul Spirit, and a
cage of every unclean and hareful bird, and whereas before the Church was
peaceable, and meek, and kindly, affectionate, gentle, etc. Now they come to be
a blood thitsty, adulterous whore, drunk with the blood of Saints: for in her
was found the blood of all that was slain upon the earth, insomuch that the
Lord cries out, Come out of her my people. Now we know whilst that People are
in a capacity of recovery the Lord calls not out, but to reform: nay, if they
were not past recovery, why did you come out from them, seeing you lay such
blame upon others for separating from you because you have some gudly, and so
there was in Rome, from whence it appears, that you could not keep that
constitution you had before (if you had any) therefore that constitution that
you had from them, which you still retain without any essential difference,
evidenced that if you be a true Church, Rome is too. Parishes were the first
seats of Popery, after of Prelacy, and now you endeavor to take them up under
the same Notion. First, they baptized all this Nation Infants, and there laid
the foundation, making all Christians (as they called them) and then by the
Laws of Civil Policy, convenience of situation etc. they divided this Nation
into so many Parishes, and counted all Members, living within the precincts,
bounds and liberties of such a place, of such a Church, though in works they
denied God. They came first in by Honorius Bishop of Canterbury, says Mr.
Saltmarsh bringing the learned Mr. Seldom for proof in his book, De decimis,
but how ever it is evident, that there was never such a thing as Parish heard
of in all the word of God, they never were of Apostolical constitution; there
was never such a thing heard of in all the Word of God, that ever a man should
be accounted a member of this Society, rather then of that, merely from
liberties of place, whereby it appears they were not of Divine institution, but
humane. Lastly I deny that to be the means appointed in the word of God in the
days of the Gospel for gathering of Churches, which you say yours were gathered
by; viz. the preaching of the Gospel, and the command of the Magistrate.

That is the way appointed and approved of by God that the Apostles went in
when they constiruted Churches; but the way that they went was by the preaching
of the Gospel only, without the command of the Civil Magistrate; ergo, etc.

The Major is undeniable, the Minor is proved, Asts ^. 41. and all the Churches
that the Apostles constituted were so constituted. 2. If the preaching of the
Gospel and the command of the Magistrate are to go together to the constitution
of a Church; then where men are wrought upon by the Gospel, they must stay till
the Magistrate commands, before they join to the Church; for what God has
joined together, no man ought to part: but they ought not to do so, for they
may join themselves the same day of their conversion, if there be no
Magistrate, Acts 2. 41. therefore these two are not to go together; Nay how if
there should be no Christain Magistrate to command (it is* possible) must a man
stay till there be one before he be joined to the Church if he believe? How if
there be none while he lives, what then? If you say as in our public Dispute
you did, when I urged the Apostolical constitution, that then there was no
Magistrate; this is a plain grant then, that you were not gathered as they
were; and I desire you to show your Scripture to prove, that then the preaching
of the Gospel was sufficient, then and after the power of the Magistrate is to
be jo^ned with it. Where has Christ showed you this? Is not the Gospel as well
able to effect its own ends now as it was then? I was as easy for God to have
turned the hearts of Magistrates then, had the Aposties wanted their power as
since. Are you true Ministers of Christ powerfully enabled from him to dispense
his Gospel, it will bring as many as be fit matter for the Church, you need not
make your supplement from the Word to the Sword. It is the commanding power of
Love that is to force into the Church of Christ; and all that are so wrought
upon, need not to be forced, they are willing in the day of the Lords power,
and to force those into the Church that are not willing, is a ready way to fill
the Church with Hypocrites, and to force by compulsion into the Church is
directly to contradict Christ's order in his Testament, and to make up a Church
of such matter as all Gods people ought to fly from.

If you say it is not constitution you apply it to, but recalling; I answer, it
is not recalling that can serve your turn; for you have never been called (as
you stand) or if you had it was lost, and a new foundation to be begun (as
above) or thirdly, If it was not, the case is the same; no power of the
Magistrate (though an Ordinance of God^n^^^ place) is to be exercised in
reforming Gospel Churches, see Rev. 2, 4* 5, ^, 1. 1, 2, 3, 4, 18 etc. See what
the Lord councels these backslided people too, to repent and turn to their
first love, and take* he Lords Council while he offered it, or else he would
come upon them (not with the power of the Magistrate to beat them to him
contrary to their wills) but with the power of his Justice to take away that
means of grace he had afforded them; to your places of Scripture, I answer
thus, we are not under Moses but Christ: we are to follow those examples in
this case that the Apostles and God himself in the New Testament has left us.
Consider Matthew. 17 5. Heb. 1. 1. Acts 3. 22, 23. Thus these Arguments being
answered, which should be as the foundation to bear up all the rest, and being
found too light, all the rest, were they 500. of them, will melt away like Snow
before the Sun.

Your inanimadversions is the reason why you see no difference between Reply
this and the former Argument, that was taken from the internal essential
causes, this from the external, instrumentally efficient: which might have been
spared, but for your importunate crying out Dr. B
against our first gathering: which I affirm to have been out of Heathenism
only by preaching the gospel, and out of Popery by that and the Magistrates
assistance: You desire to see proved that ever these 8432. Parishes were
gathered by the preaching of the Gospel into a Church; you may see sufficient
to give any reasonable man satisfaction in the Answer of the Elders of New
England (to which I formerly referd you) though their testimony sway not with
you, their intercited reasons may.

The ninth Question runs thus. Whether do you hold all the most of our Parish
Assimblies in Old England to be true visible Churches of Christ, with which you
may lawfully join in every part of Gods true Worship, etc. They answer first,
that they doubt not but of ancient time there have been many true Churches in
England, consisting of right matter and compacted and united together by the
right form of an holy Covenant. The Gospel was brought hither in the Apostles
times, or within a little while after. Mr. Fox his reports out of Guildas Te
tullian and Nicephorus to confirm this are at large related. 2. Though Popish
Apostasy did afterward for many Ages overspread all the Churches in England,
yet they believe God still reserved a remnant, for whose sakes he preserved the
holy Scriptures amongst them, and baptism in the name of the Trinity only; and
when God of his rich grace was pleased to stir up the Spirit of King Edward the
sixth and Queen Elizabeth, to cast off the Pope etc. though at first some
Sbires and sundry Parishes stood out against that Reformation for a time, yet
afterward they generally received the Articles of Religion agreed upon Anno
1562. which are published and consented to by all the Ministers endowed, with
the silent consent also of the People, and Subscription of the hands of the
chief of them, containing the Marrow and Sum of the Oracles of God, which are
the (...), the Eloquia Dei, concredited only to the Church. We do therefore
acknowledge, that where the People do with common and mutual consent gather
into settled Congregations every Lords day, as in England they do, to hear and
teach this Doctrine, and do profess their subjection thereunto, and do bind
themselves, and their Children (as in Baptism they do) to continue therein,
that such Congregations are true Churches. -- much more you may read in their
Treatise of Church Covenant, in their Answer to the eleventh Objection, where
they show, that if Christian Congregations in England were at the first
combined by Covenant, the Eternity of Gods Covenant is such, that it is not the
Interposition of many Corruptions that may arise in after-time that can
disanull the same, etc. That Objection also, that the Members of our
Parishionall Assemblies were not brought in by their own voluntary profession,
but by the Authority and Proclamation of the Prince, as also that Rome and the
Assemblies of Papists may go for true Churches also, you shall find there very
fully answered. The Name of Parish I perceive all along is stumbled at as
Popish (as are the names of Parsons, Vicars and Curats, which is the main, if
not the only Reason why some of you cast off both the English Churches and
Ministers) and yet the thing signified by the name is owned by Scripture, and
upon that account Mr. Hollingworth proves Parishes to be of Divine Right, to
whom I formerly referred you, and reason it self evinceth it most expedient for
the better performance of those duties which arise from Church Membership, that
the Members should cohabit or dwell as near together as conveniently they may.
It Is falsely charged upon as that we hold, Parish Precincts give a man right,
or make him matter fit for a visible Congregation; but the Question is of a
Nation or City Christian, whether the bounds of Parishes discreetly measured,
may not rationally be fixed, as most expedient for Religious Meetings, seeing
all cannot meet in one place; and if the Members of a Parish be visible Saints,
you will not say it is not lawful to limit the Congregation unto such, (read
the Review formerly cited) and that our Congregations generally consist of
such, though not in your, yet in a Scripture sense, has been in part, and
shall be more fully proved.

In your Answer to the first Branch I see nothing worth replying to,

1. The World out of which this Nation (when made Christian) was called, every
man's Eyes; but yours, easily see. 2. Many Members of the best Churches retain
the lusts of the World in their hearts, and 3: May be deadly Enemies one to
another, bite and devour one another, yea, and be Enemies to their faithful
Ministers for telling them the truth, and yet the effects of Gospel gathering
seen well enough.

To the second branch, 1. You say we retain the Constitution which we had from
Popery, which is very false; for we rejected Popery, embraced Gods holy truths
and joined together in true worship, and so were Matter and Form distant far
enough from Popish Rulers; you mean we retain the same Parish bounds which
Papists left us, to which sufficient has been spoken.

2. You deny the Command of the Magistrate (assisting the public Preaching of
the Gospel) to be a means appointed and approved of God for the gathering or
recalling of a back-slided People. That the Magistrates duty is to command, yea
and compel men that have forsaken their God, and the true Faith, to return
again to God, I proved by the approved examples of the good Kings undor the old
Testament, which you throw off very lightly, as if old-Testament-Proofs were of
no force; whereas the Apostle expressly teaches, that the Gospel Churches are
built upon the Prophets, as well as the Apostles, Ephesians. 2. 20. And that I may
farther convince you of your Error and Folly in slighting these Examples, 1.
You cannot but grant that what these good Kings did was by virtue of divine
warrant, Deuteronomy. 13. 5-11. 17. 2. Exodus 22. 20. 2. It will thus appear, that
these Rules and Patterns are binding under the New Testament, 1. Because we
find no Repeal of these Precepts, no Prohibition of these Practices.

2. This Power is of Common and Natural Equity, and that which is answerable
to the Moral Law binds under the Gospel. 3 This Power was established and
exercised upon Moral grounds, and for Moral ends, Deuteronomy 13. 5. 11. 4. We find
this very thing prophesied of the times of the New Testament, Es 49. 23. Zech.
13. 3.

5. The Apostle makes Rulers a terror to evil works, and Revengers to execute
wrath upon Evil Doers, without limitation, or exception, and you will not deny
transgressions of the first Table to be evil works. Moreover, you cannot but
remember that it is a Gospel-expression, Compel them to come in.

Your first Argument from the Apostles gathering Churches, without the
Magistrates help (there being no Christian Magistrate) proves the Power of God,
who can make his Word alone Effectual, but it proves not, that had there been
Christian Magistrates, they ought not to have aided by their authority, or that
the Apostles would not have called for their assistance.

The consequence of your second Argument is absurd. If I have Bread and Water
to preserve my life, must I not make use of these, because I want those other
means which God has appointed, and which, when he sees good, he will add to
these to make my life more comfortable?

Your conclusion of this Answer, is a triumph before the victory. My following
Argument, which you say, will melt like Snow before the Sun, may make a flood
which will sweep away your refuge of lies. James 3. 14, 15.

Those Assemblies wherein Christ dwells by the special presence Arg. 4. Dr. B.
of his Grace, are true visible Churches: but Christ dwells in the Parochial
Assemblies of England by the special presence of his Grace; Ergo the Parochial
Assemblies of England are true visible Churches. The Major proved, Rev. 1. 12,
13, Psalm. 132, 13, 14. Exodus 25. 31. 1 Timothy 3. 15. 2 Cor. 6. 16. The Minor
thus, Where ever the word of God is faithfully and constantly Preached to the
Ears and Eyes of people, and by them attended, and submitted unto, there Christ
is present by his grace: But the word of God is faithfully, and constantly
preached in the Parochial Assemblies of England, etc. Ergo.

Again, Where Christ by his Spirit in the Ministry of his word converts,
confirms and comforts his people, there is the special presence of his Grace:
But in our Assemblies Christ converts, etc. Ergo he is present with us.

Lastly, Where there is a settled meeting together in the name of Christ for a
true worship of Christ, there is Christ present: But there is such a meeting by
the Assemblies of England. Ergo.

The Major I grant, id est, 1, Where Christ dwells by the special Answ. 1. 0.
presence of his Grace, as they be golden Candlesticks, a house of God, a Sion,
there must needs be a true Church; for it is no more but as if you should say
thus, where the presence of Christ is with a society as they are a true Church,
there must needs be a Church, for all those expressions, Candlestick, Sion,
house, are but special terms, emphatically to set forth the nature of that one
thing the Church; for the Candlesticks are the Church, Rev. 1. 20. The House of
God is the Church, 1 Timothy 3. 15.

But now I deny the Minor, I deny that God dwells in the Parishes of this
Nation as a Church: I deny not but that God may be present with some, who walk
in the sincerity of their hearts to what they know; but that God dwells with
the Parishes generally (of which the Question is) as a Church, I deny.

And now to the proofs of your Minor, you argue thus, Where ever the word is
faithfully, etc.

I deny, that the word is faithfully preached in the Parishes of Answ. 1.
this Nation, (generally.)

2. I deny, that the word, such as it is, is generally submitted unto, except
by assent, and by submitting you understand a bare acknowledgment of the things
taught to be true, then the consequence is abundantly false; for the wickedst
men in the world, perhaps the Devils themselves, may assent and submit so far,
and no man will say such may make a true Church.

Lastly, I deny the Consequence, that wheresoever the word is truly preached,
there the presence of Christ is, as it is a Church. A bare denial might be
sufficient to a bare assertion; for you have given neither Scripture nor reason
for your Argument. But I answer first thus, If in many Parishes of this Nation
there be ignorant, idle, dumb dogs for the Ministers of those places, then the
Word cannot be faithfully preached there: But in many of the Parishes of this
Nation there are such, Ergo, the consequence is undeniable. The Minor is your
own words; For the first time I heard you Preach, and excepted against you, you
applied those words of the Prophet, Esaias 56. to some of the Ministers of this
Nation. Secondly, That word that they do Preach, such as it is, is not obeyed
nor submitted to upon your own grounds; for if the word be generally truly
preached, and generally truly submitted to, it must unavoidably follow that
all the men in all the Parishes of this Nation are faithful people, which is
false, because in their works they do evidently deny it: and to say they be
faithful people, is first to Preach plain contradictions, one while denouncing
Gods judgments against them as wicked unbelievers, another while when you are
put to prove them Churches, tell them they be faithful people, to sow pillows
under their elbows, and to say Peace when there is none, and making them to
trust in lying words that will not profit. Jer. 7. 4. Ezekiel. 13. 10.

Thirdly, I deny the Consequence, Though the word should be truly Preached and
assented and submitted to, that will not prove that place to be the place where
the presence of Christ is, as it stands related to the Church according to your
Scriptures; because the presence of Christ in the faithful Preaching of his
word, and also submission to, may be separable sometimes from the Church, and
therefore cannot be a note, seeing that which is a note of a thing to know it
by, must agree to it, and to it only, and at all times.

You argue further, Where Christ by his Spirit -- Converts, etc.

Answer, The special presence of Christ may be considered two ways, Either with
Believers simply, as such, being fit matter for a Church, or, Secondly, as they
be a company of Believers joined together in Gospel Order, being a Temple built
up by God for an habitation for himfelf through the Spirit. Ephesians. 2. 21, If
the presence of Christ be by you understood in this last sense, which is only
to your purpose, your first Argument standing in that form, then I deny the
Consequence; because that both Conversion by the Ministry of the word, etc. may
be separable from the Church, and performed out of the Church, as is so evident
it needs no proof.

Lastly, you reason thus, Where there is a meeting together etc.

Answ. I deny that there is such a meeting by the Parishes of England, as that
in Matthew. 18. for the presence of Christ there spoken of is, that when two or
three that are truly Godly are met together to desire something of the Lord, he
will grant their requests, because he at that time is present with them; but
what is this to the general meeting of the Parishes of this Nation, where many,
nay the most are openly wicked, some meeting for fashion because others do,
some for Custom because they have done so, to hear a Sermon, a Prayer, and then
depart, not knowing what the power of Godliness is? what (I say) that meeting
in Matthew. 18. is to this, is a riddle to me; and truly Sir, I wonder why you
left your Minor so helpless, adding neither one Scripture nor Reason to help it.

You grant my Major, but in such a sense as is to me non sense, when Reply. Dr.
B.
I say those Societies where Christ dwells by his special presence are his
Church, you say, true, if he dwells in them, as they be his Church; You might
have done better to have waved your Asses, and given us an instance of any one
Society where Christ was ever so present, that could be evicted by the Word
not to have been his Church.

Where ever the Kings Personal presence is, there is the Court, and so where
Christ's special Gracious presence is, there is his Church; the Scriptures
(which you speak nothing to) plainly hold forth this doctrine, that the
Assemblies where Christ is peculiarly resident, and gives out special tokens
of his grace, are his Churches; and that he is in such a manner present no
where else, in all the world. I reason thus, Christ is only visibly present in
his visible Church, therefore where he is discerned so present there is his
visible Church. Psalm. 63. 1, 2.

You deny my Minor, with the same limitation as you granted the Major, God
dwells not (you say) in the Parishes of this Nation as a Church. I will to
gratify, and (if it be possible) to convince you, make good, that Christ dwells
in the Parishes of this Nation, as a Church, by those three Reasons, evidencing
his presence amongst us; For the fortifying whereof, I was sparing in bringing
Scripture Proof, or farther reason, not because I had not store of both, but
because I judged it needless to light a Candle to the Sun; but seeing you tax
me for bare Asserting, you shall see me strongly Confirming each of the Reasons
(taking in your own restriction) First, I prove the Faithful Constant
Preaching of the Word, to be a note of Christ's presence with a people, as a
Church. Deus. 4. 7, 8.* So nigh unto them -- this special neerness of God is
proved, because they had the Law set before them, i. e. fixed among them. Psalm.
147. 19, 20. By Word, he means his will, revealed in the Scriptures, given to
his Church, as a most precious and peculiar treasure. Zech. 8. 23. The reason
why the Gentiles should join themselves to the Jews is, because the Word was
with them, we have heard by your Preaching, this was the great and glorious
prerogative of the Jews, which afterward they lost, and as soon as they lost,
it ceased to be a Church, Acts 13. 46. the Apostle witnesses this to be the
greatest privilege the Jews had. Romans 3. 1, 2.

If this be a peculiar privilege to the Church of God, to have a standing fixed
preaching of the Word among them; and if no People in the world can be named,
that had this ordinance of preaching, which were not Gods Church, then this is
a sure sign. Secondly, it appears, that his working saving Grace, by this
Ordinance, is as a sure sign, 1 Cor. 14. 24, 25. -- he will report that God is
in you (as a Church) of a truth. John 4. 22. Christ proves the Jews to be a
true Church: Because Salvation might be had there; out of the Church there is
no salvation (ordinarily) If you can show that Christ is present to Convert,
etc. in any Society where his word is faithfully and constantly Preached that
is not his Church, this Reason shall stand for invalid. Thirdly, the meeting
mentioned, Matthew. 18. you deny not to be a Church-meeting; therefore where a
Society meet to worship God by Prayer (as you expound it) or for the
Administration of Church Censures (as the place carries it) there Christ is
present as his Church.

Now that the Word is faithfully and constantly Preached in our Assemblyes, and
that Christ Converts, etc. by our Preaching, and that our People meet together
to pray in his Name, is manifest to all the world; that we have idle, ignorant
Ministers, in many Congregations, and a great multitude that want the power of
Godliness among us, etc. is acknowledged, but its well known as bad of both
sorts were in the Church of the Jews, and in the Apostolical Churches, which
notwithstanding remained true Churches, while he continued his presence, and
they met and joined in his true worship, till God gave them a bill of divorce,
and withdrew his presence, and they cast off Gods true worship, through
obstinacy.

Those Assemblies that are built upon the Foundation of the Arg. 5.
Prophets and Apostles are true Churches, Ephesians. 2. 19, 20. But ours are so
built, for they have the whole Doctrine of the Old Dr. B.
and New Testament for the infallible and immovable ground of their Faith,
whereby they subsist in Church Communion.

I deny you Minor, What you mean by these words (they have Answ. J. O.
the whole Doctrine) etc. is doubtful; if by having of it you mean Christ has
left this Old and New Testament in the world for the immovable ground of men's
Faith; that is true, but nothing to the purpose; for if so, it is left to all
men, and many men may also believe it to be so, and yet be so far from being
built upon it, as they walk and build directly from it: If you mean that they
have it in the practice of it, so as they practically build upon it, that is
false; for such Persons are built upon it, as the Apostle holds out in that
Chapter, such who were dead, but now alive, saved by Grace, such who were made
to sit in heavenly places in Christ. Now the greater part of the men in your
Parishes are such as were never spiritually alive, lying in their sins still
unquickned: therefore they are not built upon that Foundation practically.

When I say our Assemblies are built upon Prophetical and Apostolical Reply.
Doctrine, I mean there is no other Doctrine taught or owned with us, but what
has warrant from the Old and New Testament; Dr. B.
if there be show it; now that hence it follows we are therefore Gods true
Church is apparent from the Apostles Scope, proving the Ephesians to be the
Household of God, because they were so built; for that by building is meant
Owning and Confessing the truth, I prove from that of our Savior, Mat. 16. 18.
nor can you show any Society Confessing the whole truth of God, that was not a
true Church. The want of Practice which you allege in the greatest part of our
Members weakens not at all the force of the Argument; for the very same is
taxed by our Savior in the Church of Sardis, Rev. 3. 1. Thou have a name to
live and art dead; the generality of the members of that Church were void o^
Grace, and ungodly men, and yet Christ owns it for his Church in the beginning
of that verse; and how far the Church of Corinth, and other Gospel Churches
were from being built practically (in your sense) you have heard sufficiently,
and yet (blessed be God) we have in our Parochial Churches a competent number
of practical Christians, that walk exactly according to the rule of the
Gospel, for whose sakes, if you had the Spirit of Christ, you would (I
suppose) acknowledge our whole Societies to be his visible Churches.

That Church, that is the pillar and ground of truth, is the true Arg. 6.
Church, 1 Timothy 3. 15. but so is the Church of England, in respect of the
profession and maintenance of true Religion, which it both Dr. B.
supporteth as a Pillar, and makes it openly known to others, defending it
against all Errors, Contradictions, and Corruptions whatsoever. Revel. 2. 13.

You subtly alter the terms of the question, that the folly of your Argument
may not appear; instead of these words, the Parishes of this Nation, you say,
the Church of England, which you ought not to have done; the Argument from
these words (if it include the Question) must proceed thus; That Church which
is the Pillar and ground of Truth, is a true Church: but so are the Parishes of
this Nation in their maintaining and professing true Religion, supporting it as
a Pillar, etc.

Now Sir, The Minor is evidently false, the very naming of it is Confutation
sufficient, it being evident to behold, that the Parishes of this Nation, have
always been, and still are, inclinable to whatsoever their Teachers and Rulers
set up, without ever questioning the truth of it except here and there a man,
which is nothing to our question, it being of the Parishes generally; Look upon
them in the time of Popery, and produce one Parish Church (much less all) that
opposed the power of the Pope, but all inclinable to that wicked worship; so in
the time of Prelacy, how conformable to that, never once talking then of
Presbytery: and I believe as formerl^ so now if the power of this Nation should
enact that al should turn Independents, they would obey without any general
opposition, and within this few years would as little think of Presbytery,
which you think to be truth now, as they did then, when he was Counted an
Heretic, that believed not as the Church believed, Which was then the
scarlet-colored whore of Rome; and yet you let not to say, they have been the
Pillar of Truth, defending it against all Errors, which if true, Presbytery is
false, in that the Parishes of this Nation have born Testimony to two contrary
Religions (Popery and Prelacy) -- That Church that one time professes Popery,
and another while Prelacy, being variable, according to the times, in which she
lives, that Church is not the Pillar and ground of truth: But the Parishes of
this Nation have one while, etc. Ergo, and for Revel. 2. 13. When you have
proved the Parishes of this Nation Pergamus, I will Consider of it.

I know no advantage I should have gotten, if the word Reply. Dr. B.
Church had been permitted to stand instead of Parishes, but rather
disadvantage, because a National Church is as liable (if not more) to
exception, nor can I imagine how this could have hidden the folly of my
Argument, its folly to pick a quarrel; the Church is nothing else but the
Parishes, or if you will, that is the Mother, these the daughters: the Minor
proposition which you deny, will appear evident enough, by considering the
Apostles meaning of Pillar and Ground of Truth, and applying it to our
Assemblies. both which I will do in few words.

The House, or Church of God, is so called, in respect of the profession and
maintenance of the true Religion of God, which it both supporteth as a Pillar,
and makes it openly known to others; as Magistrates use to hang and affix
their Edicts and Proclamations on pillars, or other places of strength and
firmness; and here consequently is declared the Office and duty of the Church,
in holding and publishing the Truth, and defending it against all Errors,
Contradictions and Corruptions, and whatsoever Societies do this, its written
upon those Societies with a Sun beam, that they are the true Churches of Christ.

Now, its notoriously known, that the Articles of Religion agreed upon, Anno
1562. are published and consented to by all the Sea the answer of the Elders of
the several Churches of New England to the ninth Question p. 26. and Church
Covenant, p. 40.
Ministers endowed in every Congregation of this Nation, with the silent
consent also of the People, and subscription of the hands of the chief of them,
wherein they do acknowledge no rule of Faith or Manners but the holy
Scriptures, no divine worship but to God only, no Mediation nor Salvation but
in Christ only, no Conversion by Man's free will but by Gods free grace, no
Justification but by Faith, no perfection nor merit of works, with all other
necessary and saving truths upon which the Church is grounded and built, and
which also it holds forth and maintains; This alone abundantly evinceth,
that the Parishes of this Nation are the Pillar and ground of Truth. Besides,
these truths are daily in most Congregations faithfully opened and applied, and
whatsoever is contrary thereunto on the right hand or left convincingly
confuted; our Parishes therefore keeping Gods Records faithfully, are his
Registers, and consequently his true Churches.

Your declaiming against the inclinableness of our People, to alter with their
Governors, might have been spared, well knowing it was the practice of the
Church of Israel to do so, and the Churches of Galatia, how soon were they
removed from him that called them into the Grace of Christ, unto another
Gospel, to the admiration of the Apostle? Galat. 1. 6. And therefore it needs
be no marvel if our people so easily change from one Church-Goverment to
another, which they may do without prejudice to fundamental verity, which
though the Galathians overthrew, yet they remained true Churches. If you read
the Epistle of Christ to Pergamus understandingly, and compare our Church with
that, you will find, that we are not worse, and wherein any in that Church were
praiseworthy, for doing or suffering, you may find some in ours not short of
them.

From our practice, agreeing with the practice of the Primitive Arg. 7. Dr. B.
Apostolical Churches. Those Societies that continue steadfast in the Apostles
doctrine and fellowship, and breaking of bread, and in Prayer, are true
Churches, Acts 2. 42. but so do ours, Ergo.

I deny your Minor, and the reason why we separate from you, is upon Answ. J. O.
that ground; you have added neither Scripture nor Reason to prove your Minor,
but have left it destitute of all proof, you could hardly have brought a
Scripture in all the Bible, which in every thing, both in doctrine and
practice, makes so directly against you, as this that you have brought for you.

For first, your doctrine is contrary, secondly so is your practice; for
doctrine first: after that Peter had preached the Lord Christ, to these men, it
working upon their hearts, ver. 37. they cried out, What shall we do? the
doctrine of the Apostle to them ver. 38. is Repent, and be Baptized, and so
they were ver. 41. they were the same day added to the Church; but you, both
Ministers and People, go directly contrary, first, Baptize them at three or
four days old, and so make them members of your Church, and perhaps, twenty or
forty years after preach Repentance, just contrary to the Apostles doctrine,
and Gods examples. 1 King. 6. 7. Ephesians. 2. 21, 22. 1 Pet. 2. 5. First, you take
into your house, unhued stones, and unsquared timber, and twenty or forty years
after fall to squaring them for the building; Now, for your practice in your
fellowship, the powerful operation of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, after it
had workt them from the world, and from themselves, and one into another in the
unity of the Spirit, as one man, it is said ver. 44, 45. and all that believed
were together, had all things common, and sold their possessions, etc. And
chap. 4. 32, 34, 35. and the multitude of believers were of one heart, and one
soul; neither said any of them that ought that he possessed was his own, etc.
But your fellowship is directly contrary, one sortfed with all delicious fare,
clothed with gorgeous Apparel, and pride abominable, and the other sort one
company working and toyling more than they be well able, and glad if they may
be set on work, and all to get a few clothes and food, and yet cannot get
enough to satisfy, they being tormented by the oppression of the rich, that as
the Lord says, their faces are ground, and their burdens are almost
insupportable, the other sort begging from door to door, which is miserable to
see in that Nation, where many vainly spend so much in one hour as would
relieve many a poor creature ready to perish with cold, and famisht with
hunger, all which is evident by lamentable experience, and yet you have the
boldness to compare your Parishes with those in Acts 2. betwixt which there is
as much difference, as betwixt light and darkness.

Those that continue not in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship, etc. are no
true Churches; but the Parishes of this Nation continue ^ot, etc. Ergo, they
are not true Churches; the Major is your own by the rule of contraries, the
Minor is Evident by that which has been said.

You render us a reason of your separation from us, which whether it will hold,
when God shall ask you Who has required this Reply. Dr. B.
at your hands, you have just reason to question; groundless separation, and
Church-division, being as great a sin as Adultery or Theft. Our Blessed Savior
and his Disciples separated not from Assemblies, whose teachers and members
were worse than ours, read Matthew. 23. nor can you find any command or example
in all the Scripture, for separating from Societies that hold all fundamental
Truths, and join together in Gods true worship, as ours do. The doctrine and
practice of the Apostles in Baptizing Jews or Heathens, brought within the Pale
of the Church, professing their Faith and Repentance, and desiring to be sealed
with this Sacrament, for the strengthening of their Souls in this Faith, as
these here did, is the doctrine of our Churches; our doctrine and practice of
Baptizing Infants of Believers, is so far from being directly Contrary to the
doctrine of the Apostles (there being neither here nor any where else any word
of theirs forbidding to baptize Infants) as that there is very clear warrant in
this very place to Baptize such Infants. For the Apostle makes it his Argument
to them to be willing to receive Baptism, because the promise is made to them
and their Children*and, to as many as the Lord our God shall call, and to their
Children, this must needs be understood, or else the promise to Believing
Gentiles is not of the same Latitude, as it is to Believing Jews. I presume,
you will acknowledge, that the Covenant of Grace is as fair and full to these.
Now, if the Promise be made to Believers and their Children* the Command must
reach, not only to them, but to their Children also; running thus, be Baptized
you and your Children, for the promise is made to you and your Children, if
otherwise, this that was intended to be an effectual motive, would have been an
effectual disswasive, and deterred Parents from accepting Baptism, and
renouncing Circumcision, to which initial sign their Infant-Children till now
had right, having privilege of Church Membership as well as Parents, which by
this acceptance they must lose, and be cast into a condition like that of
Infidels. Which loss to the Church by Christ's coming seems to be no less than
of denial of his coming in the flesh. Moreover, the Apostles practice in
Baptizing whole families (a part whereof, and the greatest part for the most
part, Children are) immediately upon the parents believing, is a warrantable
pattern for the practice of our Churches. Your objection that there is no
express mention of Infants Baptized in those families, notwithstanding your
selves will take liberty to believe, that many were Baptized, of whose Baptism
there is no mention made in Scripture (the twelve Apostles for instance) nor is
it said, there were wives, or servants, in those families.

You do not well, to call all Infants, unhued, and unsquared Timber, have you
never read, what the Scripture says of Infant-Children, born within the bosom
of the Church? Esaias 65. 20. The Child shall by an hundred years old, that is,
he shall be as well instructed by Gods inward teaching (according to that
promise, Esae. 53. 14.) As if he had lived under the Churches teaching an
hundred years. And if some Children be timber hued, and squared, for the
Kingdom of Glory (Mark 10 14) why should it be thought a thing incredible with
you, that they be squareable for the Kingdom of Grace? Moreover, that place in
1 Cor. 10. 1, 2. If duly considered, more than probably proves, that it was an
Apostolical practice to Baptize Infants born within the Church, if not, it will
be difficult to make the Apostles Comparison of the two Churches, and their
Sacraments, and subjects thereof, to run parallel.

Your pleading for Anabaptistical Community, I think not worth replying to, as
neither your declaming against the hardheartedness of some of our rich members;
you will find as bad, or worse, among the members of the Churches Apostolical,
read 1 Cor. 11. 21, 22. and Jam. 2. and 5.

We are not therefore overbold to compare our doctrine and fellowship, with the
Primitive; degrees of Purity, in doctrine and practice, we easily yield them
above us; But the same Truth we hold fast, and will not let it go, we teach no
other doctrine, have fellowship in no other worship, Ergo, we are true Churches.

Those Christian Societies that have the true Ministry of Christ Arg. 8. Dr. B.
set over them, for their Pastors, and Spiritual Rulers, are true Churches,
Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. But so have the Parishes of England. Ergo. That the Ministers
of England are true Ministers, appears by their ordination, which was, by
laying on of the hands of the Presbytery; Secondly, by their abilities both
(...), and (...), 2 Timothy 2. 15. Galat. 2. 14. Thirdly, by Gods blessing on
their endeavors and labors, 2 Cor. 3. 1.

I deny the Minor, in the proof whereof you forget your self; you should Answ.
I. O.
say thus, that the Parishes of this Nation have a true Ministry of Christ set
over them; and then the question is, Who set them? you say, it appears first
by their Ordination, etc. I answer, your Ordination is false, and that upon a
double account, and seeing, you either will not, or cannot prove it true, but
only barely affirm without proof, I will give you the grounds of my denial.
First, the Presbytery by which you were ordained, which is the Bishops, now it
is undeniable, they had their Ordination from the Pope, and I am sure, he had
his from the Devil. Now, the Devil ordaining the Pope, the Pope the Bishops,
the Bishops you, how can you be true Ministers by him, that was none himself?
how the Bishops could confer that power to you that they never had themselves,
is a mystery? you hold that Ordination is Essential to Preaching, now except
you be able to prove your personal succession of ministry from the Apostles,
and that they do lineally succeed without interruption, your Ordination is
false, for except there be a personal succession uninterrupted by heresy, or
whatsoever else may nullify a Ministers calling, from the Apostles time to this
present, for if there be but one who when he ordained was no Minister (or not
ordained) all that were ordained by him are no Ministers, if Ordination be
essential; now, if there should be a personal succession, this draws with it a
perpetual visibility of a Church, which when and where it is to be found in the
dark times of Popery, I desire to see, for though there were Godly men, yet not
a visible Church with a right-ordained and ordaining Ministry. Secondly, were
it granted that all the Bishops were true Ministers, Lineal succession, etc.
That as you were ordained, I deny that you were right set in those Parishes (if
they were Churches as they are not) according to Ephesians. 4. for First, he must be
enabled with abilities from God for that work, Ephesians. 4. 8. Romans 12. 6. 1 Cor.
12* 11. Together with Grace to walk suitably thereunto, 1 Timothy 3. 23. tit. 1,
6, 7, 8. Secondly, being thus fitted with abilities, the Church that is in want
of Officers, seeing such Men fit for the work, are to Elect such Men for the
Service they are enabled to perform, Acts 14. 23. They ordained i. e. they
Elected and Chose, so the word ordained is put where the Scripture speaks
expressly of Choosing, Acts 1. 22. So says one of your own Divines, they made
them by voices, the matter went to suffrages, which could not be betwixt Paul
and Barnabas, Election by most voices, or lifting up of hands, in token of a
suffrage, had place only amongst a multitude assembled together, so Acts 1. 23.
They, the Church, appointed two, and although the Lord showed by lot, which of
the two, yet it was the Churches Act, to reduce it to two, so Acts 6. 5. The
Argument will hold good from the less to the greater, if the Church must choose
a Deacon in the time the Apostles were present, and an inferior Officer, much
more a Pastor, that they were so highly concerned in, and it is contrary to all
reason, that the Church should be debarred of the choice of her own Officers,
after which Ordination by Imposition of hands, Acts 6. 6. only to signify the
setting apart of that Man to that which he is chosen to. In the Apostles time,
the Holy Ghost was given by it, but now as the Miracle so the Mystery is
ceased, and if it be used to that end still, it is false, the end being ceased.
Now you were set in these Parishes by the Bishops clean contrary, like Men
minding directly to oppose Christ in all they did; for first, when Men
proceeded to such degrees in the Universities they made them Ministers, in that
they had attained to so much literature, and not only in regard of their having
received abilities from God, with grace to walk up thereunto, which only ought
to be the ground upon which they ought to be judged fit for that work* as
appears from hence, in that they ordained many that were ignorant sots in the
knowledge of the things of God, that with all their wit could not tell how to
make a Sermon in their way of sermon* making, except they could patch up an
hours talk out of others works, and then come and read it to the people, which
is no Preaching; they had better bring their great books where their Sermons
are made to their hands, and read out of them: for First, It would save them
much paixes. Secondly, It would not cozen their hearers. Thirdly, It would not
be robbery to their owner; and so far have many of them been short of grace to
live holy lives, which is as absolutely required as gif^s, 1 Timothy 3. 3. and
Tit. 1. 0, 7. as that experience shows their works are abominable. Secondly,
as they went upon a wrong ground, so in a wrong manner: For first, they made
them Ministers before they had a flock to Minister to, which was ridiculous,
seeing that Pastor and Flock are Relates; the one gives being, and the
Essential Constituting Cause to the other, and if it be foolish to say, a Man
may be a father and have had no child, a busband and no wife, it is also as
foolish to say, a Man, a Minister, a Pastor, without a flock, the like reason
in both: So election by the Church which is to give the very being to a Pastor,
in relation to the Office he is to perform, so as without which he may not
perform the work, this is altogether left out, and a violent intrusion by the
help of the Patron (a thing unheard of in Gods Word) is come in its stead, and
Ordination which is to be a solemn setting and Confirming of such a Man into
that work he is chosen, being the last, this is made first, and Christ's order
directly changed. First, from hence it appears, that the Ministers of this
Nation are not rightly set into the Office of the Ministry, and so their
Churches no true Churches: and what help your other two Reasons will afford
comes now to examination; You say by their abilities (...), and (...), and then
by Gods blessing on their endeavors. I answer, if these be particulars, to wit
of some of the Ministers of these Parishes, they include not the Question,
which is of all generally, but if generally all the Ministers of these Parishes
of whom the Question is, I deny that they are generally able to divide the Word
of Truth, as our Translations render it, for if they be, you did very ill to
call them dumb dogs and greedy dogs as you did, they are so far from rightly
dividing the Word of Truth, as that the Word of Truth is a Mystery to them, as
daily experience shows, and what this Exhortation of Paul to Timothy, study
to show thy self, etc. Is to prove, that all the Covetous, Ignorant, Drunken
Priests of this Nation are able to do so too, is a Mystery to me; the like may
be answered to the next, what blessing is to be seen in the labors of such
Men, I know not, where like Priest, like People, almost generally for where
they have an Ignorant drunken Priest, such commonly are the People, as it is
easy to instance in too many, and what is the words of Paul, 2 Cor. 3. Ye are
our Epistle etc. to prove that there is the like effects by the Ministers of
the Parishes of this Nation, generally upon their hearers, as was by Paul upon
the Corinthians, I can in no wise see, and truly Sir, I must tell you, that I
cannot but think that cause to be bad, that is fain to make use of such poor
proofs to hold it up, viz. That the Ministers of this Nation generally are set
by Christ in these places, and yet many of them visibly abominable, that have
nothing to do to take Gods Word into their mouths, seeing they hate to be
Reformed, and that all these are able rightly to divide the Word of Truth, and
that God has blessed their Labors, which is so evidently false that the naming
of it, is confutation sufficient.

You did, or might have heard from my mouth, a full discourse, Reply. Dr. B.
in vindication of the Ministry of England, and of the lawfulness of their
Ordination: wherein all that you have here objected, and much more, was fully
answered, You have therefore no reason to say, that either I will not, or
cannot prove it true, your self, or friends, have the Notes at large, which you
may remember, were publicly produced the next Month day after the Sermon was
preached. Two things I shall lay down, as to the charge brought against our
ordination by Bishops. First, That the Bishops, by See joint consent answer to
the 4 objection against the whole body of our Assemblies p. 19.
whom we were ordained, cannot truly and properly be called Antichristian,
because they held the truth of doctrine, and prof^ssed all the fundamental
Articles of the Christian Faith, many of them have written powerfully against
P^pety, and suffered much for defending the Truth of Christ against Antichrist,
some of them yet living, such Gospel Ministers against whom Envy it self
cannot except, fulfilling the Word o^ God, by fidelity of dispensation, and
sincerity of Conversation. Let all such places of Scripture be Consulted where
Antichrist is described and you will find him always marked out by his fall
doctrine; though therefore it be confessed, that in the Authority which our
Bishops had, and the exercise thereof, there were something Antichristian, yet
it is as unchristian, to call them Antichrists, upon that account, as to call
you an hypocrite, because there is something of hypocrisy in you. Secondly,
Suppose them to be indeed Popish and Antichristian, it will not follow that the
ordination we had from them is so. It is confessed by all, that this Nation had
not the light of the Gospel, and consequently the ordination of
Gospell-Ministers from Rome, but from Jerusalem, even in the times of the
Apostles, or soon after; and though the succession of this ordination has
passed through all the times of Popery since, and the ordination of our first
Reformers was from men of the Popish Religion, yet is not the rightfulness of
our vocation to the Ministry hereby Nulled; the Scriptures themselves,
Baptism, and the Articles of our Creed, have all passed through the Papacy to
us, and yet they cease not to be true Scriptures, true Baptism, no more does
Ordination; Ministerial Acts are not at all vitiated, much less made null,
though they pass through the hands of the worst of men. Scribes and Pharisees
were worse than naught, Judas was a Devil, Math. 23. 2, 3. John. 6. 70. Acts
done by virtue of Office may be just and allowable, though the Men and their
Religion be naught. You are not ignorant of the instance given of Popish
Landlords, and Judges, whose Leases and sentences are not therefore
Antichristian? So in this Case, Ordination is an Act of Office, and derived
from Christ, and is not Popish, though it be executed by Papists. He that
thinks Christ's Ordination better for the Man that confers it, is justly thought
to incur the danger of that Curse denounced Jer. 17. 5. Much more may be said
to stop your mouth, but that so much is written already, that all our
adversaries are never able to resist.

Touching the exception against our entrance, that we were not thosen by our
People, but presented by Patrons, many things have been Answered that may
suffice to give satisfaction to any sober minded. First, That the right of
presentation that patrons have, was given first by the Peoples free consent,
and therefore the choice they make may be accounted to be the choice of the
people. Secondly, The Law of our Land in the worst times required, that People
should have the same Election for substance which you plead for. Thirdly, Many
of our Ministers were chosen by their People. Fourthly, The faithful in many
Congregations by their glad receiving of Ministers placed by Patrons, and
submitting themselves willingly to their godly directions, at least by taking
no exception against them, consent to their entrance. Fifthly, Though it be very
unfitting, that People (if fit to choose) should have a Minister thrust upon
them, yet there is no clear Scriptureevidence, that Ministers must be chosen by
their People, the meaning of that word in the Acts (...), can be no more but
this, that the event of the Lot was approved by the common consent, and no
marvel, because it was determined by God, but hence it follows not, that it
was their choice to accept or refuse him for an Apostle, or if it did follow,
what is this to ordinary Ministers?

To that in Acts 6. not to say as some do, that it might be the Apostles
indulgence to the People, Certain it is, that an example without a precept,
makes not a constant Rule; again, from the Peoples Election of Deacons, to
their Election of Ministers, the Consequence is not valid, as it is not from
the Election of a Mayor to the Election of a King. That place in Acts 14. 23.
seems most potent, but the word there (...), is not strong enough, because
it is used to signify any Choice whatever, though made by one alone, Acts 10.
41. (...), the Apostles were Elected by Christ alone, Mark 6. Moreover, the
word is used by Ecclesiastical writers for to signify Imposition of hands,
which no way belonged to the People, but was always referred to the Apostles
and their successors 6. Suppose it necessary, yet it is Evident enough that
there may be some entrance into the Ministry sufficient, where the People at
first have not made Election; as in Case they have not knowledge of their
right, or have not been suffered to use it, but yet afterward yielded
themselves subject thereunto. 7. Those that Consider how the Office of High
Priest in our Saviors time was bought and sold, and the succession ordinarily
broken, and yet how valid Acts done by them were to all intents and purposes,
will be abundantly satisfied that these allegations, to null our Ministerial
Office, are lighter than vanity.

The other two Reasons to prove our Ministers to be sent of God, are such as
you threaten to examine, but finding them too strong to deal with, you leave
them, but leave not to cast filth upon his Faithful Laborers, because there
are many unfaithful ones among them; as if the Priesthood under the Law were
made null, by the ignorance and wickedness of a multitude in that Office: If
there were but a tenth of dexterous dividers of the Word of Truth in our
Assemblies, and of such whose Ministry God has blessed with Conversion of
Souls, it might suffice to prove Gods approving the Ordination, which you so
vehemently inveigh against; you will not own one of all our Ministers to be
sent of God, how able and holy, and successful soever, which shows your
miserable shifting off the force of the Argument, because the word General is
in the question, which you as miserably Misunderstand, as if it included all.
The Text in Timothy clearly shows, that by dividing the Word of Truth aright,
Gospel Ministers approve themselves to God, and that such as do so, are called
of God. And that in 2 Cor. 3. is a like manifest declaration of a lawful
mission, for as much as the Apostle brings it to prove his extraordinary
calling of Apostleship; to which I add Gods own Word, Jer. 23. 22. Nor can you
give an instance of Gods honoring any Prophets or Ministers not sent by him,
whose labors he ever blessed with the winning of souls.

Those Christian Congregations, that seeing their defects and Arg. 9. Dr. B.
Corruptions, labor after Reformation, are Christ's true Churches; but so do
the Congregations of England, Ergo*

I deny your Minor, I deny that the Parishes of this Nation Generally Answ. I.
O.
see their defects and Corruptions. For first, there is amongst all diversities
of Religion in the World, but one that is only right. Secondly, There is in
this Nation a great many, perhaps half of the Ministers and Parishes, that
stand in their hearts for the Government of Bishops, that is now put down, and
the reason why both these Ministers and People are not so active as others, is
not for want of will, but power to execute their will, for had they power
according to their will, you should find the Parishes of this Nation, so far
from being generally for that which you call Reformation, as I believe, you
should see Presbytery, as well as all others besides their own, as soon put
down, as their Common Prayer, Surplice, Hood, Tippit and Altar, etc. This being
so evident, that it needs no proof, Common sense proves it, from whence against
your Minor I thus Reason^ although I utterly deny that Presbyterian Government
which you would establish to be right, yet in this place I will give it to you
to see of what advantage it will be to you) thus, that which you would reform,
those defects and Corruptions that you would mend, are such as prevailed in the
time of Prelacy, when Bishop were in their pomp, and as you would reform it to
that which is commonly called Presbytery, now those that were commonly called
by the name of Cavalliers, of which there were many whole Parishes Genera^^y,
these think which you Reform from is Truth, and that which you Reform to is
false, your Reformation is their deformation, and that which you count to be
Corruption and defect, that they count to be truth, and would as willingly have
all that they have had, as you to have the contrary; this being evident, your
Minor is apparently false; for how can the Parishes of this Nation Generally
see their defects and corruptions, and endeavor a right Reformation Generally,
when that which one Parish would reform from, that another Parish would reform
to; if it be said, that many whole Parishes really see their defects, and
desire to mend, I answer, whatsome Parishes of this Nation see is nothing to
our purpose; the Question in dispute is of the Parishes of this Nation
generally.

You discover much Ignorance, in making every diversity of Reply. Dr. B.
Judgment and Practice in point of Church-Goverment, a diversity of Religion,
difference among Christians, in higher matters, and much nearer the foundation,
hinders not but they may be of one and the same Religion; and so Episcopal men,
Presbyterians, and Independents, nor do any of these cast off
Antipoedobaptists, as men of another Religion, but pity their folly, in
cutting themselves from Gods Churches, by denying all besides their own
Societies to be true Churches.

You mistake much, if you think I intend in my Argument the desire and endeavor
of the whole body of our People in all our Parishes for a right Reformation,
the greater part in all times have been backward to good, but if you go through
all the Parishes of England, you will find very few where there are not some
whose faces are Sion-ward, and these with a very great number of Ministers in
all quarters, earnestly desire, that in every Congregation there might be set
up a Gospell-government.

You seem to me clearly to grant my Major proposition, and to yield that there
are some of our Parishes who see their defects and corruptions, and labor
after Reformation. If you will acknowledge, that these (yea but one of these)
are true Churches, I will say, it argues ingenuity in you: and farther give you
satisfaction, that through the tender mercy of our God, it is with England at
this day, as it was with those fields our Savior speaks of, John 4. 35. That
they are white already to harvest, ready to receive a Gospell-Reformation, and
had been ere now in a more blessed case, had not those of your way hindered the
work; which I pray that God would lay it to your heart, that it may not be laid
to your charge.

Drawn from Cant. 1. 7, 8. They that walk in the footsteps of Arg. 10. Dr. B.
Answ. J. O.
Christ's ancient flock are true Churches: but ours do so, Ergo.

If you mean Christ's ancient flock recorded in the holy Word of God* your Minor
is denied, this is the cause we separate from you, because you have and do
tread in such steps and paths, as we cannot find in Scripture, but in bypath
of the inventions of man; and I cannot but wonder why you left your Minor
destitute of all proof, seeing you cannot but know that it is always denied,
whether you think it is without dispute, or whether you think if you should
have compared the Parishes of this Nation with the Churches of Christ mentioned
in the Scripture, your proof would appear weaker than your bare affirmation, or
whether you thought barely to affirm was best, that so a bare denial might be
returned, truly I cannot judge, sure I am, those that write to satisfi^, do not
in disputable matters only say it is so without proof, for to me a bare
affirmation without Scripture or reason, is proof but weak; had you but proved
your Minor, the Controversy had been ended, but seeing you have not* I must
yet say, they that walk not in the footsteps of Christ's Ancient Flock, are no
true Churches; this is your own by Rule of Contraries; but the Parishes of this
Nation walk not, etc. Ergo, as is already proved from Acts 2.

I thought it superfluous here to compare our Churches with Reply.
the Churches of Christ mentioned in Scripture, having done it already: if you
look upon the Flock of Christ before his Incarnation, you will find, that our
Congregations walk in the steps of Abraham, of his Faith, as in other things,
so particularly in this (which I look you will storm at) that they bring their
Infant-Children to the sign of initiation appointed for the Church, in the
administration under which they live: of the Faith of Moses, and all the
Prophets, following their doctrine and pious practice too.

If you say, most of our People deny the power of Religion, I answer, more of
the Church of Israel did so.

2. Look upon the Flock after Christ, and you will find ours follow their steps
both for doctrine and discipline, the former none denies, and the substantials
of the later we had, even in the Bishops reign, as Learned and Godly Mr.
Hilderson has made good against the Brownists; and for that which is styled
the Presbyteri^n Government, if you read without prejudice, the Jus divinum
Regiminis Ecclesiastici, you will find proof sufficient that That lays truest
Claim to divine right, and they that embrace and follow it, walk in the steps
of Christ's Ancient Apostolical flock. Your common Allegation against this, viz.
That our Members are not Baptized Believers, and therefore we walk not in the
steps of the Ancient Flock, is notoriously false. For first, that our Members
are Believers, and many of them Real ones, you will not deny. Secondly, and
that they were all Baptized in their Infancy you will acknowledge, at least
they had water applied to them in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
which is the right form of Baptism. All that you do, or can object, is, that
they were not a fit subject of Baptism: but our Saviors Words in his
Commission, according to your own interpretation of them, confute you, for
Infants are a part of a discipled Nation; yea, they are Disciples, Acts 15. 10.
holy, 1 Cor. 7. 14. and Church Members, as learned Mr. Baxter has proved by
27. Arguments, and by denying Infants of Believers to be a fit subject of
Baptism, you deny (as was lately showed) that Christ is come in the Flesh. For
if he be come, certainly the Church is no loser, but a gainer by his coming:
but by denying to Believers Infants this privilege, the Church is a loser by
his coming.

The tenth Argument shall be ad hominem, and an additional to a branch of the
second.

If your societies be true Churches, then so are ours: but the former is true.
Ergo, the latter. The consequence is only to be made good. If all that is good
in your Churches you had it from ours, both persons and things, then the
Consequence is certain, Because, nihil dat quod non babet: but all that is good
in yours, etc. Two thing make persons good; First, Profession of the true
Faith; Secondly, Correspondent piety: the former of these you have all along
yielded, the latter likewise you have granted our best members have, but the
best of them you must acknowledge you have gained from us, for as much as
immediately upon their departing us, you Baptize them, which argues they are fit
matter for your Church*

1. The Consequence of the first, and also second Syllogism framed Answ. J. O.
to prove the first, is false. For, we might constitute our Churches, of such
matter as we gained from you; and yet ours true, and yours false; because ours
was constituted of such matter as appeared all good, and yours was constituted
of such as was for the greatest part bad. For though it be most true, that
nothing gives that it has not, yet it is also as true, that something may be
gained from another that the loser retains not. An Army of Soldiers may
consist of honest men and wicked; and the honest may be gained from the wicked;
and now upon your Consequence, the wicked may prove themselves as good as the
honest thus; if all that is good in you, you had from us, then if you be honest,
we are honest.

But all that is good in you, you had from us. Ergo, if you be honest, we are
honest.

If this Consequence be true, viz. That if all that is good in one Church they
had in another: then if one be true, so is the other; I will upon your own
principles prove Rome a true Church Thus:

If you be true Churches, Rome is true; but the former is true, Ergo.

The Consequence is only to be made good: if all that is good in the Parishes of
this Nation you had from Rome, both persons and things, then the Consequence is
certain; because, Nihil da^ quod non habet: but all that is good in yours, etc.
The Consequence is your own, the Minor is evident, that you, both persons and
Ordinances came from Rome; and thus you may see what your Logic helps you to.

Now, let us see upon this Consequence, which way you can prove your selves
true. and Rome false; and I am confident, if you speak to the purpose, you will
answer for me against your self.

But if by these words [had from ours] you should say you mean not only to have
a Company out, but to have them made good, and fitted by those from whence
they be taken, if thu be your meaning, then the Minor of your second Syllogism
is contrary to your self for sure, you never fit men to say, that your
Ministry is false, your Church and Ordinances false, and that ours is true,
and that they ought to Separate from you, and come to us, if not they were not
fitted by you for us: for thus they come to us. Thus the Consequence of your
Argument carries with it no Concluding force, and the Conclusion falls to the
ground; for if all that is good in us dia come from you (as it does not,) Yet we
might be true, and you false. But secondly,

I deny your Minor, viz. That all that is good in us, came from you; Two things
you say, make persons good: profession of the true Faith, and Correspondant
pretty, the former I yielded the latter granted. I Answer, I never granted any
such thing; I have granted, and still do; that there may be some in the
Parochial Assemblies, that may be godly People; but that they be professors of
the true Faith, as it is fully banded out in the Gospel, I have alwais denied.
So not yielding the former, not granting the latter.

Our Baptizing them immediately at their departure, you say argues, we judge
them fit matter, etc. I answer,

It Is not true, we Baptize them not Immediately at their departing you, but upon
considerable time of trial, as may be convenient to judge, that their
Conversations, together with their principles, in owning of ours, and disowning
of yours, and all others, so far as they be contrary to truth, is real.

Next you say, for things, the pure word and Sacraments rightly Dr. B.
administered they had in our Church: you will not (I know) object want of
discipline, because you teach, that not to be necessary to the being of a
Church.

If it was, many of our Churches are not without it: the power of the Keys
(you well know) is exercised in many of our Congregations. That which you
Object is want of true Baptism, and giving the Lords Supper to a promiscuous
Company.

I prove they had true Baptism thus; If the Baptism they had in our Churches,
be better than that they had in yours, then it is true Baptism; now that it is
so, I thus evince. That Baptism that is dispensed by an authorized
Administrator is better than that which is administered by such as are not
authorized: but our Baptism is so administered, so is not yours. That our
Administrators are lawfully authorized, you heard me prove at large in a full
discourse, and then I took away all material objections against our calling,
and manner of Entrance into it, to which I heard you then said nothing, though
the day after, you mentioned one of the objections I put, viz. That we had our
Ordination from the Bishops, they theirs from the Pope, he his from the Devil,
but to this I gave two answers: viz. That our Bishops were not Antichristian,
because they had truth of doctrine. Secondly, If they were, yet it makes not
our calling null; the Reasons at large you have in your notes: if you please to
deal faithfully in overthrowing them, I shall take it thankfully. Evident it
is, that our Administrators are set apart by solemn Calling, and Ordination,
for the public Ministry; and that such only may baptize, appears Matthew. 28.
18, 19.

As for you, or any of yours that administer Baptism, who say, you have
authority from Jesus Christ, I wouldfain, I could never yet see, that Question
so frequently put to you, anwered to the least colorable satisfaction, I
entreat you to do it, viz. How came you by this authority from Jesus, to
Baptize, immediately, or mediatly? If you say immediately, you must either show a
new Commission, or make it appear by an immediate Calling, your names are put
into that only written Commission, (so you call it) And if your calling be
extraordinary, let me ask you as the Jews did Christ, John 2. 18. whereby it
may appear, that you do these things by divine authority; show the gifts of
tongues, miracles, interpretation of tongues, etc. An extraordinary call never
wanted the evidence of Extraordinary abilities, or qualifications, in one kind
or other. If you say, your Calling is mediate from the Church of Christ, then
our demand is, whether your Call came from a Church in order built up,
according to the true Gospel Platform; or from a Company of Believers out of
Gospel Order, i. e. ungathered; you will not say sure from the larter, because
you deny the Ministers of the Church of England to be a true ministry, because
they were not Called by a true Church, i. e. a society of Baptized Believers,
and put into order according to your way: if you should say, you had your Call
from a Church ungathered, you would proclaim your Calling to be Antichristian,
from your own principles; and yourselves Scihsmaticks by separating from a true
Ministry. If you say, your calling is from a Baptized Congregation, then the
Question still is, whether this Congregation was of your own, or some others
gathering. If you gathered them, then you gathered without Call, for none can
elect till they be Baptized, and in a way of Gospel order.

If the Congregation that Chose and Called you, was of another gathering and
Baptizing, then we ask who Called than man to gather and Baptize, and so up
higher; you must needs find out some one that was a baptized person, and called
by a Baptized Congregation, by whom the first Administrator in England was
Baptized, from whom to derive it successively.

If you can find such a man, yet (you know) two scruples remain still, which
you are desired to remove; the first is, How that Baptizer had his Call, and so
backward to the first, and he (it seems) must either be one who Baptized
himself, or one who rested contented with his own Infant Baptism; but this you
hold null, and for that you will not say, there is the least color in
Scripture, or if neither of these, then he must prove himself sent of God, to
begin a new Institution, as John was, even more than a Prophet, for, this way
was not till 1500. years after. The other scruple is this, by what authority
that man so called, Baptized the first person that was Baptized in England,
seeing to Baptize is an act of office, and power, and no man can be a lawful
Officer, or Administrator, unless elected to that authority by baptized Persons?

I need not acquaint you how you are pressed with these Questions: and the
result that is gathered, viz. That you have no mission from God, or his Church,
but Satan has filled your hearts with blind zeal, and sent you abroad to
profane this holy Ordinance, and to lead people in the ditch; that you are
wandering stars, and subverters of unstable souls, such as have fed upon ashes,
etc. but I will make no such inference, but expect that you either justify
your calling, or repent you of your Practice.

First, we neither have had the pure Word taught, but instead thereof J. O.
Answ.
they are the Commandments of men; Nay many Parishes from whom we have received
members, have been so far from having the pure Word taught, that their teachers
have been Ignorant, Idle, dumb dogs, as said your self, and such as know not
well what preaching is, as said Dr. Grew.

Neither yet have we had the Sacraments rightly administered; for the first,
instead of Baptizing a Believer, according to the Mar. 16. 15. 16. Mar. 28. 19,
20. Go ye Disciple i, e. Make them Scholars or learners. See Luke 14. 16, 27.
Institution of the Lord Jesus, and the practice Joh. 4. 12. Act. 8. 12. 13. 37
etc.
of all his holy Disciples, that are recorded in holy Writ; you have sprinkled
a little water in the face of an Infant; that has been false in the Subject,
viz. an Infant, instead of a visible Professor of the Laws of Jesus; false in
the manner, viz. Sprinkling instead of dipping, accoraing to the signification
of the word, according to Christ's own Mat. 3. 16. Act. 8. 38.
example, and his holy servants, and according to one end for To. 6. 4.
which it was Instituted; and false in one Principal part of the end, it being
by you most applied as a Scal of grace; when mostly it is a signification of
Mat. 28. 19. Baptizing into the Name (so the Word) which frequently signifies
profession. Ma. 10. 22. Jo. 15. 21. Act. 5. 41. Revel. 2. 13. etc. So Paul 1
Cor. 1. 13. 15. Were you Baptized into the name of Paul? i. e. Were you in your
Baptism caused to devote your selves into the profession of Paul, or rather of
Christ? which principal end of Baptism is wholly evacuated by the Baptizing of
Infants.
profession made: And for the administration of the Lords Supper, it has been
so far from being rightly administered, that whilst we were amongst you, it was
administered to visible, abominable, cursed Creatures, directly contrary to the
Holy Ghosts Command, 1 Cor. 5. 11. whereby we through you, in that you
separated not the precious from the vile, were made partakers of other Jer. 15.
19. Hag. 2. 12, 13. 1 Cor. 5. 6. Psalm. 119. 99, 100. Rev. 18. 4. 2 Cor. 6. 15,
16, 17.
men's sins, being leavened by their wickedness; that had not the Lord through
his Commandments given us more understanding than all our teachers, and caused
us to obey that word, Come out of her my people, we might also have stayed to
have been made partakers of her Plagues; and to this part of the Objection, you
are so far from removing that you do not once set about it.

Now, how will you prove the Baptism we had from you to be good, comes to be
examined? You say, if the Baptism they had with you be better than that they
had with us, then it is true: but the former is true, Ergo.

The Consequence is weak and feeble, and carries with it not the least show or
shadow of truth, as a weak capacity may easily see.

For one thing may be bad, and another may be better, and yet both naught.
Suppose I should grant by way of Concession, that your Baptism is better than
ours: do you think you would not be pitifully troubled, by virtue of that
only grant, to prove by sound Arguments yours true: Ours may be bad, and yours
a little better, and yet both short the rule, for ought this Consequence
forces; thus the Consequence being feeble, the Conclusion falls of it self: and
all that you here say (which is more than you have said to eight of your other
Arguments, where it seems, you think you have some great advantage) might be
let pass, for I am only to attend such Arguments as you have to produce to
prove your selves true, which this in the least does not; Yet nevertheless I
deny the Minor, viz.

That your Baptism is better than ours.

Yours you say is better, being dispensed by a Lawful Administrator, and ours
not, which you have already proved, etc.

That your Administrators are lawfully authorized, I deny, and though I heard
you in your Lectures endeavor to prove it, and answer Objections that were
brought against you, yet in my apprehension there was not any thing said by
you, that had any strength to sway with the Judgments of those that were not
prepossessed with prejudice against whatsoever on the contrary part should be
said.

And though you say you heard me then say nothing, but the day after, etc. Yet
others can witness, that when you had done speaking, I declared my self
unsatisfied, touching what was delivered, and I began with the beginning of
your Sermon, intending to have gone through it; for in my apprehension, you
spoke little that was true that day; you after some few words, pleaded your
weariness, etc. told me, that if I would dispute, there was one that should do
it for you, and so went your way, and I demanded of the man, if he would
justify what you had preached, which he seemed to be willing to, and so we
began where we left before, viz. Whether the Parishes of this Nation were right
for matter, etc. and from that I came to what you preached about the truth of
your Ministry (of which you say, I said nothing) you saying your Ordination
came not from the Pope, but Christ. I desired him to show how he could be able
to prove your succeeding from Christ, successively down to you, through all the
dark times of Popery, and not from them? did the last true Minister before
Popery, live to set Ordination on foot after Popery; or was there any
successively in the time of Popery, and not of them (which I desired to see)
and if neither of these, but that you were made Ministers by the Bishops, and
they by the Pope, and he by the Devil, how could your Ordination come from
Christ? seeing,

No man can confer, and give out to another, what he has not in himself. Sure,
Christ never authorized the Pope to ordain Ministers, to which he (to my
remembrance) made no Reply: but said, he had not studied of those things, etc.

Immediately, upon which you came in again, demanding what you had preached that
was not true. And I told you what, which was, that those who were not Ministers
in Office, might not publicly preach: which I told you was false, and gave you
my grounds from Scripture to prove it; and after some small debate, you again
departed, and would not stay to hear what I had further to say; therefore to
say, I then said nothing, is not true.

But to this you say, you gave two Answers. First, that our Bishops we not
Antichristian, because they had truth of doctrine. Secondly, If they were, it
makes, not our Calling null. The reasons I have in my notes at large, etc.

For what you have writ I am ready to answer. Reply.


But for what you preached I am loath to meddle with: for though I did take the
notes of your Sermon, yet by reason of the mighty crowd of people, I could not
write one perfect sentence (having hardly liberty to breath) but only the
beginning* and end, in some imperfect characters, which whilst partly in
memory, partly before me, and you ready to rectify what I took amiss, it served
for the present, though now useless.

However you go about to justify the wicked in their wickedness, saying, the
Bishops were not Antichristian: I think they were cried down under that notion.
Do not declare it to the world now, that you cried them down under that notion,
as Antichristian, not that they were so indeed, but being the easier gotten
down under that name, you might the sooner get into their places. I know not
what you mean by, they had truth of doctrine: whether they had it left by
Christ in his Word, or whether they had it in the knowledge of it. Sure I am,
they practiced contrary, as appeared in their imposing so many abominable
things upon the consciences of men, that were Popish, human, and merely of the
Invention of the Devil: to root out the pure Ordinances of Christ, intrenching
upon the Kingly office of Christ, which is the only Lawmakers to his Church;
and not only so, but perverting, and hellishly tormenting the Saints of Jesus,
that bore testimony to the Regal office of Christ, opposing and persecuting
Christ in his members. If these men were not Antichristian, I know not where
Antichrist will be found; If you say, they were not all such, but some of them
were godly, I answer, the office of them all was Antichristian, else why did you
not put down only the bad ones, and let the good ones remain? their calling to
their office was all alike, and the Pope was the Ordainer of them all;
therefore if you were all Ordained by the good ones, as you were not, the case
is not a whit the better, seeing they Ordained not by goodness, but by Office;
which was alike in them all.

Secondly, you say, if they were Antichristian, it makes not your calling null;
and the reason that you gave (as I remember) was, that some things may be
wanting in the worship of God, and yet not all null, as you instanced; I
answer, You hold Ordination Essential to preaching, so as a man may not preach
without it, now the Office of the Bishop being false, and they in that office
Antichristian, having never received call to that Office from Christ, or his
Church, but originally from the Devil, how these can by that Office, make a
true Minister of Christ, conferring that power to another, that they were never
possessed of themselves, is a mystery.

This is not only a want of some, but all things, whereby the work should be
lawfully performed.

Evident you say it is, that your Administrators are set apart, etc. And that
such only may Baptize, Mat. 28. 18, 19. to that I answer.

That an Ordination you have it is true, but it is performed by such as have no
authority from Christ, for what they do. Neither yet do they do it according
to Christ's Order; as I have already proved, in answer to the 5. Argument,
whereunto I refer the Reader, being unwilling needlessly to multiply words, and
how you shall be able to justify your Call, manner of Entrance, etc. against
those exceptions, when I see it published (for before I must not by our
agreement) I shall in Convenient time give the world, and you, an account of
the strength or weakness thereof; and that such may Baptize, whom Christ
Authorizes, in Matthew. 28. I grant, but that Christ Authorizes only Ministers in
office, by Ordination (if you was such as you are not) I utterly deny; for that
text holds forth the plain contrary, as presently shall be showed.

Now for your Call, where you make so many intricat turnings, and needless
tautologies, many of your Quaeres being for substance one, I shall first show
by what means, and how we had our Call to the performance of this Ordinance;
and then shall answer what of yours that makes against, and what is in yours
not contradictory to the thing in hand, when rightly showed, shall be left as
not material; thus --

The mystery of iniquity from the Apostles time beginning to 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7.
work, and after their death more and more to creep into the Church, and so far
prevailed by degrees, (through the subtilty of the Devil) that the pure Laws
of Jesus came to be eaten out, and the inventions of man came in their room, so
far prevailing, till the Lord Christ's Prophetical, Regal, and Priestly offices
were justled out, and cunningly undermined, till at last the man of sin did get
into the Temple of God, showing himself that he was God, Verse 4.
revenging the contempt of his wickedness, and making spoil of the precious
Saints of Jesus that testified against his Abomination, till they were drunk
with the blood of the Saints, that ceased not to cry, How long Lord holy and
true, etc. then were the Inhabitants of Rev. 6. 10.
the earth made drunck with the wine of her fornication, and all the world
wondered after this Beast; in so much that she began to Chap. 17. 2.
say in her heart, I sit a Queen and I am no Widow, etc. thus being at her
pitch of glory, darkness, ye thick darkness, and a dismal Chap. 18. 17.
gloomy night, was spread over the world: for the neglect of keeping close to
the Word of Truth the Lord suffered an Eclipse (by the interposition of man's
inventions betwixt his truth and their sight) to darken the world, till his
pleasures was to appear, and then like the appearing of the day, darkness and
the clouds of Ignorance began to dissipate, and he by the brightness of his
coming, did reveal by degrees the mystery of iniquity, and sweetly Verse. 2. 8.
enlighten his servants in the knowledge of his Truth, by that infallible Word
the Scriptures of Truth: helping them by his Spirit to a right understanding
thereof, and by degrees giving forth the knowledge of his will, each age
receiving more than other, as Waldenses, Wickliff, Hus, Luther, etc. still more
and more increasing till it was by some seen (not immediately, hence here is an
answer to your first demand, neither yet mediatly by the help of men, hence an
answer to the second) by means of the Scripture, the Spirit of the Lord,
helping to a right understanding thereof, that they had been cheated of that
blessed (though much despised Ordinance) of Baptism, and a contrary intruded in
its room, that was right neither in the Subject, Manner, nor End; and these
people seeing it their duty to practice it, and knowing of it to be the will of
Christ, that it should be performed, Resolved upon the work, to reassume this
Ordinance. Now the Call to the knowledge of it was thus, The Spirit of the Lord
inlighting, by means of the Scripture, to the understanding of his Will.

They Call to the practice of it thus.

A company of believes, assembled in the Name of Christ, willing to follow him
in the way of his Ordinances revealed in his Word: and yet seeing their want of
a personal succession, and yet knowing it their duty, and the will of Christ
it should be performed, did appoint one that was unbaptized, to reassume and
set again on foot this Ordinance of Christ.

And if any one question the lawfulness of this, further than I shall have
occasion to vindicate it from such exceptions as here make against it, I refer
him to a Treatise entitled, A way to Zion sought out, where all that are
willing to see, may First, from abominable, damnable absurdities that will
follow, if the Saints in light (though they want a personal succession of this
Ordinance) seeing themselves deprived of this or any other Ordinance, may not
take it up without a Lineal succession. Secondly, from Scripture plainly
proved, where all that will not wilfully shut their eyes may see.

Now what of yours seemingly makes against this is, first,

If you should say, you had your Call from a Church ungathered, you would
proclaim your Calling Antichristian, from your own principles, and your selves
Schismatics, by separating from a true Ministry. Answer.

Let the reasons wherefore we judge you false Ministers (in relation to the
external Call which we are now only speaking of) be briefly laid down, and also
the grounds of our reassuming this Ordinance, and then let the Judicious judge,
whether upon the Judgment that is given of the first, the like may be given
upon the latter, upon the same Principles.

We judge you false, First, because the very Original of your Call came from
the Devil, he sending the Pope, the Pope the Bishops, the Bishops you; and
seeing you still retain, and stand Ministers, by vertur of that Call, and yet
no man can communicate that to any other, that he has not himself: and the
Devil never being Authorized by Christ to ordain Ministers; and yet you having
no other, must needs, (we think) be false.

Secondly, for manner of entrance; that Church that is in want of a Minister,
is to elect such a man as she shall judge sit; which man thus chosen, is to be
solemnly ordained by the approbation of the body for whom he is to officiate.

And you were made Ministers, (such as you are) not only by them whom Christ
never authorized to ordain: but also before ever you knew what flock to
Minister to, which is a ridiculous foolery, seeing Pastor and Flock are
relates, the one gives being and the essential Constituting Causes to the
other, and then get to the patron, or to those in whose power it was to
establish you, and make the place sure, and then intruding your selves into the
service of those, demanding, nay forcing wages from those that never set you at
work, whereby we judge you false Ministers.

The other is this. A society of believers (as yet no Church in order)
assembled together in the Name of Christ, to reassume an Ordinance of Christ,
appoint one man for the performance of the work (not as a Pastor) but as a man
enabled by God, to be instrumental in the discovery of this Truth.

Now, whether there be the like reason, upon the same principles, to judge of
the one, as the other, I leave it to be considered. And which of these two, is
the rightlyest authorized, let all men judge. And how the holding that an
unbaptized person, in case of necessity (one rightly Baptized not to be found)
might Baptize, will prove us Schismatics, in separating from a true Ministry,
is to me a riddle, the unfolding of which belongs to the Learning of him that
does assert it.

Hence your first scruple may be removed, viz. how the first Baptizer had his
Call; being one who never did Baptize himself, nor yet rested contented with
his Infant Baptism; neither yet sent of God to begin a new Institution, as John
the Baptist was: but one enlightened to discover, that old, yet new appearing
institution unto us.

For if what you say was truth (as it is not, there having been some in all
ages, bearing testimony to this Truth) viz. That this way was not till 1500.
years after, there was no need of beginning a new Institution: for that Matthew.
28. 18, 19. is to last to the end of the world, whether men obey it once in a
thousand years or not; now whereas you demand, by what authority this first
man Baptized, seeing to Baptize is an act of office, etc. And no man can be a
lawful Administrator unless Elected, etc.

I Answer, by what Authority, I have already showed; and for Baptizing to be an
act of office, and so not not to be performed but by officers, I deny.

And the Scripture you bring to prove it, Matthew. 28. 18, 19. proves the plain
contrary, as is evident; for such as had received Abilities from Christ,
whereby they were enabled to Convert a soul to Christ, might Baptize such a
person so Converted. The Commission holds alike for both, Disciple and
Baptizer, etc. Now this Commission, though it was given to the Apostles, it was
not given to them as Apostles, but as Disciples, and in them to all others so
gifted, to the end of the world; as your self well know; and undeniable it is
that they were to Preach and Baptize, by virtue of Gift, and not by virtue of
Office, seeing these men were such as were never elected by any Churches, to
the Pastoral charge; for that was not Congruent to their Commission: the
Election of the people tying to the Church, by whom they were elected, and the
Commission sending them forth to all the word, to prepare matter for the Church;
whence it is evident, that such who can disciple men to Christ, may Baptize
such so discipled, disciple and baptize, etc. but some that are not Ministers
in office can do that, Ergo.

The proposition is evident from the words, the Assumption I suppose no man
will deny, except it be some who do endeavor to Monopolize Preaching only to
themselves, and stop the mouths of all others, though never so eminently
gifted, except they have served a prentiship to the same trade that they have
done, or else come under their Bishopping, by laying on of their hands, that so
they may ty them to preach after their fashion; which opinion is so gross,
that I am loath to spend time in confutation. Yet seeing, though you dare not
deny, but that all who have received gifts, whereby they are enabled to preach,
may; yet deny that they may publicly preach: and this preaching, Matthew. 28. is
a public preaching. I shall give you an Argument or two, to prove that.

If there be tolleration given by God, to all who have received the gift of
Prophecy, to Prophecy in the Church; Then there is tolleration given by God
to all who have received the gift of Prophecy to Prophesy publicly; but the
former is true, 1 Cor. 14 31. Therefore the latter.

This whole argument you have granted to be true, only you say, that Prophecy
was extraordinary; but that it was not, I thus evince. That Prophety is there
meant, that came within trial and Judgment; but extraordinary Prophecy did not
so; therefore that is not meant.

To this you Reply, that extraordinary Prophets doctrine did, Acts 17. 11. to
which I answer. That Judgment spoken of in the 14. of Cor. was such a judgment
as presupposed the Prophets might err; but this searching of the Bereans, to
see if the things Paul spoke were so, was no such thing. Therefore nothing to
the purpose, it only showed that Paul preaching, and alleging Scriptures, as
his manner was, thus and thus it is written and yet citing neither Chapter nor
ver^e, That they did seek to see if it was as he said: and did in no ways
presuppose, that Paul was liable to err in what he preached. Secondly, That
Prophecy in that place that men (that are gifted) are tolerated; That
Prophecy in that place women (though gifted) are forbidden; but extraordinary
Prophecy women are not forbidden, Ergo.

The Minor, viz. that women extraordinary gifted may deliver their Prophecy in
any place, I think no man will deny. And for the Major, viz That the same
manner of Prophecy, that the gifted disciples were tolerated, in verse 31. is
the same that women are forbidden, verse 34. is evident to all that will
Consult the scope of that place.

Secondly, we have an example in Scripture of such men preaching See also Acts
18. 28. If it be objected Apollos was an officer, 1 Cor. 1. 12. Answer: first,
It is not probable it was the same man. Secondly, If it was, the consequence is
bad to say, Apollos was an officer, when Paul wrote this Epistle; therefore he
was one when he preached in the 18 of Acts, knowing only the Baptism of John,
verse 25.
who were not Ministers in office, publicly, which work has had the
approbation of God, by accompanying these men in this work, with his holy
Spirit, making their preaching effectual to the conversion of Souls; Therefore
all who have gifts enabling them to preach publicly, may, by a Scripture
example, and the approbation of God concerning that thing.

The Consequence, I think no man will deny, that ownes the Scripture as a rule
of direction for us to follow. The Antecedent is evident in both branches:
First, Acts 8. 1. they, i. e. the Church, were all scattered and they thus
scattered, went every where preaching^ verse 4. which preaching was approved of
by God, in accompanying them in this work by his Spirit, Acts 11. 21. But to
this you object, First, that we cannot prove but that they were Officers; I
Answer, That we can evidently, first, it is said, they were all scattered, and
all thus scattered preached. Now all men know, all a Church is not Officers;
but to this you object; The word All, signifies not every one. Answer, true,
but where the Scripture says, All, except such as it excepts, with what
forehead dare any man say the contrary? It is in effect as much as to say, the
Apostle said not true; evident it is, Philip preached; Acts 8. Object. Philip
was an Evangelist. Answ. True, by gift, in that he brought the glad tidings of
Remission of sins by the Blood of Jesus, to the souls of sinners: but both he
and Stephen, Acts 7. by Office were Deacons, Acts 6. 5. by which office, they
had no more to do to Preach than any Disciple. Object. Saul entered into every
house haling men and women, etc. And devout men carried Stephen to his burial;
therefore not all scattered. Answ: There is never a syllable in the Text, that
proves this was in Jerusalem; but it might be in other places, whither they
fled for refuge; and for the burial of Stephen, that was before they were
scattered, for the persecution arose about the stoning of Stephen, Acts 11. 19.

But the last shelter that you are forced to fly to, from the clear Countenance
of this Text, is, that this was extraordinary, as David's eating that bread in
time of hunger, that at other times was unlawful. Yet necessity might justify
the action; to this I Reply, that some things, in case of necessity, may be
done, that at other times are unlawful: and that necessity justifies the
action I grant: but now there is not the like Connection betwixt persecution and
preaching, as is betwixt hunger and bread, a man in ex^reme hungar cannot well
forbear bread, but a man in time of persecution may forbear preaching; was it
lawful for these men to preach? it could not be persecution that could make it
lawful? what, though they were persecuted a thousand times, they might hold
their tongues for all tha; was it unlawful for them to have done it? nay,
rather of the two, it tied them to hold their peace, being persecuted for what
they preached.

Thus it appears, that all that can preach may; and such who can by preaching
convert a soul to Jesus, may Baptize him so converted, though no Minister in
office.

And whereas you say, no man can be a lawful Administrator, unless Elected,
etc. That Is apparently false; for, both Philip Acts 8. 38. and Ananias Acts 9.
18. Baptized, and were never Elected to that work. See but the natural face of
your assertion.

No man can be a lawful Administrator, unless elected to that authority by
Baptized persons.

But neither Ananias, or Philip, were elected so.

Ergo. Neither of these were lawful Administrators; the Major's your own, the
Minor is evident. Philip a Deacon, Ananias a disciple.

Thus your assertions cast dirt in the face of the Scripture.

Now for the inference that you say is drawn; that we have no Mission, etc. I
answer. I never yet heard any man, from such questions draw such inference, had
you but done me that favor, to have told me who they were, I should have been
ready to answer them. I have cause to suspect from whom it comes, and I fear,
themselves are the men, to whom every part of that result may with ease be
applied, but seeing you say you make no such inference, I am willing to let it
pass; it being you only I deal with.

Thus having answered this which you have most spoken to, I shall expedite an
answer to the rest of your Arguments, which it seems, you make less account
of, in that to some you have endeavored to add a little proof, and to some none
at all.

If the separated societies be not true Churches, then our Assemblies Arg. 11.
Dr. B.
are; for certain it is, Christ has some true Churches amongst us; and the
only question is, whether the Parochial or separated Congregations; but you are
not true Churches, which I prove by an Argument of your own.

Those Churches that are not righly gathered, are no true Churches; but your
Churches are not rightly gathered. The Minor I prove thus:

The way of gathering your Churches has no warrant in Scripture, Ergo.

I put you upon producing one precept or president in all the Scripture of
gathering Churches, out of Societies that hold and profess the fundamental
verities.

2. Those Churches that rob Gods people of their right, are no true Churches;
but so do yours; for you take away Churchmembership from the Infant Children of
Believers, in denying the Sacrament of Initiation, appointed for
Gospel-Churches, which was granted them under the former administration, and is
no where repealed but confirmed rather Romans 11. Acts 2. 39.

3. Your Churches want a right form, Ergo. The consequence is clear, because
form gives being. The antecedent is certain, because an express Covenant is no
where made the right form of a visible Church. If this be the right form, then
why are not Popish Churches true, there being such a Covenant between Popish
Priests and people?

If by separated societies you mean all that are separated from you, Answ. J. O.
the consequence may be good, otherwise not; There not being fullness enough in
the division: If you mean all, I deny the Minor, both of the first, and also of
the second framed to prove it, and also the Consequence of the third, and after
all, the result is, you put us too no proof that we are no true Churches, we
are not rightly gathered, the way of our gathering has no warrant in
Scripture, and that this is so, I put you to prove that it has.

This is the pittifullest proof that ever I heard man make, had I undertook to
prove your Churches false, and after three Arguments, drawn such a Conclusion,
you would even have hist at it, sure, your schools never taught you thus to
dispute. I had thought you had engaged to prove.

Sir, prove that you the Parishes of England generally hold and profess the
fundamental verities. Secondly, That it is unlawful to separate from a people
so professing, etc. And when I see it, I will return you an answer.

To the second, viz. that we rob Gods people of their right, etc. I answer. The
expression [Rob] is as unsuitable; as untrue; for we take not away that in the
night, nor secretly in the day, that which we are afraid to be taken with in
the light; but what we withhold, we proclaim and give, nay invite all to bring
in their evidence, That if they for Infants can lay just claim thereunto, they
shall be admitted. Sir, take heed you pronounce not sentence of Condemnation
against your selves: for I think was it material it might easily be made
appear, that you rob Goa's people of their right, and that in many things. But
that we do not rob Goa's people of their right you shall be witness, and your
self shall answer your self, and that may the soonest give your self and others
satisfact on: thus from the notation of the word Church, which signifies (you
say argument thirteen) a company called out from the world unto Christ, come
together upon that call, etc.

Whence I thus reason. If the word Church signify such a company, so called,
so come, then it is impossible for such who were never thus called, thus come,
neither yet are in a capacity to be of that company.

For words significant aris^ from the nature of the thing to which they are
applied, and where the answering of the signification of a word is not to be
found, there that word is improperly applied, as I think all men will grant,
and Scripture example is full; but the word Church so signifies. This is your
own, Ergo.

Now that Infants are not called out of the world, by the Word, come together
upon that call, etc. is undeniable. Therefore Infants are not of that Company.

Thus, if to deny Infants Church Membership be rebery, it is the Notation of the
Word Church, and your thirteenth Argument, that is the thief, Sir, you must
either repeal this thirteenth Argument, or it will utterly repeal Infants
Church Membership, and put you to prove where and when it was done; and for
Acts the 2. and Romans 11. where you say it is Confirmed, I answer.

When you have reconciled this thirteenth Argument, and
Infant-Church-membership together, and drawn your Arguments from Acts 2. Romans
11. to prove it, I will return you an answer.

And for your third reason, where you say, we want a true form, etc. I answer,
we make not an express Covenant the form of a visible Church, (as you well
know) therefore this makes nothing against us; we may be true Churches for all
that, if what you say be true.

Either our Congregations are true Churches, or there were none Arg. 12. Dr. B.
since Christ, and the Apostles; for what Churches can be showed that have come
nearer the rule in respect of Doctrine? and for Government, the Jus divinum
regiminis Ecclesiastici, And Provincial vindication, have sufficiently evinced
the Presbyterian government to lay just claim to divine Right. But the latter
is false, for the gates of Hell never did, never shall prevail against the
Church.

1. To say, that if you be not true Churches, there have been none Answ. J. O.
since Christ, etc. is confidently to dictat and Magisterially to set down,
without the least color of proof that which is so principal a Question betwixt
us; for we have abundantly offered to make good, that we come nearer the rule,
first in Respect of doctrine, than you; and for government, which you say is
sufficiently evinced in the Jus Divinum, etc. I shall pay you with your own
coin, and that may soonest satisfy; thus, your Presbyterian government has
been abundantly confuted, and the Independ^^cy of Churches, in Relation to a
sufficiency in herself, for the performance of all the Ordinances of Christ, by
the learned Mr. Hooker, in his survey of Church discipline.

Secondly, I deny that the latter is false, by virtue of that Scripture, (if
you understand it of the visible Church, which is only to your purpose) for the
gates of Hell may, nay has prevailed, yea overcome the visible Church, as the
Revelations abundantly makes manifest. Sir, I wonder you have not so much
foresight, as to see how upon your own He that can make it appear that this
place is meant of the visible Church, and that which is a true Church, shall
always visibly appear, will do the Pope essential service, he no doubt will
return him many thanks, he will undeniably prove Rome a true Church, because
Rome once only visibly appeared, keeping down all others.
principles, your own arguments wound your self. For, where was the visibility
of your Presbyterian Church in the midst of Popery (except you will say Rome
was it) where is the line of your succession? I doubt it is utterly lost, and
so upon your own interpretation of Scripture, you prove your selves false
Churches.

From the notation of the word Church, which signifies a Company Arg. 13. Dr. B.
called out of the world unto Christ by the word come together upon that call,
all are called externally and some effectually.

This Argument fi^rcely fights against nay cuts the throat of the Answ. I. O.
Causes it should defend; for the word Church, signifying such a Company so
called, so come, does utterly exclude all not so called, so come, being of that
Company; now beyond dispute it is, that the generality of People in the
Parishes of this Nation, were never visibly called out of the world, etc.
Therefore not possibly to be concluded of that Company. I had always thought
there had been a World in England, what are all the Carnal, wicked, covetous
persons in the Parishes of this Nation called out from the world to Christ? if
they have not as any man that has but the least spark of godliness may easily
see; how dare you apply this notation of the word to them? if this be not to
sow Pillows under all Arm-holds, making them trust in living words, saying, the
Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, so you the Church, Church Members,
faithful people, etc. I am much mistaken, Sir, take beed lest that fall upon
you spoken of, Pro. 17. 15. all you say called externally, some effectually,
Answer, if by external call you mean a bare call by the Preaching of the word,
without a visible submission thereunto, you are contrary to your self, which is
not of a verbal call simply, but of a calling O^t, and a coming thereupon unto
Christ, if you say they are visibly called out, etc. nothing can be spoken more
falsely, common sense proves the contrary, and what the effectual calling of
some is to prove that all are externally called out according to the notation
of the word, is to me a Paradox.

Our Churches are in Covenant with God, Ergo, They are true Churches, the
consequence is evident from Psalm. 50. 5. where the Arg. 14. D. B.
Prophet implies, that by being in Covenant with God, Men are really a Church,
for they have right to be an actual Congregation; the Assumption is proved so
abundantly by others, that I need say no more till they be answered; the sum is
this, we have the word ourselves, and the blessing of the Covenant, Ergo, we
are in Covenant with God.

I deny the Antecedent, That the Parishes of this Nation generally Answer I. O.
are Saints, who have made a Covenant with God by sacrifice, according to Ps.
50. 50. is most abominably false; the very naming of it is confutation
sufficient; he that justifies the wicked in their wickedness, is abomination
before God; and who those are that have proved, that the Parishes of this
Nation generally are Saints, that have made a Covenant with God by sacrifice, I
never yet saw attempted; the truth is, you have neither had the word (as you
ought to have had) nor yet the Seals rightly administered, neither yet the
blessing of the Covenant, and that this is so, is so abundantly proved by
others, that I need say no more till they be answered.

Those Societies that answer the Kingdom of Heaven in those Parables of our
Savior, where he declares what the visible Church Arg. 15. D. B.
is, they are true Churches; for his scope is to teach us by those similitudes
how to know the visible Church on earth; but so do our Assemblies. I will
instance in two or three of those Parables, first of the good seed sown in the
field, Mat. 13. 24. which because our Savior says is meant of the world ver.
38. you with many others deny the visible Church to be thereby intended; but
interpret it of the wider world.

But that Christ means his Church (his Field) scattered throughout the world,
appears evidently by the servants wondering at the tares, ver. 25. there had
been no place for this wonder, if that were his meaning, for who can wonder to
see the world full of wicked persons, I argue thus,

Those Societies that have good seed sown in them, and mixture of good men,
and wicked hypocrites, united in external Communion and Profession of Religion,
are true visible Churches; but so have ours, and so had the Apostolical
Churches, in Corinth for example. A second is that of the Draw Net, ver. 47.
Many in the Church not of the Church, 1 Jo^. 2. 19. this is apparent that in
the Church, sincere and hypocrites are gathered to profession and external
Communion, and where they are so, there is the Church, to the same purpose is
the Parable, Mat. 22. of him that had not on a wedding Garment, and that in
Mat. 25. of the 10. Virgins. Finally the Church is compared to a flower, where
there is Chaf mixed with Wheat; that which is objected, that the Church is a
society of Saints called to be Saints, is easily answered, the denomination is
taken from the better part i. e. all should be, some are real Saints.

To the first of these Parables it is apparent, it is not meant of the Answer
I. O.
Church at all, but the world, ver. 38. Christ himself interprets it; now
whether it be believed of Christ or you, Let all men Judge. Whereas you say we
interpret of the wider world, I desire you in your next to show if you can,
where Christ makes any distinction of wider or narrower world, or whether the
Church is not a people called out of the world visibly known from it, if you
cannot, you do not well in making such distinctions, where the Scripture makes
known, you say Christ means his Church his Field. Answer, That is as much as
you should say, his Church, his World, for Field is world, ver. 38. so you
confound the Church and world together as one, that has always been so
distinctly separated; nay this is also to confound your self, who say the word
Church signifies a Company called out of the world.

You say it appears by the servants wondering at the tares, and if meant of the
world, there had been no place for this wonder. Reply.

This it seems is that weighty reason. that persuades your judgment contrary
to Christ's exposition of his own words; There is never a such Word as Wonder in
the Text, they only asked the Question if he did not sow good seed in his Field,
and from whence came the tares; and that they might well do, from the
consideration of that precious Gospel of Peace Christ cast into the world, and
that deadly enmity hatched against is when declared; or if there could no
reason be given of this their Question. we must not therefore frame an
exposition of our own, contrary to Christ's express determination, for
similitudes carry not an equal Parallel in all things, but very many times:

That Christ means not the Church, I thus evince.

That which makes void the Doctrine of Excommunication, and makes Christ speak
plain Contradiction, is not the meaning of Christ in this Parable; but to
interpret it of the Church does so, Ergo.

The Major is undeniable, the Minor is manifest from the whole scope of the
place; for when the tares, i. e. wicked Men, ver. 38. did visibly appear, ver.
26. the servants said, will thou ver. 28. that we go and gather them up, the
Master said nay, ver. 30. Let both grow till the Harvest, which Harvest is the
end of the world, ver. 39. now what can be more plainlyer laid down in the
world then this, that if it be meant of the Church, no Min is to be cast out of
it till the day of judgment, though visibly wicked; and how does it make
Christ speak plain contradition, one while commanding ungodly persons to be
cast out of his Church, and an other while commending them to be kept in? Let
them alone, etc. thus the interpretation of this Scripture by you being false,
the Argument that you draw is from a groundless Construction of the words, and
so useless; now for all the rest if they be to be understood of the Church, its
such a mixture as is not severable till the day of judgment, and so
undeniable, not discernable to the eyes of Men; seeing those that appear to be
naught, are to be separated before that time, 1 Cor. 5. 2, 5, 7, 11, 13. 2 Cor.
6. 14, 15, 16, 17. With many other places to the same purpose; evident it is,
for that of the Draw net, ver. 49. to the end of the world was the time of
severation, and so the time of discerning, and of him that had not the wedding
Garment on, it seems the Master of the Feast only discerned; and for the ten
Virgins, the time of discerning the wise from the foolish, was when the
Bridegroom came. I readily grant, that in a true Gospel Church there may be
many in it that are none of it: many Hypocrites gathered to profession and
external Communion, etc. but then they must be such as to the eyes of the Church
undiscernable: for we see all along the Scripture by Christ's own command, Mat.
18. 15, 16, 17. If thy Brother trespass against thee, go and tell him of his
fault betwixe him and thee alone, and if he will not hear thee, take with thee
one or two more, and if he will not hear them, tell it to the Church, and if he
neglect to hear the Church, let him be to thee at a Heathen and Publican, and
thus the Apostle was careful to keep the Church visible, purer, Purge out from
you the old Leaven, says Paul, know you not that a little Leaven leaveneth the
whole lump, see and consider Haggai 1. 11, 12, 13: now you being such as are
and ever were for the most part visibly naught, cannot Answer those Parables,
if understood of the Church; true it is that many Churches in the Apostles
times had amongst them visibly bad, they being degenerated from what he was,
but they were to remain but for a considerable time of trial, to see if they
would be restored; and if they would not be reclamed, but prove contumacious,
they are to be delivered to that Kingdom from whence they For those which you
so harp upon, that was bad in the Apostolical Churches, and as bad as you say,
as yours, these were not fit matter for a Church, as such, for such they were
commanded to excommunicate, 1 Cor. 5. 5, 6, 7. and forbad to have Communion
with ver. 11, 12, 13. sure was unfit matter for the Church.
came; and for the objection that you say is so easily answered, the Church
being called Saints, the denomination being taken from the better part, I
answer, if you mean this if a Church at its first constitution, its abundantly
false, and you have spoken it without the least color of Scripture or reason.
I challenge you or any Man in the World, to produce one example in all the New
Testament of any one Church, that at its Constitution received one visible
wicked Man; and if not but all appeared Saints, then undeniable it is, that the
denomination arose from the visibility of sanctity that appeared in all, and so
it was as the Scripture plainly declares, to all that are willing to see.

If you mean it of a Church when degenerated from what they were, its nothing
to your purpose, because you for the most part were never visibly Regenerated;
it appears that the Churches after corrupted, retained the name of Saints, from
that visible sanctity once they had; and yet not past recovery to their former
Estate; for after they appeared past recovery, see what they may be called,
Mat. 18. 17. all you say should be, answer, true, therefore those that are not,
are as they should not be.

Some you say are true; but that does not show that those that never were are
to be accounted so; nor that those that never were are to be accounted Church
Members, though amongst the other; for then Babylon is a Church, and a society
of Saints, for some Saints may be, and have been there, Rev. 18. 4.

Those societies from which it is a Sin to separate, are true Churches, Arg.
16. D. B.
but it is a Sin to separate from our Assemblies, Ergo.

That Church for separation from which there is as little reason as there was
for separating from the Church, whereof Christ professes himself a Member,
John 4. 22. and so from the Church of Corinth it is a sin to separate from; but
there is little reason to separate from our Assemblies; compare our Churches
with the Church of the Jews in Christ's time for Teachers and Rulers, and you
shall find as bad of both as with us; if you say these Churches had a right
Constitution and gathering, I have proved ours have both.

The Minor of the first, and also of the second Syllogism, is denied, Answer 1.
0.
and were our separation from you only; for the evilness of you, it might
easily be made appear, that there is more reason to separate from you, then
either the Church of the Jews or Corinthians; You have been so far from proving
that Constitution true, that after you had endeavored it, and see my answer to
it, you then deny that you were to prove any such thing, see page the 2d.
Argument 2. and then page 6. at the Reply.
but the truth is, you yet never were a Church at all; you never having had any
Gospel Constitution, and where you say you have proved it, there I have
disproved it, and proved it false, where unto I refer the Reader, being
unwilling needlessly to multiply words.

Those Churches that have brought forth a multitude of Martyrs, Argument. 17.
Dr. B.
for the Causes of Christ against Antichrist are no Antichristian but true
Churches; that ours have so, is superfluous for me to prove.

Sir, I desire you in your next to prove, that the bringing over Answer. 1. 0.
of men to yield up their lives in the defense of some truths, (for these did
no more) is sufficient to prove the societies that so taught them, true
Churches; go throughout all the diversities of Religions almost in the world,
and you shall find some so taught, as were they called to it, would yield up
their lives, and Seal some truths of Christ with their blood. Rome it self I am
confident would yield many Martyrs for the Cause of Christ, in many real
truths; and though they could not be concluded Antichristian in that, yet they
might in many other things that they might hold, that might be erroneous.

Here are many societies in England, that deny the Baptism of water to be
practiced upon any subject, without which no society in the world can be
accounted a visible Church, and yet I am confident (had they occasion) rather
than they would deny, they would seal many precious truths of Christ with their
blood; and now upon your Argument, they in so doing might be proved true
Churches (if what you say be true) though they deny that without which no men
can be esteemed so.

Secondly, I desire to see it proved (for yet you have not) that the Parishes
of this Nation did bring forth these Martyrs, I rather think that the Parishes
of this Nation were as willing to have them Martyred, as those bloody men
themselves that did it; for that Parish that brought forth some that were
Members of her to profess and dye for some truths, must needs profess the same
things themselves, and so they should all have been Martyred; for such was the
blood-thirstiness of those men, that all that would not submit to their
abominations must dye.

But we see no such thing; for only some few in some Parishes (and in any one)
were Martyred, and the rest not touched, which shows that the Parishes (except
some few) were of the mind of those bloody men, and so the edge of the Argument
may be turned into your own Neck thus.

Those Churches that have consented to the Martyrdom of a multitude of those
that dyed in the defense of the Cause of Christ; are no true Churches, but the
Parishes of this Nation have so consented, Ergo.

Thirdly, were all this true, viz. that they that have brought forth such, are
true Churches, and that some Parishes have done so; as it is not, yet this
Argument includes not the Question; for I think it will never be proved, that
half the Parishes of England have brought forth any, and so all those Parishes
that have brought forth none, are (notwithstanding) this Argument not proved
true, were it true as it is not.

Those Churches that Antichrist hates with a perfect hatred, and seeks the
destruction of, and which hate Antichrist with Arg. 18. D. B.
as perfect a hatred, and pray for the destruction of, are true Churches, but
such are ours.

This Argument is only affirmed without proof, you only say it Answer I. O.
is so, and I with as much reason may say it is not so; to what purpose would
five hundred Argments so left be? truly Sir if your end in writing be for
satisfaction, I would entreat you to bring some Scripture or reason for what
you say, or else say nothing, for your words will now be taken no more for
Oracles, you will be believed no further than clear evidence carries a persuasive
power.

I know not what you mean by perfect hatred; it cannot be denied but
Antichrist hates all, so far as they hold and practice any thing that is good,
Let it be Pope, or who it will, and they also so far hate him.

But this proves not such true Churches; but if by perfect hatred you mean, the
highest perfection of hellish malice, which Antichrist casts forth against a
society, endeavoring their destruction in chief.

I acknowledge the Major true; for those that have so far, and so perfectly
hated Antichrist, as to get clean out of his kingdom, imbodyed together in
Gospel order, and endeavor to discover, and break in pieces his kingdom.

They are the principle, perfect subject, of his hatred, betwixt whom there is
the deadliest enmity; he inseeking their destruction in chief, and they of him;
but now I deny your Minor, viz. that Antichrist hates you with this hatred;
for daily experience shows that there be some societies, that he is at more
deadly enmity then with you, seeking all hellish contrivances, to cast dirt in
the faces of them that are departed his kingdom; now if you be not chief
subject of his hatred, (as you have neither proved, nor once set about it) then
you perfectly hate not him; for such who perfectly hate him, are the chief
subjects of his hatred.

And for your praying for his destruction; that you may do all your life, and
practice such thing as are the foundation of his upholding, men may highly be
Antichristian under a seeming pretense of seeking his destruction.

Those societies that consist of faithful Rulers in the Lord, and Arg. 19. D. B.
faithful Members united, the one ruled well, the other ruled willingly they
are true Churches, but such are many of our Parochial Assemblies.

The Minor is short the mark, and includes not the question Answer I. O.
in dispute, which is of the Parishes generally; if you say be generally, is
not meant every one, but the greatest part; yet still it will be too short; for
if such should be faithful Rulers, and ruled as you judge so, yet you can never
prove, that above half the Nation is such.

For though I utterly deny, that there is ever a Parish in England, that
consists of such faithful Rulers, i. e. faithfully ruling according to the will
of the Lord, revealed in his word, neither yet are the other faithful Members
united, i. e. in complete order according to the Gospel rule; yet seeing the
question is stated, and this Argument brought to prove it, and yet includes it
not, no answer need be given, it not only includes not the question in debate;
neither yet gives proof for what it does conclude of.

Sir, wherefore is it that you decline the question in the close of all, and
leave out some Parishes as no true Churches: not only here, but also in
dispute, when you argued from the truth and ability, etc. of the Ministry, to
the truth of the Churches (Argument 5.) I answering you with your own words,
that you preached thereby undeniably proving that all was not such, and so not
all true; therefore not including the question, you said (to this purpose) that
if above half was, it did, whence I declared that you granted some to be false,
to which you denied not.

Now this is a plain grant that you are all false.

For you stand all upon one foundation, you have all one and the same matter
and form, and all the Reformation that some above others are more zealous of,
is such, as (had they their desires) gives no new essential constitutive
principles, viz. matter and form, but is only a building upon the same matter
and form, that you had once together with those you now leave out, and which
they also retain still, as well as you.

Therefore if there be some Parishes that be false Churches, there is never a
one that is true.

The consequence is evident, in that matter and form, which is only a
differeneing note of distinction, is one and the same with you all.

But there are some that be false.

This you have not denied, or if you had, it might easily have been proved from
the Minor of the last Argument, there being some (upon your own principles)
that have neither faithful Rulers in the Lord, neither yet faithful Members
united, and so not possible to be true.

Therefore there is never a one that's true.

FINIS.

