The Great DOCTRINES OF THE Gospel of Christ, Owned, Believed and Asserted In
several DECLARATIONS OR Sermons Preached in London, by Sundry Servants of
Christ of the Society of Christian Quakers.

London, Printed for Nath. Crouch, at the Bell in the Poultry, near Cheap Side.
1694.

A SERMON Preached by Thomas Budd At Devonshirehouse, London, June 17th 1694.
1 Timothy 3.16. And, without Controversy, great is the Mystery of Godliness: God
was manifest in the Flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached
unto the Gentiles, believed on in the World, received up into Glory.
A Great and Glorious Mystery indeed-it is, beyond what Man can conceive or
apprehend; God manifest in the Flesh of our Lord Jesus Christ; For in the
fullness of Time the Word took Flesh: The Word became Flesh, The Word took Flesh
in the Womb of the Virgin; being over-shadowed by the Holy Ghost, she conceived
with Child, and in the appointed Time of the Father she brought forth her
Firstborn into the World, and according as the Angel directed, his Name was
called Jesus, for he shall save his People from their Sins; And it is said,
This Child increased in Wisdom, and Stature, and in Favor with God and Man.
When he was Twelve Years old he disputed with the Doctors in the Temple; in the
Temple at Jerusalem: He disputed wisely, and they greatly admired his Wisdom;
and when the Time was come that he was to show himself to Israel, and to do the
Work that was appointed him of the Father, He came to John to be Baptized of
him in Jordan; but John forbad him, saying, I have need to be Baptized of thee,
and come thou to me? And Jesus answering, said unto him, Suffer it to be so
now, for thus it becomes us to fulfill all Righteousness: Then he suffered him.
And Jesus, when he was Baptized, went up streightway out of the Water, and lo
the Heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending like
a Dove, and lighting upon him; and lo a Voice from Heaven saying, This is my
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.

And having received the Holy Ghost, and being fitted for the Work which he was
afterward to accomplish, He was led up of the Spirit into the Wilderness to be
tempted of the Devil; and when he had fasted Forty Days and Forty Nights, he
was afterward an hungered: And when the Tempter came to him he sai^^ If thou be
the Son of God, command that these Stones be made Bread: But Christ resisted
the Temptation, and told the Devil, That Man does not live by Bread alone, but
by every Word that proceeds cut of the Mouth of God. And then the Devil not
prevailing by this Temptation, He takes him up into the Holy City, and sets
him on a Pinnacle of the Temple, and says unto him, If thou be the Son of God,
cast thy self down; for it is written, He shall give his Angels charge
concerning thee, and in their Hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any Time
thou dash thy Foot against a Stone. And he overcame the Devil in this
Temptation also, and said unto him; It is written again, Thou shall not tempt
the Lord thy God. And the Devil takes him up into an exceeding high Mountain,
and shows him all the Kingdoms of the World, and the Glory of them, and said;
All these things will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me. Then
said Jesus unto him, Get thee behind me Satan; for it is written, Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

Here was a great Temptation indeed; how apt are these things to prevail over
Mankind? The love of Riches, Honors and Pleasures of the World; but these
could not prevail over our blessed Savior, who was the Holy One of God:
Therefore we that profess to be his Followers should tread in his Steps and
follow his Example. How can we be his Disciples, except we deny our selves and
take up his Cross and follow him, who is the Captain of our Salvation? Who is
our High Priest; who is ascended into Heaven and entered into the holiest of
all, made without Hands? As the High Priest under the Law, he entered into the
Holy Place, made with Hands, not without Blood, which he offered for himself
and the Sins of the People: But Christ being become an High Priest of good
Things to come, neither by the Blood of Goats and Calves, but by his own Blood
he entered in once into the Holy Place, having obtained Eternal Redemption for
us.

Christ is not entered into the Holy Places made with Hands (says the Apostle)
which are the Figures of the true, but into Heaven it self, now to appear in
the Presence of God for us; nor yet that he should offer himself often, as the
high Priest entered into the Holy Place every Year, with the Blood of others;
for then must he often have suffered, since the Foundation of the World; but
now once, in the End of the World, has he appeared to put away Sin by the
Sacrifice of himself, Heb. 9.24. And he is able also to save them to the utmost
that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make Intercession for them.

And God the Father has regard to the prevailing Intercession of his Son; him
he hears always, and if we pray in Faith and in the Name of Christ, our
Prayers shall enter into the Ears of the Father; as the Father hears the Son
always, so he hears those that believe in him and pray in his Name; they are
sure to receive the Spirit of Adoption, whereby they cry Abba, Father:
Therefore, ask in his Name and receive, that your Joy may be full; you shall
receive fullness of Joy, that will give Satisfaction to your Souls, and you
shall receive a double Portion of the Divine Spirit, and come with a filial
Confidence and humble Boldness to the Throne of Grace, and obtain Mercy and
find Grace to help in the Time of Need. God so loved the World that he gave his
only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
Everlasting Life, John 3.16.

They that receive the Dear and Well-beloved Son of God, receive him as God's
Gift; and they that believe in him, believe in both his inward and outward
Appearance: Ye believe in God (says our Savior to his Disciciples) believe
also in me, John 14.1.

So that it is not enough to believe in Christ's Inward Appearance, and to look
only to the Spiritual Appearance and Operation of the Divine Word of Truth
within us, but we must look unto Jesus, that is the Dispencer of Life and the
giver of his Holy Spirit to them that ask him; Look unto me* and be ye saved
all the Ends of the Earth. We must look unto him that is the Giver of Grace and
the Dispencer of Life and Salvation, as the Author and Fountain of it. We must
believe in Christ, the Eternal Word, that came down from Heaven, that took
Flesh and dwelt among us; that came in the likeness of sinful Flesh, and for
Sin condemned Sin in the Flesh. We must believe in him as the true Light, that
lights every Man which comes into the World.

There is a Sufficiency in this Light, which is the Light of Life and the Arm
of God's Salvation: But the Righteousness which is of Faith speaks on this
wise; say not in thy Heart, Who shall ascend into Heaven (that is, to bring
down Christ from above) or who shall descend into the Deep (that is, to bring
up Christ again from the Dead) But what says it? The Word is nigh thee, even
in thy Mouth and in thy Heart (says the Apostle) That is the Word of Faith
which we preach, that we might hear it and obey it. And, if thou shall confess
with thy Mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine Heart that God has
raised him from the Dead, thou shall be saved.

Here is the Means of Salvation, the powerful Working of Faith in thy Heart,
and that is the Light within, the Spirit within; It is the Power and Spirit of
the Lord Jesus Christ, that works this Living Faith in thy Heart. This Faith
in Christ Crucified when thou shall be assured of Eternal Life in him, of
Eternal Salvation by him. This Work of Faith with Power is wrought by Christ in
all that believe on his Name: He is the Dispenser of it: This is the Word of
Faith which we preach; if thou shall confess Christ with thy Mouth and believe
in thy Heart that God raised Christ from the Dead, who died for our Sjns and
rose again for our Justification, and ascended into Heaven and sits at the
Right Hand of God, and lives for ever to make Intercession for us.

By this Living Faith in the Lord Jesus, which works by Love, which
constrains thee to live to him that died for thee, thou shall escape the
Wrath to come and obtain Eternal Salvation; by means of this Living Justifying
Faith thou may receive the Spirit of Adoption, and call God Father. Christ
Jesus is become now thy High Priest and Elder Brother, and thou may walk by
Faith, in the narrow way that leads to Eternal Life. And if thou have received
Christ Jesus the Lord, then walk in him, and follow his Example, who was Holy,
Harmless and Undefiled, and separate from Sinners, and made higher than the
Heavens by Faith in Christ; thou shall overcome the world, and obtain Victory
over thy Sins and Lusts: And if we be once united to Christ by a Living Faith,
he will be a Light and a Leader to us, and as a Pillar of a Cloud by Day and a
Pillar of Fire by Night, as he was to the Israelites, when he conducted them
out of the Land of Egypt, through the Red Sea and the Wilderness, and brought
them safe into the Land of of Canaan; a Land flowing with Milk and Honey.

O the Showers of Mercy that come from this Heavenly Cloud and fall down upon
the believing Soul. Who can declare the Showers of heavenly Joy and Consolation
that are poured down upon those that are Children of Light? that walk in the
Light and have the Light of God's Countenance lifted up upon them?

O thou poor distressed, sorrowful Soul that art clouded and at a distance from
the Lord! that art cast down and disquieted, having all thy Sins set in order
before thee; thou art greatly afflicted and almost overwhelmed with Grief, when
thou remembrest how thou have transgressed the righteous Law of God, and sinned
against the tender Love and Compassion of thy Heavenly Father, that waits to
be gracious; rely upon his Grace and Mercy, and pardoning Love, and he will
subdue thy Lusts and Corruptions, and speak Peace unto thy disconsolate Soul.

If he appear unto thee as unto his Servant Moses, in a Flame of Fire, out of
the midst of a Bush, when the Bush burned with Fire and was not consumed. If
God appear terrible to thee, as a Flame of Fire, it is not to consume thee, but
to burn up and destroy thy Sins and Lusts, which would destroy thy Soul. When
he appears as a consuming Fire, he will purify and refine thee from thy Dross,
and only burn up the combustible Matter in thee. And when he appears as a Cloud
to thee, thou shall feel Divine Showers of Joy and Refreshment to thy Soul,
which will make thee as a watered Garden to be green and flourishing.

Here is the Baptism of the Cloud, of which the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 10.1.
Moreover, Brethen, I would not that ye should be ignorant how that all our
Fathers were under the Cloud, and all passed through the Sea, and were all
baptized unto Moses in the Cloud and in the Sea: When the Lord shall suddenly
come into his Temple (says the Prophet Malachy) even the Messenger of the
Covenant, who may abide the Day of his coming, and who shall stand when he
appears? for he is like a Refiners Fire, and like Fullers Soap, and he shall
sit as a Refiner, and Purifier of Silver. Here is a Refiner and Purifier
indeed: When he has refined thee with Fire, he will then water thee, and
cleanse thee, and make the Cloud thou art under drop down divine Dews of
Refreshing upon thy disconsolate Soul, and he will lead thee in the way as he
did Israel of old by the Pillar of Fire and of a Cloud both by Day and by
Night; so he will shine into thy Mind by the Light of his Dear Son.

When the Children of Israel were marching out of Egypt they were in a great
strait; Pharaoh* and his Host pursued after them, to destroy them, they saw no
way to escape, they must unavoidably go into the Sea, or fall into their
Enemies H^nds: Then the Lord appeared to deliver them by a mighty Arm of Power;
when the Egyptians pursued after them all the Horses and Chariots of Pharaoh,
and his Horsemen and his Army, and overtook them encamping by the Sea. And when
Pharaoh drew nigh, the Children of Israel lift up their Eyes, and behold the
Egyptians marched after them, and they were sore afrai^, and cried out unto the
Lord; and they said unto Moses, Because there were no Graves in Egypt, have
thou taken us away to die in the Wilderness? wherefore have thou dealt thus
with us, to carry us out of Egypt? And Moses said unto the People, fear ye not,
stand still and see the Salvation of the Lord, which he will show to you this
Day; for the Egyptians whom ye have seen to Day, ye shall see them again no
more for ever.

So when thy Soul is brought into great Straits, then stand still in a pure
Resignation to the will of God, and he will deliver thy Soul: wait upon him and
be resigned up to him, and he will work Deliverance for thee from Time to Time,
when thou art in great Straits and Troubles, and afflicted, and distressed, and
see nothing but a Sea of Trouble before thee, that thou must pass through,
thy Faith fails, and thou art ready to sink into this troubled Sea, which does
with its proud waves threaten to overwhelm thee, walk upon this Sea and fear
not sinking; thou fear thou shall not overcome the Trial and Temptations
that are before thee; be not discouraged with any Danger, but stand still and
thou shall see the Salvation of God, and he will deliver thee out of all thy
Troubles and Afflictions, and lead thee safely through this raging troubled Sea
as on dry Land: Therefore mind thy Divine Guide, look to the Divine Light, and
the Arm of God's Power; the Spirit of God will conduct thee by his Divine
Influences; and though the way be difficult and dangerous, he will carry thee
through; trust in the Mighty Arm of the Lord and in his Divine power and aid,
and he will lead thee through all troubles that attend thee in thy way to the
Heavenly Canaan; If so be thou do return to Egypt's Land in thy Mind, in thy
desires and affections, then thou will be overcome by the Adversary, and be
made to serve the King of Egypt again.

Therefore let me entreat thee to resign thy Heart and Soul to the Lord, and go
forward; And the Lord said unto Moses wherefore cryest thou unto me? Speak unto
the Children of Israel that they go forward; therefore my Advice Friends is
that you go forward; let us go Hand in Hand, let us go up to the Mountain of
the Lord, for he is good and gracious who will teach us of his ways and enable
us to walk in his Paths: It is said that Moses stretched out his Hand over the
Sea, and the Lord caused the Sea to go back by a strong East Wind all that
night, and made the Sea dry Land, and the Waters were divided, and the Children
of Israel went into the midst of the Sea upon the dry Ground, and the Waters
were a Wall unto them on their right Hand and on their left, and the Egyptians
pursued and went in after them. And it came to pass that in the Morning-watch
the Lord looked unto the host of the Egyptians through the Pillar of Fire and
of the Cloud, and troubled the Host of the Egyptians, and took off their
Chariot Wheels, that they drove them heavily, and the Lord overthrew the
Egyptians in the midst of the Sea, and the Waters returned and covered the
Charriots and the Horsemen and all the Host of Pharaoh that came into the Sea,
and there remained not so much as one of them.

Now consider with thy self, although thou had powerful Sins and Lusts that
did beset thy Soul, they have been destroyed in the Sea of Gods Judgments, and
the Lord has given thee a Feast of Joy and Consolation to thy Soul, and thou
can tell unto thy Neighbors what great things the Lord has done for thee,
and has made thee Witness of, and thou can now sing both of Mercy and
Judgment; And say, Come all you that fear the Lord and I will tell you what he
has done for my Soul: Here is a living experience. O thou can speak
experimentally; thou needst not boast in another Man's Line, and of things made
ready to thy Hand, thou speak and declarest things thou have found true and
experimentally known. When thou feel it thus with thee, be not secure after
thy many deliverances the Lord has wrought for thee of one kind and another;
do not think that thou art come to the end of thy Journey, or that thou shall
never meet with trouble again but always feel these sweet Consolations.

For after God had brought the Children of Israel out of Egypt through the Red
Sea, and by his Almighty Arm had saved them and destroyed their Enemies, he
then brings them into the Wilderness to prove them and try them, and after all,
to do them good; in the latter end, he brings them into strai^^ and
necessities, they want Bread to eat and Water to drink,

Thus God deals with his Spiritual Israel in the same manner as he did with
outward Israel which was a figure of the Spiritual Israel traveling to the
Heavenly Canaan, as Israel was led to the Earthly Canaan a Land that flowed
with Milk and Honey and abounded with all good things necessary for the
nourishment and sustenance of Man, as Corn, Wine and Oil, this was for the
outward Israel; so the Spiritual Israel is led into the Spiritual Canaan, a
Land flowing with Milk and Honey; there is the sincere Milk of the Word, and
Honey out of the Rock to satisfy us; this Blessed Land is worth all our pains,
Labor and Travel; therefore persevere and go on with patience and courage, and
think not thou art come to the end of thy Journey, notwithstanding all thy
inlargements in Duites, and sweet Enjoyments and strong Consolations of the
Spirit thou have been made partaker of: God may bring thee into the Wilderness,
into mnay straits, afflictions and distresses, to prove thee, and try thee, and
do thee good in thy latter end; thou may be brought into the Wilderness as
thy Master Christ was, and tried to the utmost of thy strength.

Seeing it must be thus, be contented with the will of the Lord, though he
should hide his Face and thou should feel desertions and great distresses of
Soul, insomuch as thy Soul should be as the dry and parched Ground where no
water is, that is barren and brings forth no Fruit; and thou think with thy
self that the Lord is angry with thee, and delays his coming to thee, and thou
art afraid thou have done something that has displeased the Lord, that he
should so long hide his Face and not lift up the Light of his Countenance upon
thee. And this causes great searchings of Heart, and makes thee cry out, what
have I done? why is it thus? and why has the Lord withdrawn himself, and why
do I want those Comforts that sometimes I have enjoyed? I am now in a starving
Wilderness and barren Desert; O how shall I recieve again those sweet incomes
of the love of God that sometimes I have enjoyed! I will put my self now upon
strict performances and exact walking.

Thou think by this means to obtain Divine comfort, and have the joy of thy
Salvation (which thou have in some measure lost) restored to thee, but alas all
this will not do.

What must I d^ under these sad Circumstances? If Obedience will not do.

If thou shall receive no comfort or refreshment because of the Lords
withdrawing and hiding his Face, trust not to thy own Duties and Obedience, but
rely upon Christ's Obedience, his complete and perfect Obedience. Look unto
Jesus who is thy Advocate with the Father, and Propitiation for thy Sins, and
not for thine only, but for the sins of the whole World. 1 John 2.1. My little
Children (says the Apostle John) these things I write unto you that ye sin
not; and if any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
Righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins, etc. Look, therefore unto
Jesus; how shall I look unto him? Look unto him by Faith, believe that he is an
Advocate, an Intercessor and Mediator, and a Propitiation for thy sins. This
will give thee an entrance and admission into his Presence again, and thou will
have the Springs of Life that were stopped, opened again, the Wells of
Salvation opened, and thou will come to know Joy and Consolation again, and
then thou will declare what God by this living Faith has wrought for thee,
when thou come to know the overcoming of Unbelief.

If thou have this living Faith, thou can say to this corrupt Tree of
Unbelief, that is grounded and rooted in thee, be thou plucked up, and it shall
be so. If thou have Faith as a Grain of Mustard Seed, a very small seed, thou
shall say to this Mountain, Be thou removed, and it shall be so; and to thi^
Sicamore-tree, Be thou plucked up and planted in the midst of the Sea, and it
shall be done.

O this living Faith, this Faith unfeigned, it works by Love and Charity, which
the Apostle says 1 Timothy 1.5. Is the end of the Commandment, out of a pure
Heart and good Conscience. This pure divine Faith does witness the overcoming
of Unbelief, and it is more precious than Gold that perishes, and will be found
to Praise, Glory and Honor, at the appearing of Jesus Christ. This Faith will
endure all Temptations, Trials, Afflictions, Buffetings; O this pure living
Faith that is wrought by God's powerful Word, and declared by the Light within,
by the Arm of God's Salvation, it does do the Work that is appointed for, it to
do. The Hand cannot do any thing without the Body or the Head; no more will
this Arm of God's Salvation within, work without the power of the Man Christ
Jesus, that is the Giver of it, nor without his Death and Sufferings, but it is
all-sufficient to save us with them, with his Death and Sufferings,
Resurrection, Ascension, Mediation and Intercession.

Look not only to the Light within, but look unto Jesus the Dispenser of it. It
pleased the Father, that in his blessed Son Jesus Christ should all fullness
dwell; The fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily in him; of his fullness we all
received, and Grace for Grace.

A Brief DECLARATION OF Thomas Budd, AT The Close of a Meeting in Harp-lane,
October 14th, 1694.
Romans 10.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, Say not in thine heart, Who shall ascend into Heaven?
(that is, to bring Christ down from above, or who shall descend into the deep
(that is, to bring up Christ again from the dead) But what says it? The Word
is nigh thee, even in thy Mouth, and in thy Heart: That is, the word of Faith
which we preach. That if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and
shall believe in thine heart, that God has raised him from the dead, thou
shall be saved. For with the heart Man believes unto righteousness, and with
the mouth confession is made unto salvation.
IT is not a bare litteral, traditional or historical Faith or Knowledge of the
Lord Jesus Christ, that he was raised from the Dead, will save us; but we must
know a living Faith wrought in our Hearts by the living Word (...) God, that
Word that is nigh, that is in o^ Hearts and in our Mouth; we must know the
operation of the living Word of God to wor^ Faith in our Hearts, in the Man
Christ Jesus This Faith must be wrought in our Hearts b^ the living Word, and
by the Spirit of Christ by the same Power that raised up Christ from the dead.

It is not a bare historical Faith or Knowledge, that will save us, but we must
have living Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; we mu^ believe in him that he died
for our Sins, an^ rose again for our Justification, and that he ascended into
Heaven, and sat down at the righ^ Hand of the Majesty on high, and that the
Heavens received him, and will retain him until the time of the restitution of
all things according to the Testimony of the Angels a^ his Ascension into
Heaven. Act. 1.9, 10. It i^ said, That while the Disciples beheld, he was taken
up, and a Cloud received him out of their sight and while they looked
steadfastly toward Heaven as he went up, behold two Men stood by them i^ white
Apparel, which also said, Ye Men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into
Heaven? This same Jesus which is taken up from you, shall so come, in like
manner as ye have seen him go into Heaven.

The Apostle says, The Heavens have received him till the time of the
Restitution of all things; he will come again and restore all things, and raise
the dead to life. He will open the Graves and cause the Dead to come forth;
then he will come to be glorified (...) his Saints, and to be admired in all
^em that believe, in all them that ^elieve the divine Promises, and that put
their Trust in him: He will be glorified in all that believe in him and expect
Salvation by ^im. Then Believers shall be restored to their ^rimitive State,
and to a greater dignity and ^lory than Adam enjoyed in Paradise, when ^e was
created in the Image of God: That ^ost Image shall be restored again, when the
Lord Jesus himself shall descend from Heaven with a Shout, and with the Voice
of the Arch^ngel, and with the Trump of God, and the Dead in Christ shall rise
first, they shall have ^he preference: For as in Adam all die, so in Christ
shall all be made alive, but every Man in his own order; Christ the first
Fruits, afterward ^hey that are Christ's at his coming; then he will change our
vile Body that it may be fashi^ned like unto his glorious Body, according to
the Workings whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto himself, to the
Bodies of the Saints.

A SERMON Preached by George Keith, At Devonshire-house, June 17. 1694.
Romans 10.6, 7, 8, But the Righteousness which is of Faith speaks on this
wise: Say not in thine Heart, Who shall ascend into Heaven? (that is, to bring
down Christ from above) Or, who shall descend into the Deep? (that is, to bring
up Christ again from the Dead) But what says it? The Word is nigh thee, even
in thy Mouth and in thy Heart: That is, the Word of Faith which we Preach.
THE Apostle Paul, by the Wisdom given him of God, preached Salvation by Christ
Jesus, both within us, and without us: This is the true Gospel of Salvation,
the true Gospel-Doctrin which Christ Jesus himself preached, and all the holy
Prophets; Evangelists and Apostles; they preached Salvation by Jesus Christ, by
the Knowledge of him, without dividing him. It is not our Principle to divide
these, Christ within us and Christ without us, but to join them. I have fully
preached, ^saith the Apostle) the Gospel of Christ; Say not in thy Heart, Who
shall ascend into Heaven? (that is, to bring down Christ from above.) But we
may know his coming down spiritually, that we may witness and enjoy a further
measure of him, and of his spiritual and heavenly Presence, and wait for his
coming to us. O, says David, when shall thy Word come unto me? How sweet are
thy Words unto my taste, yea, sweeter than Honey to my Mouth. He waited that the
Word of God might come unto him: Send forth thy Light and thy Truth, send it
forth from thy Zion, from above, from thy holy Hill, from thy Dewlling Place
above in Heaven; Send forth thy Light and thy Truth, that it may guide me to
thy holy Habitation, thy holy Hill of Zion: He waited more and more for it.

These Words were first of all spoken by Moses, Deuteronomy. 11.12. For this
Commandment which I command thee this Day, it is not hidden from thee, neither
is it afar of: It is not in Heaven, that thou should say, Who shall go up for
us to Heaven, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it and do it? Neither is
it beyond the Sea, that thou should say, Who shall go over the Sea for us
and bring it unto us? That we may hear it and do it: But the Word is very nigh
unto thee, in thy Mouth, and in thy Heart, that thou may do it.

This is the Word of Faith, the Word of Life and Reconciliation, the powerful
Word of God that is within; as a Hammer and a Sword, and as Fire, it breaks and
melts the Heart, and is helpful to every good Thing: The Tribes of Israel had
it; This Word which I command thee this Day: This Word of Righteousness and
Salvation every Man and Woman has it in all Ages and Generations; blessed be
the Lord, it is more abundantly revealed now than in former Ages and
Generations; yet Moses says, This Commandment which I command you, it is not
hid from you; But this Mystery of Christ was hid from Ages and Generations. It
is said to be hid because it was not so plentifully revealed as in latter Ages,
yet it was not so hid always but something of it was known in darkest Times.
Moses might well say to the Children of Israel, It is not hidden from thee,
neither is it far off: It is not in Heaven, that thou should say, Who shall
go up for us to Heaven (that is to say, to bring down Christ from above) to
bring him down to appear in a Body of Flesh; he was not then come in the Flesh,
yet was expected in many Ages. Moses and all the Holy Prophets, and Holy Men of
God, they were contented with a Spiritual Sight of him; they waited and prayed
for his Coming; yet he was not manifested in the Flesh in their Days and
Generation, they died in the Faith, that Christ should come into the World in
the fullness of Time; and they obtained Remission of Sins for hi^ sake, Who has
redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us, and died the
accursed Death of the Cross, that our Sins might be forgiven, and that the
Blessing of Abraham might come upon the Gentiles, through Jesus Christ, that we
might receive the Promise of the Spirit through Faith.

Before the coming of Christ, God's Israel of old offered Sacrifices of Rams,
Bullocks and Goats; not that they believed there was any Virtue in the Blood of
those Sacrifices to take away Sin, but this was a Testimony of their
Thankfulness to God: And so likewise it helped their Faith, as a Symbol, to
preach Christ to them and their Posterity, That in the fullness of Time Christ
should descend from Heaven and take a Body of Flesh, Gal. 4.4. The Apostle
tells us, But when the fullness of Time was come, God sent forth his Son, made
of a Woman, made under the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law, that we
might receive the Adoption of Sons. Romans 8.3. The Law of the Spirit of Life in
Christ Jesus ^^th made us free from the Law of Sin and D^^th, for what the Law
could not do in that it was weak through the Flesh, God sending his own Son, in
the lik^nes^ of sinful Flesh, and for Sin condemned Sin in the Flesh t^^t the
^ighteousness of the Law might be ful^^^^ in us, who walk not after the Flesh
but after the Spirit. Christ was a Sacrifice for Sin; he came to finish
Transgression and make an end of Sin, and bring in everlasting Righteousness.

Now it was in the fullness of Time tha^ Christ should descend from Heaven and
com^ in the Form of a Servant, and die for ou^ Sins and rise again for our
Justification. Before Christ died and rose again from the Dead this Prophecy of
Moses was not fulfilled. Who shall go up for us to Heaven and bring down Christ
to us, or who shall go over the Sea for us and bring it to us before Christ
died and rose again from the Dead. He wen^ over Lakes and Seas. Here is a
Prophecy given forth by the Spirit of God in Moses hi^ Time, and now fulfilled.
Christ went about doing good: He went about by Land an^ by Sea, to do good unto
People: Sometimes he preached aboard a little Ship, and sometimes on the Land.
He traveled both by Sea and Land, and went about doing good, and heale^ all
manner of Diseases; for God was with him: And that was the Time and Age of
which Moses gave forth this Prophecy, That Christ should die and rise again
from the Dead, and go over the Seas. And the Apostle Paul was guided by the
same Spirit when he wrote these Words, Romans 10.6, 7. Say not in thy Heart, Who
shall ascend into Heaven (that is to bring down Christ from above) or who sha^
descend into the Deep (that is, to bring up Christ again from the Dead) the
Word is nigh thee even in thy Mouth and in thine Heart; tha^ is the Word of
Faith which we preach.

This was declared and fulfilled in the Apostles Days; Christ had descended
into the lower parts of the Earth, died and rose again and was ascended into
Heaven: This is the Word of Faith that we Preach.

I shall insist further upon this (God willing) if I have an Opportunity
renewed to me: If you have a right Faith and Belief that Christ died for you,
you will believe it was for us, and not for himself he suffered the Death of
the Cross; he was cut off for our Sins, not for his own; he shed his precious
Blood for our Sins, not for his own; he offered not a Sacrifice as other
Priests did, first for his own Sins and then for the Sins of the People, for he
had no sins of his own.

If you have fixed your Faith upon this, and if you have a living Faith in your
Heart i^ will open to you, and give you the Comfort of it. I say, It is a
Lamentation, and may be for a Lamentation, that the true Faith of it is so
little preached in Christendom: Therefore Christendom is as a Wilderness, which
might have been as the Garden of the Lord. This Faith comes from this Living
Fountain, this Living Root and Foundation, Christ within the Hope of Glory:
This would make Christendom as the Garden of Eden and the Paradise of God; but
Christendom is now become a barren Wilderness, there is little true Faith found
among them.

The Lord has some, even a remnant, that love and fear him, and that are near
and dear to him, that have a True and Living Faith in the Lord Jesus, but they
are as a Cluster of Grapes in a barren Wilderness, but the rest are as a
Thorn-Hedge.

My Friends, Is Christ ascended into Heaven? Let us by Faith ascend and dwell
with Christ in Heaven; let our Faith ascend to Christ in Heaven, and let our
Meditation ascend to Christ in Heaven, and let our Hearts and our Affections
ascend to Christ in Heaven; while we are in the Body and in the Wilderness of
this World, yet in our Minds and Affections let us be with Christ in Heaven;
and let us witness with the Apostle, That our Conversation is in Heaven, from
whence we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ; who shall change our
vile Body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious Body, according to
the Working whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto himself. They
looked for the last Appearance of his glorified Body, and they looked for his
daily coming into their Hearts; I will not leave you comfortless, I will come
unto you. How will he come unto them? By daily renewed Incomes of his Spiritual
Life and Light, and Divine Power: He knew they would have but little Meetings
at first, yet he encourages these little Meetings, Where two or three are
gathered together, in my Name, I will be in the midst of them. It is not
limited to a great number, the Promise is to Two or three as well as to an
hundred or many hundreds.

If a Man be in his House alone, or if he be on the Top of a Mountain, or by
the Side of a River, in Prayer, if he be a true Disciple of Christ, and takes
up his Cross and follows him, he shall find the Holy Spirit present with him;
If a Man love me (says Christ) he will keep my Words (John 14.23.) and my
Father will love him, and we will come unto him and make our Abode with him.

So that here is a daily coming: From whence? From Heaven. Here is a daily
Coming from Heaven, of Christ's Descending from Heaven; The Father, Son and
Holy Spirit will come from Heaven to a true Believer, and make their abode with
him: We must not understand this coming so grossly as if the Father Son and Holy
Spirit should leave Heaven and come and dwell with the Sons of Men. What is
this coming then? It is the Heavenly Influences, the Heavenly Powers, and
Heavenly Virtues, like Heavenly Rains, the Heavenly Gifts and Manifestations of
the Lord Jesus, by his Blessed Spirit in our Hearts.

So then, Friends, I beseech you, observe these following Words, which are of
the like Import and concern to every one of us, The Word is nigh thee; this is
the Command (says Moses) which I command thee this Day; this Word is not
hidden from thee, neither is far off; it is not in Heaven, that thou should
say, Who shall go up for us to Heaven, and bring it to us, that we may hear it
and do it? How may we be sure it is God's Command, as well as the most known
and revealed Truth? It was a Command to them, I say to them, to believe that
Christ was to come in the Flesh; they were to obey that Commandment, the Word
of Christ in their Hearts; the word of Faith, the word of Righteousness, the
word of Reconciliation to believe that the Lord Jesus Christ was to die for
Sinners. In the Time of the Law, and before the Time of the Law they were to
believe that Christ was to come and die for them, and shed his Blood for them,
Heb. 11.1. Faith is the Substance of Things hoped for, and the Evidence of
things not seen.

Now from the beginning of the World, all that long Trace of Time between Adam
and Moses for about Four thousand Years, they lived by that Faith, they hoped
for Christ's Coming, and had got an infallible Assurance that God would forgive
them their Sins, and receive them graciously into his Hands when they should
come to die and go out of this earthly Tabernacle of the Body, and give them an
abundant Entrance into his Everlasting Kingdom, the Paradise above.

But why is this Word called the Commandment, in the singular Number? I will
tell you, because one Word, not many is comprehensive of all God's
Commandments; be acquainted with this word in thy Heart, and it will learn thee
all God's Commandments; It will teach you all that can be preached from the
Holy Scriptures: This Word of God that is in your Hearts is comprehensive of
all.

Then you will object and say, What need I have any outward Preaching? I will
sit at home, and only mind the Light within, the Word that is nigh and in my
Heart.

No, that is a great Mistake, to say there is no need of outward Preaching;
many things are greatly profitable that are not of absolute necessity: I do not
say the Bible is of such absolute nece^sity, that if Men should take the Bible
from us we must perish for want of it; God forbid: If we should be banished
into Turkey, and they should be so cruel as to take our Bibles from us, as they
do other Goods, and think to bring us over to their Religion, this word of
Faith in our Hearts will bring to our Remembrance what is written in the Holy
Scriptures; so that the Bible is a necessary and profitable outward Help, but
not of such absolute Necessity that we must be undone for ever, and perish
without it: This word of Life that is in thy Heart will preserve thee from
perishing eternally: O be acquainted with it!

If a Time should come that there should be no Meetings, no outwatd Preaching
or Hearing, or that we should be shut up in Prison, and see the Face of Man no
more, yet this word of God in our Hearts will teach us, and witness the love of
God to us in our dying Moments, and we shall feel our departing Souls in the
Hands of the Lord, and may say with our Redeemer, Father, into thy Hands I
commend my Spirit. O what Joy will this be to us in a dying Hour!

Now what is it that gives this Knowledge, Understanding and Assurance to us?
The word of Faith in the Heart. It may well be called the word of Faith. An
hypocritical Faith is a Faith without Charity, Love and Obedience: All Faith is
false that is not grounded upon this Word of God; it is needful to be preached
this inward Word; this Word of God within, how does it reconcile us to God? It
reconcileth us to God by opening of the Mys^ery of Christ Jesus, and
discovering to us. That Jesus Christ in the fullness of Time died for our Sins,
and became an Offering and a Sacrifice to reconcile us to God, by dying and
shedding his precious Blood for us. So this Word within us is put into us; he
has put into us the Word of Reconciliation. Christ is the great Sacrifice of
Atonement, the great Reconciling Sacrifice, and by his Spirit he applies the
Virtue and efficacy of his Death and Sufferings to us.

Christ being risen from the Dead, we are not ashamed to own it; we are not
ashamed to confess it with our Mouths, For with the Heart Man believes unto
Righteousness, and with the Mouth Confession is made unto Salvation; for the
Scripture says, Whosoever believes on him shall not be ashamed; If thou shall
confess with thy Mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine Heart that
God has raised him from the Dead, thou shall be saved. The Brain and Head
Belief will not do, it is the Word of Faith in the Heart that begets this
Belief in us.

If the Lord shall hereafter be pleased to give me further Opportunity, I shall
show you what Salvation is, in the full extent of it. It is not only from Sin
and Wrath, and the Anger and Displeasure of God, but it is a Salvation from all
the Consequences and effects of it: It is a Salvation from Ignorance and Error,
and from Darkness of Understanding; It is a Recovering of us from a State of
Sin and Misery, and a Restoring of us to a higher Dignity and Felicity than
that Primitive State which Adam was created in; to whom God gave Dominion over
all the Works of his Hands.

We are saved gradually; we obtain Victory by degrees, and Dominion over Sin,
and Power over all our Spiritual Enemies: This is a great Salvation indeed, we
are saved by Faith, and saved by Hope. There is a Time coming when there shall
be no more Sorrow, Sickness, Pains, Aches, Miseries, Afflictions, Agonies or
Death; but Mortality shall be swallowed up of Life.

The great Necessity of Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, as he is both God and
Man, in order to Salvation. Held forth in a Declaration or Sermon, Delivered by
GEORGE KEITH, At Grace Church Street, August 22. 1694.
Acts 16.30, 31. Sirs, what must I do to be saved? Believe on the Lord Jesus
Christ, and thou shat be saved, and thy House.
I Shall not spend much time about the word Sirs, which in the Greek signifies
Lords, which is the Title that the Jailer here gives to Paul and Silas. He was
struck with fear and terror in his Conscience, and was under much horror and
consternation, when by the mighty Power of God he was convinced of his Sin, and
danger of falling short of Salvation. We read, That at Midnight, after Paul and
Silas had many Stripes laid upon them, and were cast into the inner Prison, and
their Feet made fast in the Stocks, they prayed and sung Praises to God, and
the Prisoners heard them. And it is said, That suddenly there was a great
Earthquake, so that the Foundations of the Prison were shaken, and immediately
all the Doors were opened, and every ones Bands were loosed, Being in such fear
and consternation, no wonder that the Keeper of the Prison gives to Paul and
Silas those high Titles of Sirs or Lords, What shall I do to be saved? Not that
they desired those Titles, or accepted those Titles, which the Jailer gave to
them. For Paul says, There is but one Lord; not Lord Paul and Lord Silas, not
Lord Timothy and Lord Titus. To show his Honor and Esteem of their Persons,
and of their Advice and Counsel in his distressed condition, he cries out,
Sirs, or Lords, What must I do to be saved? Which will not justify such Titles.

But, notwithstanding, the Query was seasonable and proper, and is so to every
awakened Conscience, that is struck with a deep sense of the need of a Savior,
and want of Salvation, What must I do to be saved? Now the Answer is very
short, but full and comprehensive, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou
shall be saved, and thy House. It must not be supposed or thought that this was
all they spoke, or the whole they preached to him, and to those that were in
his House; but this was the matter, and the sum of their Exhortation and
Counsel, though they might enlarge in many Words. We do not read that they went
to Bed all that Night; they had a sweet time together, until the next Morning,
when they parted, being discharged from their Imprisonment. For the Magistrates
that sent them to Prison came and besought them, and brought them out, and
desired them to depart out of the City. Without question there was much
Discourse and Conference passed between them; but the chief material thing
which Paul and Silas preached to the Jailer and his Family, was, Believe on the
Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, and thy House.

It is not to be understood that his House and Family, Wife, Children and
Servants, should be saved by his Faith alone; no, every Man and Woman are to be
saved by their own Faith, The Just shall live by his Faith, not by another Man's
Faith, but by his own Faith. The Words imply so much, Believe on the Lord Jesus
Christ and thou shall be saved, and thy House. If they believe also, you shall
all be saved if you believe in the Lord Jesus Christ.

Now some say, Was there not need of some Preparation before the Preaching of
Faith?

Here was an excellent Preparation, the Man's Conscience was mightily awakened
with the sense of his lost and undone state and condition. What needed he to
ask for Salvation, if not sensible of his lost and undone condition? So indeed
here was a good Preparation; and such a Preparation is necessary to have the
Conscience awakened, through a deep and inward sense of sin, and of the wrath
of God that was due because of sin; this Preparation is necessary to Faith. The
Whole (says our blessed Lord) need not a Physician, but they that are sick:
And I came not to call the Righteous, but Sinners to Repentance.

Who are these Righteous that Christ did not come to call to Repentance? Did
Christ find any Righteous? Are there any found Righteous before they be called?

No, there is none Righteous till God first visits them by his mighty Power.
What is the sense of these Words, I came not to call the Righteous? It is those
that are Righteous in their own Sight, in their own Eyes; those that have their
own Righteousness, a humane Righteousness, a legal Righteousness, such are not
Righteous in the sight of God, they have need of Christ as much as others. They
that rely upon their own Righteousness, a humane or legal Righteousness, they
see not the want they have of Christ Jesus, the great Physician of Souls.

It is certainly so, before ever Christ Jesus can be welcomed as the Souls
Physician and Savior, before he can be welcomed, embraced and received as a
High Priest and Propitiation for Sin, as an Advocate, as an Intercessor, and as
the Atonement; we must see our absolute need of him, in order to our obtaining
Eternal Salvation: Christ is both the Priest and the Sacrifice, the Priest that
offers, and the Atonement that is offered.

O glorious Mystery! that he who is our great high Priest should offer himself.
The Priests under the Law offered other things, ^s the Body and Blood of a
Beast, but Christ offered himself; he gave himself a Ransom for us, he offered
his own Blood, his own Life, he made his Soul an Offering for Sin, he offered
himself Soul and Body, a complete Offering; not his Body only, but his Soul and
Body also, he offered himself through the eternal Spirit. Before Christ can be
thus embraced and sought after as a Hiding Place, there must be a Preparation
going before. And it is prophesied of him, A Man shall be a Hiding Place, the
Man Christ Jesus. No Man but he can be a Hiding Place from the Storm and
Tempest, And as the Shadow of a great Rock in a weary Land. And it is
prophesied of him again, He shall be our Peace when the Assyrian shall come
into our Land. What Man is this? And who is this Assyrian? It is an Allegory or
Metaphor. The King of Assyria you know invaded the Land, and carried away the
ten Tribes. The King of Assyria, by way of Metaphor or Allegory, is he that
seeks to destroy our Souls and make havoc of them, Christ shall be our Peace.
When the Assyrian comes into our Land to spoil us and destroy us, the Man
Christ Jesus shall be our Defense: How? through Faith in him, he shall be our
Hiding Place and our Defense, and as the shadow of a great Rock in a weary
Land. We must fly unto him by Faith, and our Faith must not stand in the wisdom
of the words of Men, but in the power of God, and of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
is the true Foundation; he is the true Ground and sure Footing (for every one)
of our Faith.

The mighty Power of God and of our Lord Jesus Christ, opening and revealing to
our Souls the great Mysteries of our Salvation. Christ is called the Power of
God and the Wisdom of God. The Jews require a Sign, and the Greeks seek after
Wisdom; but we preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a Stumblingblock and unto
the Greeks foolishness; but unto them which are called, both Jews and Greeks,
Christ the power of God and the wisdom of God.

Does Paul preach two Christ's?

No, by no means; neither Prophet, Apostle or Evangelist, preach two Christ's;
as if Christ within were one Christ, and Christ without another Christ. The Man
Christ Jesus that died a painful and shameful Death upon the Cross, in whom all
Fullness dwells, the Fullness of the Godhead bodily; (he is the living, powerful,
eternal Word,) that had the Spirit without measure, which is in measure in us;
he is but one Christ, one complete and entire Christ.

But some may say, Why does the Apostle Paul call Christ the Power of God, and
the wisdom of God?

I answer plainly, because the fullness of the divine power and wisdom dwelt in
Christ, and dwells in him, so that through our Faith in him we receive such a
measure of the divine wisdom and power as we need, in order to have the work of
our Salvation wrough out, to have it begun, carried on and finished.

There are two things that we greatly need, that we absolutely and
indispensibly need, Wisdom and Power.

We need a measure of God's Wisdom, of heavenly and divine Wisdom, to make
known to us the whole Will, Counsel and Mind of God for our Salvation; for all
that we can read in the holy Scriptures and other good Books, and all that we
have preached to us from time to time, can never suffice to give us the true
Knowledge of the will and mind of God in order to our Salvation, unless we be
supplied with divine Wisdom from above, unless we be inwardly inspired, endued
and enlightened with the Spirit of Wisdom and Knowledge from God and Christ
Jesus. We need a measure of the divine Spirit and of the divine Wisdom, to
teach and instruct us concerning the Mind and Will, and Counsel of God,
concerning our Salvation; not by Piecemeal and in Parts, but we must know the
whole Mind and Counsel of God, as much as is needful to our Salvation, to have
it wrought in us. David was sensible of this, when he thus prayed, Teach me to
do thy Will, O God, teach me thy Judgments, Psalm. 119.108. And teach me thy
Statutes, verse. 64. teach me by thy good Spirit.

But some there are that are ignorant and self-conceited, which are ready to
say, What need we pray after this manner? Did not David know God's Precepts and
Statutes? He had them upon his Memory, and upon his Heart. But for all the
knowledge that he had of God's Precepts, yet he needed further to be taught and
instructed in the depth of the Mystery of divine Wisdom and Knowledge;
therefore, in respect of the Commandments and Statutes of God, he prays, Lord,
teach me thy Precepts, teach me thy Statutes and Testimonies, and Judgments: We
need the Teachings of the Spirit of God, which is called the Spirit of Wisdom
and Revelation.

The Apostle prays thus for the Ephesians (1 chapter 17, 18.) That the God of
our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of Glory, may give unto you the Spirit of
Wisdom and revelation, in the knowledge of him: The eyes of our understandings
being enlightened, that ye may know what is the hope of his calling, and what
the Riches of the Glory of his Inheritance in the Saints, and what is the
exceeding greatness of his Power to usward who believe, according to the
working of his mighty Power which he wrought in Christ when he raised him from
the Dead and set him at his own right Hand in the Heavenly places. We need a
measure of the Divine Wisdom that dwells in all fullness in Christ. He that was
Crucified, and buried* rose again, and Ascended into Heaven; and is now there
in that prepared Body wonderfully Glorified; but not another Body, it ^ the
same Body, but now impassible, not subject to suffering or Bodily weaknesses,
a^ Hunger, Thirst Sleep or Wearyness; hi^ Body is not now passible or obnoxious
to any kind of Suffering.

Secondly, Another thing we greatly need is Power; these two, Wisdom and Power
do in a manner comprehend and contain all our needs; We want the Instruction of
Divine Wisdom to give us understanding and knowledge to know the Mind of God,
to know the whole Will and Counsel of God, to know our Duty to God, and what
the Lord requires of us, and what the Lord Christ requires of us in order to
our Eternal Happyness. And then we want Power as well as Wisdom; if God should
give us Wisdom and Understanding and Council to know what we ought to do, and
withhold Power from us to do it we should be at a great loss and disadvantage.

But God is so full of Grace and Bounty, (blessed be his Name) that he gives
us both Wisdom to know his Will and Power to fulfill it. Therefore the Spirit of
God which was promised to rest upon Christ, the Root and Stem of Jesse, God
promised that the Spirit should rest upon him, and that a measure of it should
be given to all the Members of that Body whereof he is the Noble and Holy Head;
he gives it in one measure to one, in another measure to another, and in a
suitable measure to all, according to every ones Capacity, to some more and
some less, as in the ^istribution of Talents, he gives to every ^ne according
to their ability. The state and ^ondition of Men with respect to Spiritual and
Divine gifts, they are like the Capacity ^f Vessels, some of a lesser, and some
of a greater quantity. There are Cups, and Flaggons and Barrels, and other
Vessels that contain greater and lesser quantities. So for Vessels of the
Sanctuary, Vessels of the Lords House, there are Cups, and Flaggons and other
Vessels: A Cup is not capable of holding so much as a Flaggon, nor will a
Flaggon contain so much as a Barrel or Firkin; herein appears the Wisdom of
God, in that he gives to every one according to their Capacity, so that none
have reason to repine and murmr, and say Lord thou have not given enough to
me.

Grudge not at the gifts of God to others, but consider that though God has
given thee but a little, he has given thee what is fit for thee to receive; if
he had given thee more, there might have been more danger to thy Soul; if thy
Cup run over there is more than it is capable to receive, and therefore God
gives that measure to thee that is fittest for thee. God gives to every Man and
Woman a measure of his Grace, which was purchased for them by the Son of his
Love, the Lord Jesus Christ, by what he has done and suffered, even by his
Obedience to the Death. The Spirit of God which rests upon his dear Son Christ
Jesus, is said to be the Spirit of Might. Isa. 11.1, 2. And there shall come
forth a ro^ out of the stem of Jesse; and a branch shall grow out of his roots.
And the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the Spirit of wisdom an^
understanding, the Spirit of council and might, the Spirit of knowledge, and of
the seat of the Lord: Here is a Spirit of might as well as a Spirit of Wisdom
and Understanding; here is I say, a Spirit of might, and of the fear of the
Lord.

The Holy Scripture says perfect love casts out fear; what fear is it that
it casts out? Slavish fear, but Filial fear, Evangelical fear, perfect Love
casts not out; for this Love and fear are Twins, they are Inseparable, they
are of one kind, of one nature; our Lord Jesus Christ himself was filled with
this Holy Spirit of fear; it is said Hebr. 5.7. Who in the Days of his Flesh
when he had offered up Prayers and Supplications, with strong crying and tears
unto him that was able to save him from Death, and was heard in that he feared.
Isa. 11.3. The Spirit of the Lord (says the Prophet) shall rest upon him, etc.
The Spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the Lord. And shall make him of quick
understanding in the fear of the Lord, and he shall not judge after the sight
of his Eyes, neither reprove after the hearing of his Ears, but with
righteousness shall he judge the Poor, and reprove with equity for the meek of
the Earth.

If we believe in the Lord Jesus Christ sincerely and truly, by this belief we
shall receive Wisdom and Power, sufficiency of it, plenty of it, one measure
and degree after another, we shall have the Spirit of God to teach ^s and
counsel us what we ought to do, what ^s our Duty to God, to our Neighbor, and
^o our selves, and all that is required of us in order to our Eternal Happiness
and Salvation, which is given by Christ Jesus, and also Power to do what we
ought to do, and also Power to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ. There are some
have made such an Objection as this, and I have sometimes made it my self, in
my own Thoughts. O! say some, we want a Power to believe, we find it very
difficult to believe.

It is good to be thus sensible of thy own Inability; and it is good to be
persuaded that it is not so easy a thing to believe as many hold it to be. The
generality of Christians, here in Christendom, they think it to be an easy
thing to believe: It is impossible for any Man or Woman rightly, and truly, and
sincerely to believe in God or in Christ, with the least Measure of true saving
Faith, unless the mighty Power of God work this Faith in us: And this Faith
begins in a very small beginning; it is first sown in the Heart of Man or
Woman, as a grain of Mustard Seed; he that sows it will make it to grow; he
is not like an unskilful Husbandman that begins to plant or build, and is not
able to go through with it; the Lord is wise and Powerful, he will go through
with his Work; if thou do not by the Obstinacy, Subbornness and Carelessness
of thine own Heart hinder it, the Lord will carry on this Work of Faith by his
mighty Power; And if you have Faith but as Grain of Mustard Seed, you shall say
to the Mountain, Be removed, and it shall be removed.

This Faith is witnessed by a Blessed Remnant, that know the removing of
Mountains not earthly Mountains, but all those inward Letts, Impediments and
Hindrances that the poor Soul feels within it self, even Mountain^ of Sin and
of the Powers of Darkness, tha^ stand between God and their Souls, which
intercept the Light of his Countenance from shining on them, they would get
near to the Lord, they follow hard after him: The Lord lifts up the Light of
his Countenance in some lesser degree upon them, which is like a little Beam of
Light coming through a Cranny; they have not that full and satisfactory
Enjoyment of the Lord that they desire.

Act Faith upon the Lord's Almighty Power, that has given thee a little Grain
of Faith, a small measure of it, and in due Time thy Faith shall be
strengthened, and be able to remove all those Mountains of Sin, and of the
Powers of Darkness, that are in thy Heart.

I say it has often been an Objection to me: O! I would fain believe, I want
Power to believe, and I bless the Lord that let me see that I was not able of
my self to believe, that I had no might or Ability of my self to act Faith; the
Lord was pleased, by the shining of his blessed Light into my Heart, to enable
me to act Faith, and to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, for Life and
Salvation.

I would never speak a Word to diminish ^r lessen the great Work of Faith, but
we may easily see the Vanity, and falsness, and unprofitableness of that Faith
that abounds in the World. The vain Person's Faith, the worldly and covetous
Man's Faith, and the proud Man's Faith, which greatly abounds in Christendom 3
Men, say they, believe in Christ, and yet Covetousness, earthly-mindedness,
Pride of Spirit, and Envy, and Malice, and Strife, and Contention abound among
us. I say, If Faith had but room and Place in the Hearts of People, here in
Christendom (the Lord grant that Time may come) it would then remove these
Mountains; and had it taken Place it would have removed them long ago.

If any shall ask me, What Time I will prefix or allow that this little Grain
of Faith will remove all those Mountains of Sin, and Unbelief, and
Unrighteousness, and the Powers of Darkness that are in Peoples Hearts?

I answer; No time is to be prefixed for the effecting of this; wait the Lord's
time, for his time is the best time. If thou desire to make this time short,
then improve that little measure of Grace bestowed upon thee, that little Grain
of Mustard Seed, pray with it, and give Thanks to God for it, pray with all the
strength and ability that the Lord has already given thee. There is none of us
to whom some measure of Grace and Held is not given; there is no ground to
complain that enough is not given; but our Complaint should be, That we have
not made use of that H^ that is given us. Do not despise the Day^ small things:
Who art thou that despisest (...) day of small things? Do not despise a lit^^^
Grace, a little Help, that God has given (...) thee; let us make use of that
little Streng^^ we have, and God will give us more, and (...) will do it in due
time, in his own time, wh^^^ is the best time.

I may be bold to say, The time shall n^^ be long, if thou will do thy utmost
Endeavou^^ the time will not be long before the Lord r^move these Mountains of
Sin and Unbelie^ and of the Powers of Darkness, and give the the sense of his
Love and Mercy, and refres^ment from his Presence; then all those Cloud shall
be scattered and vanish away, whi^^ formerly interposed between the Presence
(...) God and thy (...).

I shall next ^^me to show how Paul preached Christ, 1 C 1.23, 24. We preach
Christ crucified (says he) unto the Jews a Stumbling block, and unto the
Greeks Foolishness; but unt^ them which are called, both Jews and Greek^ Christ
the Power of God, and the Wisdom o^ God. This Power and Wisdom of God di^ dwell
in Christ in all Fullness, and out of tha^ Fullness he distributes to every one a
suitable measure. Ephesians. 4.7. says the Apostle Paul But unto every one of us is
given Grace, according to the measure of the Gift of Christ: Wherefore he
says, When he ascended on high, he le^^ Captivity Captive: he received Gifts
for Me^ yea, for the Rebellious also, that the Lord Go^ might dwell among them,
or inhabit them, ^s the Word signifies.

I come not here to show my self skilful in Hebrew, Greek and Latin; I hope it
is no Of^ence to tell you of a better Translation of a ^lace of Scripture, as
in the Margent of your ^ibles. I come not hither to speak Hebrew, ^reek and
Latin, and to show my Skill in se^eral parts of Learning and Philosophy, after
^he Rudiments of the World, as one vainly ^uft up by a fleshly Mind; I
relinquished it ^^ove thirty Years ago. I never reckoned ^mane Learning a
necessary Qualification to ^ake a Man meet to be a Preacher of the Gospel of
Christ. There is needful another Qua^ification for the preaching of Christ and
him ^ucified, preaching his Cross, which is a Stumbling Block to some, and
Foolishness to others, but unto them that are s^^^d, it is Christ, ^he Power of
God, and the W^^dom of God, ^orasmuch as the Fullness dwell^ in him, and
^orasmuch as we receive our several Measures one after another, and we receive
them by him and through him, and from him. Christ is the Author or Beginner of
our Faith, and the Finisher of it; he is the Light of every Man that comes into
the World, a common Illumi^ation is given to all.

There are some that say, That Lam gone from any ancient Testimony to the Light
within; they have not said it to my Face, though they insinuate and whisper
against me. I am bold not in mine own Ability and Strength, but in ^he Lord to
say, None can justly charge me that I am gone from my ancient Testimony t^ the
Sufficiency of the Light within, that ther^ is a Sufficiency in the least
measure of it to profit withal; though it be never so little, if Me^ labor to
improve it, God will not be wanting to give more.

I am yet to learn that there ever were any among our Friends in former Days,
or of thos^ that are newly risen up among us, will say^ Any have received so
much that they need no^ depend upon the Lord for more; as if tha^ was
sufficient for all time to come, we have already received, We are to pray for
ou^ daily Bread, we are to pray for daily Supplies of the Spirit; Lord give us
more of thy Spirit, and multiply thy Mercies and Blessings upon us, says the
Apostle Peter, 2 Pet. 1.2. Grace and Peace be multiplied to you, through the
Knowledge of God and of Jesus Christ our Lord.

But to proceed, and speak a little further concerning that Doctrine which Paul
and Silas preached to the Jailor and his Household, Believe in the Lord Jesus
Christ, and thou shall be saved, and thy House. I did not study a Text before I
came hither, I did not know what I should speak, but waiting for the pure
Motion of the Lord, that Scripture was brought before me, and a sweet Motion
was upon my Spirit, and yet continues with me; Believe in the Lord Jesus
Christ, and thou shall be saved.

Observe here, that Paul nor Silas does not say, That he must witness
Regeneration or Sanctification before he does believe in the lord Jesus Christ:
He does not say, Thou ^ust have a pure Conscience before thou do ^eceive the
Mystery of Faith, [which is a Do^trin that some hold, that a pure Conscience
^ust be witnessed before Faith.] Though the ^ords are true, Faith is held in a
pure Consci^ce. But we must not say, That the Conscience ^^st be first pure,
and then Faith will be gi^n to a pure Conscience; Faith and a pure ^onscience
go together.

I have experience of (...) ^lessed be God, ^ have known a defiled Co^^^^ence;
and now, ^o God's Praise I spea^ (...), I know in some ^easure a purified
Conscience. My Consci^nce was not purified before I did receive the Faith of
Christ; the very same moment that ^ received a measure of this pure Faith, this
^ure Faith purified my Conscience.

So Men and Women come to be cleansed from the Defilements of Sin by the power
of ^ true and living Faith, not that Faith which ^s so common in Christendom, a
traditional and historical Faith. What if all Men and Women in England should
say, They have ^he Faith of Christ within? What if all Chri^endom should
profess the Light within them, and yet live contrary to that Faith, and
cru^ifie the Lord Jesus Christ afresh with their Covetousness, Strife, Envy,
Fighting, and ^uch things? It is not every Profession of Faith ^f Christ within
us, or of Christ without us, ^at is a true Faith. The Enemy of our Souls ^ay
creep in at that Door under a Profession of Christ within, or the Light within,
wh^ there is neither a true Belief of Christ within nor of Christ without; many
have profess to be taught by the Light within, and the Spirit of Christ within.

It is not a traditional Faith, nor an hist^rical Faith, of Christ without or
of Chr^ within that I preach, but that evangelical, ^^ving and living Faith, by
which we come be dead with Christ, and buried with hi^ and risen with him,
according to the expre^ Testimony of Scripture, Romans 6.3, 4. Kn^ you not that
so many of us as were baptized (...) Jesus Christ, were baptized into Death?
th^^^fore, we are buried with him by Baptism in Death, that like as Christ was
raised up from the Dead by the glory of the Father, even so w^ also should walk
in newness of Life. It is no^ meant there of outward Baptism, but of more
excellent Baptism; and you are not risen with Christ before Faith; no, but
through the Faith of the operation of God, that Power that raised Christ from
the Dead, 1 Col. 2.12 And if you feel not a measure of that Power which raised
Christ from the Dead to bege^ Faith in your Hearts, it is impossible yo^ should
be dead with Christ, or risen wit^ him.

Why shall they profess Faith in Christ tha^ have it not otherwise than the
World hat^ it?

If they have not a true and living Faith which is another kind of Faith than
the Worl^ has, or Christendom generally has; for the are Strangers to true
Faith: This true, living, ^aving Faith is as necessary to be preached at ^his
Day as ever it was. As to the manner of ^t, I do not say, It is needful to
stand up from Morning to Evening, to preach to People in a ^are historical way,
to convince them that the ^ternal Son of God came in that prepared Bo^^, and by
his Death was a Sacrifice for our ^edemption and Salvation, that is not the
^^ing I labor in; I never Labored a quar^er of an hour, much less have I
stood up in ^ Meeting from Morning to Evening, to con^ince People barely from
the Letter, that Christ is come: But I will tell you what I have labored for,
I preach Christ as I am moved, and as the Lord is pleased to open my Mouth to
speak; and I hope, he has opened the Ears and Hearts of People to (...)* I
have labored to prove, That the (...) of that Faith in Christendom is a false
Fa^^^ not a Faith of the operation of God: I have demonstrated, That the Faith
that abounds in Christendom, is an unprofitable dead Faith; their Works do
prove it so.

It is an absurd Doctrine to say, That divine Revelation and divine Inspiration
is ceased; the true Faith comes by divine Revelation, inward Revelation and
Inspiration; and also, by outward Preaching, and hearing instrumentally in
God's ordinary way of working. It is the Spirit of God that reveals the Mystery
of Faith in our Hearts. Its well known how I have labored, and what Books I
have written for this Testimony, that none have this true sincere Faith but
they that have it by i^ward, divine Revelation; the Mystery of i^ must be by
Inspiration revealed within them I have labored with all my Heart to pro^
this, but a preparatory Work goes before han^ John Baptist was sent to prepare
the way (...) the Lord; therefore, it is no new Testimon^ but it is the ancient
Testimony of our Frien^ that I have long since heard preached. It is the which
answers John's Ministry, that is, a M^nistration within. Before Christ's
Ministr^tion, the Gospel Ministration, there is the M^nistration of the Law
within, and of Joh^ Baptist within, and Mount Sinai within Thus I have pressed
and preached.

O, my Friends, before you come to the spiritual Sion, you must pass by the
spiritua^ Sinai: You must not take up your Rest i^ Mount Sinai, nor in the
Wilderness, but yo^ must follow the Pillar of a Cloud by Day, an^ a Pillar of
Fire by Night, that God leads hi^ People by. Isa. 4.5, 6. And the Lord wi^
create upon every Dewlling Place of Mount Zion, and upon her Assemblies a Cloud
and Smoa^ by Day, and the shining of a flaming Fire by Night; for upon all the
Glory shall be a Defense. And there shall be a Tabernacle for a Shadow in the
daytime from the Heat, and for a place of Refuge, and for a Covert from Storm
and from Rain.

Here is a Cloud not without Christ's refreshing Rain, it will shower down
heavenly Rain, and divine Influences from Heaven upon us; and this Cloud shall
likewise be as a Fire in a cold Night, to warm us with heavenly Heat and
Influence. So we are not to ^it down at Mount Sinai, but to pass through the
several Ministrations of both the Law and the Gospel.

It is not my present Testimony to demonstrate to People these great, important
and weighty Truths, That Christ is God; That he is the true Messiah and Savior
of the World; and, That he is already come, God manifest in Flesh. I should
think it almost needless to demonstrate these things to any but such as are
ignorant of them, as Jews and Heathens, to demonstrate that Christ is outwardly
come; but it is a most necessary and profitable Labor, and God has blessed it
with Success to all that labor in the Power of the Lord to demonstrate to
People that it is a living Faith in the crucified Jesus that is absolutely
necessary to Salvation, to believe in him as he lived in the Body, died and
rose again, and is ascended and is gone to Heaven in the Body. The Heavens, and
the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain him as to his Godhead, which fills Heaven
and Earth, but with respect to his Body he is only in Heaven: The Heavens have
received his Body until the appointed time of the restitution of all things,
when he shall come again to judge the World; then all Nations shall see him,
and shall stand before the Son of Man. God has appointed a day wherein he will
judge the World by the Man Christ Jesus, not by the Light within only (though he
shall judge Men here by the Light within, and also hereafter.)

All that are born of Women shall stand before Christ Jesus at his Tribunal;
the Saints shall behold him with Joy, and the Wicked shall see him with Horror;
and they would be glad that the Mountains would fall upon them, and hide them
from his Presence; but the Saints shall see their Savior with comfort, and
rejoice to hear him pronounce that blessed Sentence, that sweet and loving
Invitation, which will transport them into an Extacy of joyful Admiration, Come
ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the
Foundation of the World.

Therefore, Friends, I beseech you, unless you would rush upon that Rock that
will be too strong for the stoutest of you, embrace the necessary Doctrine of
Christ crucified, by whom alone you can obtain Salvation, and escape that Wrath
that is to come, that will certainly fall upon those that make light of Christ,
and what he has done and suffered for them.

Do not discourage me in my Labors; a necessity is laid upon me to preach
Christ and him crucified, and a right Faith in him; if any shall put this
Question of the Jailor, What shall I do to be saved? My Answer is that of the
Apostle Paul and Silas, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be
saved. Say not in thine Heart who shall ascend into Heaven? (that is, to bring
down Christ from above) or, who shall descend into the Deep? (that is to bring
up Christ again from the dead) the Word is nigh thee, even in thy Mouth and in
thy Heart, that is the Word of Faith which we preach, that if thou shall
confess with thy Mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine Heart, that
God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved; for with the Heart Man
believes unto Righteousness, and with the Mouth Confession is made unto
Salvation.

But that is not all, there must be Obedience, and we must express our love to
Christ by keeping his Commandments, for He is the Author of Eternal Salvation
to all them that obey him. If any shall reject this Doctrine and Faith in Christ
crucified, and say, It will do me no good; I can tell them from mine own
Experience, That the Lord has wrought it in my Heart (blessed be his Name) and
I find the purifying Nature of it.

Let it not be said, That all Christendom or all England, have this Faith which
I preach; for the generality of Men and Women have only a literal, an
historical and traditional Faith; they believe only because they have it
sounded in their Ears, or read it in the Bible, that Christ died for Sinners,
to reconcile us to God, and purchase Salvation for us. And though, as I have often
declared, I have that Charity, that God has a Remnant in all Professions in
Christendom, that have some measure of the true Faith; If it be a right saving
justifying Faith, it must be wrought in us by the mighty power of God. Your
Faith stands not in any Man's Words, though never so good but in the Power of
God: Your Faith mu^^ not be grounded upon any Man's Testimony He that
believes, says the Apostle, has the Witness in himself, and the Spirit of
God bears witness with our Spirits, that we are the Children of God, and
witnesses the great lov^ of God that gave his only begotten Son to die for us,
and the love of Christ that gave himself for us, and took our Nature and Sins
upon him, and became a Curse for us. Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us (says
the Apostle) from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us; for it is
written, Cursed is every one that hangs on a Tree; he has also once suffered
for Sins, the Just for the Unjust (that he might bring us to God) being put to
Death in the Flesh, but quickened by the Spirit.

If all England had a right Belief, a right Faith and Persuasion of the Love of
God that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, and of the
love of his Son Jesus Christ who gave himself for u^* this would melt their
Hearts, and draw them effectually to the love of God and Christ, and constrain
them not only to love the Lord Jesus, but to live to him that died for them.
This Faith in a crucified Jesus, is a Faith that works by Love, and Love is
the fulfilling of the Law, and will make you have respect to all God's
Commandments; and if this divine Love reign and rule in our Hearts, it will be
the most delightful Exercise of our Lives to do the Will of God.

If all Christendom had a right Belief of the Love of God, that gave his Son to
die for us, and did live in a sense of the love of Christ that was crucified,
and gave himself for us an Offering, and a Sacrifice to God for a sweet
smelling Savor, this Love would captivate and overcome them, and melt their
Hearts before the Lord.

My Friends, the power and efficacy of this Faith and Love, is that (blessed be
the Lord) which I know from Experience and from a deep sense of this Love of
God shed abroad upon my Heart, by the Holy Ghost which is given to me, and has
opened to me the Mystery of that infinite love and grace of God in the Work of
Man's Redemption by Jesus Christ, wherein the Power, Mercy, Wisdom, Justice,
Truth and Holiness of God are wonderfully displayed to our unspeakable Joy, and
his everlasting Glory.

A SERMON Preached by George Keith, At Devonshire-house, August 26. 1694.
John 15.1, 2, 5. I am the true Vine, and my Father is the Husbandman.
IN these Words there is a great nearness and unity held forth by the Lord
Jesus Christ between himself and his People that do believe in him. In the 5th
Verse he says, I am the Vine, ye are the Branches. What Ye is this? All Men
and Women upon the Face of the Earth? No: who then? Only them that believe in
him. These are Branches ingrafted into this Vine, abiding in this Vine, and
bringing forth Fruit from the Sap and Moisture that this Vine affords; they
only that believe in him, derive vital influence from him. By Faith we are
ingrafted into Christ the ^rue Vine, and united to him; true Faith is of ^n
uniting Nature. No sooner are true Be^ievers united to Christ by a true Faith,
but instantly and immediately they find a divine Sap and Virtue flowing from
Christ into their Souls, which will make them fruitful; I am the true Vine, and
my Father is the Husbandman; every Branch in me that bears not Fruit he
takes away: And every Branch that bears Fruit he purges it, that it may
bring forth more Fruit. True and sound Believers that are really united to
Christ, will become fruitful in every good Word and Work, and abound in all the
Fruits of the Spirit mentioned by the Apostle, Gal. 5.2. But the Fruit of the
Spirit is Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness. Faith,
Meekness, Temperance, against such there is no Law.

Now from this it evidently appears, that that Faith which generally abounds in
Christendom, is not the true Faith: Why? Because they have not these Fruits.
Love is a Fruit of the Spirit; where is Love amongst them? Where Love is there
will not be Backbiting, Heartburnings, Jealousies, Surmises and uncharitable
judging one another; No, where Love is these things will not be, but Love, Joy
and Peace, Peace with God, and Peace with one another; and nothing but Peace
and good will even toward all: Then our Swords will be beaten into Plowshears,
and our Spears into Pruning Hooks, and Men will learn War no more. That there
is so much strife and contention in Christendom, it is because true Lov^ is
wanting among Men, and true Faith is also wanting.

But there are a Remnant that have tru^ Faith that works by Love; but this
noble Faith, and Love, and the rest of the Fruits o^ the Spirit are greatly
wanting amongst the generality of the Professors of Christianity. I^ is by
Faith that we come to be ingrafted into Christ the true Vine, and abide in him
and bring forth much Fruit.

It is by unbelief that Men are severed from Christ, and not abiding in him,
they are cast forth as Branches that are withered, and then cast into the Fire
and burned. O great is the hurt of unbelief, and great is the benefit of true
Faith. He that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit Ephesians. 4.10, 11. (says the
Apostle.) Christ when he Ascended upon high he led Captivity Captive, and gave
Gifts unto Men. He that first descended into the lower parts of the Earth, is
the same that ascended up far above all Heavens, that he might fill all things.
And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some
Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the
Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ, till we all come into the
unity of the Faith, and the knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfect Man, unto
the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, that we henceforth be no
more Children tossed to and fro and carried about with every Wind of Doctrine,
by the sleight of Men, and cunning craftyness whereby they lie (...) wait to
deceiave.

Hence observe the manner of the Speech and Phrase used by the Holy Ghost; all
these are for edifying the Body of Christ, till we come unto the unity of the
Faith and knowledge of the Son of God, to a perfect Man: All Believers make up
one perfect Man, where Christ is the Head, and Believers are the Members. Let
thy progress be never so great, thou can not come to equality with Christ; he
has the fullness of the Godhead dwelling in him Bodily; we can come only to
the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ; unto every one of us is
given Grace according to the measure of the gift of Christ; now the greatest
and higest measure is but a measure. Consider what is Written, Romans 11.24. The
Jews that were natural branches were cut off from Christ the good Olive Tree
through unbelief; What was their unbelief? They did not believe in Christ Jesus
the Son of Man; they did not believe in him that was born of a Virgin to be the
Prophet that God promised to his People; they did not believe the Man Christ
Jesus to be the true Messiah that God had promised to send, to put an end to
the Types, and Figures and shadows of the Law, and to their new Moons and
solemn Feasts, and to Circumcision, and to the Passover, and to put an end to
the offering up of outward Sacrifices and the shedding of the Blood of the
Sacrifices that so their Sins might be forgiven them, for without shedding of
Blood there is no Remission.

It was not the Blood of Beasts that were offered in Sacrifice could take away
Sin: Why? Because these were only Representations and Symbols to help the
People's weakness, and to present Christ to their Eyes, and suited to their
weak State, which is compared to the state of a Child: This was the Reason they
received not Christ outwardly; and the Unbelief of the Jews was great in that,
because they did not receive Christ into their Hearts in his Spiritual
Appearance, but they received him neither inwardly nor outwardly.

Whosoever reject Christ outwardly they reject him inwardly, and whosoever
receive Christ inwardly and sincerely they also receive him outwardly, to be
the great Sacrifice for their Sins; they own his priestly Office for the
Remission of Sins, through the Blood of the Covenant; they do admire the
wonderful Design and Contrivance of the Wisdom of God in the great Work of
Man's Redemption; they adore and admire the Mercy and Love of God, his Power
and Justice, Holiness, Wisdom, Goodness, Faithfulness and Truth in that
glorious Contrivance, that he should send his Dear Son to die for the Sins of
Men, and take our Nature and Sin upon him, and be made a Curse for us, and take
the Curse from us, and to be made Sin for us who knew no Sin, that we might be
made the Righteousness of God in him: He was wounded for our Transgressions,
bruised for our Iniquities; the Chastisement of our Peace was upon him, and
with his Stripes we are healed, Isa. 53.5. Who his own self bare our Sins in
his own Body, on the Tree, that we being dead to Sin should live unto
Righteousness. He was made Sin for us (says the Apostle) 2 Cor. 5. How was
Christ made Sin for us? Sin, that is a Sin-offering. He became an Offering for
Sin. They that are Branches in the true Vine, and grafted into Christ, receive
heavenly Sap and Moisture from him. We must believe that Christ died for our
Sins; we must believe that he was made a Curse for us, and that he shed his
Blood for the Remission of our Sins; We must believe this weighty Testimony,
This is a faithful Saying and worthy of all Acceptance, That Christ Jesus came
into the World to save Sinners, of whom I am chief, says the Apostle, 1 Timothy
1.15. This is a faithful Saying and worthy of all Acceptance, that Christ
Jesus came into the World to die for Sinners, and to shed his Blood for
Sinners, as well as inwardly to appear in the Hearts of Sinners: A Work that
was a most necessary Work for the Redeeming, Renewing, Sanctifying and
Cleansing of us from all Sins.

So, my Friends, true Faith in Christ receives him with all his Benefits,
receives him both in his outward and bodily Appearance, as manifest in the
Flesh, and also in his Spiritual Appearance and coming into our Hearts, and by
true Faith in him we come to be ingrafted into him, and receive Sap and
Moisture, and heavenly Influence from him who is the true, generous and Noble
Vine.

Our blessed Lord here holds forth a wonderful Mystery in these few Words; I am
the true Vine and my Father is the Husbandman* every Branch in me that bears
not Fruit he takes away, and every Branch that bears Fruit he purges it,
that it may bring forth more Fruit. He cuts and dresseth it with his
Pruning-knife, that he may cut off fruitless and superfluous Branches. You may
take notice from hence that it is manifest that those that are grafted into
Christ and bring forth Fruit, they may have some Superfluities that may need
cutting off; but so long as the Branch brings forth Fruit the Husbandman will
not cut it off; if there be any Life or Virtue in it he will spare it, that it
may become fruitful. God is the wise Husbandman, every Branch that bears
Fruit, he purges it, that it may bring forth more fruit: He comes with his
Pruning Knife and cuts off the superfluous Branches, that the fruitful Branches
may grow and flourish by the Sap and Moisture they receive from the heavenly
Vine, As new born Babes (says the Apostle) desire the sincere Milk of the
Word, that ye may grow thereby. Those that are in Christ may have some
Superfluities; if we may be as Instruments to cut off those Superfluities and
save the Branch, it is well.

In this Parable of the Vine, representing God as the Husbandman, Christ as the
Vine, and Believers as the Branches; God the Father acts the part of a
Husbandman. What is the Office that God exercises toward Christ the Vine,
under this Figure, Metaphor and Allegory, representing him as a Husbandman? We
know what Christ the true Vine does to us that are Branches, if we be grafted
by Faith into him, he supplies us with heavenly Sap and Moisture: The Vine
gives Sap and Moisture to every Branch, it has such plenty of Sap, and
Moisture; and Fatness in it self as to make every Branch fruitful: There is no
want in Christ the good Vine, to minister and convey heavenly Sap and Virtue to
every Branch that abides in him. We now understand what the Office of Christ
the true Vine is to Believers that are the Branches, and what he does to them.

But (may some say) what does God to Christ? What does God the Father, the
heavenly Husbandman do unto Christ the Noble Vine? What Influence has the Son
from the Father? We need Influences from the Son of God, but what Influence
has the Son from the Father?

I answer, Christ, as the Son of Man, needs a continual Influence from the
Father, as we need a continual Influence from Christ. As the Father has Life
in himself, so he has given to the Son to have Life in himself, and he
quickneth whom he will. Says Christ, John 5.19. Verily, verily, I say unto
you, the Son can do nothing of himself, but what he sees the Father do; for
what things soever he does these also does the Son likewise; for the Father
loves the Son, and shows him all things that himself does. And in another
Place he says, My Father works hitherto, and I work.

But some may say, Is not Christ God?

Yes, he is God, and he is Man too; we must have a right Faith in him, not only
as God, but as Man: Had Christ been God only and not become the Son of Man, he
had not been a Savior, that is, a perfect and complete Savior. It behoved him
to become Man, to take upon him the Form of a Servant; it behoved him to bear
the weight of our Sins in his own Body, upon the Tree, and become a Sacrifice
and die for us, and then to rise again from the Dead and ascend into Heaven,
and live for ever to make Intercession for us: We needed such an high Priest,
that was sensibly touched with the Feeling of our Infirmities, and in all
Points tempted like as we are, yet without Sin. That is an excellent Place
wherein David prophesied of Christ, Psalm. 69.18. Thou have ascended on high,
thou have led Captivity captive, thou have received Gifts for Men, yea for the
rebellious also, that the Lord God might dwell among them; or, as it may be
better translated, That the Lord God might inhabit them and dwell in them. Here
David prophesied what Christ received; from whom does Christ receive Gifts to
give unto the Rebellious? He received them from the Father; he received them
from him for them.

So that you may understand that Christ is a Mediator or middle Person between
God and us. God the Father has sealed the Son, and appointed him to give Bread
to all the Household of God; Labor not for the Meat which perishes, but for
that Meat which endures to Everlasting Life, which the Son of Man shall give
unto you; for him has God the Father sealed: He has put a Mark upon him,
whereby he may be known from all others; all are inferior to him and short of
him, all are Servants under him, Heb. 3.5, 6. Moses verily was faithful in all
God's House, as a Servant, etc. but Christ as a Son over his own House^; whose
House are we if we hold fast the Confidence and the rejoicing of the Hope firm
unto the end. Believers are God's House, he is their Master; Christ is the
Steward of the House; God has sealed Christ and has marked him: How has he
marked him? With the fullness of the Holy Spirit. John the Baptist taught the
People! (...) to know Christ before all other, I indeed baptize you with Water
unto Repentance, but he that comes after me is mightier than I, whose Shoes I
am not worthy to bear, he shall Baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with Fire.
John, when he had Baptized Christ in Jordan, saw the Spirit descending on him.
Jesus, when he was Baptized, went up straightway out of the Water, and lo the
Heavens were opened to him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a
Dove, and lighting upon him; and lo a voice from Heaven saying, This is my
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased,

Now, to open a little further, in a few words, the Relation that the Father
has to the Son, that is here set forth by way of Metaphor or Allegory, in this
Parable, wherein Christ is styled the true Vine and the Father the Husbandman;
what the Husbandman does to the Vine, that God the Father does unto Christ. You
will say, what is that? what does the Husbandman to the Vine? does Christ need
any pruning, purging or dressing? was there any Sin in him? No, he needs no
pruning, or purging; there is no Sin in him nor never was. What does the
Husbandman do to the Vine? He puts Earth and Fatness to the Vine, and the Vine
it self must have Earth and Soil to grow in: The Vine cannot grow unless it
have a Soil to grow in. As a Branch cannot grow unless it has a Stock to grow
upon, neither can a Tree nor a Vine grow unless it has Earth and Soil to grow
in: Now God the Father, who is the heavenly Husbandman, he gives Divine
Influence and Fatness and Moisture unto Christ the true Vine: It is an
Allegory, a Metaphor and Figure, but there is a Reality under it and in it; the
Son is planted in the Father, and we are planted in the Son; the Father gives
Life to the Son, and the Son gives Life unto Believers; the Son is continually
receiving from the Father, and we are continually receiving from the Son,
through the Exercise of our Faith.

Would you know and feel an heavenly Virtue, and Sap, and vital Influence
flowing ^^om Christ into your Souls? And would you now nothing of dryness,
barrenness nor un^^uitfulness? then live by the Faith of the Son ^f God, and
exercise your Faith upon Christ ^ontinually: It is not enough to have Faith ^e
by you, as a Man has an Instrument lying ^y, and he does not use it: But know
the Use and Exercise of Faith, you must know ^he daily Operation of Faith, els^
you cannot ^eceive continual Sap flowing (...) you from Christ the heavenly
Vine. G^^. 2.20. I am ^rucified with Christ (says the Apostle) never^heless I
live, yet not I but Christ lives in me; and the Life, which I now live in the
Flesh, I ^ive by the Faith of the Son of God, who loved ^ne and gave himself
for me. There is no ^iving but by the Faith of the Son of God, Romans 1.16.17. I
am not ashamed of the Gospel ^f Christ; for it is the Power of God unto
Salvation, to every one that believes, to the Jew first, and also to the
Greek: For therein is the Righteousness of God revealed from Faith to Faith; as
it is written (Hab. 2.4.) the Just shall live by his Faith.

Every Man and Woman are to live by their own Faith: It is not the Faith and
Holiness of another will serve our turn; every one must have Faith of his own,
which is the Gift of God. I once more warn you against that Faith that is only
literal, traditional and historical, for that is not the Faith that will
justify and save you; that is not the Faith which I preach: I am much abused,
wronged and traduced by some, that say, I preach an unprofitable Faith, and
that the Fai^^ which I preach, all England has it, and a^ Christendom has it:
If they had it w^ should see the Fruits of it, Love, Joy, Peace Longsuffering,
Gentleness, Goodness, Meekness and Temperance; these are the Fruit of the
Spirit and Concomitants of true Faith The Faith which I preach is indispensibly
necessary to every one that expects Salvation and to live with God and Christ
in Heaven for ever. It is a Faith that is wrought by the mighty Power of God,
the powerful word o^ God in the Heart, Heb. 4.12. The Word o^ God is quick and
powerful, sharper than an^ two-edged Sword, piercing even to the dividing
asunder of Soul and Spirit, and of the Joynt^ and Marrow, and is a discerner of
the Thought^ and Intents of the Heart. This Faith come^ from an inward Root;
this Root is the Ligh^ within, the Power of God, the Spirit of God within.

O, how many thousands in Christendom have risen up against this Testimony?
Blessed be God that gave me a share in this Testimony; there is a living
Testimony that remains in my Mouth and Heart to this Day, that the Lord Jesus
Christ died for us, performed the Office of an High Priest for us, and upon the
account of his precious Blood we receive Remission of Sins. All this is by
Faith in Christ; we witness to his prophetical Office, he is the great Prophet
and Teacher of his Church and People; and we witness to his Kingly Office, he
rules and governs in our Hearts by his Holy Spirit. This Faith is not
universally preached and known in all Christendom, in the Root of it, which is
Christ within, the Light within, that Christ in his prepared Body did the Will
of God and suffered Death for us. This Faith, whereby I believe Christ died for
me and makes Intercession for me, the Root of it is the Light within and Christ
within.

Is this the Doctrine that is believed and professed all over Christendom? No,
by no means: This Faith I can prove out of our Friends Writings, in Print, that
it respects Christ whole and entire. Every true Exercise of Faith does respect
Christ, as he is both God and Man: It respects him as he came in the Flesh,
died and suffered for us in the Flesh, and as he rose again from the Dead and
ascended into Heaven, and now appears in the Presence of God for us, and as he
will come again to judge the world, as he is ^he Son of Man, God has appointed
a Day, wherein he will judge the World, by the Man Christ Jesus, whereof he
has given Assurance ^o all Men, in that he has raised him from ^he Dead.

Some will be ready to say, Shall not the Light within judge all Men? Shall not
the words which Christ has spoken judge us at ^he last Day?

Yes, Christ shall judge all Men at the last Day, both by his Light in their
Hearts, and ^s he is the Man Christ; now if any think ^^at the Light within is
the Man Christ Jesus, and nothing else, and exclude the Person o^ Christ, the
same Person that was crucified an^ died for us, and was buried, This would b^ a
great Error, and a contradiction to the fundamental Principles of the Christian
Faith I say, that blessed Body which God prepare^ for his dear Son to
tabernacle in, to be h^^ Temple, that Body remains in Being, and wi^^ remain a
glorious Body to all Eternity. The Apostle tells us, Phil. 3.20. That our mea^
and vile Bodies shall be made like unto Christ^ glorious Body. For our
Conversation is in Heaven, from whence also we look for the Savior the Lord
Jesus Christ, who shall change ou^ vile Body, that it may be fashioned like
unto h^ glorious Body, according to the working where^^ he is able to subdue
all things unto himself.

It will be the Happiness of the Saints the they shall be made like unto
Christ, both i^ Soul and Body. We shall be made more lik^ to Christ in our
Souls and Spirits then, an^ we must be cleansed from Sin, and made li^^ him
now; for we expect no Purgatory aft^^ this Life, therefore defer it not: He
that ha^ this Hope, says the Apostle, purifyeth himse^^ even as he is pure.

My Friends, I expect no cleansing after the Life; I expect all my cleansing
here, to (...) cleansed from all filthiness both of Flesh a^ Spirit, perfecting
Holiness in the fear of G^^ that so when I come to die, I may be receiv^ into
the Bosom of Christ, that I may have measure of that holy Confidence to pray
(...) Stephen, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit, This ^lessed Martyr Stephen being
full of the Holy Ghost, he looked up steadfastly into Heaven, and ^aw the Glory
of God, and Jesus standing on the ^ight Hand of God; and when they were ston^ng
him to Death, he kneeled down, and cried with a loud Voice, Lord, lay not this
Sin to their Charge, and when he had said this, he ^ell asleep.

Friends, you that have a Life of Faith, and ^eel Christ dwelling in your
Hearts by Faith, ^ou feel his Life, Power and Spirit in you, to ^ead you in the
way of Obedience. You may die in Peace, and with great Joy and Satisfaction,
you may die with great Courage, and commit your Bodies to the Grave, and with
^ulness of Assurance commit your departing Souls to the Lord Jesus, to be
received into his Bosom, and to have an abundant entrance unto his everlasting
Kingdom. All the decea^ed Saints, though they have a greater Enjoyment of God and
Christ than we have now, or th^^ ^hey had when tabernacled in a mortal Body,
^et they wait and long for the Reward which ^hey shall receive at the
Resurrection of the Dead; then is the full Possession, the joyful Harvest which
our Savior has told us of; When thou make a Feast, invite not thy Friends
^r the Rich that will invite thee again, but the Poor and Needy that cannot
recompense thee. How few make such Feasts? This was our Saviors Counsel and
Advice, Luke 14.12, 13. When thou make a Dinner or a Supper, call ^ot thy
Friends nor thy Brethren, neither thy Kinsmen nor thy rich Neighbors, lest
they als^ bid thee again, and Recompense be made to the^ But when thou make a
Feast, call the Poor the Maimed, the Lame and the Blind, an^ thou shall be
blessed; for they cannot recompenc^ thee, for thou shall be recompensed at the
Resurrection of the Just. When is the Resurrection of the Dead? when Men and
Women die (...) No; when a good Man and Woman die they certainly go into
Paradise; there is a great fruition of the Lord's Presence, and o^ his Love and
Life, that they then receive an^ enjoy: But that is not the Resurrection o^ the
Dead. Many were raised from the Dea^ before Christ died, but this is not the
genera^ Resurrection of the Dead: And our Saviou^ himself raised Lazarus and
the Widow's Son this is not the Resurrection of the Dead. Bu^ now Christ is
risen from the Dead (says the Apostle) and become the first Fruits of them
tha^ sleep, 1 Cor. 15.20. though some were raised from the Dead before Christ's
Death and Resurrection, yet none of them went bodily to Heaven, but Christ
himself: As in Adam a^ die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive but every
Man in his own Order; Christ the first Fruits, afterward they that are Christ's
a^ his coming, then comes the end.

Friends, I hope in this manner of Doctri^^ my Testimony is acceptable to some;
I war^ you let none despise it; I hope in God tha^ this Doctrine of the
Resurrection is acceptabl^ to many; if the holy Scriptures have Weigh^ and
Authority, and Credit with you, as I hop^ they have with all here present, then
the Faith of the Resurrection of the Dead, and the Faith of our own
Resurrection and of Christ's Resurrection will be of Credit with you, which is
such an important Matter, that all Preaching is vain without it, and our Faith
vain without it: If you have not a true Belief of the Resurrection of the Dead,
you are yet in your Sins. Pretend what you will of divine Enjoyments, if you
have not a Belief of the Resurrection of the Dead, I say you are yet in your
Sins, and your Faith is vain. I prove this from the Testimony of the Holy
Ghost, 1 Cor. 15.14. But if there be no Resurrection of the Dead, then is
Christ not risen; and if Christ be not risen, then is our Preaching vain, and
your faith is also vain; yea, and we are found salse Witnesses of God, because
we have testified of God that he raised up Christ, whom he raised not up, if so
be that the Dead arise not; for if the Dead rise not, then is not Christ
raised, and if Christ be not raised, your faith is vain, ye are yet in your
sins, 1 Cor. 15.16, 17.

Some ignorantly imagine, that the Apostle Paul speaks of an inward Rising and
of the new Birth; as the new Birth is a most necessary preparation for a
glorious Resurrection, that better Resurrection; but that is a great Mistake to
say, the Apostle speaks here of the new Birth: for he is speaking of raising
the Body out of the Grave. He speaks of the same that Christ spoke, John 5.28.
Marvel not at this, for the hour is coming in which all that are in the Graves
shall ^ear his Voice, a^^ shall come forth, they that have done good un^^ the
Resurrection of Life, and they that ha^^ done evil unto the Resurrection of
Damnation The Resurrection of the Just is a comfortabl^ Resurrection, but that
of the Unjust is (...) dreadful Resurrection, 2 Cor. 5.10. For (...) must all
appear before the Judgment Seat Christ, that every one may receive the thin^
done in his Body, according to that he ha^ done, whether it be good or bad. You
man take notice of those Words of the Apostle 1 Cor. 15.14. If there be no
Resurrection (...) the Dead, then is Christ not risen, and if Christ be not
risen, then is our Preaching vain, an^ your Faith is also vain.

These Words are linked together like s^ many Links, making a strong Chain that
can not be broken. The Resurrection of the Dead both of the Just and Unjust are
linked wit^ Christ's Resurrection, and Christ's Resurrection is linked with the
Faith of it, and the Faith of it linked with the Preaching of it they that have
not the true Faith of Christ Resurrection, and of the Resurrection of the Dead,
are yet in their Sins; and let them pretend never so much to the Faith of
Christ within, if they have not the Faith of Christ without them, they are yet
in their Sins.

Take not things upon my Credit, but searc^ the Scriptures; I hope the holy
Scriptures have Credit, Esteem and Authority with you. Le^ me once more caution
you to take thing rightly, that you may not mistake me; I say that a bare
historical Belief of the Resurrection of the Dead, or of the Resurrection of
Christ, will not prove a Man not to be dead ^n his sins; but if we do really
believe the Resurrection of the Dead and Christ's Resur^ection, if we believe
these great Truths, and ^f our Faith be from an inward Work of the Spirit of
God upon our Hearts, this Belief will lay a Constraint upon us to live unto
Christ that died for us, and to have our Hearts in Heaven, and our Conversation
in Heaven: If you are risen with Chrict (says the Apostle) then seek those
things that are above, where Christ sits on the right hand of God; and set
your Affectons on things above, and nor on things on the Earth.

What are those things above that we are to set our Hearts and Affections upon?
And what is it to set our Affections upon things above?

To set our Affections on things above, it is to have our Thoughts and
Meditations exercised after this manner: Lord, whom have I in Heaven but thee?
There is none upon Earth that I desire besides thee; Lord, my Desire is only
unto thee, and to the remembrance of thy Name; I, am traveling through the
Wilderness of this World, this is the place of my Pilgrimage; I am here in a
strange Land, I am passing through this Wilderness, this Country that is
earthly, but I desire a better Country, that is an heavenly. Lord, I am coming
to thee, and to be with thee, and to enjoy fullness of Felicity with thee: That
which I have now, is but an earnest and fore-taste of Heaven; that divine
Refreshment which I have now from thy Presence, O Lord, it is very sweet unto
my Soul, that follows hard after thee, and even faints and longs for thy
Salvation! Lord, my Soul is satisfied as with Marrow and Fatness, when thou
drawest nigh to me, and liftest up the Light of thy Countenance upon me; this
puts Gladness into my Heart, more than in the time that worldly Men have their
Corn and Wine increased. But what is all this in comparison of Heaven and the
full Fruition of thee, and that fullness of Joy, and Rivers of Pleasures, at thy
right Hand for evermore?

I would not diminish those divine and spiritual Enjoyments, and sweet
refreshing Consolations, which the Lord is pleased many times to vouchsafe to
his People here; they have large Enjoyments of the Lord's Presence and sweet
Communion with him; but all this is but a fore-taste and earnest of what is to
come. Therefore, setting our Affections on things above, is to be exercising
our Faith, our Hope and Meditations, upon that Felicity which we shall enjoy
after this Life.

I would not have any set their Imaginations on work so as to form Ideas in
their Minds what sort of place Heaven is, for those thoughts and conceptions
that will profit you, the Spirit of the Lord must give them to you, and so help
you to contemplate and meditate upon the joy and Glory of Heaven. If ever you
have any real benefit and advantage by the Exercise of your Thoughts, it must
be through the help and assistance of the Holy Spirit; you can have no
profitable Meditation concerning God, and Christ, and Heaven, and Judgment to
come, except the Spirit of the Lord does work in your Hearts, and form your
Thoughts, and excite your desires, and raise your affections to a spiritual and
lively Exercise.

Friends, you must labor to come to a Holy silence and stilness in your
waiting upon the Lord, and to deny your selves and take up the Cross of Christ,
and give up your selves entirely to the leadings of his Spirit, and suppress
the natural workings and actings of your own Spirits, and let every Thought and
Imagination be brought into subjection and into a Holy Captivity to the Lord
Jesus Christ, in your Meditations on God, and Heaven, and Glory in the World
to come; these Thoughts must be given you by the Spirit of God, you must form
and frame and work them together with the Spirit.

The Life of a true Christian is to live above, to have his conversation in
Heaven, and to look beyond all present Enjoyments, unto that which is to come,
unto fruitions that are future and Everlasting. The Apostle, according to the
Wisdom given him of God, has given us an excellent definition of Faith. Hebr.
11.1. Now Faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things
not seen. Hope looks to that which is future, which is not presently enjoyed.
Romans 8.24., says the Apostle, We are saved by Hope; but Hope the is seen is
not Hope, for what a Man sees w^ does he yet hope for it? But if we hope for
the we see not, then do we with patience wait f^ it.

If any one say that this Doctrine draws (...) from the present enjoyment,
from the gift o^ God in our selves to look to that which is beyond the grave; I
say it does not. Tru^ hope centers you in that which is the prese^^ measure,
and confirms and establishes you i^ it; it is the present measure that works
tru^ hope in us, a present measure of the gift o^ God, of the Grace and Spirit
of God; the effec^ of Grace cannot lead us from Grace; therefore it is great
weakness for any thus to argue, (...) am afraid my meditation will carry me
from m^ present measure. I tell thee the Thoughts an^ meditations that work in
the Heart of a tru^ Christian, that carry him beyond present enjoyments to
those that are future, will no^ hinder the present measure of Grace received.

Let me add this one word further; the mystery that has been told us; the
Mystery that has been hid from Ages and Generations which is Christ in us, who
is the hope of glory, may we not say Christ in us is our glory* and Christ in
us is our Enjoyment? We may say, if we are true Believers, Christ in me is Joy
and Sweetness to my Soul, and delight and satisfaction to my Soul beyond all
the transient Joys and pleasures of this World. If I had the possession of
them, and were Master of them; Christ within affords me that ^atisfaction and
content, that peace and joy, that surpasses all worldly Pleasures. Christ
within us is our hope of Glory, but the present measure of Christ within is not
our full possession of Glory. I own it, that Christ and his Grace is in every
Saint, and Grace is Glory begun; it is the earnest and first Fruits of Glory.
The Apostle calls Christ within, the Hope of Glory; not the full possession of
it. Christ within leads us to that which is beyond the Grave, and beyond Time,
which is to be enjoyed in a glorious Eternity.

The Apostle Paul tells us, Tit. 2.11, 12, 13. The grace of God that brings
Salvation, has appeared to all Men, teaching us, that denying Ungodliness and
worldly Lusts, we should live soberly, righteously and godly in this present
World; looking for that blessed Hope, and the glorious appearing of the great
God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us, that he might
redeem us from all Iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar People, zealous
of good Works. When is the time of the appearance of this blessed Hope? At the
glorious appearing of the great God (who is both God and Man) and our Savior.
When is that? At the Resurrection of the Dead, when all Nations shall stand
before the Son of Man, the Good and Bad, the Just and the Unjust together.

What this glorious Appearing will be, i^ beyond the power and ability of any
Man t^ demonstrate; but there is one thing I shall mention which will make it a
most glorious Appearing, that all the unjust Judgments that have been passed
against just Men, against the Saints and People of God, shall be reversed this
will be very glorious, and God will then, before Men and Angels, justify his
righteous and faithful Servants, that have been unjustly condemned by Popes,
Bishops, and general Councils and Synods.

Thus our blessed Lord himself was unjustly condemned, and charged with
Blasphemy, as you may read in the Evangelist, Mark 14.62. The High Priest asked
our Savior, and said unto him, Art thou the Christ the Son of the Blessed? And
Jesus said, I am. And ye shall see the Son of Man sitting on the right Hand of
Power, and coming in the Clouds of Heaven. Then the High Priest rent his
Cloths, and says, What need we any further Witnesses? Ye have heard the
Blasphemy; what think ye? And they all condemned him to be guilty of Death. A
wonderful thing! that Innocence it self should be condemned as Guilty, and that
the supreme and righteous Judge of the World, should have such an unrighteous
Sentence passed against him, and be crucified and slain by those, he came to
save, and that for their sakes endured the pains of Death, to purchase for them
eternal Life: He was made a Curse, that they might inherit the Blessing. When
Pilate would have released Christ, they cried, Not this Man, but Barrabas.

As they have treated the glorious Head of the Church, so they have dealt with
his Members; this godly Man, and the other godly Man, have been reproached,
persecuted and put to Death, for the sake of Jesus, the Author and Finisher of
our Faith, the great Captain of our Salvation, who was made perfect through
Sufferings. If we suffer with him we shall reign with him, at the Day of h^s
glorious Appearing; and it will be a glorious Appearing indeed to them that
look and long for it.

The new Covenant opened: IN A SERMON Preached by George Keith AT Harp-lane,
near Towerstreet, London, Sept. 2d 1694.
Jeremiah, xxxi. 31, etc. Behold, the Days come, says the Lord, That I will
make a new Covenant with the House of Israel, and with the House of Judah: Not
according to the Covenant that I made with their Fathers, in the Day that I
took them by the Hand, to bring them out of the Land of Egypt (which my
Covenant they brake, although I was an Husband to them, says the Lord) But
this shall be the Covenant that I will make with the House of Israel; After
those Days, says the Lord, I will put my Law in their (...) write it in th^^^
Hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my People: And they shall
teach no more every Man his Neighbor, and every Man his Brother, saying, Know
the Lord: For they shall all know me, from the least of them unto the greatest
of them, says the Lord; for I will forgive their Iniquity, and I will remember
their Sin no more.
THERE are diverse great and weighty things needful here to be opened, for
there are many Persons are very apt to mistake, that have not a right
Understanding of the Nature of the New Covenant, and they make a great jumble
and confusion between that common universal Illumination, extended to all.
Mankind, even the most barbarous Nations where the Gospel never came, by any
outward Ministry, and that Illumination which is proper and peculiar to the new
Covenant.

The Apostle, speaking of the Gentiles, to whom Christ was not outwardly
preached, and where his Name and Fame, and the Sound of him was not come, he
writes thus; Romans 1.20. For the invisible things of him, from the Creation of
the World, are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even
his Eternal Power and Godhead, so that they are without Excuse. And, again, the
Apostle speaking of the Dispensation of God that the Gentiles were under, who
had not a Law outward^^ delivered to them, Romans 2.14, 15. For when the
Gentiles, which have not the Law, do by Nature the things contained in the Law,
these, having not the Law, are a Law unto themselves; which show the Work of
the Law written in their Hearts, their Conscience also bearing Witness, and
their Thoughts in the mean while accusing or else excusing one another.

Here is Writing of the Law upon the Hearts of the Gentiles; and to be sure God
wrote this Law: But with what Pen, you may say, did he write it? You may read
in John 1.1, 2, 3, 4. In the Beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God,
and the Word was God, the same was in the beginning with God; all things were
made by him, and without him was not any thing made that was made: In him was
Life, and the Life was the Light of Men. Here is the Pen; God's Light is this
Pen: God has written his Law upon the Hearts of all Men, both Jews and
Gentiles, Believers and Unbelievers, for both Writings are God's Writings, they
are written by the Hand of God, the Finger of God, or with the Spirit of God.

But you may say, What is the difference between these two Writings? What is
the difference between that Illumination which is common to all Mankind, and
that which is proper and peculiar to the new Covenant?

I answer, the Differences and Distinctions may be branched forth into diverse
weighty particulars more than at present I shall have time to mention; but I
shall speak of some of the chief of them.

First, The Law of God is universally writ^en upon the Hearts of all Men; but
it does not make a Change upon them, so as to sof^en their Hearts. We read of
two Sorts of Hearts in the Holy Scripture, Hearts of Stone, and Hearts of
Flesh: God has promised to ^ake away the Heart of Stone and to give ^n Heart
of Flesh. This universal Law of God is written upon the Hearts of all Men; upon
the Hearts of the Wicked and Disobe^ient: Let wicked Men do their worst, and
^ndeavour never so much, with all their wickedness and filthiness to obliterate
and ^lot out the Law of God, that is written upon their Hearts; they cannot do
it, it remains to judge them, and will judge them, and leave them without
Excuse. But the Law ^f the New Covenant is written upon a Heart ^f Flesh: It is
written upon the Hearts of ^one but those that are the People of God, that are
true Israelites, upon them that are ^ews inwardly in the Spirit not in the
Let^er, whose Praise is not of Men but of God. This is one great difference
between that Illumination that is common to all Mankind, and that which is
proper and peculiar to the new Covenant.

Secondly, The Law of God, as he writes ^t upon the Hearts of all Men. It is
his Law, ^s he is the great Creator and Maker, and Lord of Heaven and Earth:
All ought to be subject to his Law, as he is their Maker, a^ they are obliged
to serve him, reverence hi^ fear him and obey him; and hereupon he^ every Man
and Woman's Teacher. Ho^ As he is the great Creator, and Maker, a^ Lord of
Heaven and Earth: And here t^ Relation between God and Men and Wom^^ is that
which is between a Master or Lord a^^ a Servant: But now the Law of the ne^
Covenant, it is the Law of a Parent towa^^ his Children; now this far exceeds
the other and God's Teachings here are fatherly Teac^ings; they are God's
Teachings, as he is Father to his People, and as they are his Chi^dren: So that
God's People that are und^^ this New Covenant, they have access to Go^ as
Children to a Father; they come with a ho^ Boldness and Freedom into his
Presence. Master of a Family has in his House both Se^vants, and Sons and
Daughters; and yo^ know there is a greater Nearness and Affect^on between a Man
and his Sons and Daug^ters than between him and his Servants: Master of a
Family loves his Children bett^ than he loves his Servants; so on the oth^^
hand Children, if they be dutiful, love the^ Parents with a purer Affection,
with a mo^ free, kind, generous and noble Affection tha^ they that are Servants
love their Masters The Love of a Servant toward God is me^cenary and for the
Reward; but the Love o^ God's Children is a free and filial Affection they say
unto God, Lord I love thee for the self, because thou art good and the most
exce^lent Being, and there is none like or equal unto thee in Heaven or on
Earth; I love thee because thou have given me a Heart to love ^ee; thou have
made me partake of a Child's Nature; thou have given me the Heart of a Child,
that I might love thee.

My Friends, the Love of those that are ^ervants is a mercenary Love, and their
Fear (...) a servile Fear, a Fear of Punishment: The love of God's Children is
a filial Love, a ^ee and generous Affection, a Love whereby ^he Soul is changed
and brought under the New Covenant: a Love to God for his own ^ake, not only
for his Blessings and for his Gifts, but chiefly and principally for himself;
^ot only because they believe that when they ^lie they shall go to Heaven, and
that because Heaven is a blessed Place, and that therefore ^hey are glad they
have such a Place to go to; but they love God above Heaven, who is better to
them than Heaven it self, and they can ^ay with David, Psalm 73.25. (Lord) whom
^ave I in Heaven but thee, and there is none upon Earth that I desire besides
thee.

Thirdly, Another difference between that common Illumination which is common
to all Mankind, and that which is special and pecu^iar to those under the New
Covenant, may ^ppear in his Teaching them; God teaches Sinners, (says the
Psalmist) Good and upright is the Lord, therefore will he teach Sinners in the
way: God by his universal Illumination teaches Men many things concerning
himself, and their Du^y to him in a general way; but God teaches his People
under the New Covenant by r^vealing and making known to them clear^ and
distinctly Christ Jesus the Mediator (...) the New Covenant. God gives them
t^^ Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God (...) the Face of Jesus Christ,
2 Cor. 4.6. Go^ makes known to his People this great M^stery of Christ, as he
is the Mediator betwe^^ God and them: So we read in the Epistle (...) the
Hebrews, Heb. 12.22. But ye are com^ unto Mount Zion, and to the City of the
li^ing God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an i^numerable Company of Angels, to
the gener^^ Assembly and Church of the Firstborn, whic^^ are written in
Heaven, and to God the Judg^ of all, and the Spirits of just Men made perfect,
and to Jesus the Mediator of the New C^venant, and to the Blood of Sprinkling
the speaks better things than that of Abel. The^ is no approaching to God but
through the Man Christ Jesus.

But you may say, How shall they com^ unto God by the Man Christ Jesus the
Mediator, that never saw him with their bodil^ Eyes, nor never heard him with
their Bodil^ Ears? How then can they come unto Jes^^ the Mediator of the New
Covenant, who they have neither thus heard nor seen?

Blessed be God that has given thousand and ten thousands, and hundreds of
thousand to understand this great Mystery of comin^ to God by the Man Christ
Jesus, whom the never saw with their Bodily Eyes, nor hear^ with their Bodily
Ears. The like Objectio^ may be made against coming to God, who cannot be seen
with bodily Eyes, for he is a spirit and invisible, yet there is a coming to
God, Heb. 11.6. He that comes to God must ^elieve that he is. We have now no
Oppor^unity nor occasion of seeing Christ with bodily Eyes, or hearing him with
our bodily Ears, yet we may come to him by Faith. Who works this Faith? God's
blessed Spirit, When is it wrought, and where and how is it wrought? It is
wrought in God's ordinary way, by Preaching; when Christ is preached by those
that he has qualified and fitted by his blessed Spirit; when he is thus
preached by the Power of his own Holy Spirit, Faith is wrought in the Hearts of
those that hear; not of all, for some believe the Gospel, and ^ome believe not.

Thus it has been all-a-long, wherever the Gospel has been preached, some
believe and others do not believe: I say, the Word of the Gospel, as it is
preached and complied with, it is like Rain and Snow that falls upon the Earth,
it returns not in vain, but has a Service; though it make not all the Parts
of the Earth fruitful, all Places are not alike fruitful, some remain barren
still: Thus says the Lord by the Prophet, Isa. 55.10, 11. For as the Rain
comes down, and the Snow from Heaven, and returns not thither, but water^eth
the Earth and makes it bring forth and bud, that it may give Seed to the Sower
and Bread to the Eater; so shall my Word be, that goes forth out of my Mouth,
it shall not return unto me void, but it shall accomplish^ that which I please,
and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it. When the Gospel is
preached in any Congregation, in any City, Town, Country or Nation, it cannot
be expected that all should be converted, it cannot be expected that the good
seed should fall every where in good Ground: No, it may be one part is good
Ground but where the seed is sown, according to Christ's Parable of the sower,
Mat. 13.3, 4, 5. Some seeds fell by the way side, and the Fowls came and
devoured them up; some fell upon stony places where they had not much Earth
etc. And when the Sun was up they were scorched, and because they had not root
they withered away; and some fell among Thorns, and the, Thorns sprung up and
choked them; but others fell into good Ground, and brought forth Fruit.

Blessed be God that has taught us this great Mystery of coming unto God by
Christ Jesus the Mediator, whom we have not seen with Bodily Eyes, nor heard
with Bodily Ears. We have access to God by him, and we have access to the
Mediator by his precious Blood, and by his Blessed Spirit. And Faith is a
great mystery, it well deserves to be called the mystery of Faith; and the
mystery of it is this, it joins Believing Souls to God through the Man Christ,
and to the Man Christ whom they have not seen with Bodily Eyes, according to
those words of the Apostle Peter, Pet. 1.1, 8. Whom having not seen ye Love; in
whom though now ye see him not, yet believing ye rejoice with Joy unspeaka^le
and full of Glory. These words Import, that though now ye see not the Man
Christ jesus, yet the time will come when you shall see him, that is, when he
shall appear in his Glory at the great Day of Judgment; when ^he Nations shall
stand before him, then they shall certainly see him though now they see him
not, and then Believers shall rejoice with ^oy unspeakable and full of Glory. I
say Faith is a very great mystery in that it joins the Souls of them that truly
believe in him, to Christ now in heaven. Believers do not rejoice Imaginarily,
but really. True Faith is incomparably a more excellent thing than Imagination
is. Faith joyneth us to Christ, it knitteth us to him and gives us access unto
God by him. Remember what our Lord said to Thomas after he arose from the Dead,
when he appeared to his Disciples, the Doors being shut; the eleven had seen
Christ before, when Thomas was not present; he would not believe that the Lord
Jesus Christ had appeared to them, John, 20. When the other Disciples told him
we have seen the Lord. He said unto them, except I shall see in his Hands the
Print of the Nails, and put my Finger into the Print of the Nails, and thrust
my Hand into his Side, I will not believe. And after eight Days again his
Disciples were within, and Thomas with them; then came Jesus, the Doors being
shut, and stood in the midst, and said, peace be unto you; then says he to
Thomas, reach hither thy Finger, and behold my Hands, and reach hither thy
Hand, and thrust it into my Side, and be Faithless, but believing. And Thomas
answe^ed and said unto him, my Lord and my G^^ Jesus says unto him, Thomas,
because thou h^ seen me, thou have believed. Blessed are they the have not
seen, and yet have believed.

O my Friends these Words are preciou^ my Heart is touched and tendered with
the^ Blessed are they that have not seen yet ha^ believed; we have not seen him
risen from the Dead, he appeared not to us as to them, and (...) he appeared to
Paul, outwardly; this is o^ case, you are blessed if ye believe in him who^ ye
have not seen, in the Lord Jesus Christ, (...) the Man Christ Jesus; and if
they are Blesse^ that have not seen, yet have believed, then follows by the
Rule of contraries, that the^ were not blessed who did not believe in hi^
though they saw him and heard him Preach.

I cannot say it is a Sin in them not to b^lieve in the Lord Jesus Christ who
have n^ heard him Preached to them outwardly nor Inwardly, who have not heard
of his Death Burial, Resurrection and Ascension and sittin^ at the Right Hand
of God. I cannot say (...) is a Sin in them not to believe who nev^^ heard of
those things; but those that have ha^ this Doctrine preached and also read in
the Holy Scriptures, and yet do not believe Christ risen from the Dead, that do
not believe Christ died for their Sins, nor believe that he is gon^ to Heaven
and lives for ever to make intercession for us, It is so great a Sin not to
believe Christ's Incarnation, Death and Resurrection, when it is preached, that
they bring a Curse upon themselves that believe not this Doctrine, after it is
plainly preached to them: I do say it, and am ready to prove what I say, They
that have an opportunity to hear this Doctrine preached, and read it, they have
an obligation lying upon them to believe it; not because of the outward
Testimony barely, for wherever the Scriptures come, and are read and
preached, there is an inward Witness and Testimony goes along with the outward
Testimony, and it cannot be supposed that the inward Testimony of God's holy
Spirit will be wanting to them that enjoy the preaching of the Gospel of
Christ, to enable them to believe: It is Unbelief that brings Men under the
Curse, and makes them guilty before God. Our Savior told the Jews, Except you
believe that I am he, ye shall die in your Sins: O this is most dreadful! and
whither I go, ye cannot come.

It is not a bare literal, traditional or historical Faith or Belief in Christ
that I preach to the People, which is a Faith of no Value or Worth, for
Hypocrites have this Faith; but that Faith which I preach, it is a living
Faith, wrought by the mighty Power of the Spirit of Christ, accompanying the
outward Teaching: It is a living Faith, a fruitful Faith, and wherever this
Faith is, Love is; it is never without Love, for Faith, Hope and Love always go
together, and all the Fruits of the Spirit, all evangelical Virtues, Humility,
Meekness, Temperance and Patience, so that they that believe in the Lord Jesus
Christ they have a Faith that works by Love, Love to God and Man. That Faith
that they have in them is a pious, devout, religious, conscientious Faith; and
this Faith is accompanied with a Desire that every one might partake of the
like precious Faith: Every one tha^ has it, they feel an earnest Travel and
concern upon their Spirits, that all might be partakers of it; they are zealous
for the Faith of Christ's Doctrine, for by the Faith of Christ's Doctrine we
have the Faith of Christ himself.

So that I do not understand, for my part, how people can have the Faith of
Christ, that have not the Faith of his Doctrine. A Man or Woman may have a
measure of the true Faith of Christ, and be short in some matter of Doctrine,
that is not fundamental; they may be wanting in some measure, but it were
better that there was nothing wanting, if possible. I long to see you (says
the Apostle, Romans 1.11. compared with 1 Thessalonians. 3.10.) that I may perfect what
is lacking in your Faith. He did suppose those that were partakers of the Faith
of Christ might have something lacking in their Faith that might be supplied to
them. Christ's Doctrine, as it is powerfully preached, has this Service in it,
to help a Man to lay hold on Christ by Faith; as you know we can more easily
lay hold upon a Man that is clothed than upon one that is naked; we can more
easily lay hold upon Christ by laying hold upon his Doctrine and upon his
precious Promises, the Promise of Remission of Sin, and of his Holy Spirit:
John 7.38. He that believes on me, as the Scripture has said, out of his
Belly shall flow Rivers of living Water. These are exceeding great and precious
Promises, by which we may be made partakers of the Divine Nature.

I can tell you something of mine own Experience: I was enabled to lay hold on
Christ by laying hold on the Promise of Christ. Christ comes clothed with the
precious Promises, to believe the Promise of Salvation, through Christ Jesus,
the Promise of Remission of Sin, of Justification, of Peace with God, and of
eternal Life and Happiness; as Christ was held forth in the Promise, we lay
hold on Christ as his Doctrine is preached. As we lay hold on a Man by taking
hold of his Clothes, or a Lap or Skirt of his Garment, so we lay hold on Christ
by the precious things testified of him: So that there is a great difference
between common Illumination given to all Mankind, and that special Illumination
which is proper to Believers; and whatsoever other Differences there are, may
be reduced to these three. But though the common and special Illumination be
differing, yet they both come from one Fountain and Root, God, Christ and the
Spirit, according to 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6. And the common Illumination is of a
saving tendency, by way of introduction and preparation to the other.

But some may put the Question and say, Of what Use is this common
Illumination? if it belong not to the new Covenant, then of what use is it to
us?

I answer, it is of great use; it is of the same use with the Law; it is as a
Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, to point us unto Christ. This common
Illumination is like John the Baptist his Ministry and Baptism; he was sent
before to prepare the Way of the Lord. This common Illumination prepares Men
and Women for Christ; it will make them sensible that they are miserable
Sinners, miserable Offenders and Transgressors, and that God is angry with
them, and that they deserve to die, and that the Wages of Sin is Death; they
having sinned, Death is their Wages: I say, this is of great Service to People
to be thus far convinced that they are Sinners, and that they need an Advocate
and Mediator to come between God and them, because they have offended him. If
we had offended a great Man, we would be glad for some who had Interest in him,
and great favor and friendship to speak for us.

If we had offended the King and committed Treason, would not we be glad of
some Person that has a great Interest in the King's favor, to intercede for
us? If the King had a Son, would not we be glad that he should mediate for us,
and interpose between us and the Wrath of the King, and turn away his
Indignation, and make Reconciliation for us? Would not we be glad that the
King's Son should obtain a Pardon for us, and restor^ us to the King's favor?

We have offended the King of Kings, and the supreme Lord of Heaven and Earth,
so that we need a great Mediator; we need one to make our Peace, and purchase
Pardon and Salvation for us; God has laid help upon one that is mighty, he
has given his dear Son Christ Jesus, to be the great Mediator between God and
Man, to be the great Peacemaker and Reconciler, and the Savior of Sinners.
But it should not be thought that Christ has greater tenderness and love for
us than God the Father, Who so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting
Life.

And now, in the next place, there is another thing that is weighty upon my
Spirit, and it is of great concernment, and that is, to answer this Question:

Question, How does God do this great Work, of putting his Law in our inward
Parts, and writing his Law in our Hearts? Does he do it without all outward
Means, Helps and Instruments?

I answer; In God's ordinary way he does this great Work by outward Means,
Helps and Instruments, though he can do it without them. It may suffice us, that
God has vouchsafed to us these outward Means and Helps of Instruction, in the
Preaching of the Gospel, and in our Reading of the holy Scriptures. It pleases
the Lord by the mighty working of his (...) it, to go along with the outward
Ministry of the Word, and to make impression upon us, and to write his Law in
our Hearts, this Law of the New Covenant.

This I testify from mine own Experience; and I doubt not but diverse here can
witness the like to have been their Experience, that God has, by the mighty
power and operation of his holy Spirit, accompanying the outward means and
helps of Instruction, made impression upon them, and written his Law upon their
Hearts.

This Law of the New Covenant, here expressed in the singular Number, is
sometimes styled Laws, in the plural Number: When it is styled Law in the
singular Number, it signifies a Body of divine Laws consisting of many parts; I
will put my Law in their inward Parts, and write it in their Hearts; and I will
be their God, and they shall be my People. Now the Laws and Precepts of God
which he gave to his People, the twelve Tribes of Israel, some have computed
their number to be above six hundred Laws, many of which were typical and
ceremonial: How do these typical and ceremonial Laws, which were given to them,
bind us that live under the Gospel? Do they oblige us now?

I answer, they do not bind us as to the typical and ceremonial part; but they
bind us as to the spiritual part, as they have a spiritual and moral
signification, as the Law of the Sabbaths, and Sacrifices, and New Moons etc.
they bind us not as to the ceremonial part, but as they have a spiritual and
moral signification in them.

I shall now proceed to some few things that remain. In the new Covenant God
has promised to his People, To blot out their Iniquities, and to remember
their Sins no more. The Law of the first Covenant does not admit of Pardon of
Sin; The Soul that sins shall die; but the new Covenant has Pardon of Sin,
through the Mediator Christ Jesus, upon the account of shedding his Blood for
us, This is my Blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many, for the
remission of Sins, Mat. 26.28. Why does not he say, for Remission of the sins
of all? He died for all, and shed his Blood for all; but it is only effectual
to those that believe in him.

Pray observe with me this weighty Matter of Doctrine, which is this: None has
his Sins blotted out, but as he comes to God's Teachings, the Father's
Teachings, but as he comes to be taught of God over and above all Men's Teaching
whatsoever; every one that is taught of God, does know more of God, more of his
Love, more of his divine Grace, more of his Power, more of divine Enjoyment;
those that are taught of God, know more of a divine Sweetness and Enjoyment,
and of Comfort, than can be had by the Teachings of Man, or in the Bible it
self, according to that Expression of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2.9. Eye has not
seen, nor Ear heard, neither have entered into the Heart of Man the things which
God has prepared for them that love him. The full fruition of these things is
reserved to the World to come; but the deep things of God are revealed by the
Spirit of God, and the first Fruits and Earnest are given to the People of God
here in this World, the full enjoyment whereof is reserved for the next Life.
Now the first Fruits and Earnest are of the same nature and kind with the full
Harvest in Glory.

If thou be a true Believer, thou enjoyest a measure of the same Delight and
Pleasure in Communion with God on Earth that the glorified Saints do enjoy in
Heaven to all Eternity. O the inward sweetness, delight and satisfaction, that
the Soul of every true Believer enjoys in God in this Life; it is of the same
nature and kind that the Saints shall enjoy in Heaven to all Eternity; this
first Fruits and Earnest is but little, in comparison of the full Harvest that
is to come. Those that are the People of God, that have experienced God's
Teaching, know that which is beyond all the Teachings of the best of Men, as
the taste of Honey is beyond all Reports of it; the Joys and Comforts of God's
holy Spirit, are beyond all that can be declared and expressed by Man
concerning these things. Whatsoever God's Servants have declared and reported
concerning the great things that God has promised to them that love him, the
Knowledge, and Taste, and Experience of God's People goes beyond it. Yet this
makes not void the outward Testimony and Teaching of holy Men; for so far as
any holy Man has greater Experience than I, and a greater experimental
Knowledge of God, he is sit to teach me further than I at present know; for the
Children of God are gradually taught under the new Covenant.

None have Forgiveness of Sin vouchsafed to them, but those that come under
God's Teaching; they believe not because of Man's Testimony only, because Paul
taught so, and Peter taught so, and James and John taught so, but as they said
to the Samaritan-woman, John 4.42. Now we believe, not because of thy Saying;
for we have heard him our selves, and know that this is indeed the Christ, the
Savior of the World.

Those that are thus taught of God, know the Truth and love the Truth, as it is
in Jesus; they have heard himself preach; he is not bodily present, but he is
present by his Spirit; the Voice of the Spirit of Christ is the Voice of
Christ, and the Voice of God the Father; you that hear the Voice of the Spirit
in your Hearts, you hear the Voice of the Father and the Son; they that are
taught of God, they hear the Voice of God the Father, Son and holy Ghost.

There is one thing further upon my Heart, which I shall deliver as the Lord
shall be pleased to enable me, in a few Words, concerning the new Covenant. I
hope you all know thus much, that the nature of a Covenant is mutual, it binds
and obliges both Parties; so does God's Covenant, who ever comes under God's
Covenant: As, God obliges himself to be their Father, and their God, an^ their
Husband; thy Maker is thy Husband So God's People, that come under this
Covenant, are engaged unto God, and God expects and requires that they should
be faithful unto him. And certainly God expect^ and requires of every one in
order to their coming into Covenant, that they give up their Hearts and Souls
to him, and to take the Lord for their God: We must dedicate our selves to his
glory and service, and say, Lord, thou shall be my God, I will have no other
God but thee, no other Lord or Master but thee; Other Lords have had dominion
over us, but now we will make mention of thy Name only. Isa. 44.5. One shall
say, I am the Lords, and another shall call himself by the name of Jacob, and
another shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, and surname himself by the
name of Israel.

Is this only an outward Book, an outward Writing and Subscription? No, that is
but little to be accounted of; thou must write with thy Soul, thou must write
with thy Heart: There is a Bond between the Lord and thee, and thou bindest thy
self to him, and it is written in thy Heart, The Lord shall be my God. Thus
David engaged himself to the Lord, Psalm. 119.94. Lord, I am thine, save me; and
he takes the Lord for his Portion, Thou art my Portion, O Lord, I have said
that I would keep thy Word. How can you say, That the Lord is your God, unless
you are his by Covenant? God's Covenant has a mutual stipulation or
obligation; there is a mutual engaging and promising: The Lord promises to be
our God, and Father, and Husband, and our Preserver, to be all in all to us;
and we promise, to be his People, to love him, and serve him, and obey him.

So, my Friends, I now commend you to the Lord, and commend those things to you
that I have declared at this present time; I commit them to the Witness of God
in all your Consciences. I commit you to God and the Word of his Grace, to open
your Understandings, that you may be enlightened to know him, who is the only
true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, which is Life eternal, and that
you may feel his mighty power to make impression upon your Hearts, by those
things that I have been testifying and declaring among you; the Lord alone can
teach you to Profit, and make those great and precious Promises that have now
sounded in your Ears, to have a due impression upon your Hearts, and to become
effectual through the mighty Power of his blessed Spirit, for the Salvation of
your immortal Souls.

A SERMON Preached by George Keith, At Harp-Lane, London, September. 30th 1694.
Cor xiii. 5. Examine your selves whether ye be in the Faith; prove your own
selves: Know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye
be Reprobates? Or as it may be better translated: Unless ye be unapproved,
disapproved, or without a proof.
THis is a seasonable Exhortation of the Apostle, Examine your selves, whether
ye be in the Faith, etc. know ye not your own selves, etc. how that Christ is
in you except ye be Reprobates? says our Translation'.

It were sad indeed if all they were Reprobates that know not Christ within
them: God forbid, for there are thousands that know not that Christ is in them;
they have not that Knowledge, Understanding, Proof and Experience, yet they are
not Reprobate.

But who then are Reprobates, may some say? They are Reprobates of whom we may
truly say, God has wholly left them, utterly left them, and cease to be a
Reprover to them, and their Day of Mercy is expired; the Day of God's
Visitation and the striving of his Spirit is at an End toward them: These are
properly said to be Reprobates, yet those that are not yet in Christ, and know
not that Chtist is in them, so long as they are capable of Repentance and
Conversion, and of being turned to God, and the Day of his Visitation being not
yet expired, it cannot be said that they are Reprobates.

But now, as to the principal Subject Matter, that is before me, it is this;
That it is the Duty of every one that professes himself to be a true
Christian, to examine himself whether he has the true Faith of Christ, or
whether he be in the true Faith: It is all one to have the Faith to be in us,
or for us to be in it: It is one and the same thing, I say, we are in the
Faith, as well as it is in us. I say, too many deceive themselves; many think
they have the Faith or are in the Faith, which have it not, and are not in it:
This is great folly in Men, and a most dangerous deceit, to be deceived in this
Case. Which of us all would be willing to be deceived in Money? We are all very
unwilling to take counterfeit Money, of Brass, Silver or Gold; and if we be
deceived, here the deceit may be an outward damage to us: But this is nothing,
comparatively to the deceit of a counterfeit Faith. When Men shall deceive
themselves to their dying moment, and fancy they have true Faith, when they
have it not, they that die, wanting the true Faith, they die in their Sins: If
ye believe not (says our Lord Christ) that I am he, ye shall die in your Sins;
and whither I go ye cannot come.

Therefore examine your selves, and examine effectually, that ye may know
whether ye have the true Faith and be in it.

It is in my Heart at this Time, in a few Words to open this to you: I have
been often upon this Subject, therefore I shall not now enlarge upon it. Now,
in opening to you the true Nature of Faith, first I will tell you what it is
not that denominates a Man or Woman to be a ture Christian: I shall (God
willing and assisting me) first tell you what true Faith is not, and then I
shall tell you what it is.

I. It is not a bare historical literal or traditional Faith of God and Christ:
You say, you believe in God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and believe these
great Truths as they are declared and recorded in the Holy Scriptures, and you
hear them preached to you by one Minister and another, and because you read
them in the Holy Scriptuers, which good Men in all Ages have always had a great
Esteem and Veneration for, ever since they were written; and therefore you
believe this is the ground of your Faith, the foundation of it, and you know no
other foundation but this. O this is not enough, for thousands have this Faith
which have not the true Faith: So much negatively what this Faith is not.

II. To speak something positively and affirmatively, what this Faith is, and
how it is wrought.

First of all, I say unto you, that it is a supernatural thing; the other Faith
is but natural or human. That Faith that is wrought in Men and Women only by an
outward Testimony, let it be never so true, only because they hear it preached,
or read it, or because holy and godly Men say these things are true, you
believe them because of an outward Testimony; all this is but natural: But a
true, saving, justifying Faith, that by which we are justified and saved, and
by which Christ comes to dwell in our Hearts; that Faith by which we overcome
the World, and come to be Children of God, it is a supernatural Work, an effect
of God's mighty Power, that Power which raised Christ from the dead. That Power
must quicken a Man that is naturally dead in Sins and Trespasses, and work in
him a true Faith, a divine Faith; the which Faith is wrought instrumentally by
outward Preaching and Hearing, in God's ordinary way.

Now, to open a little further to you, the Nature of this true Faith, we must
consider it both with respect to the Object of it, and the Subject of it, that
is, the Seat of it, whether it be placed only in the Understanding? Whether it
be only an Assent in the Understanding, That Christ Jesus came into the World
to save Sinners? And that God gave his Son to die for us, that we might live
through him.

Now, first as to the Object of Faith, What is it that we look to? That our
Faith has a regard to? What is it that we do believe in? Is it in God the
Father only, or also in his dear Son Jesus Christ, and in the Holy Spirit? Now
here is a right belief in Christ; We believe in God, the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that he has given his dear Son for us and to us; and none have a
right Belief in Christ, the Eternal Son of God, but they that believe he is
both God and Man; and believe that the Word was made Flesh, and took our Flesh
in the fullness of Time, and came in a prepared Body, and put an end to all the
Offerings and Sacrifices under the Law, which were Types and Figures of his
offering up his Body upon the Cross; Isa. 53.10. It pleased the Lord to bruise
him (says the Prophet) he has put him to Grief: When thou shall make his Soul
an Offering for Sin, etc. He shall see the Travel of his Soul, and shall be
satisfied: Our Lord Jesus Christ became a complete Priest and Sacrifice both in
his Soul and Body: He offered himself both in his Soul and Body as a Sacrifice
for Sin; and both these must be effected by Faith in Christ, viz. Justification
and Sanctification: Justification is attributed to Faith instrumentally, and
Sanctification also is attributed to Faith, in the Blood of Christ, which
cleanses from all Sin. True Faith respects, for its Object, Christ, as he is
both God and Man, as the Eternal Word took Flesh; not the nature of Angels but
the Seed of Abraham. It respects Christ inwardly, and it does respect his
outward coming and appearance in a twofold Sense.

1. As he came and is already come in a state of Humiliation and Suffering: And,

2. It respects him as he is without us, glorified and exalted in Heaven, at
the Righthand of the Majesty on high: God has appointed him to be Judge of the
World; all Nations shall stand before him, and every Eye shall see him; and he
shall separate them one from another, as a Shepherd divides his Sheep from the
Goats; the Sentence will pass, and be pronounced outwardly, by the Man Christ
Jesus. I do not deny but that there is also a Judgment within in the Conscience.

But now there is a weighty Matter or Point before me to insist upon, and that
is this; That as Christ within us and Christ without us is but one Christ, so
the true Faith in Christ respects both Christ without us and Christ within us;
and the Faith of Christ within us, and of Christ without us, is but one Faith;
as Christ is but one, that suffered for us, and was nailed to the Cross, and
Christ within us; so Faith in Christ within us and without us is but one. This
is the Improvement that I would have you make o^ this Doctrine, That no Man can
have the true Faith of Christ without him, unless h^ has the Faith of Christ
within him. This (...) declare to you, as if they were my last words That true
saving Faith respects Christ both inwardly and outwardly, the one cannot b^
without the other; for if one could be without the other, then there must be
necessarily two Faiths: If I might have the true Faith of Christ without me,
and not the Faith o^ Christ witin me, then one might be separated from the
other, whereas they are but one Faith, and one of them cannot be without the
other. Whoever has the Faith of Christ without them, and has not, at the same
time, the Faith of Christ within, it is but a hearsay and traditional Faith.
The true Faith of Christ without us, whereby we believe he was born of the
Virgin Mary, and is the Savior of the World; This true Faith is a supernatural
thing, and cannot be without the Faith of Christ within,

Dear Friends and People I beseech you to weigh and consider these things well,
for they are of great weight; there are some that say this Faith needs not be
Preached, for all Christendom has it, and all the Ministers of the several
persuasions Preach this Faith; a strange Argument that this true Faith of
Christ without us must not be Preached in our Meetings because it is Preached
in all other Religious Assemblies and Meetings in Christendom.

There are some that say that this Faith of Christ Crucified is not necessary
to Salvation; ^^e Belief that Christ Died and rose again the ^^ird Day and
Ascended into Heaven and ^tteth at the Right Hand of God, and lives ^or ever
to make intercession for us, they say that this Faith is not at all necessary
to our ^anctification and Salvation. We have some ^f us diverse times heard this
Text of Scripture ^cited and brought out, but not explained, but ^ather shut up
than opened, God knows, 1 John, ^1.7. But if we walk in the Light as he is in
^he Light, we have Fellowship one with another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ
his Son cleanses ^s from all Sin. ^hen they go about to explain this, they
(...) that the Blood is the life, and the life is (...) light, and the light is
within, so that by (...) means the minds of the People are taken (...) ^^om the
merit, efficacy and great benefit of the precious Blood of the dear Son of God.

Therefore you that believe that the Son of God shed his most precious Blood
for the Remission of Sin, that the wrath of God might pass over us, as the
sprinkling of the Blood of the Lamb upon the Lintel and the two side Posts was
to signify to the Israelites that the Lord would pass over the Door and not
suffer the Destroying Angel to come in unto their Houses, the signification of
it is, that we are in great danger of the wrath of God, and of Destruction
falling upon us, if we be not sprinkled with the Blood of the Lamb of God which
takes away the Sins of the World.

Faith is the Hand whereby we take the Blood of Christ and sprinkle it upon us
and the virtue and merit of it, together with his Obedience. The great thing
that the Father designed in the shedding the Blood of his Son was his Obedience
and Submission. He humbled himself and became obedient unto Death even the
Death of the Cross; It is not his Obedience without the Blood, nor the Blood
with out his Obedience, that was so well pleasin^ to God as to make our Peace
and Reconc^liation, and procure the P^^^on of our Sins an^ the Acceptance of
our Persons; but it wa^ the Blood of Christ scaling his Obedience an^ even the
humbling of ^im^^lf to the Death o^ the Cross both togethe^ ^^^t made
attonemen^ for us.

Let us therefore (...) unto Christ that wa^ wounded for our tr^n^^ressions,
and let us take Sanctuary in his Death, and hide our selves in his Wounds, in
the Clefts of that Rock of ou^ Salvation, where we can be safe from the
indignation of the Almighty.

There now comes to my Mind that comfortable passage of Scripture, Genesis 9.11,
12, 13. Which I have often thought of with great melting and brokenness of
Heart and with no less Comfort and Refreshment. The Lord said to Noah I will
establish my Covenant with you, neither shall all flesh be cut off any more by
the Waters of a Flood, neither shall there any more be a Flood to destroy the
Earth. And God said this is the Token of the Covenant which I make between me
and you, and every living Creature that is with you for perpetual Generations;
(...) set my Bow in the Cloud, and it shall be for (...) token of a Covenant
between me and the Earth. and it shall come to pass when I bring a Cloud ^er
the Earth, that the Bow shall be seen in (...) Cloud, and I will remember my
Covenant which is between me and you, etc. And the Bow ^all be in the Cloud,
and I will look upon it that (...) nay remember the Everlasting Covenant
between ^od and every living Creature of all Flesh that is upon the Earth.

The Rainbow was a Type and Figure of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, as I
could ^pen at greater length than the time will ^low me* see Revel. 4.3.10.1.
The Rain^ow is made of the Beams of the Sun and a Cloud, when the Cloud is
dissolved in Rain; The Rainbow typifyes God and Man. As the Rainbow is made up
of the Sunbeams, and ^he Rays of the Sun united with the Water ^f a Cloud,
this figures out to us the Glorious union of Christ's Godhead and Manhood. The
sweet variety of lively Colors appearing in the Rainbow, can any thing be more
pleasa^^ and delightful to our sight? this signifyes and represents the
manifold various Gifts and Graces of Christ, and which God through Christ
liberally bestows upon his Children, having all fullness in himself: I have set
my Bow in the Cloud, and it shall he for the token of a Covenant etc. And I
will Establish my Covenant with you, neither shall all Flesh be cut off any
more by the Waters of a Flood, neither shall there any more be a Flood to
destroy the Earth. If God did not look upon his dea^ Son Jesus Christ, typified
by the Rainbow, ^ Cloud and Deluge of Wrath would break ou^ upon us to our
Ruin, and drown us in Perdition: As when God looks upon the Rainbow, he does
remember his Covenant; s^ when he looks upon his dear Son, our great Mediator
and Redeemer, the Mediator of the new and everlasting Covenant, he extend^ his
Mercy and Patience, and long Suffering and the Riches of his Goodness toward
us that the Cloud of his Wrath and Vengeance, may not break out in a Deluge
upon us, and destroy us.

Now to speak something briefly of Justification, by Faith, and Peace with God
through our Lord Jesus Christ; it is not the true Doctrine of the Gospel of
Christ to preach Pardon of Sin, and Justification through the Obedience that
any Man or Woman can perform, to or by the Light within, the Spirit of God
within, or any inward Principle, without Faith in the Man Christ Jesus. It is
by Faith in him that we witness Peace with God, Being justified by Faith, we
have Peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 5.1. It is not in my
Heart to go into Niceties to answer that Question, that has more of Nicity
than of Necessity in it, Whether we are justified by Faith, or by Faith and
Works, viz. by such Works as accompany Faith, and go along with Faith, and that
flow from Faith as the effects of it?

We cannot be justified (whatever any may ^irm) without Faith in Christ
crucified; and ^hoever preach that we may be justified by ^y Works that we can
perform, any obedi^nce to Christ within or without, without ^ith in Christ
crucified, they preach another ^ospel, and pervert the Gospel of Christ, ^al.
1.8. But though we, or an Angel from ^eaven (says the Apostle) preach any
other ^ospel unto you, than that which we have preach^^ unto you, let him be
accursed.

Now they preach another Gospel that preach ^ustification and Remission of Sins
by our own ^orks and Obedience, without Faith in Christ crucified. The Apostle
James says ^deed, Jam. 2.21. Was not Abraham our ^ather justified, when he
offered Isaac his Son upon the Altar? See thou how Faith wrought ^ith his
Works, and by Works was Faith ^ade perfect. And the Scripture was fulfil^^d,
which says, Abraham believed God, ^^d it was impute^ to him for Righteousness,
^^d he was called the Friend of God. And it is ^id concerning Rahab, Was not
Rahab the ^arlot justified by Works, when she had recei^ed the Messengers, and
had sent them out another way, Josh. 2.15. She let them down by a lord through
the Window, and she said unto them, Get ye to the Mountains, lest the Pursu^rs
meet you. And the Spies said unto her, ^ehold, when we come into the Land. thou
shall ^ind this Line of Scarlet-Thred in the Window, ^ich thou did let us
down by, etc. The ^carlet-Thred did typify and represent, and shadow out the
Blood of Christ by which she should be saved; she hid the Spies, and the was a
good Work; her Faith that saved he^ was as the Scarlet-Thred, dipped and dyed i^
the Blood of Christ, which cleanses from al^ Sin: So these Works were not
without Faith but did accompany it, and were the real Frui^ of it.

I have told you, that the Object of Fait^ is God the Father, and Jesus Christ
his Son both in his inward and outward coming an^ appearance, and as he is yet
to come again and appear without us, at the end of the World, at the great day
of Judgment, and also the holy Spirit.

Now to open to you briefly one Scripture, John 1.12. But as many as received
him, to them gave he Power to become the Sons of God* even to them that believe
on his Name. The Exposition that some have given of this is the receiving of
Christ inwardly; that is so far good: But that dot^ ^ot comprehend the whole
sense and meaning of the Words. To receive him and believe on him, is not only
to receive his Light and Power, and Spirit in our Hearts, but to receive him as
he died for us, and shed his precious Blood for us, and became both a Priest
and Sacrifice for us and offered himself through the Eternal Spirit without
spot to God. We must believe the worth and value of that Sacrifice to expiat^
our Sins, and to make atonement for us ^ so that by Christ's Sacrifice and
offering o^ himself, the justice of God ha^h satisfaction made to it as fully
as if we our selves had suf^^red and made full satisfaction. So that to ^^ceive
Christ, is not to receive him only in ^^s inward Appearance, but in his
priestly Of^^ce, as he died upon the Cross, and shed his ^recious Blood for us.

I have said it diverse times, and it is in my Heart to say it again, That
Christ offered the Gift of his Manhood upon the Altar of his Godhead, that
sanctified it, and made it so ^ighly valuable and acceptable. How will ^ou
prove this, some might say? This may ^ell be proved out of the holy Scripture,
Heb. 13.14. For if the Blood of Bulls and of Goats, and the Ashes of an Heifer
sprinkling ^he Unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the ^lesh; how much
more shall the Blood of Christ, ^ho through the Eternal Spirit offered himself
^^thout spot to God, purge your Consciences ^im dead Works, ^o serve the living
God? The ^^^rnal Spirit (...) the eternal Power and God^ead, is the Altar t^^^
is greater than the Gift, ^^d the Altar which sanctifies the Gift, and which
was that that gave value and merit to ^s precious Blood, and to what his Body
and ^oul suffered; here, I say, is the Gift upon ^^e Altar, and the Altar
sanctifies the Gift. (...) Christ had been Man only, then his Death ^^d
Sufferings, and his precious Blood, had ^t been of that great worth and value
to ex^^te our Sin, and make Atonement for us, ^^d reconcile us to God. God
has had re^^d to this in all Ages. God looks favorable ^on us, only through
Christ our great Mediator and High Priest. Christ's Blood is of meritorious
Efficacy in all Ages, since it was shed and before it was shed: And as Christ
is the Object of our Faith; so is the Doctrine of Christ in all the parts of it,
in a secondary sense, but more especially as it respects the Promises of
Salvation and his Commandments; these two, the Promises of Christ, and the
Commands of Christ; if we believe his Promises, we believe his Precepts, and
obey them. We are pardoned, and sanctified and justified freely, and all
boasting is excluded. If we believe in Christ, we believe in his Person, and we
believe his Doctrine, his Promises, and all that is written, That through the
comfort of the Scriptures we might have Hope.

I will, by a Similitude, express and represent to you, of what great use the
Promises are unto us; as I have found by experience, (blessed be God) that the
great and precious Promises of our Lord Jesus Christ, and hi^ sweet Invitations
and Calls, that are recorded in the holy Scripture, are a mighty help to us, in
laying hold upon Christ. We cannot take hold of a Man so well when he is naked,
as when he is clothed: It is not so easy for us to lay hold on Christ naked, as
when he i^ preached in the Gospel, and as when he i^ clothed, as it were, with
the precious Prom^ses. It is very hard for us to lay hold o^ Christ, and
embrace him, and come to him without a Promise. The Apostle Peter hol^ing forth
this great Mystery, tells us, 2 Pet. 1.^ Whereby are given to us exceeding
great and prec^ous Promises, that by these we might be Partakers of the divine
Nature, according to his divine Power, whereby he has given unto us all things
partaining to Life and Godliness, through the knowledge of him that has called
us to Glory and Virtue.

You see the Promises are of great use to us, in order to our being made
Partakers of the divine Nature, and to witness Regeneration and the new Birth:
It is not enough to read them outwardly, unless a divine Work be upon us, to
enable us to see the Promises, and our Right and Interest in them, otherwise
they will not be effectual upon us.

The next thing that I would speak to, is the Subject of Faith, that is the
Seat of it, as it is placed in a Man or Woman, whether it is only in the
Understanding, as an assent to the Truth, or placed in the Will and Affections,
so as to have an influence on all the Powers and Faculties of the Soul.

I answer; True and saving Faith is seated in the Understanding and in the
Will, and so has an influence upon the Affections, and so the Affections come
to be renewed and sancti^ied, through the Power of Faith: As Faith is ^n the
Understanding, it respects Christ as he ^s faithful and true; but as Faith is
placed in ^he Will of Man, he i^ the Beloved of the Soul and the great desire
of the Soul; and Faith re^pects Christ, and God in Christ, as he is good, and
gracious, not only as he is holy and ^^ist, faithful and true, but as good,
merciful and gracious, tender and compassionate; (...) Faith in God and in
Christ Jesus, as it is seated in the Understanding and Will, it esteem him as
the supreme Truth and chief Good submits to his Scepter, and depends upon hi^
Sacrifice and Satisfaction, resigns and surrenders up to his Government, to
comman^ the whole Man, the Affections, Memory an^ bodily Members, that Christ
may be All in All.

And now to come to a Conclusion, and to end as I begun; it is the Duty of
every one that professes himself to be a true Christian to examine himself
whether he has the true Faith of Christ, or be in the true Faith. Now I have
opened the nature of true Faith, it is the more easy for you to come unto an
Examination of your selves; examine your selve^ by all the Marks and Tokens
that can (...) given you, whether you are in the Faith, an^ the true Faith be
in you; if you have the Spirit of God, ye may know the things freel^ given you
of God. It is by the Spirit of Go^ that we may know whether we have Faith and
Love, and Meekness and Humility, an^ other Evangelical Graces. There are diverse
Helps, and such things as may be called Marks and Evidences, whereby we may be
helped to know whether we have true Faith o^ no.

But some may say, if we may know whether we have true Faith by Marks and Signs
what need we the Spirit? And if we man know it by the Spirit, then what need w^
Marks and Signs, and other Evidences?

It is the work of the Spirit to intimate to us, whether we have these Marks;
God has given us the Book of the holy Scriptures, that tells us, If we have
Faith, it works by Love; it is such a Faith as has Works accompanying of it,
such as love to God, and love to one another: If thou love not thy Brother
whom thou have seen, how can thou be said to love God whom thou have not
seen? If we love God above all, and love our Brother, and love our Enemies,
these are good Marks and Evidences that we are in the Faith. The holy Scripture
gives Marks and Signs of a Man's being a true Believer; but the Scripture does
not tell us that we have those Marks.

But you will say, If a Man do examine himself he may be mistaken, though he
attend ^o what Conscience shall speak.

You are not to rely upon the Testimony of Conscience alone: a Man's own
Conscience may err, and his Heart deceive him, when it tells him, That he has
Faith and Love, and other Evangelical Graces. But if the Spirit of God
witnesses with our Spirits, that we have these Marks, and that we are indeed
the Children of God, then be sure we cannot be deceived, when the Spirit of
Truth does give us this infallible Testimony.

A SERMON Preached by John Raunce, AT Harp-Lane, near Towerstreet, August 19th,
1694.
1 Thessalonians. v. 21. Prove all things, hold fast that which is good.
IT is a Saying of the Apostle Paul, to the Church of the Thessalonians, Prove
all things* hold fast that which is good. The Thessalonians were a People too
like to many in ou^ Days, they wanted to be truly settled in tha^ which is
good; and that made the Apostle speak in Commendation of the Men of Berea^ Acts
17.11. These were more noble than thos^ in Thessalonica, in that they received
the Wor^ with all readiness of Mind, and searched the Scriptures daily, whether
those things were so that were preached among them.

And truly, Friends, I have this to say among you, That every one who is come
through the Exercises they have met with, to a trial of things that offer
themselves to their Consideration, they may be said to be a happy People; if
they have so proved all things as to hold fast that which is good.

This is the Day wherein we live, wherein things offer themselves to a seeking
People, after such a various manner, that truly all who desire Salvation to
their immortal Souls ought to be very mindful of the Exhortation I now
mentioned; Prove all things, and hold fast that which is good.

Some may ask me; What is here meant by All Things, that the Apostle bids them
Prove? I answer, They were such things as are of a Religious Concern: He did
not bid them prove all things, of one kind or another, that offered themselves
to them, but these all Things relate only to religious Matters.

We are among a People that are religiously concerned about many things that
offer themselves unto them: There are many Ways, many Persuasions and
Professions, and many things that offer themselves to our Consideration. It
ought to be our Care and Concern, like the noble Bereans, to try all things and
prove all things: It greatly commends those Men and Women that will try and
examine Matters, and not receive things upon Trust, as too many do in our Days.
There are a great many, (as the common Proverb is) that are ready to pin their
Faith upon another Man's Sleeve, to be of his Opinion and Persuasion, without
any good Ground or serious Consideration.

That which I have to mention, among you, at this Time, is the Apostle's
Exhortation; Prove all things, hold fast that which is good. In Matters of a
Religious Concern, Matters of Faith, wherein your Eternal Salvation is
concerned, go not by hearsay, because other Men say; so but let us all come to
practice that Counsel that is here given to the Church of the Thessalonians,
Prove all things; Try all things, prove Men's Ways, prove Men's Words, prove
Men's Doctrines, prove Men's Principles; I question not but you are such an
understanding People that I need not say much to you, I hope you are come to
that exercise of Mind that you will take care not to be led aside, not to be
prevailed upon by the fair Speeches of any, but that you make it your business
rightly to come to know how to prove all things that offer themselves to your
Consideration, which, I told you, are of a religious Concern, and are such
things wherein the Salvation of our Souls are concerned.

That which we must come to prove things by, is that which I have next to
mention among you; this a Man cannot do except it be given him from above. We
cannot prove things as we ought, we cannot try things nor search into things,
except we know a receiving something from above: A Man can receive nothing
except it be given to him by God, from above. You and I have not that
Knowledge, that Ability, that Understanding, to Prove all things, and hold fast
that which is good, until I receive the Gift of God I cannot do it: And as it
has been often told you God has been pleased to give so much of his Grace and
of his good Spirit as he has seen good; but some have not received this
heavenly Gift.

But some may ask me, What I mean by receiving it? By receiving I mean, when
this good Gift is given and bestowed upon Men, they are joined to it and made
one with it: As it has pleased God to give to every one of us a measure of his
Grace and Spirit. There are diverse Names, it is but one and the same thing; if
we have received the Gift from above let us keep to it, and abide in it; then
as we abide in this Gift, in this good Spirit, then are we in a State and
Condition to prove all things. It is a true saying of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2.14.
The natural Man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are
foolishness to him; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. You see your Calling, Brethren, how that not many wise Men after the
Flesh, not many Mighty, not many Noble are called, but God has chosen the
foolish things of the World to confound the Wise, and God has chosen the weak
things of the world to confound the things which are mighty, and base things of
the World, and things which are despised has God chosen, yea and things which
are not, to bring to naught the things that are.

The Apostle, speaking to the Church of Corinth, says; Has not God made
foolish the Wisdom of this World? for after that in the Wisdom of God, the
World by Wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the foolishness of Preaching to
save them that believe; for the Jews require a Sign, and the Greeks seek after
Wisdom, but we preach Christ Crucified, to the Jews a Stumbling Block, and to
the Greeks foolishness; but unto them which are called, both Jews and Greeks,
Christ the Power of God and the Wisdom of God. If any (says the Apostle) would
be wise, let him become a Fool, that he may be wise. Let us lay aside all our
own Parts and Wisdom, and come to the Gift of God in our own Souls; and to the
Grace of God which brings Salvation, teaching us, that denying Ungodliness
and worldly Lusts, we should live soberly, righteously and godly in this
present world.

Friends, my Charity is such, I am so persuaded of you all; I am satisfied that
God has been so merciful to you all as to enlighten your Minds, and open your
Understandings, that you are among a seeking People, walking toward Sion, with
your Faces thitherward; I do not question but you may meet with many things
which may sometimes put you in doubt and make you to question your Condition,
that you do not well know what to do; yet in the midst of all your Troubles
there there is something in your own Souls and Consciences that will not let
you be quiet till you come to be in some measure like those the Apostle exhorts
to, Prove all things, and hold fast that which is good.

It is good for all Christian People to be examining themselves, in reference
to Religious matters that do concern the Salvation of their Souls. I count
those that are seeking Men and Women, to be in this holy Exercise; the Grace of
God which is in their Hearts will put them upon it (as it is in Dan. 12.4.)
They shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased: But it is fallen
out in our Days, that Iniquity does abound and Wickedness increases.

That which I have further to mention is this, That you will be sure to keep to
the Gift of God, and when you come to know what is good, that you hold it fast;
when you are upon searching or trying any Man's Doctrine, if it be sound hold
it fast; if it be not sound meddle not with it.

But some may put this Question; How shall we be further satisfied? We may be
discomposed in our Minds, and possibly be in a maze, and in great straits, that
we cannot keep so close to the Gift of God as we ought to do.

Is there nothing els^ that may be assistant and helpful to us?

I answer, yes; God has been pleased to afford us another Help, the Holy
Scriptures. The Bereans, they did search the Scriptures, whether those things
were so? You that are a seeking, enquiring People, examine and prove all
things, according to the Gift of God which is given to you, and see whether any
Doctrine that is preached to you be according to the Holy Scriptures: If any
Man preach any other Doctrine, the Apostle passes a severe Sentence against
them, 1 Gal. 7.8. There be some that trouble you, and would pervert the Gospel
of Christ; but though we or an Angel from Heaven preach another Gospel to you
than that which we have preached, let him be accursed. It is the Lord's great
and abundant Mercy that he has graciously vouchsafed the Holy Scriptures of
Truth to be preserved through all Ages, and to be translated and turned into
their own Language; when we are in doubt or at a loss, we may go to the Law and
the Testimony, there it no contrariety between the Lord's Teaching and the Holy
Scriptures.

Therefore let us prove Men's Sayings, and be not like many in our Days, that
take things upon Trust. It is good to be striving as much as in us lies, to
prove every thing wherein the Salvation of our Souls is concerned, and to hold
fast that which is good. This ought to be our Care, and there is a great deal
required after we have examined and proved, and found out what is good; there
are many things to hinder us and turn us out of the Way. After you have proved
all things, and come to know that which is good, that wherein your Peace with
God and Comfort does consist, hold it fast, let none beguile you, the Enemy of
your Souls will labor to lay something in your Way. If the Lord had not been
very merciful to us, we might, many of us, long since have turned aside; we
might have fainted in our Minds, and been weary of well-doing.

I do not question but many of you, in your Pilgrimage-State, do meet with many
things in your way to everlasting Life: Some put one thing into your Minds, and
some another; let it be your Care, that as you have received the Gift from
above, and by the Holy Scriptures, are come to know what is good, hold it fast.
How hold it fast? By patient Watchfulness and Diligence, taking heed to the
Grace of God that has appeared and brought Salvation to our Souls.

I pity those Souls that are in an unsettled State, which are tossed to and
fro, that are sometimes for one thing, and sometimes for another; a
double-minded Man is unstable in all his ways: You are happy if you are come to
that Settlement in your Minds as to be stable and fixed, that when you have
proved all things you hold fast that which is good. As you have received an
Understanding from the Lord, let it be your Care in the Exercise of your Minds,
to live in obedience to the Lord, in what you know to be the holy, good and
acceptable Will of God, and not hold the Truth in Unrighteousness, Romans 1.18.
The Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all Ungodliness and
Unrighteousness of Men, who hold the Truth in Vnrighteousnes^ What has your
Care been? to hold fast tha^ which is good? You must hold it fast by living
according to what you know; all profession of Godliness will stand Men in no
stead, if they do not live according to their Light and Knowledge.

Therefore I greatly pity many, in our Days, to whom the Lord has been pleased
to give a large measure of his Grace, that they certainly know their Duty
toward God, and how to live and carry themselves among Men, but they are like
those mentioned by the Apostle, In Words they profess Christ, but in Works they
deny him. There are many in our Days that have more Words to speak than a great
many, that can speak a great deal, but live not answerably. I speak not this to
upbraid any, but in pity to their Souls, and that every one of us may be
excited and stirred up to live according to what we have received: What will it
profit a Man if he know never so much, and run to and fro till Knowledge be
increased? The Lord is about to seek out a People in all Places that may try
all things, and hold fast that which is good.

This I shall leave to your Consideration, and I would ask every one of you
that are before me, What do you know of that which is good? I hope none of you
will say, That you do not know that which is good, for that person speaks
contrary to what the Holy Ghost has declared, Micah 6.8. He has showed thee,
O Man, what is good, and what does the Lord require of thee but to do justly,
and to love Mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God; since the Lord has been so
merciful as to show us what is good, and what he does require at our Hands, it
concerns every one of us to know whether we live and act according to what
God requires, and do not sin against our own Light, Knowledge and Conscience.

The Lord may bear with us a great while, and his Patience and Long-suffering
may be lengthned out a great while; the Time will come when God will bear no
longer; it will be as it was with the old World, and with Sodom and Gomorrah;
when Noah went into the Ark a Deluge of Wrath came upon them; When Lot went out
of Sodom it was destroyed by Fire: The Lord sent a Flood to drown and destroy
the old World: And he sent Fire from Heaven to burn the Cities of Sodom and
Gomorrah, because they sinned against him: And, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.10.
For we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may
receive the things done in his Body, according to that he has done, whether it
be good or bad: Knowing therefore the Terror of the Lord, we persuade Men.

When I consider these awakening Words and Sayings, I think with my self, How
can sinful Men and Women go on in such a course, when they must certainly
appear at Christ's Tribunal and give an Account of their Deeds, of whatever
they have done in the Body, whether good or bad? If Men would take this into
their Thoughts, they would consider We must die, and as Death leaves us,
Judgment will find us, and take hold of us.

Consider your Ways, repent and turn to the Lord, that you may appear before
him with Joy at the great day of his Appearing. Let your Religion be what it
will, I mind not for any Man's private Persuasion or Opinion; Prove all things,
prove Men's Words, prove Men's Sayings; and that which is of greatest
concernment of all, let us prove our own Ways, and examine our own Actions; how
we have lived, and what we have done; if we have lived according to what we
have received, and done according to what we have known to be our Duty; we are
in a good condition, but if we have lived contrary, our own Consciences will
condemn us, if we be like those mentioned by the Apostle to Titus, Chap. 1.10.
That profess that they know God, but in Works they deny him, being abominable
and disobedient, and to every good Work reprobate.

I do greatly pity every Soul that is found in such a state and condition,
because he is in the broad Way that leads to Destruction. Our Lord Christ's
Saying was after this manner, Matthew. 7.13, 14. Enter ye in at the strait Gate;
for wide is the gate and broad is the way that leads to Destruction, and many
there be which go in thereat; because strait is the gate and narrow is the way
which leads unto Life, and few there be that find it. The Lord is pleased to
afford a Day of Visitation to all sinful Men and Women, a day of grace and
mercy, a day wherein he is seeking of them ^y his dear Son Jesus Christ our
Lord, to ^ring them out of their sinful state, that they may be saved from the
Wrath to come.

So often as thou find any thing in thee ^eproving and condemning thee for
any evil thing, that is the gift of God, the spirit of Truth, the holy Spirit,
the spiritual Appearance of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is come to seek and save
that which is lost: Let me entreat you all, that desire the salvation of your
Souls, that you will be careful to enter into the Examination of your Selves
after this manner:

Am I one that has lived as without God in the World, and walked after the
imaginations of my own Heart? And do I find my Conscience reproving me in my
sinful course, and requiring me to forsake it? Let it be thy Souls care and
concern to leave off sinning against God; for the time will come when God's
Patience and Long-suffering toward thee will cease, and come to an end; this
is the day of God's Visitation: The Lord affords thee a day of Grace, wherein
he is pleased to call upon thee to turn and live, Ezekiel. 33.11. Thus says the
Lord, by the Prophet, Say unto them, As I live, says the Lord, I have no
pleasure in the death of the Wicked, but that the Wicked turn from his way and
live; turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways, for why will ye die, O house of
Israel? God's love is universal to all the Sons and Daughters of Men. God has
so loved the World (all Me^ the worst of Men) that he gave his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believes in him shou^^ not perish, but have everlasting
Life; for G^ sent not his Son into the World to condemn the World, but that the
World, through him, might be saved.

We know there is Election and Reprobation; but where is the Election? It is in
Christ of them that come to believe in Christ; they that do not believe in the
Lord Jesus Christ are in a reprobate State. The Lord has not reprobated any
from Eternity, but for Sin and final Impenitency; he has not appointed any to
Destruction. The Lord has been so abundantly merciful and gracious, as to
afford a way and means whereby all may come to the knowledge of the Truth, and
be saved; I do not say that all shall be saved, for they will not come to
Christ that they might have Life, and therefore their destruction is of
themselves. God has appointed a way whereby all Men may obtain eternal
Salvation; What is that way? That they believe on him whom God has sent. This
is Life Eternal, to know the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have
sent, John 17.3.

Let every one of us be sensible of the great love of God to us; we have all
great cause to say, That the Lord has been merciful to us, in that the day of
our Visitation is continued. The Lord has sent his Son, the Lord Jesus Christ,
in his spiritual Appearance, as he appeared sometimes in his prepared Body, and
was crucified without the Gates of Jerusalem, and he is ascended into Heaven
into the pre^ence of God, and lives for ever to make ^ntercession for us: Let
it be our care to ^orsake our evil Ways, and turn to the Lord, who is pleased
to hold out the Scepter of Mercy to us. The Invitation is, That we will come
unto Christ, whom God has exalted to be ^ Prince and a Savior, to give us
repentance and remission of sins, Luke 13.1, 2.

We read in the New Testament, That when some told our Savior of the
Galileans, whose Blood Pilate had mingled with the Sacrifices. Jesus answering,
said unto them, Suppose ye that these Galileans were Sinners above all the
Galileans, because they suffered such things? I tell you, nay, but except you
repent ye shall all likewise perish. Or those eighteen upon whom the Tower in
Siloam fell, and slew them, think ye that they were Sinners above all that
dwell in Jerusalem? I tell you, nay; but except you repent, ye shall all
likewise perish. And again, John 8.21. Our Savior tells the Jews, I go my way,
and ye shall seek me, and shall die in your s ns; whither I go, ye cannot come.
These are searching Doctrins, and should put us upon a Proving all things, and
holding fast that which is good, that we may believe in our Lord Jesus Christ,
and have an ^bundant entrance into his everlasting King^om.

My Friends, I desire that you may all be in ^ good state and condition, and
keep close to the gift of God, and the measure of Grace given to you, and prove
all things that are o^ a religious Concern, and so come to be Christians
indeed, Israelites indeed (like Nathaniel) in whom there is no Guile that you
may set a Watch before the Door of your Lips: Says the Apostle James, If any
Man among you seem to be Religious, and bridleth not his Tongue, but deceives
his own Heart, this this Man's Religion is vain, Jam. 1.26. You must watch over
your Words, and be true in your Words, that your Religion may not be in vain,
that when you prove all things, you may hold fast that which is good.

If I should put the Question to the most ignorant Man or Woman among us,
Friend, What do thou think, have thou a Soul to be saved? What do thou
think will become of thee? Such a one would answer, I have a Soul that may be
saved. But I would put the Question further, What assurance have thou that thou
shall be saved? I am in some doubt, I have not assurance of my Salvation, but I
hope to be saved. Then I might ask again. Why have thou not Assurance of
Salvation? there is something that is the cause of it. My Sin (says such a
one) lies at the Door; there is something within that will let thee know, that
it is some allowed Sin or Iniquity that thou live in.

There is an awakened Conscience, the gift that God has given to Men, that
will reprove Men for Sin; though sometimes they may get over it, yet sometimes
or other, there will be an awakening of Conscience that will make them cry out
and say, Lord, I am a sinful Man, ^ am not fit to die, I am not prepared for my
^atter end. So David cried out, Lord, cleanse ^e from my secret sins. What is
it that keeps Men in doubt of their Salvation, but some secret sin or other?
When a Man comes to be awakened, and the Book of Conscience is opened, and a
Man reads therein that he has done this and the other evil thing, lived ^o
and so; Then humble thy self under the mighty hand of God, and he will exalt
thee in due time, and speak Peace to thy Soul. If thou will prove all things,
and hold fast that which is good, live according to what thou know to be the
mind of God; if thy own Conscience condemn thee, God is greater than thy
Conscience and knows all things.

We must direct Men to look to the Witness of God in their own Souls. Thus,
says the Psalmist, Psalm. 4.4. Stand in Awe and sin not; commune with your own
hearts upon your Bed, and be still. If you will come to consider your Ways and
commune with your own Hearts, you may know how it is with you; the Lord has
lengthened out your time a little longer, therefore he would have you come to
bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance and amendment of Life, and be concerned
for the Salvation of your Immortal Souls.

Ask your self this Question, Am I fit to die, whenever the Lord shall be
pleased to call for me out of the World? Am I prepared for my latter end? Who
are they that are prepared for a dying hour? But those that know Evangelical
repentance for Sin and Faith in Christ Jesus. Now what is Repentance?

1. Wherein does it consist? In a Knowledge of Sin, Contrition and Sorrow for
it, and a Hatred of it. There is first a Knowledge of Sin, we must know that we
are Sinners, that we have sinned against the Lord. This is but a common thing,
all can come so far as to say, we are Sinners and have gone astray like lost
Sheep.

2. But there is something more in true Repentance. There must be a Godly
Sorrow for Sin, as it was with those to whom the Apostle Peter preached, Acts,
2.37. Let all the House of Israel know assuredly, that God has made that same
Jesus whom ye have Crucified both Lord and Christ. Now when they heard this
they were pricked in their Hearts, and said unto Peter and unto the rest of the
Apostles, Men and Brethren, what shall we do? We are troubled and distressed,
we know not what to do, What shall we do to he saved? And thus in a deep sense
of sin David cries out, against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this
evil in thy sight, that thou might be justified when thou speak, and clear
when thou judge. When he was awakened to a sorrow for his Sin, he came to a
good condition; after he had cried to the Lord in the beginning of that
Penitential Psalm, Have mercy upon me O God according to thy loving kindness,
according unto the multitude of thy tender mercyes, blot out my transgressions,
wash me thoroughly from ^ine Iniquity and cleanse me from my Sin, for acknowledge
my transgressions, and my Sin is ^er before me.

2. There must not only be a knowledge of ^n, and a sorrow for it, but a
forsaking of (...), and a Hatred of it, that we may not re^rn unto folly. Every
one of us that hope (...) Salvation, must be sensible of the evil of ^in, be
sorry for it, and then depart from (...); happy are you that are come so far as
to ^e convinced of your Sin, and pricked at the ^eart, and to whom the Lord
has been so ^erciful as to give you hope of Pardon and ^emission. This is the
happy state of a Poor ^eking Soul, that is come so far as to have ^s Sins
washed and blotted out, and when ^n is done away there is no more Living
there^. Then as the Apostle says, Hebr. 12.1. ^e shall lay aside every weight,
and the Sin which does so easily beset us: Some have one ^^n, and some another
that is near to them, which the Apostle here calls that Sin that does ^asily
beset thee, Persons may part with many ^ins and yet keep this one Sin. This is
a ^ate and condition wherein Men may fall short ^f Mercy; therefore we must be
purged from ^ll Sin, redeemed from all Iniquity.

This should make every Man and Woman ^ake warning, and be always watchful and
^ake heed lest there should be some Bosom ^in, which like a Snake or Viper may
sting (...) and Destroy us. If any Sin prevail over ^s there is great cause of
shame, trouble and ^rrow. But there is a great difference between sinning
wilfully, and falling into Sin through weakness and infirmity. Heb. 10.26. If
(...) Sin wilfully after we have received the kno^ledge of the Truth, there
remains no more S^crifice for Sins, but a certain fearful looki^ for of
Judgment and fiery Indignation, which she devour the Adversary.

Thus it will be if we give our selves to Sin when we know it is a Sin and yet
will do it this is sinning wilfully and presumptuously* as some Persons Sin
wilfully, so others do Sin through weakness and infirmity, and ar^ surprised
by a Temptation. This was the case of Peter, who was Zealous for his Lord and
Master Christ Jesus, and said, If all should forsake him yet, he would not. Yet
when i^ came to the trial, he was overcome with the Temptation, and he denied
his Lord, Luke, 22.56. etc. A certain Maid beheld Peter as he sat by the Fire,
and earnestly looked upon him, and said, this Man was also with Jesus; and h^
denied him, saying, Woman I know him not. And after a little while another saw
him and said, thou art also of them. And Peter said, Man, I am not. And about
the space of an hour after another confidently affirmed saying of a Truth this
fellow also was with him, for he (...) a Galilean; and Peter said, Man, I know
not what thou say; and Immediately while he yet spoke the Cock Crew; and the
Lord turned and looked upon Peter, and Peter remembered the Word of the Lord,
how he had said unto him* Before the Cock Crow thou shall deny me thrice* And
Peter went out and wept bitterly.

In the 20th Chapter of John we read, how christ did reason with Peter, and
brought his ^in to his remembrance; he had denied Christ his Lord three times,
and our Savior did ^hree times put the Question to him, Simon, ^on of Jonas,
love thou me more than these? He says unto him, Yea, Lord, thou know that
I love thee; he says unto him, Feed my ^ambs. And put the same Question to him
a ^econd time, Love thou me? And he also said unto him the third time, Simon,
Son of Jonas, ^^vest thou me? Peter was grieved because he ^^id unto him the
third time, love thou me? And he said unto him, Lord, thou know all
things, thou know that I love thee; Jesus says unto him, Feed my Sheep.
Peter began ^o be troubled and exceeding sorrowful, when he remembered what
large Promises he had made to his Lord and Master, that he would not deny him
or forsake him. Our Savior ^old him of it beforehand, and said to him, I have
prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not; and when thou art converted,
strengthen thy ^rethren.

There must be a dependence upon the Lord Jesus Christ, who ever lives to make
Intercession for us: If any Man sin (says the Apostle) we have an Advocate
with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous, and he is the Propitiation for our
sins, and not for ours only, but ^lso for the sins of the whole World, if they
will ^elieve in him. If the Righteous be scarcely sa^ed (says the Apostle)
where shall the Sinner ^ppear? There is no safety nor shelter out of Christ; it
is he that appears in the presenc^ of God for us, that is, for all that lay
hold (...) him, and make it their care to live to hi^ and to live according to
what he has mad^ known to us.

Christ has loved us, do thou love him again? Wherein consists our love to
him, b^ in keeping his Commandments? As the F^ther has loved me, so I have
loved you, continue ye in my love. Christ has loved us, an^ laid down his Life
for us; he has taste^ Death for every Man, the Lord has laid upon him the
Iniquity of us all: He bare ou^ sins in his own Body upon the Tree, that w^
being dead to Sin should live unto Righteousness, by whose Stripes we are
healed. Great has been the love of God to us; he hat^ given his Son to die for
us, and his Spirit t^ live in us, and he calls us in the Day of Visitation.

How may we know when he calls? (will some say.)

When by his good Spirit he stirs in the Heart, and strives in thy Soul, checks
thee an^ reproves thee for Sin, as often as thou findes^ anything in thy
Conscience that reproves the^ for what is evil; this is the Voice of the So^ of
God, John 5.25. Verily, verily, I say un^ you, the hour is coming, and now is,
when the Dead shall hear the Voice of the Son of God, an^ they that hear shall
live. Even those that ar^ dead in Sins and Trespasses shall be quickene^ by the
Voice of the Son of God; For as the Father has life in himself, he has given
unt^ ^he Son to have Life in himself. And has ^iven him Authority to execute
Judgment al^o, because he is the Son of Man: Marvel not at this, for the hour
is coming in which all that are in their Graves shall hear his Voice and shall
come forth, they that have done good unto the Resurrection of Life, and they
that ^ave done Evil, unto the Resurrection of Damnation.

Blessed be the Lord, who has made known ^s Mind and Will unto us; we have the
Spirit of Truth within us, and the holy Scriptures without us. It is a great
Mercy that ^hey are vouchsafed to all Nations, and that ^hoy have been
wonderfully preserved in all Ages and Generations, from the Primitive ^imes to
this day, and have come to us safe through so many different Hands, and all the
Copies of Holy Writ agreeing in Words and Sense without any cousiderable
difference: Let us bless God for this singular Blessing and Mercy vouchsafed to
us.

Though I would not Idolize the Scriptures, ^et I do highly esteem and honor
them. We ^ead, Luke 16.27. That in the Parable of the ^ich Man, he speaks to
Abraham after this manner: I pray thee, Father, that thou would send Lazarus
to my Father's House; for I have five Brethren, that he may testify unto them
lest they also come to this place of Torment. Abraham says unto ^im, They have
Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them. And he said, Nay, Father Abraham,
but if one went unto them from the Dead, they will repent. And he said unto
him, If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded,
though one rose from the Dead; therefore to the Law and the Testimony, the
Testimony is in our Consciences, and the Law is written outwardly but
effectually and inwardly upon the Hearts; there is no disjoining what God has
joined.

Therefore, if any one should bring any other Doctrine that is contrary to the
Holy Scripture; or, if an Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel, we are not
to receive it. It has been the Spirit of Antichrist in all Ages and the Man of
Sin, that has endeavored to undervalue the holy Scriptures, who (as the
Apostle says) opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God or
that is worshipped; so that he as God sits in the Temple of God, showing
himself that he is God. This Spirit of Antichrist wherever it is, it secretly
undermines the holy Scriptures; therefore, it concerns you to keep close to the
Law and the Testimony.

Let me in true love to your immortal Souls, desire every one of you to mind
the work of your Salvation, and to work it out with fear and trembling, and God
will work in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure: Examine your
selves and prove your selves, whether you are in the Faith; take heed that you
be not led by a Spirit of Error, to the Law and to the Testimony. If any Man
think that he is wise in many things, let him not presume to be wise above that
which is written, lest he need to come and learn again what he does not know
and has been taught. Great is the Mystery of Godliness, and great also is the
Mystery of Iniquity, therefore you are concerned to examine your selves, and to
prove all things, and hold fast that which is good.

You are a seeking and enquiring People, else you would not have been here, at
this time. And what can inform you better than the gift God has been pleased
to give unto you, together with the holy Scriptures? examine your selves,
whether when you have proved all things, you hold fast that which is good. Make
it appear that you are good Christians, by your righteous and heavenly
Conversations, and by your holy Walk; make it appear that you are true
Disciples of Christ, that you are Followers of the Lord Jesus, and endued with
his Spirit, by being holy in all manner of Conversation. Take heed of indulging
thy self in any sin, take that Counsel which is given by our Lord Jesus to all
his Followers, Matthew. 5.30. If thy right hand offend thee cut it off, and cast
it from thee; for it is profitable for thee that one of thy Members should
perish, and not that thy whole Body should be cast into Hell.

Live so as to be always ready for the coming of the Lord Jesus, that you may
be found among the wise Virgins. The Kingdom of Heaven is likened unto ten
Virgins, which took their Lamps and went forth to meet the Bridegroom, and five
of them were wise, and five of them were foolish: Here are abundance of
Professors in this City that would be taken for Virgins and Followers of
Christ, but they are too like those five foolish Virgins that took their Lamps,
and took no Oil with them, whereas the Wise took Oil in their Vessels with
their Lamps; while the Bridegroom carried they all slumbered and slept; and at
Midnight there was a Cry made, behold, the Bridegroom comes, go ye out to meet
him; then all those Virgins went and trimmed their Lamps; and the foolish said
unto the wise, give us of your Oil for our Lamps are gone out; but the wise
answered, not so, lest there be not enough for us and you, go you rather to
them that sell, and buy for your selves: And while they went to buy, the
Bridegroom came; and they that were ready went in with him to the Marriage, and
the Door was shut; afterward also, came the other Virgins, saying, Lord, Lord,
open to us; but he answered and said, Verily I say unto you, I know you not.

O take heed that this be not your woeful and deplorable Case at the coming of
Christ to Judgment, but prepare and be in readiness, that you may have an
abundant entrance into his everlasting Kingdom. Take my words into
consideration, and lay aside every weight and the sin that does easily beset
you, and run with Patience your heavenly Race, that you may so run, as to
obtain the Crown: Let it plainly appear that you are Followers of Christ, then
you must deny your selves, and take up his Cross and follow him. Let it be our
care not to love any thing, not to love our selves, more than we love the Lord
Jesus Christ.

We live in a Day wherein there is so much Vanity and Pride, Oppression,
Unholiness and Contempt of true Religion and the power of Godliness, and other
crying Sins, that it seems to me as if the end of all things were at hand, as
our Savior has foretold, that near the end of the World Iniquity should
abound, and the love of many wax cold.

If your love to Christ (my Friends) is sincere, you will love one another: If
you love me (says Christ) then keep my Commandments; by this shall all Men
know that you are my Disciples, if you have love one to another, John 13.35. If
we have a sincere love to Christ. we shall love one another, and we shall find
that love will cover a multitude of Sins: When we see any Man falls short of
what he ought to do, we shall be concerned for him, and pity him, if he be
wanting in his Duty toward God or toward Man, we shall not be severe in
censuring him; but when we reprove him or admonish him, it shall be in love and
with a spirit of Meekness, and as the Apostle speaks, Romans 12.10. We shall be
kindly affectioned one to another, with Brotherly love, preferring one another.

This was the practice of the Primitive Christians, who were inflamed with a
holy zeal for God and love to one another, shew^ng forth the Virtues of Christ,
in a Conversation becoming the Gospel; let us follow them who were Followers of
Christ, who through Faith and Patience do inherit the Promises, and then we
shall say with the Apostle, For us to live is Christ, and to die is gain. If I
live in the Flesh (says Paul) this is the fruit of my labor; yet what I shall
choose, I wot not; for I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart
and to be with Christ, which is far better, 1 Timothy 4.6. I am now ready to be
offered, and the time of my departure is at hand; I have fought the good fight,
I have finished my course, I have kept the faith; henceforth is laid up for me
a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at
that day, and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing.

Thus if we fight the good Fight with the Apostle, and follow the Captain of
our Salvation, we shall be more than Conquerors through him that loved us,
Jesus Christ the Righteous, who is the blessed and only Potentate, the King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, who only has Immortality, dwelling in the Light
which no Man can approach unto, whom no Man has seen nor can see; to whom be
Honor and Power everlasting, Amen.

A SERMON Preached by Charles Harris, At Harp-Lane, November 4th. 1694.
There is nothing so comfortable in this lower world as to be satisfied by the
spirit of God that we are saved by the Lord Jesus from the wrath to come; and
therefore all who are waiting to dwell in the sense of this comfort, they
should work out their own salvation, with fear and trembling, knowing that it
is God which works in them, both to will and to do of his good pleasure.
There are many People desire to be saved from the wrath to come, but they would
be saved in their own ways, not considering rightly that There is no Name
given under Heaven whereby men can be saved, but the Name of Jesus.

This then have I found to be the great lesson which I and others ought to
learn, how we are saved by Jesus, and delivered from the wrath to come; the
Angel that was sent from Heaven unto Joseph, speaking concerning Mary the
Mother of our Lord, Fear not to take unto thee Mary thy Wife, for that which is
conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost: And she shall bring forth a Son, and
thou shall call his Name Jesus, for he shall save his People from their Sins.

Now observe what the lesson is that we have in these words, he shall save his
People from their Sins; it is a saying worthy to be observed, and possibly may
the inquirer say, who is it that belongs to Christ? Because the word says, he
shall save his People from their Sins; our Savior is very intent upon this
matter, No man comes unto me (says he) except my Father, which has sent me,
draw him; Here is one of the marks and tokens that thou belongst unto Christ,
that is one that the Angel spoke of, He shall save his People from their Sins.
Again says our Savior (concerning his Church and People,) in his Prayer to
his Father, John, 17.6. Thine they were and thou gave them me; How shall we
understand this saying, Thine they were? that is, they were under thy
preparation, they were under the stirrings of thy power and under thy
awakenings, before they came to believe in me. Observe again, Thine they were
and thou gave them me: How does God the Father give Believers unto Christ? he
gave them unto Christ to receive the promise of the Father made in Christ, For
in him are all the promises yea and Amen. Then again, here is your comfort,
what our Savior further expresses in his Heavenly Prayer: Those that thou
gave me I have kept, and none of them is lost but the Son of Perdition, that
the Scripture might be fullfilled.

Are you under, or have you known the drawings of the Father to bring you unto
Christ? that is, are you made sensible of the want of Christ? The spouse was
under the drawings of the Father before she found Christ, I will rise now and
go about the City (says the Spouse) I will seek him whom my Soul loves; I
sought him but I found him not. The Watchmen found me, to whom I said, Saw ye
him whom my Soul loves? I charge ye O ye Daughters of Jerusalem, if ye find my
Beloved that ye tell him that I am sick of Love. What is thy Beloved more than
another Beloved, O thou fairest among Women, what is thy Beloved more than
another Beloved that thou do so charge us? My Beloved is White and Ruddy, the
chiefest of Ten Thousand; Thus she was prepared for Christ who had inflamed her
with his love, and drawn her desires after him.

It is said concerning John the Baptist, He Preached the Baptism of Repentance
for the Remission of Sins, making ready a People for the Lord. This is he that
was spoken of by the Prophet Esaias; the Voice of one Crying in the Wilderness,
prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his Paths straight. There was a stirring
from Heaven among the People when the Baptist came Preaching, Repent for the
Kingdom of He^ven is at hand, they were prepared to recei^ his ministration; so
when People come to (...) under a Divine preparation, as many are (...) our
Days, who are ready to say, Lord have mercy upon us; among so many Religions
(...) would to God we knew how to choose tha^ which is right; these are under a
Heavenly preparation that earnestly enquire after the tru^ way and worship of
the Lord, wherein they may seek and serve him and find acceptance.

It is left upon record concerning Christ* He gave his life a Ransom for many,
to be testified in due time; If you speak of a Ransom to one that is a liberty,
he will not regard it, being unconcerned; but come and tell a poor captive in
Algiers that he shall shortly be discharged from his slavery and sore bondage,
and set at liberty, and that a noble Friend in England will pay his Ransom for
him, ^and his Heart will melt and leap for joy, and he will be transported and
greatly affected to hear such glad tidings. As the Captives in Babylon when
they sat down by the Rivers there, and hanged their Harps upon the Willows and
wept, when they remembered Zion, when they that carried them away Captive
required of them mirth, saying, sing us one of the songs of Sion. They said,
How shall we sing the Lords Song in a strange land?

So it has pleased the Lord in our Days to make Thousands sensible of their
woeful Captivity by reason of sin, and to say after this manner, alas I am where
I would not be, I am under bondage to sin and Satan; I would be at liberty, I
am confined and shut up in a dark Dungeon; I would be Discharged, I am in
Darkness and would have the light of Gods Countenance lifted up upon me, and he
refreshed with the Rays of the Sun of Righteousness; I am laboring under
weakness, and I would receive strength, and struggling under my many
Infirmities; I would receive Power from on high to do the will of God, and
never be a weary of well doing; I am now at a distance from my Fathers House,
and as a stranger on this Earth; I would have my conversation in Heaven, and
live unto Christ here, that I may live with him hereafter and sit with him at
Gods Right Hand in Heavenly places.

Now those that are made sensible of their state of Captivity and darkness, and
how they have been under the very region and shadow of Death, to such as sit in
darkness and as it were under the shadow of Death, God has caused light to
spring up, whereby the Soul comes to perceive that God was in Christ
reconciling the World unto himself, not imputing their Trespasses to them.
Christ gave his life a Ransom for many, to be testified in due time. The Soul
has its lodgment under fears and doubts, questioning whether ever it shall see
the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living; we have all sinned and come
short of the Glory of God, and we are all Children of wrath by nature as well
as others; the first step of quietness and comfort, is like that of the Fathers
running to meet his Prodigal Son when he saw him afar off; It is when the Soul
se^ and apprehends that God is in Christ reconciling the World unto himself;
the Lord says I have found a Ransom, I have laid help upon one that is mighty,
that is able to save to the uttermost.

Now after we perceive there is a Ransom, that there is mercy with the Lord
that he may be feared, then the light of that prophecy opens to us, Isa. 55.6,
7. Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, call ye upon him while he is near.
Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let
him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God for
he will abundantly pardon. Then the Soul begins to perceive this Morning of the
Day of God, and will say with the Psalmist, return to thy rest, O my Soul, for
the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee; Until the Soul comes to behold and
taste of this Passover, and to believe the record that God has given of his
Son, it cannot be unlocked, and unchained from its bondage and Captivity: He
that believes not, is condemned already, and the wrath of God abides on him,
because he believes not the record that God gave of his Son: The believing
this record and embracing the promise of God, is that whereby we feel a spark
of Divine hope kindled in us.

So that I say the greatest comfort that can be enjoyed in this life, is to be
assured by the spirit of God that we are saved from the wrath to come; we must
begin and go on gradually ^^d work out our own Salvation with fear and
^embling, till it appear to thee and thou art ^^tisfyed that thy Faith stands
not in the Wis^om of men, but in the power of God, and that thy sins are
remitted, Psalm. 32.1, 2. Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, and
those Sin is covered. Blessed is the Man unto whom the Lord imputes not
Iniquity, and in whose Spirit there is no guil. When you come ^o perceive the
Benefit which you have received by Christ Jesus, and that by a true belief in
his name, you receive Remission of Sins, this kindles in your Souls a love to
God, and you will be ready to say,

What, has he paid my debt that I might be discharged from Prison? Paid that
debt which I could not pay? I was in Captivity from which I could not Ransom my
self, and has God given his Son, and has his Son Jesus Christ given himself
to be a Ransom for me? I was under a strange King (as the Israelites of old)
under great slavery in the land of Egypt and house of Bondage, has the Lord
brought me out from thence by a mighty Hand and outstretched Arm, and brought
me as it were through the Red Sea, as on dry land? has he destroyed those
Enemies that designed my Destruction, and wrought a great deliverance and
Salvation for me? What shall I render to the Lord, for all his Benefits? Bless
the Lord O my Soul, and all that is within me bless his Holy Name, who
forgiveth all thine Iniquities, who heals all thy Diseases, who Redeemeth thy
life from Destruction, and crowns thee wi^^ lovingkindness and tender mercies.

When we apprehend that our sins are rem^ted, and that God is in Christ
reconciling t^ World to himself, not imputing their trespass^ to them, then we
have quietness and peace Rejoice and beglad O Daughter of Zion, the Lord that
is Righteous will bring Salvation and he will send forth thy Prisoners out of
the Pit where there was no Water.

Methinks I hear a sound in a Disconsolat^ Soul, saying, I believe that God is
mercifu^ the Night is far spent and the Day is at hand yet notwithstanding this
is my trouble, that ^ do not yet feel any Power to live to Christ tha^ died for
me, and to walk worthy of my vocation; the Soul may therefore cry out, O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the Body of Death? I have
formerly been greatly troubled and distressed because I wanted a certainty of
the Remission of my sins that are past now I am as much troubled and
disquieted, and my Soul is cast down within me, because I have not Power over
my present sins; alas I have not power to fight the Lambs Battles, and to
overcome my Spiritual Enemies; when I am engaged in the Holy warfare, under the
Captain of my Salvation, who was made perfect through sufferings, and he has
only made a promise to him that overcomes, I have not yet obtained the Victory.

He that overcomes (says Christ) the same shall be clothed in white raiment,
and I will not blot out his Name out of the Book of life, but I will confess
his Name before my Father and before his Holy Angels, Rev. 3.5, 12. Him that
overcomes will I make a Pillar in the Temple of God, and he shall go no more
out; and I ^ill write upon him the Name of my God, and ^he Name of the City of
my God, which is New Jerusalem, which comes down out of Heaven from my God,
and I will write upon him my ^ew Name: Thou complainest of want of power to
overcome thy Spiritual Enemies; ^rt thou one that longest to overcome? then I
^ope the controversy is at an end; do not say ^ shall carry this Body of sin
and Death to the Grave with me, but wait to be made a par^aker of Christ's
Prayer, John 17.15, 17. I pray ^ot that thou should take them out of the
World, ^ut keep them from the evil: Sanctify them brough thy Truth, thy word is
Truth.

Wait for Sanctification and to receive power, according to that ancient
lesson, John 1.12. But as many as received him, to them gave he Power to become
the Sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name; Do thou believe that
Christ is endued with all power in Heaven and Earth, that he may give power to
his People, and save them from their sins, and to be a defender of their Faith?
now he is in Heaven, as certainly as on the Eearth he offer^d himself a
sacrifice upon the Cross, and be^ame a Propitiation for the sins of the whole
World? then doubt not but thou shall have ^ower over thy sins, and be more than
Conque^our through him that has loved thee.

I will tell thee that Lesson which I ha^ learned in the School of Christ, that
is, to w^^ to be endued with Power from on high, an^ the desire of thy Soul
shall be satisfied, and the waiting will not be in vain, when thou wai^est upon
God that waits to be gracious.

But thou further complainest, I want strengt^ where my weakness is, and my
weakness (...) inward, I want assistance where my enem^ comes to assault me,
and that is within me.

Every one that belongs to Christ Jesus is (...) some measure made sensible of
sin, and is waiting to be delivered from it: Therefore, as said, Christ gave
his life a Ransom for many to be testified in due time. Let me be waiting for
Power to become a child of God Thou have Power (thou say) to stand and to
keep thy self from falling; thou have power to keep thy self from Drunkenness
an^ Uncleanness, and other gross sins, but dos^ thou wait upon the Lord for
power over thy Thoughts, and do thou say (as it is in the Prophet) How long
shall these vain Thoughts lodge within me? We have a good Lesson from the
Apostle in this case, Ephesians. 6.10. Be strong in the Lord and in the power of
his might, pu^ on the whole Armor of God, that ye may b^ able to stand against
the wiles of the Devil, for we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against
Principalities and Powers, against the Rulers o^ the darkness of this World,
against spiritua^ Wickedness in high Places.

O that all the precious Truths that are delivered to you may be mixed with
Faith in them that preach it and hear it: Wherefore, ^e unto you the whole
armor of God, that ye ^y be able to withstand in the evil day, and ^oing done
all to stand. Stand therefore, hav^^g your loins girt about with truth, and
hav^^g on the breast plate of righteousness, ^d your feet shod with the
preparation (...) the gospel of peace; above all, ^n^^^g the shield of Faith,
wherewith ye shall be ^^le to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked: ^^d
take the helmet of salvation and the sword (...) the spirit, which is the word
of God, pray^^g always, with all prayer and supplication in (...) spirit. Take
unto you the sword of the ^^irit, that you may put to flight the armies (...)
the aliens. Those strange and troublesome ^^ings, those vain thoughts that
would alie^ate my heart and my affections from God. that sort of weapons must
we use? Our ^eapons are not carnal, but spiritual and mighty through God, for
the pulling down of strong ^olds of the man of sin, and the bringing into
^aptivity every thought to the obedience of Christ.

O mind these things in good earnest, and ^hey will turn to your spiritual
advantage. ^f it please the Holy Ghost to touch the Preach^r's Tongue with a
coal from the Altar, he may ^op a word of exhortation, which will be ^^arper
than a sword, and may pierce thy ^^art. Heb. 4.12. The word of God is quick and
powerful, and sharper than any two-edged ^word, piercing even to the dividing
asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow and is a discerner of
the thoughts and intenti^^ the hearts. All Scripture (says the Apos^^^ is
given by inspiration of God, and is profit^ for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for ^^struction in righteousness, that the Man of (...) may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto (...) good works.

Some have unadvisedly said, That we d^ the divine authority of the Holy
Scripture which we so highly esteem, and can say w^ the Apostle, We are not
ashamed of the Gos^^^ of Christ, for it is the power of God to sal^^tion. If
any among us shall deny the H^ Scriptures to be of Divine Inspiration, (...)
them bear the just reproach of it. It is commendation given to the Church in
P^^ladelphia; Thou have a little strength, and h^ kept my word, and have not
denied my nam^ But now concerning the sword of the spirit which is the word of
God, I need not s^ much about it unto you; you know the wo^^ is nigh you, in
your mouth and in your Heart*

Many among us have known the word (...) God powerful upon our Hearts,
awakenin^ us to consider our eternal State: Many yea^ years ago, People
marvelled at us, saying What ails this People that they are so nice an^
scrupulous, and will not do what others do* They will not be cheerful and
merry, and g^ to Masks and Plays; they are cast down an^ afflicted, and weep,
and lament, and mout^ for their sin before the Lord, and are greatl^ astonished
what is the matter: They find the word of God quick and powerful, and sharpe^
than a two-edged Sword, and it has ^unded and pierced them; they had rather ^
touched with a naked Sword, and receive ^ Wound in their Bodies, than feel that
An^ish in their Souls, when the Sword of the ^^irit, the word of the Lord, has
reached ^^eir Hearts; then they cry out, Have pity on (...), have pity on me,
for the hand of the Lord ^^h touched me. The Word of the Lord is ^ick and
powerful, and sharper than a two-^ged Sword; thou will find it like the Sword
(...) Gideon against thy spiritual Enemies.

When the Children of Israel were greatly ^poverished because of the
Midianites, they ^ed unto the Lord, The Angel of the Lord ^eared to Gideon as
he was threshing Wheat (...) the Wine Press, to hide it from the Midia^^tes;
and the Angel said unto him, The Lord (...) with thee, thou mighty man of
valor, Judge. ^ 14. And it is said, The Lord looked upon ^n and said unto him,
Go in thy might, and ^^u shall save Israel from the hands of the ^^dianites;
have I not sent thee? And he said, (...) my Lord, wherewith shall I save
Israel? ^^hold, my Family is poor in Manasseh, and I (...) the least in my
Father's House. And the ^rd said unto him, Surely I will be with thee, ^d thou
shall smite the Midianites as one man. ^^deon desires a Sign; he put a fleece
of Wool ^on the Floor, and the Dew was upon the ^eece, and it was dry upon all
the Earth ^sides.

And Gideon said unto God, Let not thine An^ be hot against me, and I will
speak but this once; let me prove I pray thee this once with (...) Fleece; let
it now be dry only upon the Fle^ and upon all the Ground let there be Dew.
(...) God did so that Night, and gave him a cert^ Token and Assurance that he
would vouchsafe (...) presence with him. Gideon levies an Army thirty thousand.
And the Lord said to Gide^^ the People that are with thee are too many (...) me
to give the Midianites into their hands, (...) Israel vaunt themselves against
me, sayin^ Mine own hand has saved me. And there (...) turned of the People
two and twenty thousan^ and there remained ten thousand: And the Lo^ said, the
People are yet too many, bring the down to the Water. And they bowed down their
Knees to drink Water, only three hundr^^ Men lapped Water with their Tongues,
as (...) Dog lappeth: By these, says the Lord, I w^ save you. And the Lord
said to Gideon, (...) down to the Host of Midian, for I have del^vered it into
thy hand; but if thou fear (...) go down, go with Pharaoh thy servant, and
the shall hear what they say, and afterward she thine hand be strengthened. And
when Gide^^ was come near to the Midianites, that lay alon^ in the Valley like
Grasshoppers for Multitude and their Camels were without number like the sand of
the Seaside. And, behold, there was ^ man that told a Dream unto his Fellow,
sayin^ Behold, I dreamed a Dream, and lo, a Cake (...) Barley-bread tumbled
into the Host of Midia^ and came unto a Tent, and smote it, that it fe^ and
overturned it, that the Tent lay alone. An^ his Fellow answered and said, This
is nothing els^ save the sword of Gideon the son of Joash, a man (...) Israel;
for into his hand has God delivered, ^idian and all the Host. And when Gideon
^ard the telling of the Dream and the inter^retation of it, he worshipped and
returned in^o the Host of Israel, and said, Arise, the Lord ^ath delivered them
into our hands. And he ^^vided the three hundred men into three Com^^nies, and
he put a Trumpet into every man's and with empty Pitchers, and Lamps within ^he
Pitchers. And the three Companies blew ^he Trumpets, and brake the Pichers, and
^eld the Lamps in their left hands, and the ^rumpets in their right hands to
blow withal; and they cried, The sword of the Lord and of Gideon. And they
stood every man in his place ^ound about the Camp, and all the Host of Mi^ian
ran and cried and fled, and the Lord set ^very Man's sword against his Fellow,
even ^hroughout all the Host of Midian, and they ^estroyed one another.

These things are written for our Learning, that through patience and the
comfort of the ^criptures, we might have hope, so that thou that complainest of
thy Weakness and want of ^ower, thou shall be strengthened with all might, and
by the sword of the Spirit, the word of God, thou shall prevail and put to
^light the Armies of the Aliens, and say with ^he Apostle, Thanks be to God,
that gives us Victory through our Lord Jesus Christ: And with Zacharias, Luke
1.67. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel who has visited and redeem^d his
People, and raised up a Horn of salvation for us. And say as the Psalmist,
Praise ye the Lord, praise God in his Sanctuary, praise him in the Firmament of
his Power, praise him for his mighty Acts, praise him according to his
excellent Greatness; let every thing that has breath praise the Lord. And as
Moses praised God in his Song after the deliverance at the Red Sea; I will sing
unto the Lord, for he has triumphed gloriously, the Horse and his Rider has
he thrown into the Sea. The Lord is my Strength and Song, he is become my
Salvation, he is my God, and I will prepare him an Habitation; my Father's God,
and I will exalt him; who is like unto thee, O Lord, among the Gods? Who is
like thee, glorious in Holiness, fearful in Praises, doing Wonders?

But some will object and say, Notwithstanding all the strength and power the
Lord gives his People, here is a great Allay. We have a subtle Adversary to
deal with, the Devil that old Serpent; he beguiled our first Parents in
Paradise, in a state of Innocence: He is the Prince of the power of the Air,
and a roaring Lion going about continually seeking whom he may devour.

I answer; This Talk is begun to be laid aside when thou feel the power of
God; and thou may encourage thy self in this, that greater is he that is in
you, than he that is in the World. When the strong Man armed keeps the House,
his Goods are in peace; but when a stronger than he comes to dispossess him, he
spoils him of his Goods.

When once you come to be acquainted with the power of God working mightily
within you, you will say, The beloved of my Soul is come, and has strengthened
me with all might in my inward Man, and enabled m^ to overcome the Enemy: The
Son of God is come, and has given us an Understanding that we may know him
that is true: This is very comfortable, Here is light sown for the Righteous,
and gladness for the upright in Heart.

But, methinks, I hear another sound in another Soul, speaking after this
manner: I have believed unto remission of Sins, and in my waiting upon the
Lord, I have found such strength and power given, in that the Enemy has given
back. When I awake in the morning and come to a Meeting, I am in distress till
I receive Bread from Heaven, and Honey out of the Rock, and Consolation from
those precious Promises; I will cause them to lie down, and none shall make
them afraid; and they shall have Bread in their own Houses, and Water in their
own Cisterns.

The more you wait upon the Lord, the more you will find of supply from his
heavenly helping-hand; certainly, God is carrying on the Work of your
Redemption till you appear before him in Zion, though at present it causes
trouble and exercise; as it was with the Spouse, when she was seeking after her
Beloved with desires and breathings, Cant. 6.8. I charge you Daughters of
Jerusalem, if you find my Beloved, that ye tell him, That I am sick of love. To
be sick of Love is a groaning, mournful Exercise; but when thy Savior ^^mes
and opens his Mouth in blessing, thou ^ilt be abundantly satisfied as with
Marrow and Fatness, and sit under his shadow with ^^^t Delight, and his Fruit
will be sweet un^^ thy taste.

Thus it was with David; When thou hidest thy face, O God, I am troubled, and I
had fainted unless I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord, in the land
of the living. One that is earnestly seeking after Christ, will speak of his
Excellencies, as the Spouse did, and thereby excite and stir up others to seek
him also; my Beloved is white and rudy, the chiefest of ten thousand, his Mouth
is most sweet, yea he is altogether Lovely. This is my Beloved, and this is my
Friend: O Daughters of Jerusalem, whither is thy beloved gone (they said)
whither is thy beloved turned aside, that we may seek him with thee? When thou
art seeking after Christ he is not far from thee. Rev. 3.20. Behold I stand at
the Door and knock; if any man hear my Voice, and open the Door, I will come
unto him, and will sup with him, and he with me.

Some honest Country men will say one to another, where is the Door Christ
comes to? It is the Door of the Heart. What is this knocking of the beloved at
the Door? How shall I know when he knocks at the Door; when the Spouse comes to
have acquaintance with her beloved? I sleep, but my Heart waketh; it is the
Voice of my beloved that knocks, saying Open to me my Sister, my love, my
dove, my undefiled; for my Head is filled with dew and m^ locks with the drops
of the Night. My belov^^ (says she) put in his hand by the hole of (...) Door,
and my Bowels were moved for him: I (...) up to open to my Beloved, and my
hands droppe^ with myrrh, and my fingers with sweet smelling myrrh upon the
handles of the lock. I opened to my Beloved but my Beloved had withdrawn
himself and was gone, my Soul failed when he spoke.

When the Lord is pleased to give a taste of his love, then after a dark Night
of sorrow and affliction, the Day will break and the shadows flee away; then at
the dawning of this blessed Morning, Christ will come to the disconsolate
enquiring Soul, and his reward is with him and his work before him; then there
shall be joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall fly away.

Then says the humble Soul, I am sensible of the goodness of the Lord,
sensible of mercy and supporting and preserving power, but I am still under
trouble and disquietness of mind, and I am as David, when he cried out, Lord
make have to help me, for the Waters are come unto my Soul; great distress and
trouble are come into my Soul; now though I have believed in Christ and
obtained mercy, and assistance from divine power against my Spiritual Enemies,
yet I have not kept my watch, and my adversary the Devil by his subtilty and
wiles has ensnared me, and given me a snap at the Heel, and I have relapsed
unto sin, sinned presumptuously, nay I am afraid I have sinned the unpardonable
sin, the (...) against the Holy Ghost; for I have been enlightened and tasted
of the Heavenly gift, (...) have been made a partaker of the Holy Ghost, and
have tasted the good word of God and the powers of the World to come. The
Apostle says, It is impossible for such if they fall away to be renewed again
by Repentance, I am afraid to die, for I cannot triumph over Death as the
Apostle did and say 1 Cor. 15.55. O Death where is thy sting, O Grave where is
thy victory! the sting of Death is sin, the strength of sin is the law; but
thanks be to God who gives us the Victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

I Answer, Notwithstanding all thy doubts and fears, thou art still to hope in
God, who is merciful and gracious forgiving transgression and sin, and who has
promised that if we confess and forsake sin we shall find mercy, and if we
forsake sin and turn from our evil ways he will abundantly pardon. Remember for
thy encouragment the words of the Apostle 1 John 2.12. My little Children,
these things write I unto you that ye sin not. And if any man sin, we have an
advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous; and he is the
propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the
whole World. If thou do believe in Christ thou will be in a capacity to
resist the Devil thy grand Enemy, and to repel his temptations, when he comes
as an accuser to make shipwreck of thy Faith; consider the tenderness and
compassion of Christ toward broken and contrite sinners in 11 Mat. 28. in that
sweet invitation, Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden and I
will give you rest. And also in that charge he gives to Peter, John 21, 15.
Simon, Son of Jona^ love thou me? He answered, Lord thou know all things,
thou know that I love thee; then says he, feed my Lambs, feed my Sheep,
etc. Stephen when they were stoning him to Death did look unto Christ and had
strong consolation, triumphing over Death and the rage and fury of his
Murderers, Acts 17.55. He being full of the Holy Ghost looked up steadfastly
into Heaven and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the Right hand of
God; and they stoned Stephen calling upon God, and saying, Lord Jesus receive
my Spirit. And he kneeled down and cried with a loud Voice, Lord lay not this
sin unto their Charge.

Thus look up unto Jesus when thy Adversary the Devil does accuse thee, and by
believing thou will overcome him and go on conquering, and to conquer till all
thy enemies be utterly subdued. Believe in the Lord Jesus who has all Power in
Heaven and Earth committed to him, who is able to save to the uttermost, all
that come to God by him; and those that come unto him he will in no wise cast
out; when thou have fought the good fight, and the Battle is over and Victory
obtained, thou shall find a Song of praise to God, as Israel of Old upon the
Banks of Salvation when Pharaoh and his Host were drowned in the Red Sea.

Thou art discouraged and cast down, and thy Soul is disquieted within thee,
because thou art afraid thou have committed the unpardonable sin, the sin
against the Holy Ghost. ^any of the Israelites were bitten they did look up to
the Brazen Serpent, (a Type of Christ) and they were immediately healed; if the
Devil the old Serpent has bitten thee and wounded thy Heel, look up to Christ
by an eye of Faith, and thou shall be healed. As Moses lifted up the Serpent in
the Wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life; Do thou think
thy sin like that of Demas, that embraced this present World. Or like those
Romans 1.21. who were without excuse because that when they knew God, they
glorified him not as God, neither were they thankful, but became vain in their
imaginations, and their foolish Heart was darkened. Is thy sin like theirs who
turned the grace of God into lasciviousness? Is thy sin like theirs that made
Shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience? Is thy sin like the sin of them that
blasphemed Christ when he wrought mighty wonders and miracles, opened the eyes
of the blind, raised the Dead, and cast out Devils and said he cast them out
through Beelzebub the Prince of the Devils? Look up unto Jesus the author and
finisher of our Faith, look up unto him who was Crucified and lifted up upon
the Cross, raised from the Dead and is now Ascended into Heaven, and is on the
Right Hand of God making intercession for us.

And the Apostle James gives encouragement and direction to us, James 5.14. Is
any man sick among you? Let him call for the elders of the Church; and let them
pray over him* anointing him with Oil in the Name of the Lord* And the Prayer
of Faith shall save the sick and the Lord shall raise him up; and if he have
committed sins, they shall be forgiven him. The effectual fervent Prayer of a
righteous man avails much. These are the helps that God afforded to believers
in that Day and time, and he has given us ground of hope in our time and Day
that our iniquities and transgressions shall be pardoned and blotted out upon
Confession and deep humiliation, and turning from sin to God.

It may be thou can say I did not sin wilfully against the Lord, and with an
high Hand: I did not say (as they of old after a mighty deliverance wrought for
them) let us make us a Captain and go back again to Egypt. I have not so
presumptuously sinned, yet I have been tempted and overcome; the enemy the Old
Serpent has snapt me by the Heel, and bit and wounded me; then look up to
Christ (as they to the Brazen Serpent) and that look of Faith will heal thee.
If any man sin we, have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, believe in him, and then Add to your Faith virtue, and to your
virtue knowledge, and to knowledge temperance, and to temperance patience, and to
patience godlyness, and to godlyness brotherlykindness, and to
brotherlykindness charity, for if these things be in you and abound, they make
you that ye shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

It may be, another Poor dejected sorrowful Soul may say, I have met with many.
Trials, Troubles and Exercises, and I have been ready to sink under my burden,
I have been made a Spectacle to God, Angels and Men; and another may say what
is like to this, I want the assurance of my Salvation, the enjoyment of all
other things is inconstant and uncertain. We have heard of terrible
Earthquakes, wherewith many have been suddenly swallowed up and ruined; and we
hear of Wars, whereby the Blood of many thousands has been shed, and their
Lives extinguished. O the Joy of Gods Salvation! they that have the lively
hopes of this, may say with the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.1. For we know that if our
earthly House of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a Building of God, an
House not made with Hands, Eternal in the Heavens.

As you come to enjoy this blessed Privilege, and have a prospect of a happy
End, you will not be much concerned about any Troubles or Exercises in the way
to it. The Devil, your Adversary, goes about continually like a Roaring Lion,
seeking whom he may devour. He will assault and tempt us as he did our Savior,
and hit us in those places where he is most like to wound us. He takes our
Savior up into the Holy City, and sets him on the Pinnacle of the Temple,
and then said unto him, if thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down. It is
written, He shall give his Angels charge concerning thee, and in their Hands
they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a Stone.
And then he took him up into an exceeding high Mountain, and showed him all the
Kingdoms of the World, and the glory of them; and said, All these things will I
give thee, If thou will fall down and worship me. Then said Jesus to him, get
thee hence Satan, for it is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and
him only shall thou serve. Then the Devil left him, and behold Angels came and
Ministered to him. In his first Temptation, when he came to our Savior and
said, If thou be the Son of God, Command that these Stones be made Bread, Our
Savior repelled the force of that Temptation, and said, Man lives not by
Bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the Mouth of God.

Resist the Devil, as our Savior did, and he will fly from thee; and look unto
Jesus the Captain of our Salvation, and he will enable thee by Faith, to quench
his Fiery Darts, and he will be a Savior to save thee from thy Sins, and also
from the wrath to come.

I have opened the Poinr I propounded to insist on, How we may know whether we
belong to Christ; if we are his, he will save us from our Sins; and if we
belong to him, we are under the drawings of the Father; For none can come unto
me, says Christ, except my Father which has sent me, draw him. And I have
given you several other Marks and Tokens whereby you may examine your selves,
and know whether you be of Christ's little Flock, for whom he has prepared a
Kingdom.

When I come out of the Country unto this great City, among a People that hear
the Great Rabbis, the learned Doctors, the Silver-tongued Men, and the admired
Preachers and great Wits of the Age; I cannot but observe, how easy it is for
People to be bewildred and imposed on, and take things on trust, from those
they admire and highly esteem for their profound learning and excellent parts.
There are places for public Meetings, and solemn Worship, and Preaching,
almost in every Corner of your Populous City; and there stands a Pracher with
the Bible in his Hand, and he calls upon his Auditors, to give their reverend
and serious attention, and harken to the Word of the Lord: And the People
likewise have their Books in their Hands, and observe the Scriptures he Quotes,
and turn down a Leaf that they may find them when they come home; and go away
admiring the Sermon, and the wisdom and learning of the Preacher, and say, he
is an excellent Man: But Alas! too few do make it their work to apply the great
Truths of the Gospel to their Hearts, or so hear (as the Prophet speaks) That
their Souls may live.

Though I have not a Book in my Hands while I am Preaching to you, yet I do
highly esteem and Reverence the Holy Scriptures of Truth, and I do often at
other times take the Bible in my Hands, and seriously read it, and pray to God
to help me to ^ right understanding of it, that I may rightl^ divide the Word
of Truth, and declare unto you the whole Counsel of God, and open the Mystery
of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and the great things belonging to your
everlasting Peace; and how Christ saves his People from their Sins, from the
condemning Power and the concommanding Power of them. Sin shall not have
Dominion over you (says the Apostle) for ye are not under the law but grace,
Romans 6.22. And being now made free from Sin, and become Sorvants to God, ye
have your fruit unto Holiness, and the end everlasting Life; for the wages of
Sin is Death, but the gift of God is Eternal Life, through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

We that Preach the Gospel should imitate the Apostle, who used all his skill
and utmost diligence by all his Preaching to bring Men to Spirituality,
Heavenly Mindedness, and to a conformity to the Life of Christ. God who at
sundry times and in diverse manners spoke in time past unto the Fathers, by the
Prophets, has in these last days, spoken unto us by his Son, whom he has
appointed Heir of all things, etc. Who being the brightness of his Glory, and
the express Image of his Person, and upholding all things by the Word of his
Power, when he had by himself purged our Sins, sat down on the right Hand of
the Majesty on high. Thus he begins his Epistle to the believing Hebrews and
tells them, what Christ had done for them and offers to them, then he charge
them to give the more earnest heed to the things that they have heard, lest at
any time they should let, them slip; for, says he, How shall we escape, if we
neglect so great Salvation! And in the close of his Epistle, he tells them,
That they are not come to Mount Sinai that burned with fire, nor unto
blackness, and Darkness, and Tempest, etc. But ye are come unto Mount Sion, the
City of the living God, the Heavenly Jerusalem, and to an Innumerable Company
of Angels; To the general assembly and Church of the Firstborn, which are
written in Heaven and to God, the Judge of all; and to Jesus, the Mediator of
the New Covenant, and to the Blood of Sprinkling, that speaks better things
then that of Abel.

It is the end and design of our Preaching the Gospel, to bring Men to the
saving knowledge of Christ, and him Crucified, and to turn them from the Power
of Satan to the Power of God. There is a complaint of some that are Preachers
in this City, and other places (and I fear there is too much cause for it) that
they only Preach Christ within, and the Light within, but do not make mention
of the Death and sufferings of Christ, and the benefits that come to believers
by his Sacrifice and satisfaction; for he that knew no Sin was made Sin, for us
that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him; and he was wounded for
our Transgressions, bruised for our iniquities, and the chastisement of our
Peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. Without controversy
(says the Apostle) great is the Mystery of godliness; God was Manifest in the
Flesh* justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, Preached unto the Gentiles,
believed on in the World, and received up into Glory. The Prophets spoke of
Christ's coming in our nature, and being manifest in Flesh in that Body prepared
for him, to do the will of God. And Abraham, the Father of the Faithful,
rejoiced to see his Day, and was glad great things were foretold of him before
his coming, and great Titles given to him: Isa. 9.6. For unto us a Child is
born, and unto us a Son is given; and the Government shall be upon his
Shoulder, and his name shall be called wonderful Counselor, the Mighty God,
the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace.

In the fullness of time, when he came into the World, Luke 1 8. The Angel of
the Lord appeared to the Shepherds abiding in the Field, and keeping Watch over
their Flock by Night; and the glory of the Lord shone round about them, and
they were sore afraid. And the Angel said unto them, fear not, for behold, I
bring good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all People; for unto you is
born this Day, in the City of David, a Savior, which is Christ the Lord. And
suddenly there was with the Angel, a multitude of the Heavenly Host, praising
God, and saying, Glory to God in the Highest, and on Earth Peace, good will
toward Men.

I have many times been astonished, when I have considered the wonderful
Condescension of the Eternal Son of God, who being in the form of God, thought
it not Robbery to be equal with God, but made himself of no Reputation, and
took upon him the form of a Servant, and was made in the likeness of Men; and
being found in fashion as a Man, he humbled himself and became obedient unto
Death, even the Death of the Cross.

I have searched solemnly into this Mystery for my satisfaction, with respect
to his bodily and outward appearance; and I have thought with my self, God has
been pleased in his most wonderful kindness and compassion, to condescend to
our weakness and infirmity, and help our unbelief; and lest People should be
ready to question Gods Veracity, and not believe what is reported by the Angel,
concerning Christ, and Salvation to be obtained by his Death and sufferings,
and what was foretold by the Prophets; God sent his Son into the World, that
Men might see him Face to Face, and hear him Preach to them with his own Mouth,
who had Grace poured into his Lips, that they might be convinced and converted
by his heavenly Doctrine; who had the words of Eternal Life; for such Majesty
and Power appeared in his Preaching, that many which heard him were stricken
with wonder and said, Never Man spoke like this Man.

The Sadducees and Atheistical Persons of that age wherein our Savior
appeared, that denied a Resurrection of the Body, and that there were Spirits;
Our Savior, for their conviction, did many wonderful Works; he raised the
Dead, and cast out evil Spirits, and declared himself to be the Son of God,
with Power, in that he cast out Devils from the possessed Persons, and made
them confess and own his Divinity. One of the evil Spirits cried out, saying,
What have I to do with thee, Jesus thou Son of the most high God. I should be
glad, if I had time, to speak more at large concerning Christ's Death and
sufferings, and Resurrection and Ascension into Heaven, and sitting at the
right Hand of God, and living for ever to make Intercession for us.

The Apostle Peter declares, Acts 2.22, 25. Ye Men of Israel hear these words:
Jesus of Nazareth, a Man approved of God among you, by miracles, wonders and
signs, which God did, by him, in the midst of you, as ye your selves also know,
who^ God raised up, having loosed the pains of Death, because it was not
possible he should be holden of it. The Lord Jesus appeared after his
Resurrection to Mary Magdalen, at the Sepulcher, where she sees two Angels in
White sitting, the one at the Head, the other at the Feet where the Body of
Jesus had lain. And they said unto her, Woman, Why Weepest thou? she says unto
them, because they have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid
him. And when she had thus said, she turned her self back and saw Jesus
standing, and knew not that it was Jesus, And he said, unto her, Woman why
Weepest thou! Whom seek thou? she supposing him to be the Gardener, said
unto him, Sir, If thou have born him hence, tell me where thou have laid him;
and I will take him away. Jesus says unto her, Mary: She turned her self, and
says unto him, Rabboni, which is to say, Master. Jesus says unto her, touch
me not, for I am not yet ascended to my Father; but go to my Father, and your
Father, and to my God, and your God. Mary Magdalen came and told the Disciples,
That she had seen the Lord, and that he had spoken these things unto her. Then
the same Day, at the Evening, being the first Day of the Week, when the Doors
were shut, where his Disciples were assembled for fear of the Jews, came Jesus
and stood in the midst, and said; Peace be unto you: And he showed them his
Hands, and his side. And the Disciples were glad when they saw the Lord; but
Thomas was not with them when Jesus came. The other Disciples said unto him, We
have seen the Lord: But he said unto them, except I see in his Hand the Print
of the Nails, and put my Finger into the Print of the Nails, and thrust my Hand
into his side, I will not believe. And after eight Days, his Disciples were
within, and Thomas with them; then came Jesus, the Doors being shut, and said,
Peace be unto you. Then says he to Thomas, reach hither thy Finger, and behold
my Hands; and reach hither thy Hands; and thrust it into my side, and be not
faithless, but believing. And Thomas answered and said unto him, My Lord and my
God. Jesus says unto him, Thomas Because thou have seen me, thou have
believed; Blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed.

To confirm our belief of these great and wonderful things recorded in the
Scripture, Luke the Evangelist writes after this manner: Forasmuch as many have
taken in Hand to set forth in order, a Declaration of those things which are
most surely believed among us, even as they delivered them to us, which from
the beginning were Eyewitnesses and Ministers of the World; it seemed good
unto me also, to write unto thee most excellent Theophilus, that thou might
know the certainty of those things, wherein thou have been instructed.

And that we might not be jealous, in reference to any thing, concerning Christ
crucified, and his being dead and buried, and his Resurrection and Ascension,
he appeared again to Saul going to Damascus, Suddenly there shined round about
him a Light from Heaven: And he fell to the Earth, and heard a Voice saying,
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? And he said, who art thou, Lord! And the
Lord said, I am Jesus, whom thou persecutest. It is hard for thee to kick
against the Pricks, And he trembling and astonished said, Lord what will thou
have me to do?

Friends, I shall now draw to a close, and God willing, if I have opportunities
hereafter, I shall discharge my Conscience in an enlargement upon these great
points of Doctrine, which are necessary to be opened to you, for building you up
in your most holy Faith Keep your selves in the love of God, to whom I commit
you, beseeching him to strengthen you with all Might in the inwarded Man, that
you may abound in all the Fruits of the Spirir, and show forth the virtues of
Christ, and be Holy in all manner of conversation, and adorn the Doctrine of
God, our Savior, in all things, by patient continuance in well doing; For he
that endures to the end, shall be saved.

A SERMON Preached by George Keith. At Grace Church Street, October 31. 1694.
Gal. 4. 19, My Little Children, of whom I travel in Birth again, until Christ
be formed in you.
THere is something by way of Testimony upon my Heart at this time, which I
shall deliver as briefly as the Lord shall be pleased to enable me, concerning
this great and weighty Matter, which is of great con^ernment to all of us, in
order to our eternal ^elfare and Salvation, that every one in par^icular may
come to experience Christ formed ^n them.

This is more than an outward Ptofession; Men and Women may make a large
Profession of Christ, yea, of Christ within, and ^et be strangers to this great
Mystery of ha^ing Christ formed in them. It is a thing ^ore than a bare Theory
or Speculation, or that which some are pleased to Call an Ideal ^^owledg, or an
Idea of Faith; there must be Heart-knowledge, and Heart-experience, to ^itness
this, That Christ is formed in us; and ^^deed none are fit to speak of this
Mystery, ^r declare of it unto others, but those who ^ave an experimental
knowledge and Proof of ^t in their own Particulars. They know not ^ow to Preach
Christ to others, that have ^ot come to witness Christ formed in them; and by
that Rule, many that are called ^reachers, and are professed Preachers, ought
^o he rejected and denied to be true Ministers ^f Christ, if they are strangers
to this Mystery, though they have high notions of Christ in their Heads and in
their Brains, from the ^etter of the Scripture, and from orher Men's
Declarations; but if they know not this Mystery of Christ being formed in them,
they ^e not true Members of Christ, if they have ^ot experience of it.

And therefore it may well enough in part be understood as the Sense and
meaning of these words of the Apostle (though I own there is more in it) when
he said to the Galatians I travel, in Birth.

And it may well enough be understood, as if he had said, whereas formerly I
traveled for my self that Christ might be formed in me, now I travel again till
Christ be formed in you: We can neither rightly, nor profitably and effectually
Witness for the Salvation of others, and be in labor or travail for the
Salvation of others, until Christ be formed in us; until we know a travail for
our own Salvation, until we can witness our own Salvation to be wrought and
carried on, and not only begun in us; and then we shall with good success
preach the Gospel, and without this no hope of success. Let Men preach ever so
much in a form of sound words, yet they cannot preach with hope of success.

I say, further, it may have this further sense that whereas Paul had formerly
labored among these Galatians, and God had blessed his labors, so that there
was a good degree of the Work of God begun in them, there had been a good
Foundation laid, the Seed had not only been Sown, but had taken Root; and not
only taken Roor, but sprung up, in some measure. But some false teachers coming
after Paul, and gaining too much ground on the affections of the Galatians,
they had too much undone, as it were, that which he had been doing; they had in
some measure and degree marred and spoiled, and, ^s it were, undone that which
had been done before; therefore, he complains and expostulates with them, by
way of Lamentation, after this manner: O Foolish Galatians! who has bewitched
you, that you should not obey the Truth! before whose Eyes Jesus Christ has
been evidently set forth, Crucified among you. This only would I learn of you;
received ye the Spirit by the Works of the Law, or by the bearing of Faith?

Those that they had commended and esteemed as Ministers of Christ, labored to
bring them back to the Law, and to the observance of Jewish Rites and
Ceremonies, to observe days and times and such things; I am afraid (says he) I
have labored among you in vain, lest that be marred and hurt in you, and you
suffer loss in that which I labored for, and made evident to you. And
therefore, the Apostle labored the second time, that that might be recovered
in them and gained, which had suffered loss and detriment.

But now to speak somewhat more particularly to the Matter it self, which shall
be by answering a weighty question: Which is this.

Quest. What is it to have Christ formed in a Man or Woman?

Now in order to the answering of this Question, it is in my Heart to make use
of that Parable of our blessed Lord, as we find ^t in one of the Evangelists,
where the Kingdom of God is likened unto a Grain of Corn unto Seed, Wheat or
other Grain, which a Man Sows in his Field, and it springs first into the
Blade, then into the Ear, and last of all it comes to ripe Fruit. Now as to the
Seed of Corn to which he compares the Kingdom of God, it is certain, that which
the Scripture calls incorruptible Seed, is a Seed of God, which comes from him
immediately, as I may say, and yet comes to us, through Christ, 1 John 3.9.
Whosoever is born of God, does not commit Sin; for his Seed remains in him,
and he cannot Sin because he is born of God, Now the Seed of God, which is
called the Kingdom of God, is compared to a Grain of Corn, and all Seeds must
have a Soil and Earth to grow in: What is the Soil where the Seed of God grows?
It is the Hearts and Souls of Men and Women, and their inward Parts. Now you
know the Earth is full of Weeds, and of Briars, and Thorns, therefore the
Husbandman takes pains to cut up, and root up, those Weeds and Tares, to keep
his ground clean, that so the clean Seed may grow and come to ripeness and
maturity. So it is very ordinary and usual for the Husbandman to Weed his
Corn, when the Corn is young, as I have seen it practiced, and those that go to
Weed the Corn must be very tender, lest they ttead under Foot the Corn and
tender Plants; they must do it carefully, tenderly and skilfully, lest they do
more hurt than good; so they have their Weeding-Hooks and Instruments, not only
to cut down, but to root out ^^e Weeds and Tares.

Now, I say, God Almighty is the Heaven^ Husbandman, and our Lord Jesus Christ
^rincipally and primarily; and also his Ser^^nts, under him, are the Ministers
of Christ, which he makes use of to weed and cleanse ^is Field, where the Seed
is growing; that (...) the Hearts of Gods People. How does (...) do this, but
by reproving what is repro^^ble? This is one part of the Work of the ^inisters
of Christ, as the Apostle writes to ^^mothy; I charge thee therefore, before
God, ^^d the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the ^ick and dead at his
appearing, and his King^^m: Preach the Word, be instant in season, ^t of
season; reprove, rebuke, exhort with all ^^ng-suffering and Doctrine. For the
time will ^^me, when they will not endure sound Doctrine; ^ut after their own
Lusts, shall they heap to ^^emselves Teachers, having, itching Ears; and they
shall turn away their Ears from the ^^uth, and be turned unto Fables. But watch
^hou in all things, endure afflictions, do the ^ork of an Evangelist, make full
proof of ^y Ministry; rebuke with all authority; re^^ove what is reproveable,
both in Doctrine and Manners. All immoralities, covetousness and ^oing after the
World's customs, the Lusts ^f the Flesh, the Lust of the Eyes, and the ^ide of
Life, and all that hinders the growth ^^d fruitfulness of those Plants, which
are of ^ods planting. A word of reproof in the Mouth (...) Gods Servants is an
Instrument to pluck up the Weeds, that hinder Gods precio^^ Plant from growing
in the Hearts of h^^ Children.

Now according to this Parable of o^ blessed Lord concerning the Kingdom of Go^
he compares it to a Grain of Corn when t^^ Husbandman rises up, and lies down
a^ sleeps, the Corn grows. O what a singul^^ Mercy is it! The Corn grows Night
a^^ Day; it grows and springs up when t^^ Husbandman labors not. Now
Chr^^^ formed within, is a measure of his divi^^ Life planted in us, and united
to us, as t^^ Soul is to the Body, in some manner; it is li^^ a measure of
divine Nature, a divine Princip^^ a divine and heavenly substance, as it comes
take root, and spring up and grow in M^^ and Women, in their Souls and inwa^^
Parts; that it may grow, it needs not on^ an heavenly, divine influence from
above, b^ it also requires the love of our Heart the affections of our Souls;
there must be feeling of love and desire in our Hearts t^wards it, and a very
tender care and conce^^ to cherish this heavenly Seed, that as t^ Corn that
grows in a good Soil, it must tenderly cherished, So thou must cherish Go^
Plant in thine own Heart, that there may an increase and growth, God has set
an h^^venly Seed and Plant in thy Heart; it is ^^ry precious and worthy of thy
care, and m^ tender Love, and dearest affections, in or^ to its growth and
springing up, that it may s^fe and secured from what soever may be ^^rtful and
pernicious to it.

I would have you to consider a Di^^nction concerning this Seed, as it is
form^^g and as it is formed; as Corn that ^ows, while it is but young and
tender in the ^ade, it is but forming, when it is in the Blos^^m and in the
green Ear, it is yet but ^^rming; but when it comes to its substance, (...) be
solid Corn and Grain, then it is formed. ^ow when a Seed or Plant is forming,
as it is generally known to such as under^^and any thing of Husbandry) as
Wheat, ^hen it is Green in the Field, is in danger ^f Blasting, but after it
comes to be formed, and is well ripened in the Ear, it is past the ^anger of
Blasting, or Mildew or spoil^ng.

Now to apply this Spiritually and inward^y: There is a season and a time, when
this ^eavenly Seed or Plant of God's own plan^ng, is in danger, so to speak, of
Blasting as ^o us; and there is a time when it is grown ^trong and vigorous,
when the danger of Blasting is over. I hope there are some here ^rrived at that
blessed state and condition, that God's Corn and Heavenly Seed in them is ^ome
to ripeness and maturity; yet there are ^egrees of ripeness to be further
attained, that we may overcome all Hindrances and Enemies of our growth, and
increasing with the ^ncrease of God, that we may have that sweet and blessed
promise fulfilled to us, Rev. 3.12. Him that overcomes will I make a Pillar
the Temple of my God.

O Friends, Let us all wait for it, and l^^ us be strong in the Lord, and in
the Power of his might, while we are warring and figh^ing with our Souls Enemy.
We have ^ holy war, and we have Weapons, but the^ are spiritual Weapons (not
Carnal.) L^^ us make War against our Spiritual Enemy that we may overcome and
be made Pillars i^ the House of God, and go no more out: He^^ is security, we
shall go no more out, but be a God's ripe Corn gathered into the Barn; n^
danger then when any are arrived at this happy state, there is no doubt that
any suc^ will indulge themselves in Lazinefs, and tak^ any sinful liberty or
Latitude to themselves but have a holy and awful fear and dread, and a holy
care and concern upon them, to serve the Lord with all readiness and
chearf^lness do the will of God. The more that any come to a holy, and safe,
and secure state and condition, the more will their Hearts be filled with
diligence, and fear, and love, and temperance, and humility.

Now as concerning the state of the Galatians, I told you, That Paul had
labored among rhem with success; but other Teachers came among them, by whom
they received hurt, and suffered loss and detriment so that they needed a New
Visitation and building up, that all might not be destroyed tha^ Paul had been
building up in them; they had suffered that loss and damage that they needed
Paul's Ministry to bring them to an Establishment in the truth, that they might
stand in searching and shaking times.

Sometimes, in Harvest, there may arise such tempestuous Winds, as may shake
the Corn: So such shaking and searching times may come, as to try and terrify
God's People, and shake God's Corn before it be gathered into the Lord's Barn.
It is good to be preparing for such things, and making ready; and to be earnest
with the Lord to prepare us, that if shaking Winds shall come, we may be
preserved steadfast and unmovable, and abounding in the Work of the Lord, that
our labor may not be in vain in the Lord. If it shall be so that many shall be
shaken, such times may come, let us prepare and make ready, that we may not be
surprised, but preserved in shaking times; and those that shall be preserved
unshaken, when the Winds of Men's Doctrins shall blow upon them, let them bless
and praise the Lord.

The Apostle tells us, Ephesians. 4.10, 11, 12. That our Lord Jesus Christ ascended
up far above all Heavens, that he might fill all things: And he gave some
Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and
Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the Work of the Ministry, for
the edifying of the Body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of the Faith,
and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect Man, unto the measure of
the Stature of the fullness of Christ; That we henceforth be no more Children
tossed to and fro, and carried about with every Wind of Doctrine, by the slight
of Men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive. There is
nothing but the Lord's Power is able to preserve us; if we trust in the Lord,
and depend upon him, he will preserve us, and be unto us as the shadow of a
great Rock in a weary Land. We shall be preserved, if we keep in the living
exercise of Faith, if we do not live in the daily exercise of Faith, we shall
be as Corn on the House top shaken, and bring forth no good Fruit in season.
Let us live in the Exercise of faith, and depend on God for the assistance of
his Spirit, and them we shall be preserved in shaking times.

Now to speak a little further, concerning this great and weighty Matter, it is
commonly said, that in Regeneration there is an infusing of certain Habits of
Faith, Repentance and Love into the Soul; but this is not the manner of their
Doctrine, who are called Quakers, nor of my Doctrine, nor agreeable to the holy
Scriptures, to say, That Habits of Grace are infused into the Soul. The
Scripture calls it, The Life of God, which is better and more than Habits.
There is a Principle of divine Life communicated to the Soul in Regeneration, a
measure of the divine Nature, which is indeed fitly called, The Life of God,
that actuates, and enlivens the Soul, and is united to it, as the Soul does
animate and act in the Body, to which it is united, the which union of the
divine Life with the Soul, is by the Souls Faith and Love to God and Christ.

This is that which I have had experience of, and I have not lost it,
whatsoever some have said. I feel a Principle of divine Life acting in my Soul,
as my Soul acts in my Body; this is Christ formed within us. How does the Soul
put forth such noble and vigorous Actings, and rule and actuate the Body? The
Body must be organized, have its due Organs prepared, that the Soul may act in
us, and exert its vital Power and Motions in us. As the Soul of Man actuates
the Body, to bring forth the proper Operations of the natural Life, so the
divine Life, the Life of Christ, does actuate the Soul in all heavenly and
spiritual Acts and Operations.

So that I am for preaching the Light within, and Christ within the hope of
glory, but not so as to draw your Minds from Christ without, from what he has
done and suffered for us on Earth, and what now he is doing for us in Heaven;
for as he has died for us, and made his Soul an offering for Sin, and
satisfied divine Justice, and became a Sacrifice to God of a sweet smelling
Savor, so he lives for ever in Heaven, to make intercession for us.

So I would not have your minds drawn from the Light within, from Christ
within, by what is preached of Christ without; but I would have you make a due
improvement both of one and the other; which cannot be ^eparated, but are
always united and joined together in a Right Preaching of the Gospel. I know
the Doctrine of Christ crucified may be perverted and abused by some, and the
grace of God turned into wantonness; but there is no tendency in the Doctrine of
Christ without us of what he did and suffered for us, there is no tendency in
this Doctrine to draw the Minds of any from minding the Work of God within, the
Seed of God within, and Christ within. As this Doctrine has no such tendency,
so I do appeal to God the searcher of Hearts, and the righteous Judge of Heaven
and Earth, that I have no design nor intention, to draw any Man by my Preaching
Christ without, from Christ within, from the Light and Grace of God within us,
and the enjoyment of God within.

O! it is the breathing of my Soul to God, and my Hearts desire and Prayer;
that every one of us may feel and enjoy, by an inward experience, more of the
Light and Grace of God within, and of Christ within, then there would not be
such hard thoughts and hard speeches, and such rash and uncharitable judging
and censuring one another. The Lord grant we may learn of Christ, who when he
was reviled, reviled not again; and when he suffered, he threatened not; but
committed himself to him that judges righteously.

I have answered one weighty question; What it is to have Christ formed in us.
It is to have a measure of the Divine Nature, a measure of the divine Life,
acting in the Souls of the Lords People; Christ's Life ruling in the Soul, and
acting in the Soul, as the Soul acts in the Body. The Body cannot govern it
self, but so long as the Soul lives and dwells in the Body, and is united to
the Body, it carries the Body whether it will. So when this precious Life of
Christ lives and acts in the Soul, the Soul is subjected to it; it rules
the whole Man, it rules his Soul more immediately. Now another girdeth us, and
we do not gird our selves, and we witness that which our Savior said to Peter
John 21.18. Verily I say unto thee, when thou wast young thou girdedst thy
self, and walkedst whether thou would; but when thou shall be old, thou
shall stretch forth thy Hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee
whither thou would not. When we are come to Christ, and when once Christ is
formed in us (though we followed our own corrupt Wills and Inclinations before)
then we must be governed by Christ, and act according to this noble and divine
Principle, and say with the Apostle; I live; yet not I, but Christ lives in me.

I shall now come very briefly to answer another Question.

Question 2. By what means is this divine Birth, this Spiritual and Divine Life
of Christ, produced and brought forth in us? That which is born of the Flesh,
is Flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit, is Spirit. There is a natural
Birth that has flesh for the Mother of it. But there is a divine and
supernatural Birth, a being born again, and born of the Spirit. How is this
wrought and effected?

Answer, Partly by an outward Ministry of Gods fitting, qualifying and sending;
yet it is far from me to affirm, there is an absolute necessity to depend upon
an outward Ministry. There is a difference between God's ordinary way of
forming Christ, within us, and God's extraordinary Way and Prerogative to do
what he pleases: God can work without Means, as well as with Means: But in
Gods ordinary way, he is pleased, by the foolishness of Preaching, to save them
that believe, 1 Cor. 1.23, 24. We Preach Christ crucified (says the Apostle)
unto the Jews a stumbling block, and unto the Greeks Foolishness; but unto shem
which are called both Jews and Greeks, Christ the Power of God, and the Wisdom
of God.

The faithful Ministers of Christ, they labor, and they spend themselves, and
are spent in their carrying on the Work of the Gospel, for the Salvation of the
Souls of their hearers: They have a holy labor and travail continually upon
them; they do not speak words barely from their Brains, and from other Men's
Lines, and things made ready to their Hands, but they labor Night and day that
Souls may be converted and saved. They are as instruments in Christ's Hand for
the forming of Christ, in the Souls of People; the Holy Ghost is the Mother of
the New Birth.

Pray that you may have Faith in the Man Christ Jesus, and you shall abundantly
partake of his Spirit. John 7.37, 38, In that last Day, the great Day of the
Feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any Man Thirst, let him come unto me
and drink. He that believes on me, as the Scripture has said, out of his
Belly shall flow Rivers of living Water. But this spoke he of the Spirit, which
they that believe on him should receive. This Faith in Christ here spoken of,
does respect Christ as God and Man; not only as God from Eternity, but as he is
the Son of Man: As Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness; even so must
the Son of Man be lifted up. It is not barely a literal, traditional or
Historical Faith, but a Faith wrought by the mighty Power of God, that we
witness, through the Power of the most High coming upon us, and the
over-shadowing of the Holy Ghost. As it was said to the blessed Virgin the
Mother of our Lord, Luke 35. The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the Power
of the highest shall over-shadow thee; therefore, also, that holy thing which
shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God. We shall feel but in
some far inferior manner the Holy Ghost to come upon us, and the Power of the
highest to Over-shadow us, as Christ is formed in us.

A SERMON Preached by Thomas Budd At Grace Church Street, April 11. 1694.
I Am under an oppression of Spirit at this time, being sensible that there are
many that have left their first love, and have fallen from a State of Purity
and Holiness which once they were possessors of, and are come to be like the
Prodigal Son, who received his Portion from his Father and took his Journey into
a far Country, and there wasted his substance with riotous living. O how glad
should my Soul be, that some of these Prodigals might be awakened, that they
might remember from whence they are fallen, and call to mind how it was with
them when they were in their Father's House, when they were fed at their
Fathers Table. O my Soul is grieved with a Sense of their woeful condition, in a
sense of that Famine of the Word of the Lord that is come over them, in a Sense
of that darkness, and deadness, and barrenness that is come over their immortal
Souls. O! that they might be awakened by the Power and Spirit of the Lord, that
they might come to themselves, as the prodigal Son did, when he had spent all;
and when there arose a mighty Famine in that Land, and he began to be in want,
and went and joined himself to a Citizen of that Country, who sent him into the
Fields to feed Swine, and he would fain have filled his Belly with the Husks
that the Swine did Eat, and no man gave unto him.

It is not Husks that will satisfy thy hungry Soul, when once thou art
convinced and awakened to consider thy miserable condition; it is not an empty
talk of Religion, which is but as Husks, and cannot satisfy thy Hungry Soul. If
thou art awakened and come to thy self, thou will repent and mourn for thy Sin,
and lament and grieve, and mourn over him whom thou have pierced by thy
transgressions; then thou will take up a Resolution with the Prodigal who when
he came to himself he said, How many hired Servants of my Fathers, have Bread
enough and to spare, and I perish with hunger? I will arise (says he) and go
to my Father, and will say unto him, Father I have sinned against Heaven and
before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son, make me as one of thy
hired Servants.

Say to thy heavenly Father in thy humble Confession of Sin, Lord I have been a
Prodigal, I have wasted thy heavenly Treasure, I have spent and trifled away my
precious Time in a strange land, and have fed among Swinish Sinners; I cannot
fill my belly with these Husks. Now I remember the plenty of my Fathers House,
where I had Bread enough and to spare, I will return and humble my self before
my Father, I will confess my sin and Folly unto my compassionate Father; it may
be he will be kind and merciful. and gracious to me.

When good Desires were raised in the Heart of the returning Prodigal, when he
arose and came to his Father, when he was yet a great way off, his Father saw
him, and had compassion, and ran and fell on his Neck and kissed him; then he
humbled himself before his Father and said, Father I have sinned against Heaven
and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son; I have spent that
portion thou gave me, among Harlots in riotous living. If thou returnest as
the Prodigal did, and if thou addressest thy self to thy heavenly Father as a
true Mourner, with a sincere repentance never to be repented of; if thou
set thy self in good earnest to seek the Lord early and late, thou shall
find him to thy Souls satisfaction: For so the Prodigal returning to his
Father, and making these acknowledgments to his Father, it moved his compassion
and fatherly Bowels: His father did not chide him and upbraid him, but fell on
his neck and kissed him; And he said unto his Servants, Bring forth the best
robe and put it on him; and put a Ring on his Hand, and Shoes on his Feet; and
bring hither the fatted Calf, and Kill it, and let us eat and be merry; for
this my Son was dead, and is alive again; and he was lost, and is found.

This was the joyful Entertainment that the returning Prodigal found with his
indulgent Father; so when we return to God, our Heavenly Father, by true
repentance, he will receive us into favor, for the sake of his well-beloved
Son, in whom he is well pleased: We shall be stripped of our filthy Garments, and
be clothed with the Garment of Salvation, the Robe of Christ's Righteousness,
and be found in him not having our own Righteousness; and we shall be feasted
with the fatted Calf; we shall by faith, feed upon the Flesh and Blood of Jesus
Christ, the Lamb of God, that was slain and Sacrificed for us: His Flesh is
Meat, indeed, and his Blood is Drink indeed: Whosoever eats my flesh and
drinks my blood (says our Lord Jesus Christ) has Eternal Life, John 6.51.
There is a feast of Fat things, and of Wine upon the Lees well refined.

Thus true Penitent and returning Prodigals shall be entertained and welcomed
to their Father's House; he will take them into his Banqueting House, and his
Banner on them shall be Love, and he will speak kindly and comfortably to them;
Eat, O Friends; drink, yea, drink abundantly. O beloved, thus he will speak to
us, that our Joy may remain in us, and that our Joy may be full, that we may
rejoice in Christ Jesus, and be eternally satisfied in the love of God; in
whose presence is fullness of Joy, Joy unspeakable and full of glory.

A SERMON Preached by Thomas Budd At Harp-Lane, November 4. 1694.
John 14.1.2. Let not your Heart be oroubled, ye believo in God; believe also
in me.
THe Disciples were greatly afflicted when our Savior told them, He must go
away, and that he must suffer at Jerusalem: They being cast down, and very sad
and sorrowful at the thoughts of his Departure, he speaks comfortably to them,
and bids them, Believe in him; ye believe in God, believe also in me. They had
a Faith in God, they believed in God, they believed in the Light which came
from God, with which they were enlightened; yet nevertheless, the Death of our
Lord Jesus Christ, his Resurrection from the Dead, and his Ascension into
Heaven, was not then so clearly and fully discovered unto them, as afterward it
was made known. And it appears, That it was not enough for them only to believe
in God, but he bids them believe in him also. And he told them that he did go
to prepare a place for them. And if I go (says he) to prepare a place for you,
I will come again and receive you unto my self, that where I am there ye may be
also: In my Fathers House are many Mansions, where I am, there ye shall be also.

O glorious promise indeed! who can declare the large extent of it, and the
greatness of his Love? That he should love them so entirely, as to die for the
Love of them; as to die for their sakes, and lay down his Life for them, and as
their High Priest, become a Sacrifice. The Highpriests under the Law, offered
the Bodies of clean Beasts, and entered into the Holy place made with Hands. It
was not without Blood that the High Priest offered Sacrifice for the Sins of
the People, and for his own Sins, for almost all things wete purged with the
blood of the Sacrifices which were offered, and then he entered into the most
Holy place made with Hands. But Christ being come, an High Priest of good
things to come, by a greater and more perfect Tabernacle, not made with Hands,
neither by the Blood of Goats and Calves, but by his own Blood he entered in
once into the Holy place, having obtained Eternal Redemption for us: Ye believe
in God, believe also in me, He bids them, believe in him, as the Light of the
World, and follow the Dictates, and Motions of the Spirit.

You do well to believe in this divine Appearance, if so be you live in it, and
follow the divine Motions of it; O then it will be a Sanctuary to you, as the
City of refuge was to the Manslayer under the Law. There were six Cities of
Refuge appointed in the most convenient places of the Land, for the Manslayer
to fly to, if any one had killed a Man at unawars, against his Will, there was
a City of Refuge to have access to: If he could get into that City of Refuge,
he was in safety from the Avenger of Blood, from the Pursuer; if he was
over-taken by the Avenger of Blood, then he might be slain then he might be
destroyed; but if he got into the City of Refuge, there he was to remain in
safety, in safe custody, under the safeguard and Protection of the Law: But if
he went out of the City of Refuge, then the Manslayer might take hold of him.

These things are written for our Learning; the Lord has provided a City of
Refuge for his Children and for his Servants to fly unto. And what is this City
of Refuge? It is the Light of Christ Jesus, the Light of the World in its first
Ministration of Gods Holy Spirit. If so be you fly to it, and come under the
Protection of it, it will preserve you in safety: But if we depart from our
Obedience to this Heavenly Light, then the Manslayer, the Justice of God, will
take hold of us; then we shall feel the Wrath of God to be kindled against us,
and smite us, and cut us down.

And this we have known by living Experience, while we have remained under the
Protection of God, and under the safeguard of the Law, and of God's Light in
our Hearts, we have been in safety from the Avenger, from Gods severe Wrath and
Justice; God's wrath has not been kindled against us, to burn us up and
consume us; but if we have been rebellious and disobedient, then the wrath of
the Lord has been kindled against us, and his Judgments executed upon us. But
when we have run to the City of Refuge, under the divine Protection, we have
strengthened our Hearts and Hands in the sight of God.

But if we have sinned at any time, then our own Hearts have accused us and
condemned us; We are to remain under the safeguard of the Law, until such time
as the death of our great High Priest, Christ Jesus, be revealed in our Hearts;
when we have heard the joyful sound, when the tidings of the Death of the
High Priest comes to be sounded in our Ears, when the Mystery of Christ
crucified comes to be revealed unto us, then we have a glorious inheritance to
go unto, a most desirable possession beyond all the Enjoyment of this World.
The state in Paradise, wherein Man was at the beginning, is not to b^ compared
to it; it is in the Country we are traveling to, the Spiritual and heavenly
Canaan, a Land flowing with heavenly Milk and Honey, Joy unspeakable and full of
Glory, This is the Country which we are traveling to, if we believe in the
Lord Jesus Christ, and follow the great Captain of our Salvation. Who was made
perfect, through sufferings, we shall be made Heirs of Eternal life.

Let us believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, who is gone to prepare a place for
us; In the time appointed of the Father, he will come again and receive us to
himself, that where he is, there we may be also.

O blessed are you that have a living Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, and do
follow him, and the Conduct and leadings of his divine Spirit, and he will lead
you to this heavenly Country, he will go before you; and he has made this
Promise to all his faithful followers, Rev. 3.21. To him that overcomes, will
I grant to sit with me in my Throne, even as I also overcame, and am sat down
with my Father on his Throne. He is the Bridegroom and you shall be the Bride,
the Lambs Wife, And you shall be joined to him in the heavenly Marriage Union,
and you shall be with him in Glory to all Eternity.

We Read, Genesis 82.24. that Jacob being left alone, there wrestled a Man with
him all Night, until the breaking of the Day; and when he saw that he prevailed
not against him, etc. He said, let me go, for the Day breaks, And Jacob said
unto the Angel, I will not let thee go, except thou bless me; And he said unto
him, what is thy Name? And he said, Jacob. And the Angel said to him, Thy Name
shall no more be called Jacob, but Israel; for as a Prince have thou Power with
God, and with Men, and have prevailed: And he blessed him there.

So, my Friends, if you would have the Blessings of Jacob, the Blessings of
Abraham, O then wrestle with the Man Christ Jesus, and wrestle in Faith;
wrestle with this Angel of the Covenant, all Night, until the dawning of the
Day, until the Day Star shall arise in your Hearts; and not only so, but
persevere in the Faith, until the Son of Righteousness arise. As Jacob wrestled
with the Angel of the Covenant, Christ Jesus, who is both God and Man, he
wrestled with him all Night, until the dawning of the Day: Then he blessed him;
And Jacob called the Name of lhat place Peniel; For I have seen God Face to
Face, and my Life is preserved. He said, a Man appeared to him, and he called
him God: How is this to he understood? The Man Christ Jesus, he is both God and
Man. None but he that is both God and Man, can bless us with eternal Blessings;
therefore, let us believe in him, that can save to the uttermost, all that come
unto God by him, for he has obtained Eternal Redemption for us.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 16. line 26. after do, read to trust in, p. 21* l. 11. after again, r. to
the bodies of the saints, and l. ult. dele to the bodies of the saints, p. 23.
l. 25. r. Deuteronomy. 30.11, 12. p. 30. l. 12. r. after Moses, and from Moses to
Christ's coming in the Flesh, p. 192. l. 14. dele like, and r. it is a measure
of the divine nature, p. 47. l. 32. for held, r. help.

Books lately Printed for Nath. Crouch, at the Bell in the Poultery, near
Cheap Side.
I. THE Doctrine of Christ crucified, asserted in Three Declarations, or
Sermons, by George Keith: Exactly token in Shorthand, as they were delivered by
him, at the Meetings of the Christian people called Quakers, in London. Price 6
d.

II. The Concurrence and Unanimity of the People called Quakers; in Owning and
Asserting the principal Doctrines of the Christian Religion: Demonstrated in
the Sermons or Declarations of several of their Public Preachers, Namely.

Mr. Robert Barclay Mr. George Whitehead, Mr. John Bowater, Mr. Chacles
Marshall, Mr. William Bingley, Mr. John Butcher, Mr. James Park, Mr. William
Dewsberry, Mr. Francis Camfield, Mr. William Penn, Mr. Richard Ashby, Mr.
Samuel Waldenfield, Mr. John Vaughton and Mr. Francis Stamper.
Exactly taken in Short hand, as they were delivered by them at their
Meeting Houses, in Grace Church Street, Devonshire-House, St. Martins.
le-grand, S. John's-street, Wheeler-street and Ratcliff, in and about London;
And now faithfully Transcribed and publ^shed, with the Prayer at the end of
each Sermon. Price one Shilling six pence.

(...)
