Solomon's BLESSED LAND

A SERMON UPON ECCLESIASTES X. 17. Preached before an Extraordinary Assembly AT
NEW ARK upon TRENT, May 29. 1660.

Being the Birthday of our Sovereign Lord CHARLES II. KING of ENGLAND, etc.

By Samuel Brunsell Rector of Bingham in Notting.

London, Printed by E. C. for Henry Seile over against St. Dunstans Church in
Fleetstreet. 1660.

SOLOMON'S BLESSED LAND.
ECCLES. X. 17. Blessed art thou, O Land, when thy King is the Son of Nobles,
and thy Princes eat in due season, for strength, and not for drunkenness.


It Is very necessary in all meetings, especially those of a more public
concernment, that men should first understand the occasion, and not be like
that rabble of Ephesus in their tumultuous concourse, of whom it is said, Act.
19.32.
That the greatest part knew not wherefore they were come together: or like
unto masty in our later remembrances, that had lost the distinction between
their days of Thanksgiving and Humiliation; either through the commonness of
an hypocritical Sacrifice, with which not only men, but even God himself had
been wearyed, or through the mis-apprehension and mis-application of the
subject, whereby in the way of an inverted gratitude, thanks have been
frequently sent up to Heaven for the destructive prosperity of our sins; and
men have been humbled for the greatest benefits; in such sort that as they have
repented and bewailed their necessary duties, by putting some considerable
parts of their Christian obligations into the black Catalogue of their
mock-confessions, so have they not failed to bless even God himself for their
Errors and Presumptions. To the end therefore that none who hear me, may be
ignorant of the intent and design of this present Assembly, I shall acquaint
you with it much in the words of the Psalmist; It Is to serve the Lord with
gladness, Psalm. 100.
and come before his presence with a song: to wait in his gates with
thanksgiving and in his Courts with praise; to be thankful unto him and speak
good of his Name: for that the Lord is gracious, and his mercy is everlasting,
and his truth endures from generation to generation; that is, from the father
to the son. And blessed be he that sits on the Throne, and lives for ever
and ever, that has performed that mercy and that truth to our David and his
Seed, that gave, as on this day, to the Crowned Martyr a Royal Confessor (such
had the sins of an unthankful people made them) to be the Heir at once both of
his Crowns and Virtues.

If public blessings deserve public thanks and solemn commemorations; and
that Nation be so blessed whose King is the Son of Nobles; and that blessing
take its original from the birth of that Son, our thanks doubtless should keep
time with the blessing. For if men be greedy to have blessings bestowed upon
them, upon the earliest sense and first suggestion of their wants, it is fit
they should be careful to date their Thanksgivings from the very first rise and
birth of their blessings. The birth of a King, that is the Son of Nebles, is a
blessing in the judgment of Solomon, the wisest both of Kings and men. And that
blessing too is of no mean value, nor of a small extent, it is a Public, a
National blessing, that by which a whole land is blessed: Blessed art thou, O
Land, etc. And this is the blessing of this Land, through the tender mercy of
our God, whereby the dayspring from on high has visited us, even at this day.
Our King is the Son of Nobles, and our Princes eat in due season, for strength
and not for drunkenness. Nobility of descent (as that imports generosity not
only of blood, but of spirit also) and temperance in life, are very eminent and
considerable parts of those Princely excellencies that qualify the Person by
whom our Land is blessed, and that render him the Darling both of Heaven and
Earth. And this, I doubt not, will be acknowledged by all but the sons of
Belial, the Shimei's of the time, 1 Samuel 10.26.
or the company of Korah, Dathan and Abiram.

So then our duty and business is thankfulness, which presupposes a blessing.
Now as men value the blessing, so they dispose themselves for thanksgiving. Be
the blessing what it will, if men do not esteem it so, they can never be
thankful. Bread made of the corn of Heaven, even the very food of Angels, will
be loathed as light, by those that do not relish it. Not this man, but
Barabbas, cry the Jews; though that man were their King, the holy one of
Israel their Savior. So some still say even unto God himself, Depart from us,
we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. If then men cannot be thankful for
that which they do not value; it must needs be pertinent to our present purpose
well to understand the nature of the blessing which at this time calls for our
thanks. The thanks must be public, for the blessing is no less: all that do
not wilfully forsake their own mercies, have a share and interest in it. And
the words before us, are very proper to give us an account of its value, which
from them I shall endeavor to do by these degrees, showing, 1. That it is a
blessing for a Land to be under a Government. 2. That it is yet a further degree
of blessing to be under a King. 3. That Kingly Government is then most blessed,
when the King is the Son of Nobles, and the Princes eat in due season, for
strength and not for drunkenness.


How far we of this Nation are more immediately concerned in these great
improvements of blessing, will appear in the Applications.

For the first, if government were not a blessing, the world might have done
well without it, each man being left to the dictate of his own will, and acting
according to the sense of his own judgment, and the impulse of his own lusts.
And so things might possibly have stood, if every one had been sufficient for
himself, without being forced to call for the aids of others, if the ground had
not been cursed for man's sake, but Nature had of her own accord, and from her
own storehouse, unaskt, brought forth all requisite supplies, and offered them
gratis to the needs and acceptance of all. But sin had otherwise devised, and
Justice has accordingly determined. Job 5.7
Man now is born to labor as the sparks fly upward, and the decree is not to
be reverst; In the sweat of thy brows, thou shall eat bread all the days of
thy life. Man's strengths are now weak, his wants many, his dangers sudden, his
foresight short, his reason perplexed, and his heart deceitful. A little care
distracts him, a little pain tires him, the least accident afflicts him.
However, care he will, and labor he must, in order to his own preservation;
the desire whereof being rooted in our very beings, the means to effect it
could not but become the natural employment of mankind, and so the procuring of
food and raiment, with places of repose and shelter, are the first of all
humane cares. But man finding himself capable of further enjoyments, and his
appetite being loose and unconfined, he is still craving and asking, who will
show him any good? rests not satisfied with necessaries, but affects
superfluity and abundance. Not only nature must be satisfied, but the sense
must also be pleased, and the body pampered, by introducing luxury and vanity
the creature of fancy and opinion, acted by the insatiable lusts of the flesh,
the lusts of the eyes, and the pride of life. Hence, as men are able, they
store themselves with provisions for all these desires; some of which, those
chiefly of the first sort, are indeed lawful and allowable in due measure and
order. But men were not so contented, neither would they stop there: their
desires being much enlarged, they suit their endeavors thereafter, which that
they may employ successfully without interruption, and also secure to
themselves the possession of what their industry should procure, they could not
but discern the necessity of constituting such a power, as might be sufficient
for their constant protection and safety. Since therefore all power is either
of one or of many, and those many must needs be either divided or united; if
single power be weak and unequal, and if power divided cannot stand, then that
power which alone is sufficient for the forementioned purposes, must needs be
united, which it cannot be but in government, through an union of powers in a
Sovereign, which union necessarily presupposes a transferring or surrender of
the single divided powers to him or them that are to use them conjoined for the
benefit of each particular. The state of men under such power is Government,
which we have affirmed to be a blessing from the authority of the Text, and
ought to be so esteemed, because

1. By it a Land is delivered from an infinite number of the saddest and most
insupportable evils, which, without such Government, cannot possibly be
prevented or remedyed. Now those evils being no less then War and all its
wild retinue; whatever mischiefs, outrages, confusions, destructions, and
desolations, either are or can be committed by the insolence and violence of
armed rage and fury, without distinction or restraint, upon the Lives and
Liberties, Estates, or Persons of men, must needs be imputed to the want of
that power which saves and protects those that submit to it, from all such
Miseries and Calamities, as know no bound nor end, but the merciless utmost
cruelty of an irreparable and universal ruin. For where there is no
Government, every man becomes his own Judge, and admits no measures or rules of
right or wrong, but his own irregular and insatiable appetite; which cannot
fail of being encountered with the like in others, who will be as impatient of
not having their wills in opposition to his, as he of not having his in
opposition to theirs. A man being left to his own single defense and aid, to
act by his own instinct, to protect himself by his own sole power, and to use
that power to what purposes he pleases, is not withheld from doing any
mischief to another, that himself shall judge conducing to his own benefit or
content, as tending either to his necessary safety and preservation,
convenience, pleasure, luxury or wantonness. Now from whence come the greatest
Plagues and Judgments? Come they not from dissensions, divisions and
oppositions, from Wars and Fightings? Jam. 4.1. etc.
And from whence come Wars and Fightings among you? come they not hence, even
of your lusts that war in your members? Ye lust and have not, ye kill and
desire to have, and cannot obtain, ye fight and war, yet ye have not: Which
would not be, were men's Lusts curbed by Laws, and the exercise of a Sovereign
power in a fixed or wellorder'd ordered Government, which is also therefore a
blessing, because,

Secondly, No outward blessing, whether conducing to man's being and necessary
preservation, or to his well-being, can for any while with any the least
satisfaction or security be possessed or enjoyed without it. If it be a
blessing for men to have protection for their persons, leisure and opportunity
to provide things honest either for present or future use, freedom and safety
in the enjoyment, vindication from wrongs and injuries, which sometimes may and
will happen: To have the avarice of some, the pride and ambition of others
curbed and restrained, that they may not be made a prey to the insolent rage
and rapine of every desperate and insulting Villain, and by all manner of
licentious, lawless and barbarous Usages, to be devoured and torn in pieces;
then needs must Government be reckoned in the first rank of temporal
blessings, as comprehending all, since by it a remedy is provided for those
evils, that otherwise must needs overtake us, and swallow us up; and supplies
are procured for those wants, which, if not provided for, must needs render our
subsistence impossible.

By this we many see, that if there were such a thing in Nature as a state of
Universal Liberty, which some have fancyed; yet the consequences of that
Liberty being endless strife and contention; as much as men value Liberty,
'twere better for them to endure the greatest grievances of the severest
Discipline, then the sad Calamities of a mistaken Freedom. Freedom from
Government makes it free for every one to do what mischief he pleases; it
withdrawes men from the regular power of some one or some few, and subjects
them to the lawless arbitrary power and insolence of all. But freedom in
Government subjects you to the just and orderly power of some, and frees you
from the merciless cruelty of every malicious Cutthroat, and the inexorable
fury of any rude multitude.

Besides, though freedom in Naturalls be a perfection, as when the body is in
such a state of health and strength, as that it can freely exercise any proper
motion, endure any labor or hard-ship; or the mind apply it self readily and
judiciously to the consideration of any proportionable object, yet it is not so
in morals; there the case is far otherwise. Now men help and benefit, or else
hurt and hinder one another, rather by their morals, as their wills act and are
effective, then by their naturals. And therefore nothing can be more conducing
to happiness, then to have that liberty, by which men have a freedom to evil,
limited and restrained. For, if the acts of sin be damnable, the power, as
such, must needs be very dangerous, and, so far forth, not at all desirable.
It Is the honor and perfection of God, as to his Truth, that he cannot lie;
and, Numb. 3.19. Genesis 18.25.
as to his Justice, that being Judge of all the world he cannot but do right;
nor can he deny himself. And it is the happiness of triumphant Saints to be
raised above both the liberty of sinning and the power of suffering. Luke 16.26.
Between us and you there is a great gulf fixed, so that they which would pass
from hence to you cannot; neither can they pass to us that would come from
thence. And even in this state of moral freedom or rather imperfection, in
which we now are, the more any man by the strength of Reason and Religion,
diligent endeavor, and long custom and practice, has made the doing of any
vicious act very difficult for him and next to impossible, the better man he
is, no doubt, and the nearer to perfection. Were a man to go over a narrow
Bridge from whence he might easily fall; to have both sides so railed in, that
he had not a liberty to tumble down headlong, were, doubtless, no disadvantage,
not had he any reason at all to complain of that restraint: A drowning man also
naturally quits his liberty of letting go any thing he gets hold on, that has
but the least appearance of conducing ought to his safety. Sin is one of the
greatest enemies we have, and it is a liberty indeed to be able to commit a sin
or not; but that power being the power of an enemy; he, that, if he might be
quite freed from it, would yet be able to sin, by the exercise of that
destructive power, cannot be imagined in the least to consult his own safety or
welfare; but must rather be looked on as one that has made a covenant with
death, and is with hell at agreement, as we read of some, Isai. 28.15. And if
every single person despising the blessing of government, would have a liberty
to do what himself lists, and is right in his own eyes, Judge. 17.6. Genesis
16.12.
as we read it was in Israel, when there was no King there; it is true, his hand
like Ishmaels might be against every man; but then it is as true that every man's
hand must needs also be against him. Now which is more eligible and desirable,
to have it in my single choice, to act what I please upon others, whilst every
person besides my self (not one of which perhaps but may equal me on some
occasion or other) shall have the like freedom to act what he lists upon me, or
that we be both restrained? What good shall that weak and indefensible liberty
do to me that am but one against a multitude, by every one of which I may at
pleasure be oppressed and ruined? And how then is it possible I should reasonably
promise to my self the least comfortable enjoyment of any thing though but for
a minute? and what is my life, if I have no enjoyment? What enjoyment can I have
where there is no security? And what security can there be without peace? And
what peace can be expected where there is no bond of government to bind and
hold men to it?

What has thus been said of government in the general is applicable both to
the Church and state in particular, whether we consider the same persons either
as men or Christians, Government is absolutely necessary to the safety and
welfare, as of their humanity, so also of their Christianity. For should there
be allowed in Christianity a liberty for men to profess and practice what they
please, 'twere nothing but an empty name, since it can have no sense any
further, then as it signifies such a Profession as lays upon all those that
undertake it, some restraints of subjection and obligation to others. For, if
there be no such bond or obligation, there can be no union; and where there is
no union, there can be no Society Corporation or body of men; where no body, no
members; where no members, no Church. But Christ is the Savior of his body,
which is the Church; and in the body there are many members, yet but one body.
1 Cor. 12.12, 13, 14.
For (says the Apostle) as the body is one and has many members, and all the
members of that one body being many are one body, so also is Christ. For by one
spirit we are all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, bond
or free: and have been all made to drink into one spirit, for the body is not
one member, Ver. 19, 20.
but many. If they were all one member, where were the body? But now are they
many members, yet but one body. To be a Christian then is to be one of many, of
many in society or in a body. The self-deified Enthusiast is but one by
himself, above Church-Society, and so above Church-work, and so cannot be of
the body, and so no Christian. The Independent is but one in a private
Congregation, and is next to that which is next to none; but the Church is a
body comprehensive of whole Nations, Jews and Gentiles. And all the multitude
of Christians that in a converted Nation, do hold the Catholic Apostolic
Faith, and profess obedience to the same, do therefore make one National
Church, because they all submit to one and the same Ecclesiastical government,
by the Laws and direction whereof every one that is duly made a member, is
bound to act in such sort as not to violate the common faith or the public
peace. Common people therefore are abused by their false teachers, when they
are made to believe that those who assert a National Church, understand no more
to be required to make a man a member of such a Church, (suppose, for instance
sake, this Church of England) then that he be born upon English ground, or be
descended from English Parents. If any thing had been sufficient to check the
impudence of such bold impostors, the offices themselves, as they are
publicly exposed to every ones view, might have secured us from so gross a
slander.

But how much soever these Depopulators of Churches may sport themselves with
their own deceivings, and think they have gained some great advantage by their
small enclosures, 'twill yet be very hard for them to make good any claim to
the essential requisites of a Church. For albeit a multitude of Independent
Congregations might all together be called a Church, yet they cannot make such
a body as a Church should be, wherein the act of some must necessarily lay an
obligation upon all the rest, which is quite contrary to the Independency and
self-sufficiency of their single Congregations. Such Societies therefore make
no greater distinction from Universal Liberty in each individual, then a
liberty or independency in each private family would do, which has none of the
forementioned inconveniences remedied by so small and inconsiderable an
union. Such a State therefore is no better then a State of factious Division or
religious War, inconsistent with Christianity, which is a religious peace.

It Is evident then, that the want of a fixed Government, whether in Church or
State, does utterly destroy the being and constitution of either. What mischief
it creates, what fires it kindles, both in the one and the other, must needs
be obvious to any considering person, and you cannot but have sufficiently
learnt it from our own late sad experience. How have Errors and Heresies,
Blasphemies and Schisms, Impiety and Profaneness, Atheism and Barbarism,
robbing both of men and God, invaded and overrun us? What Seas of blood, what
inundations of wickedness like fire and brimstone from the mouth of Hell, have
as the waters of the Ocean without a bound at once broke in and overwhelmed us?
During that calamitous state of things, how have we been shifted through all
the shapes and forms of usurped Tyranny? What whirling and rotation from one
project to another, even as many as the hypocritical madness, or phantastique
levity of every filthy dreamer, Jude 8.
that had but the confidence to despise Dominion and to speak evil of
Dignities, could invent? How have the ways of Zion mourned and all her gates
been desolate? How have her Priests sighed, and her Virgins been afflicted? for
her beauty was all departed, and her Princes became like Hearts that find no
pasture, and are gone before the pursuer. Yea how has the daily Sacrifice been
taken away, the solemn feasts and Sabbaths been forgotten, and the King and the
Priest been despised? The precious sons of Sion, comparable to fine gold, have
been esteemed as earthen pitchers, and the work of the hands of the Potter.
They that did feed delicately have been desolate in the streets, and they that
were brought up in Scarlet have embraced dunghils. Those that were purer then
snow and whiter then milk, more ruddie in body then Rubies, and their polishing
of Saphir, their visage has been blacker then a coal, neither have they been
known in the streets, their skin has cleaved to their bones and withered and
become like a stick. These are the consequences of a subverted power,
sufficient to instruct us how great a blessing it is for a Land to be built and
settled upon the lasting Foundations of a well-ordered Government.

From hence also we may note the folly or rather madness of sedition and
innovation, when once a good Government is well fixed and established. It is I
confess a matter of very great ease to find some faults in things not capable
of absolute perfection, and so to remove one evil as to introduce a worse: But
to mend that, which the wisdom and experience of many, and those the best and
purest Ages have determined, is either the cheat of Mountebanks, or the
confidence of Fools. Whatever men may promise to themselves, or pretend to
others, the true and natural effect of such Reforming, can certainly be
nothing but mere Anarchy and Confusion, not more destructive to any then to the
first Designers. An abused people may for a while indeed resign their judgment
to implicit faith, and God in his just judgment may give them over, that
received not the truth with love, to strong delusions to believe a lie; but so
soon as the stroke of Divine Justice has made them feel their Error, they are
no less eager to throw down those popular Idols, then they were zealous before
to enshrine and worship them. To draw men into folly and danger, by abusing
their hopes and betraying their Interests, is very fesible; but to abuse their
hopes in betraying those their Interests, and not to incur their rage, may be
concluded impossible.

Various and numberless are the shifts and perplexities, infinite the hazards,
and sad are the events which such Impostors do necessarily draw both upon
themselves and others. In nothing do they suffer more then in those very points
for which at first they engage. While they cry out for liberty, they make both
themselves and their credulots followers the servants of Corruption; while Sea
and Land is compassed to make a Proselyte, the man becomes ten times more the
child of the Devil then before. While all that is cried up holds forth nothing
but truth and peace, nothing suffers more then the one by lying and perjurie,
and the other by tumult and insurrection: And then no marvail too, if Justice,
that was so loudly called for, be turned into Wormwood, the very Gall and
bitterness of Cruelty and Oppression: And the whole Religion it self, the
securing or refining whereof is evermore the great wheel in all popular
Commotions, be so far adulterated, as to degenerate at last into manifest
Apostasy and perfect Atheism. The best recompense that such Deceivers can
expect, for these their pernicious Counsels and mischievous practices, is a
shame not to be wiped away; and the infamy of those vile arts of hypocrisy and
falsehood, slander and detraction which they were fain to exercise, thereby to
draw the ignorant and unwary multitude into a dislike and hatred of the power
to which they owe their subjection and their peace.

But it is to be hoped that experience has now taught the most, what reason
might have done long since, that it is the great concernment of any people to be
fully persuaded that the benefits they receive from a good Government, are far
more valuable then any thing that their Governors are able to receive from
them, who feel indeed their own ease and enjoyments, but are less sensible of
the others cares and burdens.

Men also that did own no other rule to order and justify their seditious
attempts then providence, nor any other Judge of Controversy then success,
have now a very fair occasion given them, either to quit their Principles, or
deny their Conclusions, but shall doubtless do best to do both.

And for those who in order to the unsetling of Government, are so apt to cavil
at the directions of them that have the oversight of the Church, and to traduce
some prudent accommodations of things to emergent occasions as irregular
Impositions, they shall do well to learn the use of so much modesty, as not to
pass opprobrious censures upon the acts of their Governors, because themselves
were not made acquainted with the grounds of what they did; and not fondly
imagine that there can be no reason, which themselves do not understand. Every
one is not so happy as to be able of himself to discern the true and proper
causes of things. However, if they will not be so charitable (which they ought
to be, even to the good name of any obscure person) as to think and speak the
best, yet they might be at least so just, as first to inquire of those that
could inform them, before they usurp the seat of Judgment and pronounce their
sentence. Certainly, contempt of Authority, the immediate parent of
Disobedience, Schism and Rebellion, and the proper issue of slandering the
footsteps of Superiors, is of far worse consequence then the ignorance or
dissatisfaction of any private judgment. The Apostles Caution, if hearkened to
and observed, would doubtless prevent the petulant rashness of such
intemperance. I say, Romans 12.3.
through the grace given unto me, to every one that is among you; that no man
think more highly of himself then he ought to think, but that he think soberly
according to discretion; or as others read it, that no man presume to
understand above that which is meet to understand, but that he understand
according to sobriety, as God has dealt to every man the measure of Faith. The
Original is too elegant to be exactly rendered in any other Language.

For men also to claim and contend for an arbitrary power or liberty in the
public Offices of the Church (which certainly (if any) had need to be guided
and regulated by the public wisdom of the whole Government) and by virtue of
that liberty to prescribe or dictate at pleasure what to them shall seem good;
as it gives occasion to defile the Worship with polluted offerings, so it most
affectedly disparages the piety and judgment of a Church and State, as fit to
be rejected in comparison of the Scepticall and desultory Fancy of an
Opinionative Novellist. And then, since to have the Government of any people,
is nothing else but to have a power to dispose of their actions according to
ones will, those actions chiefly that are of a public nature; he that upon
his own private account assumes the authority of dictating to a Congregation,
or making them all act the same with himself, and not according to the legal
appointment of the Church, doubtless, arrogates, in a matter of great
importance, the exercise of a piece of arbitrary Government, to very ill
purposes. Such practice, whatever colors may be used to varnish it, is not
really effectual to men's greater edification, or a better economy, but rather
subservient to the vain ostentation of a personal ability, and displaying the
cheap Inventory of some striped Furniture to the itching admiration of ignorant
and deluded people; who, if they become by this means more receptive of Error,
and more apt to be cloven into factious separations, must needs be exposed to a
very great temptation of attempting things inconsistent with Rule and Order,
and consequently destructive both to the public and themselves.

I rather urge this, because our Government having Christians for its Subjects,
our late Contentions having been kindled at this fire from the Sanctuary: the
effect whereof, among other ill Consequences of Subverted Government, has been
the offering of strange fire upon Gods Altars, by Priests made of the lowest of
the people. The more have they to answer for, that still bring fuel to keep
them alive, rather then water to quench and extinguish them. To speak that
which I take to be clear and evident reason: when men meet together in public
to serve God by Prayers, Praises, Thanksgivings, Sacramental Devotions, etc.
the question is, Whether they shall act every one apart by the suggestion of
his own spirit and fancy without any Rule and Government, or not? If so, then
another coming in must needs say they are mad: Where Is the Union, where the
Communion of Saints? If they must not act in Division and Confusion, but in
Conjunction and Order; of necessity they must all agree in one form, and
proceed as that shall direct. The question now is, Who shall prescribe that
Form? Let the Answer be, Such as may most reasonably pretend to be most able,
prudent and judicious, to dictate that which is fit to be offered unto God by
us all; who can best assure us that we do not present a blind or a lame
Sacrifice. Now would it not be a ridiculous presumption for any private
ordinary Minister to step in, and say: I have a gift, and can hold it forth
extempore, and you shall do better to give me occasion to exercise, and let you
see that I have that gift, then to take that Form which the Church with the
approbation of the State in so many Convocations, Synods and Parliaments, in
solemn manner upon the wisest deliberation, upon a nice and careful
disquisition of all particulars, were able to contrive and fit to all the
ordinary and extraordinary necessities of Christians? Might it not justly and
reasonably be replied, We are much better provided for and secured by the
deliberate Judgment, and Wisdom, and Piety of the Church and State in this
matter, then by the sudden incoherent effusions of your inconsiderate fancy
that are but One, and that so small a Member, and so much inferior every way
perhaps to the least of them? When we pray with you, our spirit of prayer is
restrained by a form of your devising, which what it will prove in the trial,
you as yet know not your self, much less can we. As it is not your business in
this case to proclaim your gifts, so neither is it ours to admire you for them.
Whatever reason you may have to think your self abler and fitter to dictate to
us, then the ablest of the Church, in so many full and solemn Assemblies in
several Ages, after such clear and strict debates of all questions and doubts
that did then offer themselves to their piercing observations, we, sure, can
have no imaginable reason to think so of you. If you may be in the right, much
more may they: If they may be mistaken in any thing, much more may you: It can
therefore be no less then madness in us to reject them in comparison of you. We
know also, and are assured, that, by the Laws of God, we owe obedience to their
Authority, from which it is not in your power, should you pretend to more then
ever any Pope did, to absolve us. Besides, the truth is, our own unhappy
experience in this matter is such, that the most unlearned among us have been
able to discern such mistakes and absurdities, yea sometimes blasphemies to
have fallen from pretenders in this kind, that our folly would be as
inexcusable as theirs is manifest, should we rather choose to lean upon such
broken Reeds, then on the Church of the living God, the Pillar and the ground
of truth. For by its holy care and wise direction, the whole public Worship
is now so complete in all the parts, and so fitted to the occasions and
necessities of Christians; moreover for the comely fashion or manner of doing
it, all is performed with such grave and decent Ceremony, fitted only to keep
the minds of people intent by apt Declarations of their due concurrence, and
suitable improvements of their zeal and fervor, as also to gain a necessary
regard and reverence to the action, that as the Church knew not how to provide
for us better, so we have no reason to expect any other so good, but shall
rather thankfully join with the rest of Gods people happily subjected to the
same Discipline, then follow a multitude to do evil. And this we believe must
needs be more honorable to Religion by the harmony and beauty, and more
effectual with God by the strength of so great an Union, and consequently much
more reasonable and safe for us, then the pert inventions of any the most
illuminated pretenders.

They must be, I conceive, extremely passionate, self-willed and prejudiced,
that should hold such a Reply unreasonable. For certainly we have no cause to
fear any danger from that which commonly men deem, and, by mistake, have
learned to call Will Worship, which must needs be more chargeable on such as,
in opposition to the sentence of the Church, follow the decrees of their own
private wills in determining what comes nearest to the mind and will of God;
and in projecting the very frame and method after which a Congregation of
Christians assembled together for the service of God, are to present their
devotions.

As little need we to fear the suspicion of Popery, in consorming to that way
of public Worship which our Church has prescribed; when as this Conformity
stands in a direct opposition to that Popery which the Romanists themselves,
and also our Laws do account and have declared for such. For are not Papists
forbidden, by the the Laws of their own Communion, to join in the public
Service of our Church, who yet are permitted to hear the Expositions and
Sermons of the reformed, accompanied with such of their prayers as are the
present dictates of their private spirits. And are not the Reformed again on
the other side generally as liberal and free to them, who, should they join in
their Masses, and those other public Offices, by which Papists distinguish
and hold their Communion, would certainly be deemed Proselytes by those of the
Romish, and Apostates by the men of their own profession. Doubtless, that for
which men are called Recusants, and censured by our Laws as such, has more of
Popery in it, then has any ones conformity to the Service of our Church; the
denial of which conformity by the Romanists, being that by which they disclaim
our Communion, is the very essence of Popery, as that is understood to signify
Recusancy.

As for those, who (that they may not seem sine ratione insanire, or neglect
the necessary defense, as they think, of their errors and reputations) hold
themselves engaged to justify their disobedience, by traducing the decent and
instructive Ceremonies of our Church as superstitious, or at least a too stiff
insisting upon smaller matters; If the Church had bidden them do some great
thing, should they not have done it? how much more when she requires only such
forms, gestures, or habits, as best serve to beget that reverence, and express
that uniformity, without which all solemn actions must needs fall into contempt
and indecency.

But it is to be hoped, that when upon a most strict and partial inquiry with a
sincere heart and single eye, as in his sight before whose eyes all things are
naked and open, they shall have clearly satisfied their Consciences in the
grounds that moved them first to censure, and then to depart from that which
themselves had formerly practiced, and were obliged to by lawful Oaths and
Subscriptions; and when they shall well have weighed the consequences, which
their eyes have seen to flow from their very Principles, and the confessed
miscarriages of diverse of their chiefest and most renowned Patrons; they may at
length think it not only possible for them to err, but more then probable that
they have done so in the present case. The truth is, in many things we offend
all; and infallibility is no more to be found at Geneva then at Rome, though
the one be for the most part as peremptory in denying the act, as the other the
power; and though there be so little difference between him, that, upon the
clearest instances, could never be brought to say he had erred, and him that
says he never can. So soon therefore as either their passion, prejudice or
interest, and the implicit faith by which they embrace any thing that is with
confidence delivered for sound and orthodox by those, whose persons, for some
grave appearances of Learning and Godliness they have in admiration, shall give
them leave to see and consider what Superstition is? and that as a good meaning
cannot justify an evil undertaking, so neither can the reputed honesty of a
man of gifts, authorize an error either in faith or life; they will no longer
look upon the powerful convictions of sequestered truth as so many Engines of
Satan to beat them from their stedfastness; nor on those that have taken so
much pains to save them, as on men of corrupt principles or profane hearts.
Indeed when men have for a good while together had quiet possession of some
congruous error, the least disturbance proves very afflictive, and those that
have long enjoyed the pleasure of thinking well of themselves and despising
others, (like men preferred to honor in a dream) are much disquieted upon the
first opening of their eyes and judgments to perceive the Delusion. So much
more agreeable to natural corruption is familiar error, then unacquainted
truth.

they, our Ringleaders, and we their close and constant followers or rather
over-runners, have all this while been deceivers and deceived: and is it likely
that so many of Gods people, whom we always took and do take to be the only
honest party, should complain without cause? Must we be looked upon as men that
had no just ground for what we labored for, and took pains with prayer, and
preaching, and fasting, even to strife and debate, and smiting with the fist of
wickedness? The very life of our Good Old Cause, the honor and reputation
both of it and our selves are herein nearly concerned: and what also will the
world then think of us? answer, even what it does; unless we shall repent and
do our first works. Either we or those must be mistaken, who are far more
considerable both for numbers and qualities then our selves.

Must the Church, the State, the best, the wisest, the holiest and the
learned men be fools that we may appear wise? must they all have erred that
we may seem not to have erred? or be all in the wrong that we may be in the
right? Or will our error become none, and that which is wrong prove right by
our not seeming to see it, by our unwillingness to own it, and resolution to
persist in it? Yea, to excuse us, will Conscience cease to give in her
evidence, or will the righteous Judge, in favor to our incorrigibleness
forbear to pronounce and inflict his sentence? That we may be safe in our
reputation, must all former Ages suffer in theirs? Must Antiquity lose its
reverence, Truth its force, Kings their Majesty, Parliaments, Convocations and
Synods their judgment and authority? Must Wisdom be no more with the Aged, nor
Prudence with the Counselors, nor Instruction with the Judges? Must such a
Noble Army of Martyrs as sealed our Reformation with their blood, cast down
their Crowns at our polluted feet to lift up our Axes and Hammers? Or rather
were it not much more creditable and safe for us to engage Posterity to hide
our greater shame by a present just and pious care not to expose and deride,
but cover our Parents nakedness in case of the least discovery?

Certainly our Forefathers (as quick-sighted, for ought appears to the
contrary, as our selves) had they been able to see and remedy what we think we
discover and can reform, to wit, Error, Superstition and folly in their
careful Collections and wary Improvements, they would not, by a voluntary
guilt, have brought a reproach upon the Nation, and an open infamy upon its
Public Acts, thereby wilfully drawing upon themselves, the Church and State,
the just censures and scorn of all knowing men. The event certainly and success
of what they did, compared with that of what we have since essayed to do, must
needs justify them and condemn us; nor can our peevish obstinacy prevail with
men to apprehend it otherwise. Our wisest course certainly will be, never to be
tampering any more with foundations and pillars, least, those being shaken, the
whole pile fall down upon our giddy heads, and bury both us and our Inventions
quick in the ruins. So dangerous and destructive is Innovation in Government;
and so vain and troublesome, as well as infectious, is men's unnatural itch and
greediness after it: a levity to which either the ignorance or wantonness of
common people, like the desire of new, though undecent and uneasy fashions,
has been to apt to betray them. My son fear thou the Lord and the King, says
Solomon, and meddle not with them that are given to change, for their calamity
shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both? Prove. 24.21, 21.

In reason, all change should be for the better, and such was that which was
made from War to Peace; that is, from lawless boundless liberty, to Empire,
Rule and Government. The motive to the change was good, settlement and order
being as much better then giddiness and confusion (in which the greatest ease
and security a man can promise himself, is no better then that of sleeping upon
the top of a mast) as is a calm then a storm, health then sickness, or life it
self then death. For what is such a life but a living death? or, as the Apostle
expresses it, a dying daily? For men to live, like the wild Beasts of a
Wilderness, in the barbarous and savage condition of war, must needs be the
complement and fullness of all earthly misery. The drawn Sword of a destroying
Angel cutting down a Nation with Pestilence, was preferred by David before the
Sword of an enemy. But of all War and enmity Civil War is the worst: and this
is that which those men choose, that affect a change of Government; inasmuch as
that change, without a power able to match the Sovereign Power, can never be
effected. For the opposition of those Powers is War, the very worst of evils,
which these men choose for a remedy of something they call evil; which, be it
what it will, must needs be much better then the worst; and therefore make
their choice most unreasonable, an act of solemn madness, reproachful even to
humanity it self. For what can be thought more sottish then for men so far to
listen to to the cry of their own passions, or the enchantments of sedicious
Sorcerers, as to abandon themselves to misery by being engaged in parties and
factions, contriving and attempting to subvert a lawful power, only to make way
for another, and that a greater power (such must that needs be, by which the
former is expulst) and so more able to oppress and grind them, not resting
there neither. For such as have no other title then that of forcible entry,
nor any surer possession then that of forcible detainer, do but invite a new
force, and raise a new power to eject them. How many such turns may one succeed
another, it is not easy to determine. The right owner being once set aside,
all other pretenders have one and the same title, one just as much right as the
other, and therefore may set up and declare when and how they please. Now of
these, there must needs be as many as those are whose crimes, wants or ambition
promoted by cunning, colored with specious and hypocritical pretenses, and
backed with some external advantages may incline them to supplant the Supreme
Authority; from the justice whereof, as they could not expect impunity for
those crimes, so neither from the regular Administrations thereof, had they
reason to look either that their needs should be extraordinarily supplied, or
their ambition satisfied.

But how long that dismal Tragedy may last, wherein there are so many Actors
ready to enter the Stage, each resolved in his turn to spin out his part to the
utmost, till both himself and the sad spectators be quite worn out and spent,
he alone knows that make Diviners mad, and wars to cease in the earth, that
knappeth the Spear in sunder, and burns the Chariot in the fire; so far
pitying the follies of men, more brutish in this then the very brutes
themselves (that act not contrary to that reason they never had) as in great
mercy to raise up some to still the rage of man, and tame the beasts of the
people, and so lead them forth of that vast howling Wilderness, as he sometimes
did the Israelites by the hands of Moses and Aaron: Moses a Supreme Magistrate,
and, in correspondence with him, Aaron a chief Priest, both such by the wise
appointment and constitution even of God himself, whose Government being that
of a King or Monarch (for God is King of all the Earth) must needs be therefore
the most perfect, as we have affirmed Kingly Government to be in our second
Proposition, which comes next to be handled.

As it is a blessing for a Land to be under a Government, so it is yet a further
degree of blessing to be under a King.

Absence or Negation of Government is a State of Universal Liberty and War; and
therefore so far forth as the individuals of a multitude surrenders their
dispersed powers to the rule and disposal of a Sovereign (be that Sovereign a
natural person, as a Monarch, or an Artificial, as a Senate or Council made one
by a concurrence of voices) so far they are under Government, and in a
reasonable expectation of Peace, and no further. To counterpoise power with
power, as weights do one another in a balance, till they come to an
aequilibrium, is to make the state of a people alterable with every the least
grain of advantage. And certainly it is next to impossible for two distinct
parties invested with equal powers, to use those powers so equally, though but
for a day, as that the one should make no gain, and the other sustain no loss.
The nearer that Powers are matched, the more jealous they are of encroachments,
and the more apt to resent and contest the least transgression of bonds. Nor
can that jealousy in either party be quenched, but by attempting some further
security in an excess or usurpation of power, the possibility and suspicion
whereof at first in each other was the very spark that kindled it. Supremacy
therefore of Power, as it is Essential to Government, so can it not be
reconciled with co-ordination without a plain contradiction. To imagine such
power in a people considered as so many loose individuals, is to conceive an
unity in division, there being as many Sovereigns as men. And to think that so
great a multitude as the vast generality of a people, can join and concur in
such sort as to act every one for himself, or be otherwise embodyed and united,
then by being made one term of a relation through the necessary position of
some opposite term, is to dream or that which is impossible, to wit, of an
inferior without a Superior; or of a Superior where none are inferior. When
once a relation is put, the terms are immediately distinguished, and therefore
to confound the properties peculiar to each term, by imposing subjection on
those that govern, and attributing Supremacy of Power to those that are
governed, is to make the son beget the father, or the father become the child
of his own son. Be it so that men, of their own accord, by their own consent
and power, either through chance or choice, are fallen into a relation, yet
being once there, they cannot make void or alienate the necessary duty, which
God by his Law has thereto firmly annexed. A woman by her own consent,
uncompell'd by any Law of God, makes her self a wife to a man, whom therefore
she may be said to have made her husband; but being once in that relation, the
wife may not, upon pretense of having made that man her husband, reverse the
husbands power, and usurp authority over him. Much less, upon the like
pretense, may the Subject recall or invert the power of the Magistrate; the
duty of obedience and submission being by God annexed to Subjection. And
therefore men so related must needs be subject, not only for wrath, Romans 13.5.
but also for Conscience sake; whatever the motive or occasion were that first
brought them into the relation. This benefit however must needs be necessarily
intended in the erection of any Government, viz. That the Subjects may be
secured, so far as is possible, from danger and mischief, through strife,
violence and war, in the confused tyranny of one another. And that form of
Government which best obtains that, which all Government, as such, does chiefly
if not solely intend, must needs be preferred before other forms,
notwithstanding its being obnoxious, as all forms are, through one accident or
other, to some defects and obliquities. Engines that have many wheels will
sometimes be out of order, though no disparagement to him that either made or
keeps them. And therefore it cannot be expected, that Monarchy with its
greatest advantages should be able to satisfy all, or fully put to silence the
ignorance of foolish men. The clearest light in heaven is observed to have some
spots; and if God himself did never please all, is it possible that all should
be pleased? However, to discover a weakness or imperfection in any thing is no
argument that another is better, no more then it would be for any pretender to
prudence and moderation to conclude himself wiser then Solomon, because he is
able to charge Him with some act of folly. Upon such an account, it must needs
be easy for any one to make good his claim to an universal precedence. The
question is, What form of Government is best? Not whether that Government only
ought to be preferred or admitted which is every way perfect? No state or
condition upon earth is so: and he that will not be satisfied upon any other
terms, shall roll a stone with Sisyphus and never be at rest. Seeing then there
always were, are, and will be defects in all; certainly that must heeds be
best, which has the least and fewest. And that we say is Kingly Government, or
Monarchy, wherein the Elementall powers of a simple and unbodyed people, are
drawn together and compacted in a single person. The reason is this.

Because the more closely Sovereign power is united (as when the Sunbeams are
drawn toward a point by a Burningglass) the greater strength and aptitude it
has to obtain its end in the safety and honor of the whole Community. For
these can never be well provided for, if a Magistrate want sufficient strength
to suppress all attempts that may be made against the Government; or cannot
exercise that strength so seasonably and readily, as by timely Discoveries and
quick preventions to anticipate or countermine the practices of such as are
enemies to the public Peace, which is never more in danger, then when the
Authors of sedition, to which all Governments are subject more or less, do
receive encouragement from such probabilities of effecting their purposes, as
the frequency of opportunities and greatness of temptations cannot but create
and suggest.

If Ambition long for Empire, and be even choked with thirst after power: if
pride affectedly think it self too good or great to be subject: if passion be
impotent and cannot hold it self: if prejudice and error would contest by
force, what they cannot make good by reason: if ignorance will not see the good
of Peace and ill of War: if wantonness being cloyed and fall, despise the
Honey-combe, or curse its own Blessings, and be undone for want of variety or
something of a new mode: if covetousuesse would take and enjoy all, but
contribute nothing toward the expensive administrations of necessary Justice
and Order: if self-love will be partial, and blame the Government for those
sufferings which the heedless Subject has incurred by his own default: if
slothfulness, imprudence, luxury and pleasure will improve nothing, but spend
all and be in want, and seek unlawful supplies, or contract debts and suits:
and if all these do wilfully and greedily expose themselves to danger by the
guilt and punishment of their crimes; how is it possible but that the natural
desire in man to save and preserve himself, should dispose and incline them all
to secure themselves by force from being accomptable to that Authority which
they know must curb and correct their Insolences? But then that Sovereign
power, which is made perfect in one, to wit in a King or Monarch, must needs be
best placed and disposed, because its Government, when well administered, does
evidently afford both less temptations, and fewer opportunities to transgress,
and also less hopes of security and success.

For is it not much easier for an aspiring spirit to fancy its being one of a
Senate, then one where there is but one, which makes the attempt more
desperate? If Supremacy reside in a multitude, the natural desire of power will
scarce penult any active person in that number to rest satisfied with (...)
when he may fairly hope to have all? Nec quenquam jam far potest, Caesar,
etc. Lucan.
Equality is as offensive to one as Superiority is to another; and what men
desire and hope for, or are in a possibility, to attain, they will attempt, if
the fear of a common danger do not interpose, or that the partners do not
over-highly value each others strength and interest.

Is it not also more reasonable to infer the sense of pressures and grievances,
which occasion great calamities, from a multitude in power then from One, whose
experience constantly shows him, that his own private interest can be no other
then the public; whereas in the other, the double interest of private and
public distinct and frequently opposed, like two Masters requiring contrary
services, gives occasion to men, whose first and greatest kindnesses do
generally regard themselves, to pretend the service of the public in order to
the serving of themselves, and to sacrifice the common good to their own
private advantage? However, if One may abuse power, then certainly much more
may a Number; and if Ones spending upon a Stock will waste something of it,
what can in reason be expected when there are so many spenders?

And whereas the personal distance between the Senators and people is not very
great, but between the Senators themselves little or none at all; as the
greatest do not exceed the proportion, so neither are they sufficiently armed
against the sting of Envy, whose venom is so killing and infectious. Yet he,
that, being no more then one that goes a share in the Sovereignty, and may be
abundantly qualified to oppress the inferior people, is not placed so high, as
to be above their affronts and injuries; must needs be inclined and enabled to
abuse the public force in the vindication of private wrongs, beyond the the
limits of Justice.

Moreover, when a private estate becomes too small and weak to support the
honor and dignity of one that is a public person; it cannot prudently be
imagined, but that the interest of corrupted power should be misapplied in
repairing it. And where there must needs be place for so great a variety of
inconsistent ends and interests among so many jealous and suspicious equals,
the house is soon divided, and therefore cannot stand, but multitudes are
destroyed by the fall. On the contrary, where the dispersed power of people is
most closely united, as it cannot be more then when it is all reduced to one, it
must needs there be strongest, and most able to guard the Palladium of a
Nation, the safety of that Supreme Power by which alone it enjoyes peace,
without which no enjoyment at all.

Again, where power proceeds upon the concluding advice and executive order or
will of One, it must needs be most seeret and expedite. Where the consent of
many is to be had, that are led by parties and Factions; nothing more practiced
nor practicable then discovery and delay, which are oft-times very fatal and
dangerous, chiefly in the rise and progress of sedition. That a multitude
therefore or Assembly should sooner agree and join in one, then one person with
himself; that in such a multitude all should be sincere in their aims and
designs, and equally desire and seek the common good: That in such a divided
administration there should be less corruption and partiality where there is
much more temptation and opportunity; neither our reason nor experience will
suffer us to believe.

From hence I suppose we may safely conclude in the general, that as it is a
blessing for a Land to be under a Government, so it is a further degree of
blessing to be under a King, whose Government questionless is the best fence
against the dangers of envy, pride and ambition, the best stay and support of
every just interest, the best prevention and remedy of hostility and confusion,
and the best means of procuring and also securing the blessed enjoyments of
peace.

As to the peculiar case of this our Nation, the Subjects whereof were not only
born under, but also sworn to it; Nature, Reason and Religion, all concurring
to fasten this blessing on us, how much better it is for us in all respects, as
most agreeable to our temper and genius, to our Laws and Customs, most
approved also by long and sharp trials, and that in great variety, has been
of late the subject of so many pens, that I shall not descend further into
particulars, which I know are evident to the meanest observation among us. Only
we shall do well to remember, how happy we have been under it, that thereby,
and by the sense of what we have suffered for the want of it, we may the better
understand and value the blessing of its restitution, and being once again made
whole, sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto us. Doubtless, nothing could
have made us miserable but the ignorance of our own happiness. How did Religion
and Learning, Laws and Liberties, Truth and Peace flourish, and embrace each
other? To what a height of glory, and dignity, and wealth, and power were we
then arrived? Like Jesu^un, we were waxen fat, and it had been well for us, if
we had not also kicked, Deuteronomy. 32.15.
and lightly esteemed the Rock of our salvation. With what reverence, and
Freedom, and equity, so far as humane infirmities will bear, was Justice
administered? when the Subject might safely plead his right with the Prince, and
was not at all prejudged from the liberty of a fair hearing, and a legal
sentence? And for the Church, 'twas not in the power of every ordinary
Minister, with three or four of his Parish to make a Consistory or Spiritual
Court, and sit in judgment over the rest of his Neighbors, and admit to or
reject at pleasure the rest from the Communion of Saints. In which case, the
censured person, backed with his chief friends and relations, being apt to think
himself wronged, and hardly dealt with by those of his own place, his own
Minister and fellow-Parishioners; what hatred, and variance, and envy, and
strife, and malice, and uncharitableness must needs ensue, and be fomented
between Neighbor and Neighbor, Friend and Friend, Minister and People? Who,
having so many common interests, and being engaged, by the mutual necessities
of a daily commerce, in each others concernments, ought certainly to have no
such bones cast among them, by publishing the secreta domus, as must make them
not only snarl at, but also bite and devour one another. All matters of
importance so nearly concerning men in their spiritual interests, were wisely
determined by the Laws and Constitutions of the Church, and the Controversies
thence arising, decided by able, chosen and disinteressed persons, that had
neither temptation nor encouragement to be partial, which must needs provide
better for those rights of Christians, then a Neighbor and an Equal, that may
have so many deflexions to the contrary; besides want of fitness and of ability
for such matters, which every ordinary Presbyter or Parishioner in so great a
body, can with no more reason be thought furnished with, then every common
Lawyer or Solicitor be deemed fit to manage the Office of a Judge.

As for the due ordering of Gods public Worship in Religious Assemblies,
private Christians, that have not the leisure or ability to dive into the
depths of Divinity, had better assurance given them, that their devout
Addresses were agreeable to Gods holy Will and Word, then the uncertain chance
of a States-lay-preachers or other ordinary Church-mans fugitive and extempore
Fancy, which must produce as many distinct services in the Church, as there are
Congregations and Inventions of private men. If all the Congregations make one
Church, why should they not serve God after one and the same manner?

So they should, no doubt, and so they did, keeping the unity of the spirit in
the bond of peace.

And blessed be the God of Peace, that has once more joined us in that Unity,
and tied us again together in that Sacred Bond, which I hope we shall never
more break asunder, nor cast away these Cords from us! Better and stronger we
cannot have: good Government an excellent bond of peace, the perfection of
outward blessings; and of Governments the best, namely, that of a King, nor so
only, but Kingly Government in its greatest perfection, as being then most
blesseds when the King is the Son of Nobles, and the Princes eat In due season,
for strength and not for drunkenness. Which is the third and last Conclusion,
of which briefly and in a word.

To be a Son of Nobles speaks a relation to the quality rather then the person:
in the same sense that men of great Achievements are called the Sons or
honor, or those that apply themselves to a more curious search after
knowledge, are usually styled the Sons of Art; or, that such are said to be the
Children of Abraham, Jo^. 8.39.
who follow the says and works of that friend of God: whose sons and daughters
also are those that do endear themselves unto his grace and savor, by their
conformity to his image; and endeavoring to be perfect, as (...) Father (...)
is perfect. Mat. 5.48.
To a contrary purpose, the Scripture also expresses a vicious person, by
calling him a Son of Belial, or a Child of the wicked one, his Father the
Devil. For Children being the lively images of their Parents, by the
participation (as of a common nature, so) of some special and more peculiar
lineaments and aptitudes, by which they frequently discover the Authors of
their being; the appellation is very fitly given to those whose descent is
reckoned according to the pedigree of a moral, as well as that of a natural
generation. And thus a Son of Nobles is one, in whom are to be found the
special signatures and distinctive lineaments of those heroic endowments,
that, being propagated in a line of succeeding ages, do make a race of generous
and renowned persons, the blessing and glory of their times.

Seeing also that the manners of the mind have a great dependence upon the
temper of the body, according to that vulgar saying, Mores animi sequuntur
humores corporis; where the body is rendered exactly serviceable to the soul, in
such sort as that sensuality and passion are perfectly kept under the command
of Reason, (which is the great foundation of the best Nobility) no marvail, if
the perfections not only of the inferior, but also of the better part (as to
strong inclinations, propensities and dispositions) do many times descend
together, especially where nature is not alloyed and debased with some vicious,
sordid and unequal mixture, the great unhappiness of a mercenary and luxurious
age. That which in Creatures of a lower rank, we commonly call a good breed,
does not unfitly represent the matter. And the care men use to procure and
preserve it in their beasts, should, one would think, reproach the neglect of
it in themselves. A wretchedness occasioned by nothing more then a lazy
degenerating from the spirit and industry of our Noble Ancestors, or matching
the Child of Vanity with the Son of Honor, whose light thereby grows more dim
and obscure, being first wasted by that which impoverisheth the kind, and is
by Solomon discredited under the title of eating in the morning, as you have it
in the Verse immediately before, and directly opposed to my Text, where he
makes the misery or ruin of a people, the necessary consequence of
childishness and intemperance in their Rulers: Woe unto thee O Land, when thy
King is a Child, and thy Princes eat in the morning! that is, unseasonably: to
which if we add, the vile end and design they propose to themselves in so
doing, not strength but drunkenness, (the perfect contradictory to his end;
whom the Text Crowns with temperance) we have a very eminent cause discovered
to us of a Lands weal or woe. For without the due exercise of a power Supreme,
there can be no good Government, and so no blessing. But power is no power in a
subject indisposed to use it, because it can never be well reduced to act,
there is no strength nor vigor in it, no grace or dignity belonging to it.
Whatever therefore weakens or empairs the strength either of the mind or body,
has no proportion or congruity with the proper quality and constitution of a
Governor, the very formality of whose Office is to be a man of power.
Debauchery therefore; by transubstantiating the man into the beast, which was
never made for Rule and Dominion, is more peculiarly opposite to that state and
condition by which a Land is blessed.

He then that would truly be styled the Son of Nobles, and possess more then
an empty or ridiculous title, must not be one that eats out of season, or that
eats for drunkenness, and so takes order, that such meats be procured, and in
such sort prepared, as may best serve to inflame the thirst, and kindle
unnatural fires in the blood, to the great detriment of that health and
soundness, without which the whole man consumes and decays, till at length the
enfeebled judgment, and besotted reason become useless and insufficient for
the difficult conduct of those great affairs, in the right managing whereof the
blessing of a Land does consist. So Princely and strengthening a virtue is
Temperance: The Land, whose Rulers and Governors by their authority and
examples have planted it to a thriving, is enriched and blessed by it. So happy
also are the people whose King is the Son of Nobles, above them whose Rulers
are passionate, ignorant, unconstant; rude and wanton, the usual properties of
children, or such as is the child before the Text, who, by being opposed to
the Son of Nobles, is supposed to be of some ignoble breed, some riotous or
mean extraction. Which we shall not at all think strange, if we consider how
the meanness of their condition must needs render their envyed persons odious,
and make their power contemptible. When the vilest men are exalted, Psalm. 12.8.
then the wicked walk on every side: then servants ride upon horseback, and
Princes walk as servants upon Earth. Eccles. 10.7.


Mean persons have commonly tyrannical, sordid and insulting spirits, and are
of a base and mercenary disposition. None so insolent, so scornful and
unsufferable, as such persons generally, when they get into place or power. Not
that Noble qualities are the inseparable or sole attendants of persons
otherwise Nobly born: if I should say so, I should hardly be able to maintain
it. Nobility therefore here, is not restrained or appropriated to a bare
external relation: it principally includes the better part of Nobility, so that
the other is always to be understood in conjunction with this. And may they
ever go together, as things which God has joined, and never be put asunder!

But it is high time I came to some more special and particular application, and
more immediately referring to the present occasion.

The truth is, God himself has made the application; it is he that has put new
life and vigor into the fainting spirits of a dying and despairing people.

'Twas our happiness, the blessedness of our Land, and can be no less then the
joy and triumph of our souls, that as on this day to us a Son was born, May 29.
1630.
who is every way the Son of Nobles, Heir to a Prince Noble in all the senses
in which that word has any commendable use. Noble by the eminent luster of
most Royal and renowned Ancestors: Noble by those eminent qualities that become
so high a descent. Whatever either Art or Nature, Grace or Virtue, Reason or
Religion might contribute to make a man truly noble, was eminently remarkable
in that most Noble person and translated saint his Royal Father, to the great
honor of him whose Vicegerent he was, to the singular satisfaction of his
friends and Loyal subjects; to the shame and confusion of his enemies, even to
the wonder and admiration of all. Noble, for his zeal to Gods House, and for
his love to an unthankful people. Noble in his life, and more noble in his
death, made so by a Martyrdom so near in resemblance to that of the faithful
Witness in heaven, that 'twould be hard to find any so exact a parallel in all
the Annals and Records of time. But so it pleased God to make him, like his
Savior, perfect through sufferings; by which he had the honor of the Noblest
Victory in subduing the very malice it self even of his bitterest enemies. For
such was his patience and charity, such his meekness and constancy, such his
prudence and fortitude, such his sanctity and piety, that even the Conquerours
themselves were conquered, and being stripped of all their hypocritical
pretenses, so as to have no cloak left for their sin, exposed stark naked with
the greatest shame to the contempt and scorn both of God and men: For no sooner
was he lifted up, but he drew all men unto him.

Such was the Father, such also is the Son, Nobilis ex Nobili, if not in the
eyes and hearts of his own Subjects, yet certainly of strangers and foraigners.
For it is possible that a King as well as a Prophet, should not be without
honor save in his own Country. And had not his worth and excellency spoken
something more then ordinary, far above the usual accomplishments of great
persons, even those of his own rank, it cannot be imagined how he should ever
have been able to keep up so long so great a reputation in such a depressed
condition, and when so many blind and secret arts have been used, so much open
slander and detraction uttered to stain and eclipse his glory, by those filthy
men, Jude 8, 11, 13,
who like raging waves of the Sea cast up their own filth, and shall perish in
the gainsaying of Korah.

Commonly as men are outwardly prosperous and successful, so they are deemed
inwardly to be either wise or virtuous. The rich man thinks all that are poor
are fools; and they that only admire wealth, neither know nor are capable of
any other wisdom. But true wisdom is justified of her Children: and how much
soever virtue in the general be of small account, little considered and less
exercised, yet there is a Charm sometimes accompanying it, by which it has so
powerful and secret an influence (as some persons have the judgment or
felicity to manage it) upon the affections even of the least concerned, that at
forces them into some degrees not only of love and honor, but of wonder also.
The truth is, he that would be an accomplished person throughout, must not
content himself with those external graces that render him acceptable to the
first acquaintances and conversations of men, but be well stored with those
inward, solid endowments, which commend themselves rather by the
considerableness of their effects and after-consequences, then by the cecency
and elegance of their present appearances.

And though it is possible for men to attain by their great care and practice
some tolerable measures of both; yet the perfection of either is seldom
attained without some neglect of the other.

It Is a wonder, I confess, how persons of great and high birth, (considering
their many and unavoidable diversions; besides the eminence of their condition,
by which they are somewhat justly, but unhappily priviledg'd, from the
importunities of a strict, but advantageous discipline) should make any farther
benefit or progress, then what is imputable to the arbitrary and uncertain
improvements of Chance: Yet, if Divine Providence have so contrived out of it is
infinite pity and goodness to a Nation, that a Son of Nobles in all respects
shall be their blessing and their King: and that people shall be happy, not
only by the force of his Precepts, but, the influence of his Example; if we are
not the happiest people upon the face of the earth, it is our own fault, that
neither do nor will know in this our day the things that do belong unto our
peace. For what can more be done for us then God has already done? When we all
like Sheep were gone astray, wandering up and down as those that have no
shepherd, made a prey to Lions, and Bears, and Wolves, and Foxes, even all the
beasts of the people, God has been pleased, miraculously to put us under the
conduct of one so fit, so ready and prepared to feed us, according to the
integrity of his heart, and guide us by the skilfulness of his hands: who
(besides a most excellent knowledge both of men and things, which renders him a
perfect Master of the best conversation, and the object of their praises, that
have the honor to observe and revere so great a Majesty in so sweet a presence
graced with a happy and full concurrence of all personal ornaments) does by a
special blessing and more immediate privilege, lay so just a claim to that,
which God himself has determined to be the perfection of Kings, in what he
has testified of David the Father, and Solomon the Son, who were the most
eminent and glorious of all the Jewish Kings but he, who after he had in scorn
been called by his malicious and implacable adversaries the pretended King, one
that said he was the King of the Jews, did yet far exceed and transcend them
all, as was then acknowledged even by those contradicting and blaspheming
sinners, when God had made his foes his footstool.

Now 'twas, you know, King David's honor to be styled frequently a man after
Gods own heart, by his love to God, to his house and service, by his eminent
Justice, Clemency and Integrity. Yet the matter of Vriah was very scandalous
and reproachful to him. By the grace of God, and the assistance of his Holy
Spirit, our David stands yet, and we have no cause to doubt, but by the power
of the same grace he will continue to stand, to the last, untainted with any
such guilt. Then as for his fidelity and integrity both to God and man, he has
all along given such signal evidences, as even slander it self is no longer
able to question it.

For a person so variously afflicted, so divested of outward encouragements, so
surrounded with the strength of the most violent temptations, so constantly
assaulted with all the force and subtilty of the most importunate attempts, to
be so immovable and constant in his Religion, as that neither the seasonable
kindness of those of a contrary profession, nor the scandalous unkindness of
those of the same faith (either of which in a far less degree is an engine
strong enough to batter the resolution of a boasting Pharisee) should ever yet
be able to startle him; as it is no doubt an argument of greatest joy and
rejoicing to himself, so must it be of highest conviction and satisfaction to
others. It is more over notoriously evident, that the great value and kindness
which he has for those that have given constant and undoubted assurance of
their Loyalty otherwise, could never yet insinuate their vices into his favor
and connivance; but he has and does so manifestly declare himself an enemy to
those scandalous sins of some of them, to wit, swearing and debauchery, that
all pretenders to the honor of good Subjects, must henceforth in good earnest
either resolve to be sober, or quit the reputation and reward of strict and
severe Loyalty.

For Solomon the Son and Successor of David, 1 King. 3.6.
you know what was his Petition to Almighty God, upon his taking possession of
the Throne of the Kingdom, as also the success he had in that his request,
which was so pleasing to God, and proved so beneficial and honorable to
himself. And no question but wisdom and understanding are most essential
qualifications of an accomplished Prince, without which he cannot well go
either in or out himself, and must therefore be content to be led by others
before so great a people. So gracious in this particular has God been unto us,
in setting this Sacred person to Rule over us, that we may well say what was
said of Israel in another case, The Lord has not dealt so with any Nation,
among the heads whereof it would not be easy to find such a solidity of
judgment, as needs not (out of any necessity) be forced either to depend on
others, or distrust it self, but freely determine and stand to its own
sentence, and that firmly and steddily, without any fickleness or aptness to be
tossed and turned about like a Ship without helm or balast, with every puff of
Fancy or Conjecture. Moreover, what the Holy Scripture has so expressly
declared, That he who walks uprightly walks surely; his Majesty's example
has most exactly verifyed, by giving a most undeniable instance that there is
something more in Wisdom then Cunning, and that truth of Religion makes the
wisest, because the best men.

But then all these excellencies not being the effect only of mere study and
sedentary speculation, must needs become so much the more expedite, ready and
useful, by how much the more they have been confirmed and increased by
frequent encounters and negotiations with persons of so many different Nations
and professions, and of so contrary interests, by an unwearyed vigilance and
industry, in a full employment and exercise of the strength and powers both of
his mind and body. And all this in compliance with a life of duty, in a near
subservience to the great Majesty of Heaven, and governed also by the exactest
rules of an impartial justice, with that presence, strength and vigor of
spirit, which dangers do not terrify, nor any sufferings or indignities
discompose, nor the cross determinations of the all-ruling Providence cast into
the weak impatience of a mean despondency or abjection of mind.

And then when we consider what you all have seen, and your own eyes or ears
can witness from his own Declaration, April 4/14 1660
how merciful he is to his enemies, how pitiful and compassionate, as well to
the follies and provocations, as to the necessities and sufferings of his
seduced people, it must needs be said of us as of some persons, like our
selves, ignorant of their own felicities, O fortunati nimium! we should be even
too happy, could we but understand it. The truth whereof will, I doubt not,
through Gods blessing ere long become so evident, that albeit there be scarce
faith to be found in the earth, it will yet be eminently and most fully
verified even to the shame and conviction of the most incredulous.

For my own part, I shall only add at present, that I have not spoken all this
by hearsay, and can therefore the more easily believe, that it will soon be
found to be no flattery: should a person coming from far, as the Queen of Sheba
did, say also to him, as she did there to Solomon, 1 King. 10.8. Happy are thy
men, happy are these thy servants that stand continually before thee, and that
hear thy wisdom! Blessed be the Lord thy God, which delighted in thee, to set
thee on the Throne of Israel! Because the Lord loved Israel for ever, therefore
made he thee King to do judgment and justice.

Which thou that art the King of Kings, by whom Kings reign, and Princes decree
Justice, grant that he may constantly perform; and that we his Subjects, du^ly
considering whose Authority he has, may faithfully serve, honor, and humbly
obey him, in thee and for thee, according to thy blessed Word and Ordinance,
who with thee and the Holy Ghost lives and reigns ever one God world without
end. Amen.

THE END.

