A brief ANSWER TO OBJECTIONS Of all sorts, against PRESBYTERIAN CHVRCHES and
their GOVERNMENT.

1 Pet. 3, 15, 16. But sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, and be ready
always to give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of the hope
that is in you, with meekness and fear:

Having a good Conscience, that whereas they speak evil of you, as of evil
doers, they may be ashamed that falsely accuse your good conversation in Christ.

London, Printed by Francis Leach. Anno Dom. 1650.

An Answer to Objections of all sorts against Presbyterial Churches and their
Government.
IN former times the Prelaticall party troubled our Church with a false
Government, but now in their stead is risen up an increase of sinful men, who
will have no Government at all, but combine together against all that are for
it, like Gebal, Amon, Amaleck, and the Philistines, with them of Tire, helping
the Children of Lot to root out the name of Israel, that it be no more had in
remembrance, Psalm 83. and all these take advantage upon the late Act of
Parliament Entitled an Act for relief of Religious and peaceable people, from
the rigor of former Acts of Parliaments, in matters of Religion, by which all
those penal Statutes are repealed, that bound all sorts of People to frequent
our public Assemblies, in the worship of God.

Objection But those former Acts of Parliament which are now repealed, only
required our assembling at the time of Divine Service.

Ans. It is true; but then that which was Divine Service in show and not in
truth was abolished out of our Churches before this Act came forth, together
with the Service Book also, and that which is truly Divine Service is still
remaining, which is preaching, reading, and expounding the word of God, also
catechizing, singing of Psalms, prayer, and Administration of both Sacraments,
now to the neglect of those duties, the penalties of these Statutes did of
right belong, and these people being sensible of it desired freedom, and that
without danger of Law.

Objection, But those duties are maintained in our select Congregations, which
are as true Churches, as those particular Presbyterian Congregations.

Ans. To acknowledge those Divine ordinances to be in our Churches, and yet to
separate from them, show plainly that their practice is sedition, and their
Assemblies to be but so many Conventicles against the true Churches of Jesus
Christ. 2. Independent Assemblies are not as branches of other fixed Churches,
because they are Independent; for can that be a branch of the tree that was
never fastened to it, nor received any sap or moisture from it? or can that be
a member of the body that was never of it, but altogether Independent? 3. the
Creatours and founders of those Assemblies we know, yea any man that can but
get to himself a company of followers, he may soon create to himself such a
Church, although he steal to himself a flock out of the folds of other
Shepherds, as seducers use to do, Acts 20.30.4. They deny Classes and Synods
which would be as sinnews to the Body, and as mortar to the building to sement
the Churches together, and although they will ask counsel of other Churches,
they deny all power to determine any thing for particular Churches, so that
their meeting for counsel and advice, can do them no more good, than that head
or body can do to the fingers and toes, when the arms and legs are cut off that
should fasten them to the body. 5. These Church gatherers are not like to the
Apostles who gathered Disciples from without among heathens, and not from the
folds of other shepherds. 2. They gathered them all into that one universal
Church, but these to themselves, which would have been sedition in all nations.
3. They took nothing for their pains, but these take money of the poorest
servant, and such as cannot contribute to them shall not be admitted. 6. These
Church-gatherers are not like those fixed Officers, as Pastors and Elders,
placed by the Apostles in every Church, Acts 14.25. for these are not contented
with that flock, nor with the maintenance thereof allotted to them as their
Predecessors were before them, but seek for members out of other Churches to
make it up. 2. These men for the most part have not those qualifications
required for that office, having not the gifts of tongues, I mean those
original languages in which the Scripture was first written, neither mediately
taught them in Schools, nor by immediate inspiration. 3. These Church-gatherers
have no lawful Ordination by the hands of the Presbytery, as all the
Ministers of the Gospel have, 1 Timothy 4.14. therefore they are no true
Churches; But now Presbyterian Churches are rightly descended, as branches and
Members of the first fixed Churches, and they also as members of the universal
visible Church, instituted by Jesus Christ; I call this Church universal,
because it is not confined to any place, only it shall be built upon that rock
Jesus Christ, Mat. 16.18. who will be with his people in all ages and places,
Mat. 28.20. to him be glory in the Church throughout all ages world without
end, Ephesians. 3.21. Now this Church so promised to be built cannot be meant that
part of it in heaven, called the Church of the first born, where the souls of
the just are made perfect, Heb. 12.23. for that was not then to build, but was
prepared from the foundation of the world, Mat. 25.34. whose maker and builder
is God, Heb. 11.10. neither was that the invisible Church so loved and
sanctified by Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 5.25. because the Apostles are the builders of
it, for says Paul, I as a wise master builder have laid the foundation which
is Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3.9, 10. and this foundation was to be laid in all
nations, Mat. 28.19. and in this Church were all the Ministers of the Gospel
placed, 1 Cor. 12.28. and unto this Church were all Christians when converted
from heathens and Infidells admitted; Acts 2, 41, 47.

Now the builders of this universal visible Church being sent into all nations
to build it, where they saw the word of grace most effectual there they
tarried longest, being first at Jerusalem, and there multitudes were converted
by the Apostles, and the Seventy and others, hereupon they were called the
Church at Jerusalem Acts 22. now all the Apostles and extraordinary prophets so
wrought together as a common Presbytery, for the good of the whole multitude,
and none of them gathering to himself a Church, but seeking all to enlarge that
one Church, now when all Jerusalem, and all Judea, and round about Jordan, were
all baptized of John, Mat. 3.56. and so converted to the Christian faith, then
this Church branched it self out into Churches in Judea and Galite, and
Samaria, acts 9.31. 1 These. 2.2.14. and the Apostles ordained Elders being
fixed officers, and divided to every one his congregation, ordaining Elders in
every Church, acts 14.23. and thus Paul left Tytus to ordain Elders fixed and
confined to every City, Titus 15. which is in Scripture Language every town or
viilage, the town of Bethlehem, John 7.42. being little, Mich. 5.2. yet called
the City of David, Luke 2.4. the towns of Iair threescore Cities, Joshua 13.3^.
and Judges 10.4. thirty Cities, in the margent villages; now if our Antagonists
did but observe those things, they would be content with those Churches, which
were so confined, and so allotted to them and their Predecessors, yea even by
the Apostles themselves, as all those Elders were which they placed in every
Church The next mother Church was that at Antioch, so called, Acts 11.26.
having some Apostles, and many extraordinary prophets in it, Acts 13.1. which
came from Jerusalem, Acts 11.27, and there they also tarried, and many
Christians were converted; yea they were first called Christians at Autioch, v.
16. Now this Church did as that at Jerusalem, branch it self out into the
Churches of Syria and Cilicia, Acts 15.23.41. and those Churches were all
governed by those Ministers at Antioch who came together as all concerned in
the same business, when seducers would have broached errors amongst them, Acts
15.1, 2. neither did they rest there, in regard they could not there determine
it, but appealed to the Synod at Jerusalem, made up of fixed Officers, confined
to their particular congregations, yet those Elders with the Apostles came
together about that question, Acts 15.6. and so being determined by them, all
those Churches were established in the faith, and increased in number daily,
not only of Christians, but of Churches, Acts 16.5. and all as branches of
that Church at Antioch, depending still upon it, and having recourse to it upon
all weighty occasions.

And the next example, are those Churches of Asia, every Church there branching
it self out into Churches, and every Church there containing Churches was
governed by one common Presbytery; for the Angel of every Church is blamed for
all things amiss in all those Churches contained in it; now this Angel must
either be an Archbishop over all those Churches contained in it, or else a
Presbytery charged with those Churches: but it was not an Archbishop, for
says Christ to his Ministers, Kings of the Earth exercise Lordship over their
brethren, but it shall not be so among you, Luk 22.25, 26. Again, all the
Elders in Ephesus are charged to watch and feed that Flock, containing many
Churches, Acts, 20.21. and they all as branches of that one Church so governed.

And thus it was of old, the Lord brought a Vine out of Egypt, called the
Church in the Wilderness, Acts 7.38. This Vine the Lord planted in Canaan, and
it spread out her boughs to the Sea, and her branches to the River, and filled
the Land, Psalm. 80. And so that Congregation mentioned Psalm. 74.2. brancht it
self out into Congregations, ver. 4. having Synagogues in every City, where the
Law of Moses was read every Sabbath day, Acts 15.21. yea Christ and his
Apostles did frequently preach in their Synagogues, Luke 4.16. Acts 17.1, 2.
and also blame those that forsake this Assembling, as the manner of some was,
Heb. 10.25. this is the true descent and dependency of Presbyterian Churches.

Obj. But your Churches are descended from Antichrist, for Austin the Monk
being sent into England by the Pope, brought hither your religion, and from him
your Ministers had their ordination, and shall be destroyed together.

Answ. The Christian Religion came from Christ, and not from Antichrist, and
also our Ministers ordination, for Christ ordained 12. and sent them out to
preach, Mark 3.14. and they had power from him to ordain Elders in every
Church, Acts. 14.23. and they left the same power with other Ministers to
ordain Elders in every City, Titus 15. and thus they did successively to this
day, and although this Ordinance passed under Antichrist who sits in the Temple
of God, and received some defilement, yet not so as to nullify it, but if this
Monk or Popish Bishop, shall renounce popery, and all their usurpation and
engagements to that strumpet, and preach the word of God truly, and to one
flock, I think they may be accounted still lawful Minsters, and need no other
ordination to admit them into the Ministry, nor their people no other
re-baptizing to admit them into our Church; but secondly, suppose the Pope and
that Monk to be enemies to the true Church, yet Christ sometimes makes use of
his enemies to do service for his Church, as the King of Assiria did though he
thought not so, Isa 10.7. says Joseph, you thought evil, but God meant it to
good, to save much people alive. Genesis 50.20. The wrath of man shall praise him,
and the remainder he will restrain, Psa. 76.10. by the persecution at Jerusalem
the Gospel was spread into all Nations Acts 11.19. yea the Devil himself by the
treason of Judas, did accidentally forward our redemption by Christ, who rules
in the midst of his enemies, Psalm. 110, 2. Balaams prophecy, nor the
prophecy of Caiphes the High Priest, must not be despised because they came
from them, nor what is of Christ in the hand of a Monk, but 3dly. I shall prove
that the Christian Faith was in Britain, before either Antichrist was in being,
or Austin the Monk came hither, for says Mr. Fox in his Epistle to the
universal Church, prefixed before his first volume to his Acts and Monuments,
the heathen Emperors of Rome sought to destroy the Church of Christ, and their
Persecution continued the space of 300 years (Now mark) in all this time God
raised up in this Realm of Britain diverse worthy Preachers, and lest we should
doubt the truth of it, he sets down some of their names as Elnanus, Medvinus,
Mettivianus, Amphibolus, Alba^us, Aaron, Julius and others, in which time the
Doctrine of faith, without men's traditions, was sincerely preached, even before
the Man of sin was revealed, yea before the Empire which let was taken
away, 2. These. 2, 3. to 9. and after their death and Martyrdom, the Church
having peace, increased in Britain and was governed by Christian doctrine, a
long season by Fistidius, Mujanus, Parrynus, Bcchia^us, Dubxinus, Congellus,
Kentigernus, Helmodus, David, Daniel, Samoson, Ellnadogus, Asaphus, Gildus,
Hentanus, Ellbodus, Dinathus, Samuel, Novius, and many more a long season,
although the Civil Governors were careless, as Gildas sharply lays to their
charge, and so at length were subdued by the Saxons; now all this while about
the space of 400 years, Religion remained in Britain incorrupt, and the word of
Christ was truly preached, till about the coming of Austin and his Companions
from Rome, or as Cambden says from the Pope, who was not then in being, nor
him that leteth taken away, for the Bishop of Rome calls King Lucius the Prince
of Bishops, and Mr. Fox page 11. says the word Pope signifying Father was
frequently given to all Bishops, as to Augustine, Hierome, Epiphanius,
Athanasius, and Cyprian the Bishop of Carthage, yea to mean Bishops, for all
were of equal authority, till the Council of Nice held in the Year 340. where
they made four Patriarks, or Metropolitans, the Bishop of Rome, the Bishop of
Alexandria, the Bishop of Antioch, the Bishop of Jerusalem, and after that the
Bishop of Constantinople instead of the Bishop of Antioch, yet none of them
universal, till Pope Silvester claimed this title in the year 670. and after
him Hildebrand. Gregory the seventh added the Temporal power, caused the Sword
to be carried before him; see page 2. all which might suffice to show that
Britain had not received the Christian faith from either Pope or Monk, and yet
the true Christian faith; for we have all the properties of a true Church, we
have the word of God truly taught, and the Sacraments truly administered, and
prayer put up in the name of Jesus Christ, by those that are lawfully called
into the Ministry, and our people yielding true obedience to those truths,
taught and prayed for, now although for sin God may remove our Candlestick, yet
the gates of Hell shall never prevail to destroy such a Church, Mat. 16.18.
for God will have glory in the Church by Jesus Christ throughout all ages world
without end, Eohe. 3.21. and Christ will be with his Ministry to the end of
the world, Mat 28.20. he holds the Stars in his Right hand, Rev. 1.16. and what
is done to them he will take as done to himself, and his Ordinances shall
continue, for Christ will be with his Ministers, teaching and baptizing, to the
worlds end, and the Lords supper shall show forth the death of Christ till his
coming again, 1. Cor. 11.26. and both Ministry and Ordinances are placed in the
Church for the perfecting of the Saints, til they come to a complete man in the
knowledge of the Son of God, Ephesians. 4.12.13. which is not attained in this world,
for here we know but in part, but then shall we know even as we are knnown, 1
Co. 13.12. therefore our Churches are from Jesus Christ, and not from
Antichrist, neither shall they be destroyed.

Object. But since your first receiving the Christian says, England has put
themselves under the yoke of Antichrist, for all Christian Kings had given
their power to the Beast, Rev. 17 12.17.

Ans. It is true, that all these Kings gave their State-power to the Beast, but
the Churches power was not theirs to give, neither did the Church give their
power to the Beast, for she had always some to witness against Antichrist all
the time of this Reign, Rev. 11.3. yea the Ordinance of Baptism, and
Ordination of Ministers, the one to solemnize the admittance into the Church,
and the other into the Ministry, was never taken out of the Christian Church,
no not out of Rrme it self, for Antichrist sits in the Temple of God: 2. These.
2.4. so then it is not the want of these Ordinances, but the abuse of them that
makes Rome Antichrist; neither does the having of these Ordinances make Rome a
true Church, for Samaria had Circumcision, and Rome has Baptism, yet Samaria
was not the Jewish Church, no more is Apostate Rome the Christian Church; for
although their ministers are admitted into the ministry by Ordination, and the
people into the Christian Church by Baptism, yet they will neither teach the
Covenant of grace, nor the people yield obedience to it; the which if they did,
I suppose their Ministers need no other Ordination into the Ministry, nor the
people no other Baptism to admit them into the Christian Church.

Obj. But you give such names to the material places of public worship, as
properly belongs to Gods People, as the Church, the house of God, and the
Temple, which is superstition.

Ans. It is true that Gods people are called the Church, but it is as true that
the place appointed or set apart for the Worship of God is called the Church,
for says Paul, When you come together in the Church, or have you not houses to
eat and drink in, or despise ye the Church of God, 1. Cor. 11.19.21..
Secondly, this place of public worship in the Kingdom of Grace, is a type of
that place of eternal worship, called the Church of the firstborn, Heb.
12.23. Therefore the type may be called the Church, as well as the Antitype;
and Gods people are as lively stones built up into a spiritual house, 1. Pet.
2.5. which house are we: Heb. 3.6. but it is as true that the place of Gods
worship is called the house of God; for says David, they take the houses of
God in possession, Psa. 83.12. Is it time to dwell in your sealed houses, and
my house lie wast, Hag. 1.4 My house, says Christ, shall be called a house of
Prayer, Mat. 21.3. take these things hence, and make not my Fathers house a
house of Merchandise, John 2.16. and when this earthly house of Gods Worship is
dissolved: we shall have an house not made with hands, 1. Cor. 5.1.

And Gods people being together in the worship of God, grow unto an holy Temple
in the Lord, Ephe. 2.21. but it is as true, that the peace of Gods worship is
called the Temple, for Peter and John went into the Temple, at the hour of
prayer, being the ninth hour, Acts 3 1. The messenger of the Covenant shall
come into his Temple, Mal. 3.1. This was fulfilled when Christ disputed in the
Temple, Luke 2.46. and when he drove out the buyers and sellers, John 2.15. And
when he preached in the Temple, Luke 19.47. John 18.20.

Again, them of all Religions do highly esteem of the place set apart for the
Worship of their Gods, giving them the like honorable names, as Dagons house,
the house of Baal, and the Temple of Diana, Acts 19.27. the Idol Temple, and
also Churches, for, says the town Clerk, these men are no robters of Churches,
nor yet blasphemers of your Gods, Acts 19.37. then why should not we say with
David, Lord I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where thy
Honor dwells? Psalm. 26.8.

Again, what is set apart for holy uses, is called holy, as holy Sabbath, Nehe
9.14. holy Law, Romans 7.12. holy place in Heaven, Psalm. 24.3. and holy place on
Earth, Exodus 28.43. Mas. 24.15. and holy Temple. Jonah 2.4.

Yea, where God did but manifest his presence, holy ground, Exo. 3.15. the
Tabernacles, altars, and all the Vessels holy, Exodus 40.4.10. and all that
administer them, and their garments holy, Exodus 29.21. and their offerings
holy, the Paschall Lamb, and the Lamb of Consecration holy, Exodus 29.34. and
the people holy, Deuteronomy. 7.6. and all these not by infusing the grace of
holiness, but only set apart for holy uses, so then every man may not
administer those holy things but only such as are set apart to do it; and
secondly we ought to preserve that holiness of separation of all things so set
apart for holy uses. Thirdly, and this may show us the horrible sin of those
that cast aspersions, either upon the Ministry, the Sabbath, the Ordinances, or
place of Gods Worship: and chiefly in those that make it a place of gaming and
drinking, buying and selling; what? have you not houses to eat and drink in; 1.
Cor. 11.22. and has not Christ whipped them out, John 2.15, 16. then how dare
they presume to do so again? but most abominable is it in those that pull
down the Pulpit, and Pewes, to make stables for Horses, and their dunghill at
the door? do these men take heed to their feet when they go into the Temple of
God, Eccle. 5.1. and reverence the Sanctuary, Lev. 19.30. certainly this is the
abomination of desolation in the holy place, Man. 24.15. these men do not
desire to be a dore-keeper in the house of the Lord, rather then the Tents of
the wicked, Psalm. 84.10. these men are not glad when they are invited to the
house of the Lord, as David was, Psalm. 122.1. neither are they grieved that
they cannot go with the multitude of those that keep Holy day, Psa. 42.4.
neither are they grieved to see the Heathen enter into the Sanctuary and
violently destroy the places of the Assembly, Lam. 1.10.26. nay, they are not
sensible how that fire is cast into the Sanctuary, which is like to burn up all
the Synagogues of God in the Land, Psa. 74.7, 8. if the Lord in mercy prevent
it not.

But those places for public Worship were built by Papists for Idolatry, and
God has commanded to destroy the places of Idolatry; Deuteronomy. 12.2.

Ans. First, it cannot be proved that our Churches were built by Papists for
Idolatry; for we had the Christian faith before Antichrist was in being,
therefore the places of public Worship also. Secondly, that command was to
destroy all the inhabitants, with their houses, goods and cattle, yea every
thing that breathed, as well as the places of Idolatry, Deuteronomy.
13.15.16.20.16.17. which may teach us to loath the sin, but not to punish so
severely, without a special command as they had, which did not reach to other
people, Deuteronomy 20.10. Secondly, that command was to destroy their name also,
Deuteronomy. 12.3. but many Saints in the Apostles days were called after the names
of their Idols, Romans 16.1.14. Phil. 2.15. Titus 3.13.1. cor. 16.17. yet they
did not destroy them, nor change their names. Thirdly, meat sacrificed to Idols
was as much polluted as the place, yet the meat may be eaten, asking no
question for Conscience sake, 1 Cor. 10.25, 26, 27. then why should the place
be destroyed? Fourthly, God commanded to destroy the remainder of the Paschall
Lamb, Ex^. 12.10. and the remainder of the Pan and Bread of Consecration, Ex.
29.34. which may teach us to prize our Sacraments, yet not to burn the
remainder of bread and wine after administration of the Lords supper. Fifthly,
the Jews were bound to sacrifice in one place, but now difference of place is
taken away, John 4.21. neither did Paul destroy the schole of Tyrannus,
although a place of Idolatry and superstition, Acts 19.9.10. but preached the
Gospel there two years together with great success.

But you employ these places to superstitious singing of Psalms, which was only
for singers appointed in the Temple of the Jews.

Answ. It is foretold, that in the times of the Gospel they shall break forth
into singing together Isa. 52.9. Secondly, the Lord has commanded all Lands to
serve him with gladness, and come before his presence with singing, and into
his Gates with thanksgiving, and into his Courts with praise, Psalm. 100.2.4.
Thirdly, the Church as an Ecce to that command says, O come let us sing unto
the Lord, let us make a joyful noise to the rock of our salvation, let us come
before his presence with thanksgiving, and make a joyful noise unto him with
Psalms, Psalm. 95.1, 2. Fourthly, the same parties that are here called upon to
hear his voice and to kneel before him in prayer, are called upon to make a
joyful noise unto him with Psalms, and also the same parties that did partake
at the Lords table with Christ did sing an Hymn, or a Psalm in the margent,
Mat. 26.30. therefore singing of Psalm, is an Ordinance of God in the church,
and ought to be read that all may sing with the spirit, and with understanding
also, 1. Cor. 14.15.

But your Parish Congregations were so bounded, either by Magistrates, or by
the Prelates, therefore not to be joined with, in the public worship of God.

Answ. If particular Churches had no bounds, they could not congregate
together, as they are commanded Deuteronomy. 31.12. and as they frequently did in the
new testament. Secondly, it would be a punishment, as bad as casting out, to be
bound to Congregate some scores of miles from their dwellings. Thirdly, there
was bounds set to Congregations in the Apostles days, and that was to every
Church, in every Town or village, as was showed before, yea they were confined
to a Sabbath days journey, Acts 1.2. that is so far as they might partake of
the ordinances publicly in the Congregation, and perform private duties at home
the same day.

But although the Jews had their Synagogues in every City for public worship,
will it follow, that Christians must be, so bounded now all difference of place
is taken away?

Ans. Christian Magistrates as well as Jewish Magistrates, are required to
compel all to come to the public worship of God, Lu. 14.23. but they may not
compel the people to things impossible. 2. Magistrates now are nursing fathers
to the Christian churchs; therefore they ought to remove all inconveniences from
the public worship of God. 3. Church Officers are required to feed the Flock,
and take care of the Flock, and to be examples to the Fiock, 1. Pet. 5.2.3.
Pro. 27.23. Acts 20.28. but they could not do these duties to them that live
many miles assunder, so likewise many duties of the Members, one to another
could not be performed, such as mutual love, and holy conferrence tending to
edification and works of mercy, which could not be, if particular Churches had
no bounds.

Objection, But your Parish congregations do unavoidably admit of a mixed
multitude to to partake in the public worship of God.

Ans. The like and much worse is committed in those gathered congregations
being for the most part admitted more for money than for fitness, as may
easily be proved, 2. In all reason both the Officers and Members, yea and
Magistrates also by their Laws can better reform what is amiss both in Church
and State amongst those that dwell near to them, than they can those that live
many miles distant from them. 3. Presbyterian Churches, if once they were
erected their officers being appointed for it, would keep the Ordinances of
Christ from pollution. 4. Presbyterians do receive none to the Lords Table
without examination, and if any be unworthy it was the Prelates fault and not
theirs, therefore this slander may more be retorted from whence it came.

Ob. But if to live in one of your Parishes will make a man a member of your
Church, then a Turk may take a house in your Parish, and immediately be a
Member of your Church.

Ans. It will not follow, for he must be first baptized, and so admitted into
the universal visible Church, which includes all particular congregations, and
gives him a right to partake in all public Ordinances, in case his knowledge
and life be approved of by the Eldership without any rebaptising, or any other
covenant engaging whatsover, but this Privilege no Turk can have by living in
one of our Parishes, let him have never so much knowledge, or holiness, till
he he sealed his professed obedience to to the Covenant of grace by Baptism.

Obj. But you stand so much upon Baptism, so that if a man be but baptized,
though never so profane, you hold him still to be a member of your Church,

Ans. It is true, for so he is, until for his misdemeanour he be judicially
cut off, yea he is still a member; while he is under the spiritual Physicians
hands, although by suspension he is disabled for the present to act as a
member, as as man sick in his body or in prison cannot use his freedom of the
City, yet he ia a freeman still for all that, therefore the Church officers
ought to take care of their patient and comfort him, lest Satan get advantage,
and the man be swallrwed up of overmuch sorrow, 2 Cor. 2.7.11. 2 These 3.15,

Ob. But more is required to make members of a Church than Baptism to seal
their professed obedience to the covenant of grace, and the approbation of the
Eldership to partake of the Lords Table, for they must engage themselves to
each other to walk in all the ways of God.

Ans. The covenant of grace being sealed by Baptism, is sufficient to bind
them to walk in all the ways of God. 2. This professed obedience to that
covenant is the only form of all Christian Churches. 3s That bond lies on all
that have sealed that covenant for ever. 4. To make any other engagement than
what Christ has made for admission into the Church, is the direct mark of the
beast, Revel. 13.16, 17.

Ob. But King Asa and the people entered into a Covenant to seek the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 15.1. and the Priests and Levites sealed such a Covenant, Nehemiah 3.38
and its foretold that in the times of the Gospel, men shall bind themselves in
a perpetual Covenant, Ier. 50.5. and Paul was not suffered to join himself
with the Disciples till his engagement, Acts 9.26.27.30.

Ans. 1. Concerning Paul the Disciples, imposed no engagement on him at all,
only Barnabas declared his conversion, and how he preached boldly at Damascus
in the name of the Lord Jesus, and how he was with them at Jerusalem, and how
he had disputed against the Grecians who went about to kill him; now when they
knew this by Barnabas, they brought him down to Cesarea, and fent him on their
business to Tarsus, only upon that report of Barnabas, without any of his
engagement to them; and for those other Covenants they were not for admission
of those without the Church to bring them in, but of those already in it, to
walk more closely with God, according to the Covenant of grace, which they had
sealed before at their Circumsion, and often renewed at the Passover, and for
that Prophecy to bind themselves in a perpetual Covenant is either meant of
those without that shall come in, and seal the Covenant of grace, or else it is
no more, but that Christians should do as the Jews did before them, that is to
bind themselves to walk more closely with with God, which was done both at our
Protestation, and at our solemn League and Covenant, yet these men reproach
our Church and Ministry in which and by whom they say they will be converted.

But is your Presbyteriall Government of Divine institution?

Ans. Yes, for God has set in his Church Governments, 1 Cor. 12.28. yea all
the three persons in Trinity had a hand in it, the father sends forth laborers
into the Harvest, Mat. 9.38. and the Son gave some to be Apostles, some
Pastors and teachers, Ephesians. 4.11. and the holy Ghost made them overseeers,
Acts 20.28. and the Elders of Ephesus were those overseers, ver. 17. for the
Apostles ordained Elders in every Church, Acts 14.23. and after their decease,
they left others to ordain in every City or Church, Titus 15. now these Elders
were of two sorts, first such as were both rulers and teachers, for says Paul
obey them that have the rule over you, who also speak unto you the word of God,
Heb. 13.7, 17. those Bishops or overseers must be apt also to teach, 1 Timothy
3.2, and there is also another sort of Elders which only are rulers, but do
not labor in the word and Doctrine, and if they rule well are worthy of double
honor, but more especially they that also both rule well and labor in the
word and Doctrine, 1 Timothy 5.17, now both these have rule over the Saints, Heb.
13.24. and worthy of this honor if they rule well, Rom 12.8.

But shall the Eldership judge, and determine of all matters in the
congregation?

Ans. Yes they are to judge of all matters, unless in case of appeals to
Classes and Synods; first, because the Elders are charged to watch and keep the
flock from the danger of wolves, Acts 20.28, 29, 30. 1. Pet. 5.13: 2. The stock
for the poor is to be put into the hands of the Eldership, Acts 11, 29, 30. 3.
The Keys of the Church are to be committed to them for binding and loosing,
Mat. 16.19. John 20.23. 4. All controversies in the Church are to be decided by
them, for if brethren cannot do it, then says Christ, tell the Church, Mat.
16.17, 18.

But shall the Eldership judge and determine who are fit to partake at the
Lords Table, and keep them back who are not fit to partake of that Ordinance?

Ans. Yes, for if they are to judge of all matters, then of this also. 2. Some
were charged to keep the door in the time of Administration. 1 Chronicles. 26.12.
to 19. and some had the charge of the holy place, 2 Chronicles. 23.32.3. Some were
blamed for not putting a difference between the holy and profane, Ezekiel
22.26.4. The younger sort have in all ages and Churches been examined, and
catechized, before admittance to the Lords table, that they may offer unto the
Lord a pure offering. Mal. 1.11.

But after admittance to the Lords table shall any be deferred from that
Ordinance before any crime is laid to his charge, or proved against him?

Ans. No, for it were unjust to punish a man before he be proved to be guilty
of some offense deserving that punishment. Secondly, it would rend the Church
in pieces to suspend any communicants before they be charged with any offense
deserving i.t If the Eldership shall suspend both the godly and ungodly before
they be charged with any offense, and proceed to make a new admittance of those
already admitted, the succeeding Eldership might do the like to those that
they have admitted, and so do and undo for ever. Fourthly, this would be a
gathering Communicants out of Communicants, as bad as to gather a Church out of
a Church, which is mere sedition. Fifthly, to subpend all the Communicants at
their first sitting, under pretense to purge that Ordinance is the direct way
to destroy it, because no account can be given from what fellowship they are
all suspended, nor unto what fellowship they shall be admitted, in case their
answers be approved, having no more Members left. Lastly, this would be
miserable ingratitude to them, that in love choose them for their Elderships.

But those admitted in the Prelates time, was under a false Governmet, having
no Elderships then erected, the Pastor doing it alone, either without no
examination, or else very slightly, therefore that was no lawful admittance.

Ans. Our Pastors? were then lawful Presbyters, having a lawful call into the
Ministry, yea if the Prelates would lay down their usurpation over their
brethren, and betake themselves to feed one flock, they also are lawful
Ministers having their Ordination by the Presbytery, yea in case of necessity,
before the Eldership be erected, one minister may ordain another, thus Luther
coming out of Rome might ordain other Ministers, so before there was any
Eldership in Crete, Paul says I left Titus there to ordain Elders in every
city, Titus 15. yea before the Eldership was erected, the Apostles did the
office of ruling Elders and Deacons, receiving and keeping the treasure of the
Church, and distributing to every man according to his need, Acts 4.35. yet not
so when those other officers were chosen, Acts 6 2, 3.4, 5.11.3. as also the
Pastor is both a teaching and a ruling Elder, therefore those admitted by him
at that time was sufficient, and to say it was done slightly, the like may be
said of what is done by the present Eldership by those that shall succeed them.
2. I would know what examination those three thousand had which were admitted
immediately after the hearing of Peter's Sermon to both Sacraments, Acts 2.41,
42 shall we cavil at them because it was done before the Eldership was
erected? 3. The Communicants tenddring themselves to their examination, ought
not to be punished for their Pastors neglect. 4. Their godly life may satisfy
for that slight admittance. Lastly other Presbyterian churches will admit those
that have been commulnicants in other Churches, only upon a certificate from
thence, and shall not we do so to those whom we and many hundreds more were eye
witnesses that they were communicants, and as yet never any thing laid to their
charge?

But Church Officers ought to know the state of their flock, Prove. 27.23. and
as faithful Stewards give them no hurtful thing, therefore they had need
again to examine them before admission.

Ans. It is true they ought to know the state of their flock by visiting them
from house to house, as in the Primitive church Acts 20.20. but this is not
done at once by propounding to them two or three questions 2. If former
admittance be not sufficient, unles an exact knowledge of them, then by the
same rule their succeeding Minister must also refuse to dispense that Ordinance
till he has the like exact knowledge of them. 3. by this argument the death or
removal of their Pastor or any of their Eldership, would prove an
Excommunication of all the Congregation till that exact knowledge be obtained
by them that succeed. 4. It is not the Pastors fault if the ordinance prove
hurtful to them that have not saving grace, it being wholesome food, and
dispensed to those formerly admitted, and therefore have a true outward right
unto it, and the inward is perfectly known to none but God and their own souls,
hence I conclude that those formerly admitted, and as yet never charged with
any crime, upon the reprofession to be faithful to their former Principles, may
still partake at the Lords Table without any further examination or any new
admittance.

But Church officers are not only commanded to prepare themselves, but their
brethren, to keep the Passover, 2 Chronicles. 35.6. therefore they ought again to
be examined, and so admitted.

Ans. That Text does only charge the Priests to prepare their brethren the
Levites to be ready to kill the Passover; and besides I speak of those already
prepared and formerly admitted, that they should not be suspended before they
be justly charged with some offense.

But it is no suspension to admit them upon the goodness of their answer.

Ans. It is directly as they would deal with a Jew or a Turk, for upon the
goodness of their answer, and unblameablenesse of their lives, they shall be
admitted to both Sacraments, and no otherwise shall this man being a Christian
and a Churchmember, and formerly admitted to the Lords Table, and as yet not
charged with any offense whereby to cast him out.

But they ought to answer every man that shall ask them a reason of their
faith, much more to the Eldership, 1 Per. 3.15, 16. and he that cannot give
such an answer, although formerly admitted in the time of the Prelates, ought
not still to partake being found ignorant.

Ans. It is not said, answer every man, but be in readiness to do it, for
every man has not power to demand an account of our faith. 2. This account
has been already given, or at least tendered, when they were first admitted 3.
From this Text we are not to do it, unless we will, till they speak evil of
us as of evil doers, and falsely accuse our good conversation in Christ, and
then also before those that have power and authority to demand an account of
our faith; and if scorners demand it, cast no pearls before swine, reprove not
a scorner lest he hate thee, Pro. 3.8. If railing Rabshakah shall ask why they
trust in the Lord, answer him not a word, Isa 36.20, 21. 4. If the Elders in
their visitation find them ignorant, they ought rather to instruct them, than
to accuse and suspend them, lest they make others think that they come rather
to accuse than to edify, to cut off rather than to heal a member. 5. To accuse
and suspend those they find ignorant after admission, would make the Eldership
contemned, and then what good can they do? 6. The most exactest Eldership may
be overseen to admit some that are igonrant in some things, although they may
answer well in others. 7. The best Christian under heaven is not at all times
ready to give a direct answer to all points in Religion. 8. The Apostles
themselves were ignorant of some fundamental points of religion when they did
receive the Sacrament with Jesus Christ, as of his death, resurrection and
ascensior; Lastly this Text requires an account of hope, but faith is of a
larger extent, Thus I believe, that man at the first was made in the image of
God, righteous and holy, and had then sweet communion with God, but by sin he
lost that image of God, and that Communion also, and brought upon himself the
curse and wrath of God, and the condemning power of the Law, and all miseries
upon body and soul, name and state, in this world, and those unsufferable
everlasting torments in hell; and I believe that all the creatures in heaven
and earth are not able to deliver us out of this condition; and I believe that
the greatest part of mankind are reprobates, and shall unavoidably suffer these
torments; now this is part of the account of our faith, yet no account at all
of our hope: so likewise I believe that Jesus Christ the Son of God was
conceived by the holy Ghost, born of the virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius
Pilate, was dead and buried, and the third day he arose from the dead, and
ascended into heaven, now to put hope in this place, that Christ would do those
things, would destroy our faith, so dangerous it is to the Eldership to require
an account of faith from unblameable communicants to debar them from the
Lords Table, till they have from them a second admission from this Text.

But Paul says, let a man examine himself, and so let him eat, now he will do
it partially, if left to himself, neither does this Text exclude the Eldership.

Ans. I am speaking of those examined already, or at least tendered themselves
to it when they were admitted. 2. That self examination is of the heart,
whether Christ be in them, see 2 Cor. 13.5. which none but themselves can do.
3. If this Text include the Eldership, they must examine them every time they
come to that Ordinance. 4. The Eldership is only to examine those that are not
Communicants, that they may be Communicants unless some great sin be laid to
their Charge, which if proved may justly debar them from that Ordinance, till
reformation and satisfaction to the Church for it, now the younger sort who
never were yet at the Sacrament, will more freely answer before the grave
Eldership, than before all the Congregation, and so will those that are cast
out, that they may be admitted.

But is it sufficient for the teaching Elder to sow the seed of sound Doctrine,
and then to look no further after the growth of it in the hearts of his people?

Ans. No, for the Teaching Elder, and the ruling Elders together ought to visit
their flock, and to labor to remove whatsoever will hinder the growth of it,
as the husbandman does, when he has sowed the seed, who when he sees great
stones lie upon it, will remove them, or great clods, then he will break them,
or if water stand to drown it, he will let it out, or if the fence be broken,
he will make it up; even so should Church officers labor to remove all doubts
and scruples, that may hinder their growth in grace, and also defend them from
any that shall seduce them by error and profaneness, thus when Christ had
preached publicly in the Temple, John 18.20. Then privately he expounded all
things unto them, Mark 4.10, 34. yea he went into his garden to see if the vine
did flourish, or the pomgranats budded, which made the spouse immediately to be
as the Chariots of Aminadab, swift and comely, Cant. 6.11, 12. so also when
Christ had sent out his Apostles to preach, Mat. 10. he presently sent out
seventy more to confirm their Doctrine, Luke 10. so when Paul had preached to
them publicly, he then admonished them privately from house to house, Acts
20.20. yea when any of the Apostles had preached publicly, they returned to
confirm the souls of the Disciples, Acts 14 21, 22.15.41. Paul plants and
Apollo waters, 1 Cor. 3.5, 6. when Apollo went into Achaia, the brethren wrote
unto the Disciples to receive him, who when he was come helped them much that
believed through grace, Acts 18.26, 27. so should ruling Elders long to impart
unto them some spiritual gift for their mutual joy, Romans 1.11, 12

But although Christ and his Apostles did so, will it follow that the minister
and Elders ought now to do so?

Ans. Yes, for what Christ and his Apostles did publicly in the Ministry was
for other Ministers imitation, and what they did privately was for all
Christians to follow, but especially ruling Elders, who are appointed to assist
them in Church government 2. All Christians are bound to admonish one another
in the faith, Heb. 10.25. Iud. 20. much more ought ruling Elders. 3. Some ought
to warn the unruly, and to comfort the feeble minded, and support the weak. 1
These. 5.14.15. but neither equals nor inferiors can do this. 4. It is the
custom of other Churches with whom we have engaged, that the officers should
visit the flock, both for their protection and edification. 5. The Church has
many enemies, who seek to destroy it. Acts 20.29, 30. 1 Pet. 5.8. 2 Timothy 3.6.
therefore some had need to defend it, and who so fit as ruling Elders who watch
for their souls with the teaching Elder, as those that must give an account for
them? Heb. 13.7, 17. Lastly, this visiting them from house to house by mutual
conference will remove jealousy of their pride, and increase knowledge and
unity between them and the people.

But what if the Eldership shall find some who were formerly admitted to be
both profane and scandalous, shall they still partake at the Lords Table?

Ans. No, if they declare their sin as Sodom and hide it not, and their very
countenance does testify against them, Isa. 3.9. when the pride of Israel does
testify to his face, that he does not turn to the Lord his God, Hos. 7.10.5 5.
Such need no further proof, if they paint the face as Iesabel, 2 Kings 9.30,
35. or by setting such spots on them which shows they are none of Gods people,
Deur. 32.5. or by their naked breasts, or if men do as it was fasly reported of
David, shamelessely uncover themselves in the sight of Maidservants, 2 Samuel
6.20. or men hung about most vainly with ribbonds and points, or women in the
harlots habit, Prove. 7, 10. their apparel being strange to all modesty, God
will destroy such, although they be Princes children, Zephaniab 1.8.

But what if they in their visiting find some men wearing long hair, and
poundred locks, and women lay out their hair, shall such come to the Lords
table?

Ans. No, not till Reformation, for such people are so far from Grace, that
they have almost sinned out the very light of nature, for does not even nature
it self teach, that if a man have long hair, it is a shame unto him? 1. Cor.
11.14. Secondly, when men are called to fasting and prayer, they are charged to
cut off their hair, Jer. 7.29. and Job did so when he fell on the ground and
worshipped, Job 1.20. yea says Paul, judge your selves, is it comely for a
woman uncovered to join in public prayer, or prophesying, or at the Lords
Table? 1 Cor. 11.5.13.20. Thirdly, the Churches of God have no such custom,
although some will be contentious, ver. 16. and, women ought to have power over
their heads in the sight of the angells' or Ministers, ver. 10. let all things
be done decently and in order, 1 Cor 14.40. Fourthly, long hair in men is the
mark of Antichristian Locusts, foretold to be in these days, who are enemies to
Christ, for they have faces like Lions, and hair like woman, Rev. 9.7. yea they
imitate him, whose understanding and reason was departed from him, and the
heart of a beast given to him, his hair grew like Eagles Feathers, and his nails
like birds claws, Dan. 4. Fifthly, Such had rather leave the Sacrament, than
cut off their hair, which shows that they have no true desire to eat the
Passover as Christ had, Lu: 22.15. and women that so prize their hair, show
that they have not the hidden man of the heart, and that they are none of those
holy women who trust in God, being Sarahs daughters, 1 Pet. 3.3, 4, 5, 6. when
Mary was converted, she wiped the feet of Christ with her hair, Luke 7.38.
Lastly, God has punished this pride in Men, especially when Absalom shall
pretend to go pay his vows at Hebron, glorying in his long hair, was hanged by
the head that bore it, between the Earth and Heaven, 2 Samuel 15 7. 2 Samuel 18.9,
10. and women for this pride instead of well set hair, shall have boldness,
Psalm. 3.24.

But by what rule shall we measure our hair, and when is it too long?

Ans. The hair is called the hair of the head, and not the hair of the
shoulders, M^. 10.30. therefore it must be there confined; Ephraim had gray
hairs, and he knew it not, Hosea 7.9. Secondly, the face of man is his glory,
and his eyes are his guide to perform all duties to God and Man, and to avoid
evil, now if the hair cover any part of the face, it is to cast shame upon his
glory, and if it cover the eyes, it makes blind his guide, so that the man is
in danger both to fall into the evil of sin, and the evil of punishment.
Thirdly, it is most safe to be farthest from danger, now it is not short hair,
but long hair, that is both blamed and punished. Fourthly, neither imitate
erroneous nor profane persons, for the one is an Antic in his attire, and the
other tossed about with every wind of doctrine, Ephe. 4.18. both like Ruben as
unstable as water, Genesis 49.4. but mark, the Godly man his heart is fixed,
trusting in the Lord: Psalm. 112.7. and Sarie daughters will adorn their souls,
and not plate their hair, especially when they come to the Lords table.

But what if some after admittance shall be found Schismatics or Heretics
shall they still partake at the Lords table?

Ans. No, for there must be no Schism in the body, 1 Cor. 12.25. Secondly, if
an Heretic do not reform after the first and second admonition, he is to be
rejected, that is, cast out, Titus 2.29. Thirdly we have the example of John
the Baptist, who would not admit the Sects of Scribes and Pharisees to come to
his baptism, Mat. 3.8, 9. much less to the Lords Table. Fourthly, the leven
of false doctrine must be purged out, Mat. 16.12. as well as the leven of
profaneness, Cor. 5.7. 2 Cor. 2.5.6. for the one undermines the truth, and
eats it out as a Gangreen, 2 Timothy 2.17, 18. and the other like Swine tread the
holy things of God under feet, Ma. 7

But by these rules you admit some to the Lords table, which are prohibited by
the Ordinance of Parliament, and keep back others, not prohibited by those
Ordinances.

Ans. State-Officers ought not to judge and determine, what sins are most
scandalous to the Law of God and Religion, nor limit Church Officers in their
censure, any more than Church Officers ought to judge and determine what is
most offensive, as a breach of the Law of the Land, nor to limit or direct the
Judge in his censure. Secondly, for State officers thus to limit Church
Officers, is to rob them of that power that Christ has given them; which is as
bad as for Antichrist a Church Officer, who presumes to rob Princes of their
State-power, which God had given them: For as Magistrates are placed by God in
the State, and all mankind are required to yield obedience unto them; so
Church Officers are placed in the Church, and all sorts of mankind are
required to yield obedience unto them.

But have Magistrates no power in the Church?

Ans. No, their power is much about the Church, but not in it, they may command
all to hear the word of God, when truly preached, Deuteronomy. 31.12. and they may
proclaim a Fast, Jonah 3.7. 2 Chronicles. 20.3. and they may impose a Covenant to
seek the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 15.8, 9. 34.31, 32.35.10.16. and they may punish those
that refuse to obey God and the King, Ezra 7.23, 25.26. yea Kings shall be
isntrumental to destroy Antichrist, for Kings shall hate the Whore, and burn
her flesh with fire, and make her desolate, Rev. 17.16. and the Magistrate is
to be a guard to the Church, as the Shepherd to a Flock, Psa. 49.23. therefore
they ought to punish those Lions and Be ares, that would devour the Lambs and
poison the Children, Psa. 60.10, 12. Heathen Kings have made Laws to punish
those that did abuse the Idol worship, Dan. 3.24.6.26. much more ought
Christian Magistrates to punish those that abuse the worship of the true God,
and make rents in the Church of Christ; see 1 Kings 18.40.23.20. Judges 6.3.
yea says Job, Idolatry ought to be punished by the Judges, Job 31.27, 28. and
evil doers ought to be punished by the Magistrate, Romans 13.4. 1 Pet. 2.14. but
seducers are evil doers 2 John 11. and Paul appeals to Caesar where he ought
to be judged, Acts 25.10, 11. which was for sedition in the Church if they
could have proved it; for they said he was a mover of sedition, and a
ringleader of the Sect of the Nazarers, Acts 24.5, 6. but they could not prove
the things they did accuse him of, verse 13.

But what if a controversy arise in the Congregation, that the Eldership
cannot determine, shall they not appeal from the Church to the Parliament?

Ans. No, for God has provided another remedy to whom they ought to appeal,
and that is to a greater Eldership, made up also of Ministers and ruling Elders
of several Congregations, being sufficiently able to determine all
controversies, let them be what they will. As first, suppose the controversy
shall arise between the Pastor and the people, there be many Pastors and
people of other Congregations to decide it. Secondly, if the controversy shall
be between two Congregations, there be many delegates from several
Congregations to decide it. Thirdly, if half of the same Congregation shall
divide against the other half, then neither of those parties shall be their own
Judges, but it shall be referred to those that will judge impartially, being
related no more to the one than they are to the other. Fourthly, if the matter
require have, because of danger to the Church, they meet once a month, and
oftener if any occasion be^, this we call the Classical Eldership. And lastly,
in case any matter shall not here be decided, they may appeal to the
Provincial or National Synods, and there it shall be determined.

But how will it appear that there is any such Churches, so governed by Synods?

Ans. For such names it is not material, we contend not about names, but the
thing it self we shall find in Scripture; First for Provincial churches, we
find that every Church in Asia was made up of several Churches, in the second
and third Chapters of the Revelations. Now such a Church which comprehended many
Churches in it, could not be one single Congregation, made up of one Pastor and
his people; neither could these be National Churches, because at Ephesus which
was a City, Acts 18, 28.19 and at Thyatira a City, Acts 16.14. the like may be
said of Corinth, there was many Congregations 1 Cor. 1.12.3.4. and all made up
the Church at Corinth, 1 Cor. 1.2: also Corinth was a City, Acts 18.8, 10.
these were provincial Churches: Secondly, in Jerusalem were more Christians
than could congregate together, three thousand were added to that Church at one
time, Acts 2.41, 47. and five thousand at another, Acts 4.4. so that there were
many th^^and Believers in Jerusalem, Acts 21.20. yea it was said that all
Jerusalem were baptized of John in Jordan, 3.5, 6, and yet they are called the
Church at Jerusalem, Acts 11.21: which could be no other but a Provincial
Church. Thirdly, there was in Jerusalem many Ministers, theer was the 12
Apostles and the 70, and others, then what Church would this be, having above a
hundred Ministers in it, this could not be a single Congregation, neither could
it be a National Church, because at Jerusalem, the like may be said of the
Church at Antioch, there was many Prophets and some Apostles, Acts 11.26, 27.
and yet the Church at Antioch, Acts 13.4. Fourthly, all that multitude of
Christians, yea I may say all those Churches in Jerusalem, for they had Elders
chosen which are fixed Officers placed in every single Congregation, and there
confined, see Acts 14.23: yet all these Churches were governed by one common
Presbytery, which some times sat in Solomon's porch, Acts 5.12, 13. and
sometimes in other places, for Paul came to Jerusalem, and went in where the
Elders were present, Acts 21.18. and so was every Church in Asia containing
Churches governed, and they blamed for every thing that was amiss in any of
those Churches, comprehended in that Church under that Government.

Now a National Church is, that when God shall deal with any Nation as he did
with the nation of the Jews, to make them his people in Covenant and give his
Statutes, Sabbaths, and Sacraments, as he did to them Nehe. 9.13, 14, 15. Psalm.
147.19, 20. then that is a National Church, as well as that of the Jews, but
God has given England and Scotland the Book of the Covenant, and Ministers
after his own heart, to show us the meaning of it

And he has given the Sabbath day, appointed for that end, and the Sacraments,
whereby we have sealed that Covenant, and also the Lord has sealed many of us
with his spirit, therefore our Church is a national Church. 2. all our
Congregations containing the whole Nation, are fastened and semented together
as Members of one body, and as branches of one Vine, by Classes and Synods, as
all the Congregations in Israel made one Congregation, Psa. 74.2, 4. therefore
it is a National Church, for it is not confined to a City or Province, or one
Assembly under one Shepherd, but as that Vine brought out of Egypt, and
planted in Canaan, taking deep root, spread her boughs to the Sea, and her
branches to the river, and so filled the land, Psalm. 80. and so we as well as
they became a national Church. 3. It is foretold that nations shall come into
the Christian Church, Isa. 2.2.61.1. to 11.66.18. and this we see fulfilled,
for all the whole Nation are come in, and have sealed the covenant of grace by
Baptism, and all profess our selves members of this Church, and there is as
many living members in this Church, as in that national Church of the Jews.
4. The Lord has not as yet given us a Bill of Divorcement, but owns us still
for his Church, continuing his Ministers, and his Ordinances with us, and his
blessing upon them both, to convert those that are not converted, and to
strengthen those that are. We have seen thy goings O God in the Sanctuary, Psa.
68.24. Lastly these Churches have and do still own this title, the Church of
England, and the Church of Scotland; and all Christian Churches do so approve
of our Church, therefore it is a National Church.

And the universal Church, I prove thus first all the Churches of Christ have
one foundation, upon this rock will I build my Church, Mat. 16.18. and yet the
builders are sent into all Nations to build it, Mat. 28.19. and that upon this
foundation, for other foundation can no man lay, than what is laid, which is
Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3.4. which shows that the Churches in all nations make up
but this one Church. 2. Paul persecuted the Christians at Jerusalem, and at
Damacus, and in other strange Cities, Acts 26.10.11. yet all these he calls
the Church of God, Gal. 1.13. 1 Cor. 15.9. which shows that the Church is
universal. 3. Jews and Gentiles which comprehend all Nations make but one
Church, for says Paul give no offense to Jews nor Gentiles, nor to the Church
of God, 1 Cor. 10.32. this cannot be meant a third sort of people, because
there was no more, and this Church was made up of both, because both are
mentioned, therefore it is universal. 4. All the Churches of Christ make but
one Church; for says Paul, the Churches of Christ salute you, yea the whole
Church saluteth you, Romans 16.10.23. 5. All Ministers are placed in one Church,
1 Cor. 12.28. which shows it to be universal. 6. All Churches have but one
King, and governed by one Law, Iomes 4.12. therefore universal. 7. All
Churches are called one body, one dove, one Queen. Ephesians. 44. 1 Cor. 12.12.
Cant. 6.8. Lastly, the door of the Church is as wide as the Christian world,
for he that is admitted into one Church by Baptism, is admitted into all, and
he that is cut off as Julian was, is cut off from all Churches, therefore it is
univerfall.

But how do you prove the Appeals of Churches, and of persons in the Church.

Ans. First I will show the appeals of persons in the church for a private
trespass, If thy brother shall trespass against thee says Christ, go and
tell him his fault between thee and him alone, if he shall hear thee, thou have
gained thy brother. But 2. if he will not hear thee, take with thee one or two
more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be estabished;
but 3. If he neglect to hear them, tell the Church, Mat. 18.15, 16, 17. that is
the Eldership, for says the Lord to Moses. speak unto all the congregation,
then he called the Elders and spoke unto them, Exodus 12.21. which are called
the assembly of Elders distinct from the congregation, Psa. 107.32. or the
estate of the Elders, Acts 22.5. neither could any two or three Saints be this
Church, for then the offender and the offended brethren were this Church, but
that they were not, nor one or two more, for it was the third gradation;
neither was it the whole Congregation here meant, for then if any two or three
do but agree about binding and loosing, it should be ratified in heaven,
although all the rest were against it. But lastly, it is meant her Officers, who
have the keys of binding and loosing committed unto them, although but two
Elders, and a Pastor in that Eldership, yet if but two of them agree, being the
major part of that Eldership, it shall be ratified in Heaven, Mat. 18.17.18.19.
being the highest appeal in a particular Church.

In the next place, I will show by Scripture the Appeals of Churches the lesser
to the greater for public offenses, not one Congregation to another, nor one
Classes to another, nor one Provincial Synod to another, for so they are of
equal authority; but a Congregation to a Classes made up of many represented,
or a Classes to a Provincial Synod being greater than that, and from thence to
the National Synod, being the greatest power in the National Church.

I begin with the first, and that is proved by all those particular Churches in
Syria and Cilicia, appealing to the Church at Antioch, being a Presbyteriall
Church, having Apostles and extraordinary Prophets, and many Ministers in it,
who came as being all concerned in the business, when seducers would have
broched errors amongst them, Acts 15.12. and there they had great disputation
with those seducers, even the Apostles themselves, who might have determined
the business there, but that it was to be a president for all Christian
Churches; therefore that Classical Assembly at last, determined to send to the
Synod at Jerusalem, about that question, ver. 2. and being brought on their way
by the Church, that is, by some representing the Church, ver. 3. and they were
received of the Church, not as if all those many thousands of Believers came
forth to receive them; but some of the Synod representing them all, were sent
to receive them, ver. 4. and the Apostles and Elders came together not casu
ally, but on purpose, to consider of that matter, ver. 6. those Churches having
referred themselves to their final determination, they did authoratively pass
sentence, and made decrees to be kept for all those Churches, who did thus
appeal, first to that Church at Antioch, and from thence to Jerusalem, and they
being fully satisfied, for having read the Epistle, they rejoiced for the
consolation, ver. 30.31. and so all these Churches of Syria and Cilicia were
established in the faith, ver. 41. Chap. 16.4.5.

But you give Classes and Synods absolute power to impose there conclusions and
determinations, on particular Churches, without any refusing.

Ans. It is true, that all particular Churches ought to refer themselves, and
that none should be permitted to refuse, yet we do not give Classes and Synods
absolute power over them, so as to impose on them what they please, nor at all
to make laws for the Church, as the Parliament for the State, but only to gather
out of Scripture a model of that discipline which Christ has already made, and
cause that and no other to be put in execution.

But Classes and Synods hinder obedience to that command of Christ, which is to
try all things. 1 These. 5.21. and make the Saints liberty less than it was in
the Apostles days, for then they might try their Doctrines, Acts 17 11. yea
they would be Lords over Gods heritage, which they ought not, 1 Pet. 5.3. and
which no Counsel or Synod since the Apostles days ever had nor claimed,
neither did Christ ever give it to them.

Ans. Classes and Synods do but show the absolute power of Christ, and impose
that only as necessary, without refusing, they do but gather up the several
Laws of Christ already made into a moddell, to be observed; which is not to be
Lords over Gods heritage, nor challenge to themselves a power which Christ
never gave them, but rather to dispense the mind of Christ to the People.

But Classes and Synods, makes a Pastor to undertake more Churches than his
own; and makes them lame that they cannot do their Office themselves, and
hinders matters from being tried where they were committed, which does occasion
Tyranny, and hinder Church-liberty, and put men into many intolerable
temotations, as to wrest the Scripture to a contrary sense, and to stop the way
of knowledge, by stinting men's gifts and abilities, and making men to build
their observation and practice of divine Laws, upon humane principles and
policies that will gender to bondage; therefore Christ will root it up as the
Prelacy.

Ans. Classes and Synods do not undertake more Churches than their own, unless
in case of appeal for their help, when as their own Eldership cannot do it,
neither does lending a hand make their own Officers lame, but rather support
them when they were ready to sink under their burden; but if they can bear it
themselves, Classes and Synods will not hinder them but rather encourage them
to do it still, which will free them of a great deal of trouble; neither are
matters to be tried where the offense was committed, but in places of
Iudicatory, both in Church and State. And to speak of Tyranny, all Sects are
more guilty than Presbyterians, for their parties are their Judges, without
suffering any appeals from them, neither do Classes and Synods force men to
wrest Scripture, but rather take care to put out such mechanic fellows who
cannot avoid it, for want of Learning. And it is rather a temptation to error
and blasphemy when suffered, than if such were punished for it; Neither does
Classes and Synods hinder men's gifts and abilities, but only rectifies them
where to be employed for more profit, and that is in their own families, by
them neglected, while they presume without warrant from the word of God, to
meddle with other men's business; Also they further a learned Ministry, which
may teach the people knowledge, and only labor to prevent the blind from
leading the blind into the ditch, neither is the discipline of Christ to be
called humane principles and policies; nor is it bondage to be kept from error
and blasphemy, but rather perfect freedom; neither will the Lord root out
Presbytery, as the Prelacy, because some believe it, but rather their faith
shall fail, being built on the Churches ruin, against which the gates of Hell
shall not prevail, Mat. 16.18.

But may not Ministers alone, sometimes meet together to advise each other for
the Churches good without Classes and Synods?

Ans. Yes, but not with the like authority of Classes and Synods, yet I say
they may meet to idvise each other, and to prepare things for Classes and
Synod, and to try the gifts and abilities of those that are to be ordained, and
also ordain them, Acts 1^.23. 1 Timothy 4.14. and thus they met in Solomon's porch,
Acts 5.11, 12. And so did all the Ministers in Corinth meet together for the
Churches good, 1 Cor. 14.23.

But those in Corinth were not all Ministers, for the Text says the whole
church met together.

Ans. There was none but Ministers, for they all spoke with tongues, 1 Cor.
14.23. but says Paul, do all speak with tongues? 1 Cor. 12.39. 2. They are
called prophets ver. 29. But are all Prophets? 1 Cor. 12.29. 3. They did not
come together to preach, but to dispute, for they might all speak what was
revealed to them, ver. 30, 31. but all may not speak in the church, let your
women keep silence in the church, it is not permitted for them to speak, nor
men that are ignorant, ver. 32, 33, 36. 4. This command came only to Prophets,
and to them assigned to spiritual employment, ver. 37. therefore there was
none but Ministers at that meeting in Corinth, much like our Assembly of
Ministers at Westminster, and sometimes at Sion College, yet I say not with
the like power of Classes and Synods, to make decrees for the church, because
it is not fully represented for lack of ruling Elders.

But may none but Ministers meet to ordain Ministers?

Ans. Although it ought, to be done in the congregatiou, yet none may actually
do it but ministers; first because the Keys of the church were given to them,
Mat. 16.19. John 20.23. 2. None durst ever take upon them to ordain others that
were not Ministers themselves. 3. when the people chose Deacons, they brought
them to the Apostles to be ordained, Acts 6.3. 4. Ministers are directed how to
do it, that is not by partiality preferring one before another, nor rashly to
lay hands suddenly on them, 1 Timothy 5, 11, 12. 5. Other men may not do it,
because they cannot try their gifts, which must first be proved, 1 Timothy 3.10.6.
A Minister must not be confined to one place, he may use his office in any
congregation, therefore universal Officers must ordain them into the Ministry
who are not confined as Elders and Deacons, but such as may preach in any
church. 8. None but Ministers may remove Ministers to other Churches; the Lord
said to the Prophets at Antioch, separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work
whereunto I have appointed them, and they laid their hands on them, and sent
them away, Acts 13.1, 2, 3. therefore none but Ministers may ordain Ministers.

But the house of Stephanus addicted themselves to the Ministry, 1 Cor. 16.15.

Ans. It is true they addicted themselves to it, that is, they had a good
affection to it, and it may be they used means to attain learning, to make
themselves fit for it, but yet it will not follow that they did ordain or put
themselves into the Ministry.

But the Waldenses, being cast upon an Island, and not knowing what to do for
Ministers, made some of themselves Ministers.

Answer. All stories are not true, neither are all examples to be followed,
especially when they err from the rule, which says, how can he preach except
he be sent, Romans 10.14. and again, let him be proved, 1 Timothy 3.10. and the
Apostles ordained Elders in every Church, and after them they were ordained by
other Ministers, Titus 1.5. and then by the Presbytery as soon as it was
erected, 1 Timothy 4.14.

But if the Waldenses had not done so, they had been without Ministers.

Answ. It had been better to have been without then to have used unlawfulmeans
to obtain them; for he that does evil that good may come, his damnation is
just, Romans 3.9. 2. They should have done as others did in the like case, when
the Jews returned out of Babylon, and had no Ministers, they did not make
Ministers of other men, but sent to Iddo and his brethren, desiring them to
send them Ministers for the house of God, and the Text says they brought us a
man of understanding of the sons of Levi, Ezra 8.15, 91.17, 18. 3. They need
not say they should have been without Ministers, for the gates of hell shall
not prevail to destroy either the Church or Ministry, neither shall they be
unwilling to supply any place that truly desires the Christian faith; for when
the Apostles heard that Samaria had received the word of God, they sent them
Peter and John, Acts 8.14. and God that has wrought these good desires will
perfect them to the day of Jesus Christ, yea God will supply all their need
according to his riches in Jesus Christ, Phil. 4.19. Lastly this pretense can
be no better justified than that act of Vzza, who might have said as well as
they, if the Ark should fall and break in pieces, what shall we do for the Ark,
but God smote him to death for his error, 2 Samuel 6.67.

But if our minister be dead or removed, may we not choose another out of the
congregation, as well as they chose Deacons? Acts 6.

Ans. No, for the Deacons office is confined in that congregation, so that if
he remove he cannot take his office with him, but he that is placed in the
Ministry takes his office with him, and he may exercise that office in another
congregation without any more ordination. 2. I grant, that a member of the
universal Church, and not a Turk or a Jew, who are not members of it, ought to
be chosen into the Ministry. 3. The Scripture does not say take a man of your
particular congregation, and make your watchman; but take a man of your coasts,
and make your watchman, Ezekiel 33.2. and we choose our Minister from the
University, out of our National church, although not out of our particular
congregation, neither dare we to confine our choice into a narrower compass
than God has allotted us.

But there is Superstition used at your Ordination, which is by laying on of
hands, which ceased with the Apostles.

Ans. Where was a twofold laying on of hands in the Apostles days, one of
them belonged to the Apostles alone, at which sign the holy Ghost was given,
that is the gift of Tongues and Miracles, Paul laid on his hands, and they
spoke with tongues and prophesied, Act. 19.6. and he said to Timothy stir up
that gift that was given thee by laying on of my hands; 2 Timothy 1.6. Simon faw
that on whomsoever the Apostles laid their hands the Holy Ghost was given; he
said give me this power also, Acts 8.18.19. now this power ceased with the
Apostles, but then there was another laying on of hands, when any was fitted
before for the Ministry, whether it was mediately or immediately it mattered
not, they ordained such, that is, they approved of their fitness, by that
sign of laying on of their hands, see both these in one Text, 1. Tim. 4.14
There Paul says, neglect not the gift that is given thee, by laying on of my
hands; that is by miraculous qualifying and fitting him for the Ministry; and
also by laying on of the hands of the Presbytery by ordination, approving of
that sitnes, this last is still in use at this day in the Church, for the
Apostles left others to ordain Elders in every City or Church at their decease,
Titus 1.5.

But is your office of Ministry peculiar to Ministers?

Ans. yes, Aaron and his sons shall wait on the Priests office, Ex. 28.4 and
says Paul, the Lord put me into the Ministry, 2 These. 1.12. I magnify. mine
office, Rom: 11.13. every Member has not this office, neither may any say, I
have no need of thee, nor one Member act in another office; if al were as one
Member, where were the body? 1 Cor. 12. Secondly, Ministers are Ambassadors,
but if all were such, to whom are they sent? and they are Shepherds, but if all
be such, where is the Flock? and they are Stewards, but if all be Stewards,
where is the family and household of faith?

But may not men of other callings preach the word, and take the Pastoral
charge of a congregation without this ordination? David preached and
prophesied, Psalm. 40.9. and Solomm is called the Preacher, Eccle. 1.1.

Ans. It is true, so did women prophecy, 2. Chron. 34.22. Acts 21.9. yea women
revealed Christ, John 4.29. and declared his Resurrection, Luke 24.10.11.12.
and yet they were not in the Ministry, for Women may not speak in the Church,
1 Cor. 14.34. yea Angels declared the glad tidings of Christ, and also his
Resurrection, and call themselves brethren to the Prophets, Luke 2.10.24.25.
Revel. 22.9. yet they were not in the ministry. And for David and Solomon they
preach as Penmen of Scripture to the great Congregation, the universal Church,
but not as a Pastor to his people. Secondly, Tradesmen are placed by God, and
charged there to abide with God, 1 Cor. 7.25. 3ly. they are forbidden to be
busy bodies in other men's matters, and charged to do their own business, 1
Pet. 4.15. 1 These. 4.11. Fourthly, God has severely punished those men of
other callings, when they presumed to meddle with the office of Ministry, 1 Samuel 6.19. 2 Samuel 6.7. Nom. 16.35. 21 Sam 26.16.19. 5ly. No man can discharge
the Pastors office and another calling, for who is sufficient for it alone? 1
Cor. 1.16. Sixthly, the Apostles left their other callings, and gave themselves
only to the Ministry, Acts 6.4. and so did Christ himself the calling of a
Carpenter, Mark 8.3. and refused the office of a King, and the office of a
Judge, John 6.15. Luke 12.17. being anointed to preach the Gospel, Luke 4.10.
and knowing that Ministers are forbidden to entangle themselves with the
affairs of this life, 2. Tim. 2.4. Seventhly, every calling is to be done in
faith and love; but Tradesmen cannot preach in Faith, having no warrant from
the word of God, nor in love to profit the people, because not sent nor blessed
of God, who only teaches to profit, (...) 48.19. Jer. 14.14.

But suppose a man be not placed in any other calling, may not he take upon
him the calling of the Ministry, without humane learning?

Ans. No, for the messenger of the Lord must be an interpreter, Job 33.25.
Secondly, he must not glory in another man's line, in things made ready to his
hand, 2 Cor. 10.16. Thirdly, unlearned men wrest the Scripture to their own
destruction, 2 Pet. 3.16. Fourthly, Paul prays that they may speak with
tongues, and gives thanks for that gift in himself, 1. Cor. 5.13.15. Fifthly,
Ministers must be watchmen to give warning of dangers approaching, Eze. 3. but
unlearned men cannot give warning of errors written in Greek or Latin, by
which the Gentry may be much corrupted, and the watchman see it not for want of
learning. Sixthly the gift of tongues is placed in the Church, then chiefly in
the ministry. Seventhly, if a Bishop be a novice, he will fall into the
condemnation of the Devil, 1 Timothy 3.8. Eighthly, both Christ and his Apostles,
and all Ministers in all ages had this gift of tongues, either immediately
infused, or mediately taught in Schools, Mar. 6.2. John 7.15. Acts 2.4.
Ninthly, Ministers ought to eat the book and then prophecy, Eze: 33. Rev.
10.9.10.11. but they cannot read the book without some humane learning, Isa.
29.12. Tenthly, saving grace alone is not sufficient to make a Minister, for
then women or children may be Ministers, when as the one may not speak in the
Church, and the other cannot speak at all, for both may have saving grace, yea
a heathen without the pale of the Church, may have saving grace, yet unfit for
the office of the ministry.

But the Apostles preached, before they had this gift of tongues.

Ans. It is true, they preached to the Cities in Israel, who spoke the language
in which the Old Testament was written, but they were charged not to go among
the Gentiles, Mat. 10.5.6.7. but we are Gentiles, and speak not the Language
wherein any part of the Scripture was first written, and also when the Apostles
were to preach unto the Gentiles, they were charged to tarry at Jerusalem, till
they had the gift of tongues, Luke 24.49. yea the gift of tongues was a sign
that the Gentile Preachers were truly called to the ministry, 1 Cor. 14.22.
Mark 16.17.

But those Scriptures that speak of Bishops qualification, say nothing of the
gift of tongues 1 Timothy 3. Titus 1.6. to 9.

Ans. Although the gift of tongues be not there set down, yet it is in other
Scriptures, as has been showed. Secondly, if Ministers should make those two
texts their only pattern, and labor for those qualifications only, and for no
other, see what absurdities will follow; First, then they need not be able to
read English, because reading is not there mentioned, but then these things
they must have, First, a house of their own. Secondly, a wise. Thirdly,
children. Fourthly, they must be faithful. Fifthly, not accused of riot.
Sixthly, they must have a good report of those without, and he that wants any
of these, is unfit for the Ministry.

But who must choose the Minister?

Ans. All have a right to choose him, in case he be already ordained, and so in
the Ministry, unless they be dis-abled by a journey, or sickness, or infancy,
or excommunication, or women that may not speak in the Church, or servants who
contribute not to his maintenance.

But what maintenance is the Minisser to have of the Congregation?

Ans. A sufficient certain maintenance, either by Tithes, or some other way;
For Tithes were not altogether judicial: First, because Abraham paid tithes
before the Judicial Law was given, Ger. 14 20. and so did Jacob also, Genesis
28.22. Secondly, Tithes were not only to the Priesthood of Aaron, but also to
the Priesthood of Melchisedec which is an everlasting Priesthood, Heb. 73.
4.8.13. yea Levy himself paid tithes to this Priesthood, verse. 9. although he
received tithes of the Jews. Thirdly, whereas the Scribes and Pharisees paid
tithe of Mint, Annis and Cummin, and omitted the weightier matters of the Law,
as judgment, mercy and faith, now sairth Christ unto them, these ought you to
have done, and not to leave the other undone. Mat. 23.23. Luke, 11.42.
therefore by the testimony of Christ, tithes are still to be paid, but however
Ministers ought to have a sufficient maintenance.

First, because the Jewish Priests had a sufficiency allowed them, and says
Paul even so has the Lord ordained for Ministers of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.14.
Secondly, Ministers must give themselves wholly to the work of the Ministry,
Acts 6.4. and may not entangle themselves with the affairs of this life. 2 Timothy
2.4. therefore they had need to have a sufficient maintenance. Thirdly, as it
was the sin of Jeroboam to make the lowest of the people Ministers, so it is
their sin to make those in the Ministry to become the lowest, for lack of
sufficient maintenance. Fourthly, it is very prejudicial to the Peoples souls
for their Minister to be forced to seek his own natural food, when he should
be preparing food for their souls. Fifthly, Ministers are at great charges for
learning, to fit themselves for the Ministry, and when they are fitted for it,
yet many times it is long before they are placed in any benefice, and when they
are placed in it, then it is but for their life, in case they enjoy it so long,
and then all is gone from their wives and Children for ever, and sometimes
through the envy of evil men, they are quickly cast out of all; and it may be
never attain to another all their days; these things considered, Ministers
ought to have a sufficient maintenance.

And also their maintenance ought to be certain, and not depend on the peoples
courtesy; First, because all men have a certain rate for their work; and shall
Ministers only depend on peoples courtesies. Secondly, the Jewish Priests had a
certain maintenance; and says Paul, even so has the Lord ordained for the
Ministers of the Gospel. 1 Cor. 9.13.14. Thirdly, Ministers are hired
Laborers, Luke 10.7. 1. Tim. 5.18. therefore they ought to know their wages,
and also be certain of it. 4ly, Paul says it is the peoples duty to minister
unto them in carnal things, Romans 15.27. now if it be a duty it is not upon
courtesy, unless they will hold themselves bound in duty to give little or
much, any thing or nothing, as they please themselves.

But it is a sin to teach for hire, and to divine for money, Micah 3.11.

Answ. First it is true if they only sought their own gain, and not at all the
salvation of the people. 2. If they should more seek their own gain than the
peoples salvation. But to seek maintenance, that they may subsist in seeking
Gods glory in their salvation, is most pleasing to God, 2 Corinthians. 12, 14, 15.

By Thomas Bakewell.

Jmprimatur,

John Downame.

FINIS.

