ARNALDO, OR, The Injured Lover.

An Excellent new ROMANCE.

Written in Italian by the Excellent Pen of GIROLAMO BRUSONI.

Made English by T. S.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Dring, and are to be sold at the George in
Fleetstreet, near St Dunstans Church. 1660.

To the Noble young BARONET Sr. JOHN SALUSBURY OF LLVENNY.
Most Honored Sir,
THE High Ascendent, of your so Juvenile and Early accomplishments, as they
attract the Admiration of all, so they advertise your Friends in particular,
what Calculation their Hopes may make, of the Generous Influences your
Meridian-Perfections, will one day impart to your Country and Family, in the
Happy Conjunction of Experience with your present Eminent Qualities.

But this is not the only Auspicious Prognostic of your Growing Excellencies,
to such as have any Acquaintance with your Illustrious Family, and remember
either the assiduous Education you have received from your most Excellent
Lady-Mother; or the Hereditary Virtue, to which by a long Descent from your
Brave Ancestors (as Sr. John the Strong, Sr. John the Loiall, and Sr. Thomas
(as your Honored Father's Works speak him) the Learned) you are Heir Apparent,
and Tenant en le Tail.

But, Brave Sir, to overpasse, in this Place, that Just Tribute, which I can
never sufficiently render to your Merits, much less when confined to the
brevity of an Epistle; It is your Fame, that has brought the Injured Lover
(after his Travells, through Italy, France, and Spain,) to implore from your
Generosity that Protection, wherewith you may at once change both his Name and
Fortune.

And be pleads that his Address is most properly Directed to you, Sir, in that
the Subject of this Story, is a Seasonable Lecture to such Young Gentlemen,
upon the many Malignant Influxes, evil Women have upon the Honor and
Happiness of such, who incautelously converse with them.

Now, to conclude, Honored Sir, The vouchsafe of your Patrociny, and Courteous
Reception of this, will encourage me to expedite my intended Translation, of
the Life and Labors of your Honorable and Learned Ancester, the Famous John
Salusbury, Lord Bishop of Chartres, and Minister of State to Henry the Second.
Whose Discourse judiciously treating of the Vanities of the Court, is almost
ready to be Pressed for your Service; A work, which will be more suitable to your
Improving Gravity, and more proportionate to the extraordinary obligations of,

Worthy Sir, Your most humble Admirer T. S.

To the Most Illustrious, and Most Excellent Lord, the Lord Don GASPARE DI
TEVES And GUSMAN.
Marquess of Fuentes, Lord of Lerena, Venazuza, Arrucas, of the Isles of
Montelion, and Guadalupe; Perpetual Patron of Victory, Commandador di Colos, in
the Order of St. Jago, Perpetual Chief Justice, and Grand Secretary of the
City of Sivil; Gentleman of the Chamber to his Catholic Majesty; His great
Master of Horse for the Field, one of his Council, his Ambassador Extraordinary
to the Princes of Italy, and Ordinary to the most Renowned Republic of Venice.
Most Illustrious, and most Excellent Lord;
IT is now a good space since that I found my self engaged to publish to the
world, the Obligations, which I owe to the Merits of your Excellency: And I
began a few years past, to confess in part, this my engagement in the
Dedication of my Mercury's Grove to your Excellency: But that Work having
incountred a gale of adverse Fortune, which detained it in the Press until
now; I have been presented with an occasion of publishing, out of Complacency
to others, this little Piece, a birth of the more happy years of my youth; and
being unwilling to let it escape, without satisfaction in this also to my
obligation, I have made it to bear in it is Front, as it is Tutelar Numen, the
most renowned Name of your Excellency. Nor ought this work, because it contains
the calamities of a Lover, equally injured by Love, and Fortune, to be
therefore though unworthy of your Excellencie's perusal; for the Loves of this
Knight being made Legitimate, by Virtue and Constancy, they merit the Reading,
and withal the Compassion of all Noble and Generous Souls, that know, and
knowing can tell how to manage so Noble and Generous a Passion, in terms of
Honor and Fidelity. And to whom more properly does this Romance belong,
fraught with the Passages and Adventures of Love, and Fortune; of Courtesy, and
Honesty; of Magnanimity and Generosity; than to your Excellency, Mirror of all
the Noble Virtues, and Endowments, that render your Excellency Honorable, and
Considerable to any, that have attained the least knowledge of, or acquaintance
with them? Be pleased to accept the Loyalty and the Love of this Knight, which
with Reverence consecrates to the Immortality of his Glory, that Fidelity and
Obsequy which constitutes me,

Your Excellency's most humble and most obliged Servant Girolamo Brusoni.

A BRIEF ACCOUNT Of the Book and Author.
THe Injured Lover, or Arnaldo, (whose Story is here presented) in part of
Compensation for the hard usage he found from the Frailer Sex, has met with a
more kind entertainment with all the Nations, whose Languages have since spoke
his Adventures.

He was for Country and Quality a Grecian of Regal Extraction; and having as
he conceived been more hardly dealt with by Women than his innocence deserved,
and experimenting the dangers that result from Converse with that Sex, yea even
from the most virtuous of them, though not always through their fault; He, in
charity to bold and unheedy Youth, who are most obnoxious to their Malignity,
desired his friend Philiternus to commit his Life to Writing, and commend it to
their Observation.

Which Injunction Philiternus faithfully discharged by Penning this Relation in
the Greek Tongue, from whence the Gravity of some Spaniard condescended to
teach it that stately Language, wherewith Mr. Herberai, an excellent Personage
was so well pleased that he converted it into French, which Translation being
approved of by Bartol. Marassi, a Florentine, he made it Italian; and from his
Copy Claud. Holiband above threescore years since turned it into English. But
the Story being as yet but two Books; and, as we may suppose, much castrated in
its undergoing so many Transmutations, our Worthy Author Girolamo Brusoni, a
most Ingenious Italian, lighting upon the French Translate, and thinking so
excellent a Subject ought to be improved to a greater height, it being of so
universal benefit, and being thereto pressed by Signior Michiele, a great Wit
of his Acquaintants, he set upon the Augmentation, and perfecting of the same.
Which being done many years since, was lost, together with sundry his other
youthful Composures of the like nature, in some troubles wherein this our
Author was imbroil'd.

But about six years since, not hearing by any means of his lost papers, (as if
all conspired to make this work absolute) he, in his Maturer years, again
re-assum'd his Resolution of pursuing this design; and, as he obtained leisure
from more urgent Affairs, out of the few Notes he had left, completed this
Discourse; wherein yet, according to his own words, He has made a Spiggot of a
Lance.

So that this Work having encountered so universal an Acceptance, whilst
imperfect (in comparison); and being now Ornify'd by the Polite Pen of one of
the most refined Wits of Italy, it cannot miss of a Correspondent welcome, as
it is now a second time completed for English Perusal.

But this by the way, from him that has been at the pains of this last
Translation; That it is against both his Opinion and Custom to multiply this
kind of Reading, which ought to be used moderatly, as Sauce, not substantial
food, the end of Romantic Poetry, being 1. Either to attract the Curious and
Careless Eyes of such, who can be no otherwise induced to cultivate their
wits, and inform their Minds; or 2. To Recreate (not without some profit) the
over-intense Spirits after more serious Reading; or 3. To Reprove Powerful
Vice without danger to the Mythologist; or 4. Lastly, to Affect those with
Virtue thus set off by Fable, whose Luxuriant Fancies cannot descend to the
looking on more plain Morality.

This, from the Authority of my Honored Lord Broghill, and the Apologies of
the two Renowned Knights, Sir Philip Sidney, and Sir John Harington, is the
substance of what can be said in behalf of this kind of Poetry. Which Rules
being observed, the pains I have been at may be admitted this Publication, and
the Reader's perusual with equal safety and delight.

I could tell thee, what Affinity this Fiction has to our present Revolutions
in State, and instance in the Maxims here and there scattered for thy search;
but that were to Anticipate thy Curiosity, and pervert the primary design of

Thy Friend T. S.

ARNALDO; OR THE Injured Lover.
BOOK I.
THe day had already began to dawn upon the Mountains tops, when getting out of
the poor Lodging wherein I had past the precedent night with reasonable
tranquillity, I began my journey; and the Sun had not increased so far as to
make a full disclosure of his face to mortals, when finding my self at the
entrance of a very spacious Forest, into which my Horse thrust himself, and
through abstruse and disconsolate tracks, penetrated into its most secret
retirements, I set my self in the heat of that illustrious Planet's
Meridian-rayes, under the leavey-shade of a lofty Platan, to repose me near the
pleasant murmr of a little rivelet, which, dilated into sundry windings,
sought to empty it self into a River, with which the Forest was in a manner
wholly environed. It was not long that I had there sat, before the pleasant
whisperings of the Air and Brook had reconciled my eyes to sleep, and that I
made my head to lean on the Root of that Platan; and scarce had I given up my
brows to a languid slumber, when sleep represented to me the appearance of a
young Lady. I fancied, that with a behavior sufficiently obleiging, she
enquired of me my name, quality, and the occasion of my journey: But I not
having (oppressed by an unusual lethargy) knowledge, or power to find words to
satisfy her demand; the Apparition, offended at my fatal taciturnity, smote me
on the breast with a Serpent: Thus, says she shall I be sure to know who thou
art; and suddenly disappeared. I by this time awaking with a loud cry, found my
heart perplexed by a cruel passion, and my face no less covered with tears
than with sweat. Having therefore deposed the muddinesse of my face in the
clearness of the water, and forded the delightful rivolet, I felt my passions
augmented to that height, that they oppressed my spirit, and equally set at
liberty the reins of my Horse, and those of my Reason; nor took I any other
food then what my griefs administered, to whose mercy fortune had abandoned me.
Thence, just at the time that Sol, leaving the lowness of the Valleys,
retreated his rays to the tops of the Hills, I came into a place that had an
Ascent; from which there represented it self to my eye the prospect of a great
Plain, in form of an artificial Theater, which, incircled on every side by the
Forest, dignified its Center with a stately Palace, berounded with a well
proportioned front of little Cypresses, which expected the favor of time, to
increase with their umbrage the melancholinesse of that Seat; which, covered
with black Marble, made a fair but mournful disclosure of its Grandeur. I
therefore fixed my eye full of admiration upon that strange Edifice; and
whilst the curiosity to know the inhabitants of so lugubrious a place, led me
out of my former track; I saw issue out of the opposite part of the wood, a
Troup of men, which in the sadness of their habits, and langour of their
deportment, declared themselves very much grieved. There went before this
company a Knight, who by his own appearance, and by the Garb of his followers
might be presumed Lord of the rest, as, with his sighs, and the abundance of
his tears he made himself believed more then all others afflicted. He breathed
from his pale and meager face a most lamentable pensiveness, which tormented
the hearts of the beholders, so much the more forcibly, by how much the more
unsuteable so mournful a look appeared to so courteous an air. In the mean
time the melancholy Knight, drawing near to the place where I, for the
unexpectedness of the encounter, had made a halt, and raising his eyes to
steal a look; he discovered me: although at the first accost he appeared
somewhat moved, yet with a graceful smile he cleared up the tempest of his
face, constraining me with a sweet violence, to take, in his Heremetical
habitation, a short repose. Thereupon, taking me by the hand, he conducted me
with a very slow pace toward the gates of his house; over which I, who being a
stranger made curious observations of the things of the place, saw a gilded
scroul, in which with black Characters was engraven these words: O man! that
chance, or curiosity,
Has drawn this most unhappy lodge to view,
Know it is owned by such who only death pursue,
And, (dying every moment,) cannot dye.


Having with mine eyes run over, and with my mind lightly considered these
Verses, we entered into that disconsolate Mansion, wherein all things
represented objects of heaviness and grief; since the Hall and Chambers, hung
only with black furniture, wrought in the heart a sad melancholy, which almost
bereaving a man of himself, in despite of all he could do did constrain him to
shed tears. Over the Nieces of the doors of each room, there hung after the use
of Italy several goodly pictures, but in as much as the representation that
they made of Tragical Loves, did in a great measure impair their
delightfulness; the eye might not be fixed on them, without the prejudice of
the mind, offended by the strange sight of those miserable occurrences. Being
left for a little space by the courteous Knight, to repose my body in a Chamber
lesse-sadly furnished, he returned himself in person to invite me to Supper,
which by reason of the hot season I found was prepared with real Magnificence
in a very spacious Hall; where no sooner arrived, but carually casting my eyes
on the Walls I there observed, covered by a thin Vail, a Magnificent picture,
in which I discovered depainted a young Lady, whose face seemed to be descended
to inform the Graces with all the proportions requisite to render it a
breathing picture of beauty. Her complexion did only mourn with dolorous
appearance: a Vermillion stream of blood, which trickling from her breast,
transfixed by a little Dagger, ran to stain with mournful drops her Attire. I
was just about to vent by my mouth in words the curiosity of my mind to know
what this picture did signify, when it entered suddenly into my thoughts, that
perhaps from her took birth the deplorable cause, which held that house buried
in so profound a silence. Yet by that modest respect which ought to regulate
the actions of men well-descended, in another man's house, I refrained for that
time to satisfy my curiosity, and sat down at Table with the Knight, where,
besides the singularity and abundance of the cheer, I admired the marvelous
order of the service, proper to a great Prince.

Supper being ended, and finding the time convenient, I introduced a modest
discourse tending to the satisfaction of my desires; with which I so moved the
Knight, that he gave me no answer but in these few words. Pacify you first the
Ghost of Belisa with acquainting me Who you be, and the occasion of your
journey; and then I will likewise to morrow (it being now time that you retire
to your repose) satisfy your curiosity. I obeyed him, but not without
occasioning in him strange astonishment at so unwonted adventures. And the
Knight asserting a fatal necessity in his request, entertained me a short space
in superfluous Complements of excuse, but not with superfluous Testimonies of
his incomparable generosity.

Performing therefore the injunction of the Knight, he withdrew with a
discomposed countenance into his Lodging, and I also was, with treatments of
singular courtesy, attended and served, in the apartment prepared for me.
There at last being left alone, I went to bed, assaulted by various thoughts,
occasioned in me partly by the things I had heard, and partly by those which I
did expect to hear the next day: and that which did not a little foment my
inquietude, was, the reverberated memory of my absence from that person, which
being more dear to me then my own life, I shall sooner want a Soul in my
breast, then suffer my love to diminish in the least. Yet in the end wearied
with long watching, I lightly accommodated my eyes to repose: but scarce had
sleep distended his pleasant wings over my senses, when, first by a soft
murmr gently struck and warbled, and after by a lamentable Music, I was so
awakened, that it was impossible for me in all that dismal night to receive the
sweetnesses of Lethe. Thereupon I gave my self to hearken if I could know what
so lugubrious a song might intend, in so late an hour; and knew in the end that
the Knight my Host was the unhappy occasion of that lachtimous ditty;
afflicting himself in renewing the rewfull memory of his misfortunes,
accompanied in this sad office by his servants, who, too tender in the affects
of their Master, did increase with their vain plaints that grief, which they
ought rather with mature prudence to have tempered. So long was the mournful
harmony of those nocturnal sacrifices, that I at last more moved by wearinesses
than pity, desired nothing else but only that the Sun, dissipator of vain
phantasms, which in the night obnubilate the phancies of mortals, would rise
and illuminate the hemisphear; and already it (become compassionate of my
wailing) almost began to dart the Horizon with his rays: When the Knight
entering in suddenly and domestically into my Room, invited me to be a
spectator of the Divine Ceremonies, which in a little Temple adjoining to his
Palace he did celebrate. Being come thither, I rested no less stupefied with
the richness of that edifice, which in the concisenesse of its Gyre emulated
the sumptuosity of the most renowned Temples of the World; than with the
singularity of its Architecture, which seemed to have dis-embowelled it self to
render it a miracle of Art. This admirable Chapel was, in the exterior
circuit, of a spherical figure, berounded with Columns of black Marble, upon
Pedestals of brass, and with Chapters, and Arches of the same matter
marvelously wrought. In the spaces between the Columns, and over the Arches,
which supported a front of double Cornishes, there was placed, in proportionate
distances, sundry Statues, Historical and Fabulou^, some of Porphyr, others of
Allablaster and Brass: but the summity of the roof, wrought with Marquetry
into little foliages of Marble, enclosed a great Statue which by its aged face,
by its wings disjointed from the shoulders, and by a dyal put in his right
hand, represented an Image of the Temple. On the West Side, was situate the
Magnificent and lofty Gate by which men enter to Worship; in whose prospect
toward the East, did glitter an eminent Altar of purest Marble, inchased with
most precious Jemms; and such, and so much was the splendour, which from the
Carbuncles, Chrysolytes, and Crystals did beam forth, that without the help of
windows, which might impart the rays of the Sun, it sufficiently illuminated
that religious dwelling of the Divinity. On the other parts South and North,
hung in equal proportion two exceeding large pictures, less rich indeed in
Jewels than the Altar; but frauded perhaps with greater cunning, since it
seemed (to who intentively beheld them) that the Painter and the Carver had
strove in formalities to give the World a marvelous excess of Art; so
excellently were discovered the draughts of the pencil, in giving life to the
tele; and so rarely were impressed the touches of the chizel in inlivning the
Marbles, that they served as an Ornament to the tele. The Walls were covered
with exceeding black and splendid jet, and the pavements did even shine with
the black Marbles which were laid upon them. In this noble Chapel was erected,
more than two foot above the floor, a Sepulcher of polite Alablaster finely
historified with diverse impresses of Love, bordered and guarded with little
leaves of Myrtle and Cypress: about which with Greek Letters, which did seem
just then dictated by a pensive Amorist, his Pen being placed upon the last
Character, with a grace able to inchant Souls; was read these verses.

This Sepulcher upon the Theban shore,
(Since it to the bones he could not consecrate
Of fair Lucinda, whom he did adore)
Arnaldo r^i^'d unto her Ghost ingrate.
Now, whilst the Priests went about with Sacred Rites, and pious Oblations to
appease the anger of the offended Divinity; I sometimes suffered the curiosity
of my eyes to wander after the guidance of fancy about the things, which there
within did offer themselves to the mind to be considered: and with so much the
more inquietude, by how much, through the small knowledge I drew from thence,
the desire of beholding them came to foment. The Divine functions ended, the
Knight, after having augurated to me that day to be happy, took me by the hand
and led me out of the Temple, dismissing the people which did follow him, and
carried me all alone through a narrow path into the Forest; just where a
little Mountain dividing it self into three equal parts, did form with natural
pleasures the prospect of a delightful Theater. There did issue from its foot
a transparent rivolet; but so scant at that time of water, that it did reveal
to the negligence of the eye, all the secrets of its bottom. There were seen
through those fresh streams little fishes to sport themselves among the candid
pebles. But about the moistened banks did grow as in well ordered knots, a
hundred varieties of odoriferous Herbs, embroidered with a thousand sorts of
flowers, which opening as it were their breasts to the ruddy morning, did emit
the air of so delicate a perfume, that it had power to efface in great part
from my heart the annoyance, which through the past waking, and through the
dolefulness of the things which I saw, was there so deeply rooted. The
backside of the Tripartite hill overspread with Oaks and Pines, by nature
dispersed and disposed with a negligent art, did overshadow some very green
Meadows, which in the middle of the Forest, happily through the benefit of the
neighboring Brook, renouncing to the commerce of the plants, did conserve in
their pleasant largeness the roots of the flowers inviolate. In one of these
the Knight sat down, and I placing my self over against him, after many sighs
in a languishing and sad tone, he gave beginning to his Narration after this
manner. From the first Original, which it may be you will not believe, I must
derive to you, most dear guest, the dolorous relation of my uncomfortable
disadventures: and though the mind abhors the remembrance of past griefs;
yet because notwithstanding custom has converted grief into nature, I shall
fully make relation of as much as I shall think necessary, that you may be able
another day to manifest to the World the cruelty of a woman, and the dysasters
of a Lover abused. I was born (Philiternus) in the famous City of Thebes,
Queen of Boetia, of a stock both generous, and nearly-allied to the Royal
family, with replicated bonds of consanguinity; and from my birth had given me
the name of Arnaldo (for thus my father was called himself: a Knight no less
renowned in the Counsels of State then in the matters of War). Being grown to
boy's estate, the puissant King Agenor my Uncle would have me dwell in his
Court, to be brought up in the noble Company of his sons, whence I learnt in a
little space the qualities convenient to a Knight of great birth; nor did I
endure much labor to attain to the highest Dignities of the Court and Kingdom;
nor was I envied (if it be lawful for me to say it) by any; having preobliged
the affections of all hearts, with the affability of my manners, with the
complacency of my conditions, and the profuseness of my riches: I obtained in
gift from Heaven a Wit, greater then my Fortune. Now it befell for my fatal
disease that I being with the Court in Thebes, there passed from this life to a
better Osiander, a principal Knight and well deserving from the Crown; whose
obsequies the King himself was pleased to honor with his presence, with all
the flower of the Nobility of his Kingdom. Oh that dolorous Dagger wounded me
to the very heart, with the mournful remembrance of that most unfortunate day!
Among the other friends of the defunct Cavalier, which assisted at his Funeral,
there was a young Lady his daughter, which besides her being very beautiful of
face, and complacential of deportment, with so pitiful a dejectedness did
bewail the death of her father, that each circumstance in the Ocean of those
tears made shipwreck of a heart. She had disordered with her tender hands her
silver tresses, whence one part of them descending on her shoulders, in
precious Rings did incatenate the mind of the Spectators in stupor of her
extreme beauty: the other but ill retained by her hair-laces ran to bathe
themselves in the doleful flood of sorrow, which overran the face, ambitious
peradventure to enrich with Pearls the nudity of their Gold. Thence her amiable
face appeared a Sun which arose from the Sea with locks moistened with
celestial Dew, and even had usurped the property of the rising Sun, whilst
that fair face obfuscated by the Clouds of perplexity suffered it self to be
seen without offense of the beholders, whereas in the noontide of cheerfulness
there was no eye so firm as to be able to sustain without peril of blindness
the reflection of its splendors. As soon as on this prodigious Creature I fixed
my looks, I presently felt a fatal shivering to seize my Soul, which calling my
blood to the succor of my heart, left my face overcast with a mortal paleness.
And well might it be that he seemed dead, from whom one only look of Lucinda
had ravished his Soul: Fair Lucinda was she called, who was the happy cause of
all my deplorable unhappiness. I desired really to fly from that perilous
sight; my mind being desirous to avoid the mortal danger which I foresaw; but
Pity, a chaste companion that never separates from Love, recalled me to
compassionate the grief of the weeping Damsel, by little and little introducing
into my mind, and impressing in my heart those languishing beauties of which
they finally became an Idolater, though they be now reduced to ashes; the
sparks of my love live notwithstanding, and shall live perpetually buried in
those Cinders.

That magnificent Funeral being ended, and having waited upon the King back to
his lodging, I incontinent returned to that Temple, in which I had left my Soul
deposited under the credit of Lucinda's beauty; and Love was for my misfortune
so courteous, that I had an opportunity of incountring her, whilst among the
sad troup of her Allies she returned to the forsaken house of her father; into
which being entered she carried with her, and included between those blessed
Walls, my perplexed spirit: whereupon remaining almost an exanimate Carcass, I
withdrew my self with a slow pace to my house, without knowing where I was, or
whither I went: but only that the privation of my spirit, transmigrated into
the object beloved, made me with reiterated stingings to know, that yet I
remained without a Soul in the World of the living. Being come there, I
withdrew, with the violent companion of my new thoughts, from the conversation
of my familiars; conceiting (unexperienced that I was) to find in solitude a
comfort for my pain: but it did the more foment it; and I perceived in the end,
that retiredness from the commerce of people, wrought no other in me than a
perplexing multitude of torments. Sleep and Appetite to food forthwith left me;
and seeing my self lost in a Love upon my own advice, without hope, I began
wholly to abandon the care of my health: So that in a few days I seemed wholly
altered from my self in the eyes of the world. I sometimes attempted to
suppress that fervent amorous passion, which did afflict me; but the more I
forced my self to conceal it, the more invigorating it self, did it blaze out
with greater impetuosity: whence, my malady continually increasing I saw my
self in a little space reduced miserably to perish in the arms of melancholy
and desperation. But Necessity, the discreet inventer of healthful
contrivances, would have me live for my hurt, suggesting to me that I ought not
utterly despair of my health: since that, though the sight of and speech to
Lucinda was not by fortune permitted me; I might notwithstanding easily be able
to penetrate her meaning, finding among my Pages a youth which by being
formerly a servant to her father, had access to the house with much liberty,
and without suspicion. Whereupon I made known to him more with tears, which
unawares betrayed my constancy, then with words, the internal grief of my
heart, and I desired him he would follow his wonted visits more frequently; and
report to me what he could discover of the person and wit of Lucinda. The Page
obeyed me with sufficient discretion and modesty; and observing for some time
what seemed to him opportune to my interests, he thrust me on finally with his
persuasions, to write a Letter to my fair Enemy in this manner.

I had rather most lovely Lucinda that you should draw the truth of those
griefs which inviron my Soul from the sight of me; than, in the dead Letters of
this Paper, you should discover their appearances: But although the black lines
of the ink cannot sufficiently express the abundance of the tears, which the
bitterness of my dysasters distill from my heart; I shall at least attempt
thereby to manifest to you in some part the cruel passions of my Soul, which,
heretofore transfused into your beautiful breast, stands expecting from your
goodness some gale of grace, which may suffice to keep it alive. Be therefore
pleased to know Madam, that from that day, which you celebrated in the Temple
the exequies of your most worthy father, I remained in such manner fettered by
the enchantments of your Divine beauty, that when you returned to your house to
consumate with floods of tears the paternal funerals, I retired to my Chamber
to commence with the deluge of my plaints the celebration of the grief of my
heart, which I had left enclosed in the radiant Sepulcher of your fair eyes. I
will not deny Madam, but that I have striven to force my self to cast off the
yoke of servitude, which the Sovereign Majesty of your looks has imposed by
virtue of Love upon the liberty of my spirit: but in sum the insuperable power
of your beauty binding my Reason with Adamantine cords would have me follow
chained, the Chariot of its triumphs. I set my self therefore to love you,
because destiny has commanded it; and will love you eternally because my
Inclination imposes it. I request no other of you Madam, but only that you
would please to accept the sacrifice of my affections, which all contracted in
one sigh of Love I offer to the Idol of your super-humane beauty; and that you
would not at least deny me the happiness of your presence, that I may in the
consolation of your celestial remembrance sweeten the bitterness of my
sufferings, and that you may discover in my mortified looks the lively pledges
of my fidelity.

ARNALDO.


Having written this Letter and consigned it to Diffilus the Page, and
instructed him in the manner with which he should transact the message to
Lucinda, I retired into the solitude of my Closet, strongly assaulted by fear
and hope to expect the issue. Diffilus went, and by good fortune observed that
Lucinda accompanied by a Girl her slave, was busied about her feminine
employments; he suddenly accosted her, giving her my Letter, entreating her to
receive it. But she presently clouded her face, to which the mind imparted the
sudden motions of its displeasure; and beholding him with a fierce look
commanded him presently to get himself out of her sight, and never dare to do
the like to her, as he tendered his life. But the cunning Groom that knew the
anger of a beautiful woman to be just like the stop of a Noble Courser, not a
jot affrighted by those angry appearances, multiplied his entreaties with no
less affection than discretion: whereupon Lucinda seeing her self importuned
with so much prudence, and being unwilling to yield to so affectionate an
assault, arose to retire into some more private room, where it was not
permitted Diffilus to follow her. Whence he perceiving of her intention, just
as she was rising up to depart, cast the Letter into her bosom with so civil a
behavior, that she was necessitated to take it. An unhappy necessity for me;
since as if it had been a Viper she presently tore it, reducing it to smoke and
ashes.

This unhappy accident, related to me by the Page, gave me easily to understand
what I might expect from this my unfortunate Love. My torments therefore did in
such manner increase, that I esteemed nothing but death able to deliver me.
Thence I became so much an Enemy to my self, that my pain, become familiar to
me, left me to fall irrecoverably into a Gulf of desperate thoughts; among
which miserably consuming my days, there came to me one morning Diffilus, a
curious observer of the actions of Lucinda, to tell me she would be the
following night in an adjacent Temple, to celebrate the rites of a grand
solemnity: It ran in my mind that I might peradventure be able (hid amongst the
nocturnal umbrages, and covered with woman's apparel) to weave a pleasant snare
for my proud enemy; from which if I should get no other, I should at least with
discourse in some part vent my grief, and perhaps that Love would second with
greater success the lively force of my words, than he had done the dead
Characters of my Letter. This proposition being resolved on, and the night
desired being come, I dressed my self in a suit of Belisa my sister, and with the
only attendance of Diffilus, who in like manner habited did conduct me into
the Temple; and just in the place where he knew Lucinda would sit, he placed
me. And though the tenderness of my age, which then scarce passing the
eighteenth year, had not yet covered my face with the first down; and the
uncertain twilight, which in the nocturnal darkresse the burning Tapers formed,
did exceedingly favor our design: I kept nevertheless with pretext of the
coldness of the winter-season my face covered with a Vail, to avoid the
curiosity of the eyes of them, who frequent the Temple for no other end, than
with their looks to lay siege to Ladies. Scarce was I settled in that place,
when Lucinda appeared accompanied with so numerous a train of servants, that I
esteemed it a thing almost hopeless to get any occasion to speak to her. Now
while she was approaching to my seat, me-thought that my heart skipping within
me, would have leapt out of my breast; and they that at that time had observed
my face would have judged me mortally wounded; it was at that instant
overspread with so strange a palenesse. Yet in the end Lucinda was come close
to me, and by the singularity of my dress and deportment, believing me to be a
Lady of great quality; courteously saluting me, she sat down close by me: But
what I answered to her civil Salute, I cannot remember; my spirits being at
that time lost in consideration of the presence of her, who was the sole cause
of all my enthusiasms, so that they were disabled to all external functions.
Yet recollecting by little and little my banished forces, more by the benefit
of the nights obscurity than by any violence I knew how to offer on my self;
being assisted also by the sollitude in which Lucinda remained (the crowd of
her servants being withdrawn into several parts of the Temple) I began plainly
in this manner to express my mind.

Dear Lucinda, if Fortune shall but grant me as much ability to express my
torments, as you have power to make me feel them; I should repute my self no
less fortunate then you be fair. It will therefore concern your affability not
to regard the confusion of my speeches, but to consider the afflictions of my
heart, that compels me to pronounce them. I know not, courteous Madam, what
profit you can expect from my ruin; nor what good you can extract from my evil.
The tearing of my Letter was truly an impetuous motion of an offended mind:
but the continual rending of my heart can be imputed to no less then an excess
of cruelty. If this agree to a beautiful Lady, I leave you your self to judge.
And what excuse can you find that may stand you instead to defend the severity
of your treatment toward him, who loves you above his own life, or rather that
as to his Terrene Goddess, consecrateth upon the Altar of his fidelity, his
heart in a perpetual Holocaust? You might easily, Madam, openly discover in my
languishing looks what be the torments occasioned no less by your beauty then
by your rigor: and yet the suffering them grieves me not a jot, I am only
displeased that you are not pleased to accept my sufference; Sweeten, I implore
you, with the drop of some favor the bitterness of such severity: for that
Lady spots not the candor of her honesty, which with a single syllable of
courtesy favors the affects of a noble Cavalier her Adorer. Other favor,
Madam, I request not of you than verbal. It suffices me you be still served by
honoring me with the Title of your Slave, and some declaration that my
services are not indifferent to you; blessing me now and then with a
compassionate look. It Is but a poor word, it is but a transient glance to one,
whom it may recall from death to life.

Thus proceeded I with a languishing voice, intermingling my prayers with my
tears: But Lucinda (I believe that indignation would not permit her before, to
reply) when she perceived me thus run on, with a trembling and discomposed
voice (a sign of great agitation of spirit) thus interrupted me.

Arnaldo, I answer at this time to your propositions to the end you deceive not
your self in the judgment you may pass upon my intentions, and lest perhaps
presuming upon my silence, you may not nourish some fallacious hope to your
prejudice and my own dishonor. I shall know of a truth that you love me, if
with desisting from your unadvised enterprise you will cease to trouble me. It
is not for me to teach you what means you should use to cure this amorous
infirmity: but if you be but as discreet in your desires, as with your sighs
you pretend to make me believe you are passionate; you would be able of your
self to investigate the same.

I use not to you that tigour which I ought, because I reverence your birth;
but provoke me not in coming in this form, for you shall draw with security
little satisfaction from your boldness. Consider therefore, and remember that
deceivers are wont to fall into the Nets of the deceits they intended for
others.

This answer of Lucinda was like Oil, which, powered upon my burning heart, made
the flame of my dolours to soment the more, since the more her words diminished
my hope, the more they increased my desire of possessing her. Thence by
considering the Divine beauty of her countenance, and by harkening to the grace
of her celestial discourse, ravished out of my self, I retained not in me any
part of life, but only Memory, which attentively waited if it might be able to
draw any thing of benefit from that congression. But she nevertheless having
done speaking, and making as if she would be gone, if immediately I did not obey
her, I retired most disconsolate out of the Temple, and being returned to my
house, I shut my self into my Closet, and there reasoned to my self.

Miserable Arnaldo! What hope can be able still to flatter thy disconsolate
heart to mislead thy tormented spirit? Perceivest thou not, O wretch, that thy
unbridled desire having led thee too high, menaceth thee with some miserable
precipice? And can thou with open eyes behold this ruin, without procuring to
thy self at least that assistance which reason offers thee, of freeing thy self
from the snares of this perfidious Love, which only to render thee unhappy is
come to disturb thy peace with his importunate furies? Alas! Alas, too vain are
my thoughts, and too rash my purposes. It Is impossible that I can ever heal
this amorous infirmity, if beauty it self, which bred it in my breast do not
cure it, But not daring to hope that; what remains but that I miserably perish?
My disconsolate spirit! wherefore stayest thou any longer in this thy miserable
abode, now that it is become a ruthlesse Hell of uncomfortable afflictions?
Unfortunate Arnaldo! When thou beginnest to want strength, thou beginst to
augment thy torments; and instead of seeking a Salve to thy evils by the
constancy of a generous Cavalier, thou losest thy self in the weakness of
vulgar Lovers! And how long have thou served Lucinda, that she ought to give
thee her Love? With the price then of a few months of servitude would thou
go about to purchase the reward of her favor? The gifts of Love are not
obtained with so little labor. And again: Ladies desire to try the fidelity of
their servants with slighting them: but after the Tempest of contempts, follows
the serenity of favors, which they concede to their faithful Lovers. Love
therefore thy Lucinda; and since thy passions are not of a kind that do offend
the Laws of the World or of Heaven, hope that the World and Heaven ought to
assist thee in pursuing the end of thy servid and honest Love.

Thus, agitated betwixt diverse purposes, and lacerated by various skirmishes of
different affects, I knew not to which part, either of hope, or of desperation,
to betake my self: but like a ship in the main Ocean tossed by the winds, and
assaul^ed by the Waves, I lived incloistered in the solitude of my Lodgings,
without ever going out of the storm of my sadness, grief, and sorrow: I
obscured by the Clouds of sundry perturbations, all light of the knowledge of
my unhappy state, and bereft my self of all the directions of reason to arrive
to the Port of Consolations, by the unsafe complacency I took in my Enemie's
beauty.

Arnaldo; or, the Injured Lover.
Book II.
FOr as much as the King saw me not to appear any more in Court, and
understanding in part my new affliction; thinking perhaps to please me, he
elected me maintainer of a Justing which he had proclaimed for the approaching
feast of the Spring. And though I was at that time more disposed to
retiredness then to the company of Gallants; yet because I would not displease
the King, I accepted of it. Thereupon, my Soul flattered with I know not what
gale of alacrity, I not only prepared my self to the designed enterprise* but
communicated my resolutions to a certain number of youthful Knights, and we
agreed upon a most capricious Mask to present at the feast which, the night
following the Turnament should be celebrated in the Royal Hall. But for as much
as the desire of glory did not ease my heart so much of the weight of its
afflictions, that they did not still press me down to the center of
melancholy; being got up with the Aurora of that fatal day; I would have the
sadness of my habit accompany into the field the sorrow of my mind. So mounted
on a Thracian Courser, I appeared in a military posture, armed with black Arms,
with a Cassock of black Velvet imbroidered with studs of Pearl: an emblem of
my tears. The creft of my Helm was dignified with no other ensign, than a
mournful Plume of sable feathers. But in my shield I had caused to be
depainted a Limbeck from which did drop-in diverse parts of the distilled water
with this Motto: And within burns. Now whilst the elected Knights prepared to
the course, I vaulted upon my Horse before the Scaffold of the Queen, and
raising my eyes by chance, I saw my fair Lucinda, which upon an adjoining
Scaffold wrapped in her mournful Mantle (in those Countries they wear the
mourning for their Parents a complete year) darted through those Clouds the
luminous rays of her Divine face, and menaced with death, who ever through too
much boldness should have attempted to fix their looks, on the immortal Sun of
that glittering beauty. What befell me upon so unexpected and astonishing a
sight, if ever you have been a Lover, you are able to judge. I think I should
never have remembered the affair that had called me into that place (I was so
besides my self), if Lucinda taking notice of my stupefaction, with a sudden
fiction of talking with another Lady of her acquaintance, had not, in depriving
me of the serenity of her face, made me to forsee the tempest, which began to
rise in my heart, which, calmed in part by the consideration of my duty in so
great an occurrence, I in the end gave beginning to the Tilting; of which as
the incounters and accidents were various, so it would be necessary I should
expatiate in a superfluous discourse if I should recount them all: It shall
suffice to tell you, that my success in that adventure was such, as I was not
able to desire more with my vows to Fortune for the increasement of my glory:
if love of glory had been able at that time to open a way in that breast which
knew no other affect then the love of Lucinda.

The Turnament being concluded with the day, and accompanied with the applause
of all people to my house, I disarmed, and masked my self with the rest of the
Knights my companions; and came into the Hall appointed for the Ball, where, in
the presence of the King, the dances were begun. My consorts each of them
having took out his Lady to dance, I withdrew my self apart, more then ever
troubled with my fears, and distracted by my griefs to see my self poor in that
good of which I had so much need, and rich in that evil which I did so much
abhor. Yet finally, (thrust forward by that desire, which, enkindling in my
Soul, did set me all on fire) I drew near also with trembling feet to my fair
Lucinda to invite her to dance, with almost a certain credence of being
refused. And truly the suspension of that Lady confirmed my belief: But yet in
the end constrained by generosity, and by the accustomed frequency of such
passages, she courteously gave me her hand. But what passions did not torment
my wretched heart, seeing my felicity so nigh me, and the remedy of my
infelicity so remote? The dance being ended, which made me with its turns to
experiment in my Soul, the turning of Ixions wheel to torment me; Lucinda,
(perhaps annoyed with my presence), sat her self down so near the Queen, that
it was impossible for me to speak a word to her: wherefore withdrawing (almost
in desperation) into a Wardrobe of the Kings, I assumed a resolution to try my
Fortune again by writing. And thus amidst the confusions of my spirit I indicted
upon the Paper these confused words.

Arnaldo to Lucinda.
LUcinda, If I was granted as well the means to redressing my misfortunes, as I
have occasion of expressing them; I am certain I should be more contented, than
now I find my self agrieved: But seeing you have bereft from my heart all
feeling of consolation, though not from my mind all sense of good judgment;
have patience also, I beseech you, if I write to you that which does not please
you. But what can I write, since I have written and said so much already of my
passions and miseries? Let it suffice you to know, that except you be in the
end moved with commiseration of my passion and sufferings, you shall in a short
time see the date of my life terminated in my death. And yet, alas, you might
with more ease, if you so pleased, collect the infinity of my sufferings, from
my words and from my tears, which abound in my eyes, the speaking mirrours of
inamoured and languishing minds. I am truly miserable, since the more constant
my fidelity is, the more remiss you are in vouchsafing it a recompense. And
whereas you think, that by giving peace to my life you must proclaim War
against your virtue; I will not desire you to do any thing, nor will I speak
any thing that may offend you. It shall content me, if you but only vouchsafe
sometimes to cast your eye on my torments, so that the sweetness of your looks
may allay the sharpness of my sorrow: for by this slight favor you may easily
obtain pardon for the many injuries you have so often done me. For this only,
be not I beseech you so mortal an Enemy; for if you desire I should dye, I also
will not much desire to live; and so we may with little labor both receive
satisfaction: where as on the other side denying me this, the memory of your
cruelty and my death would be eternalliz'd. I verily believe, that if you would
but follow for a little the impulse of reason, you should see how that it is an
act unworthy of a noble, and courteous Lady, to torment those that offend you
not; unless you can call offense my constancy in loving you, and the
resolution I have taken of always serving you. But if you continue in the same
opinion which you have formerly expressed, remember a little, remember, Lucinda,
the sufferings that I undergo: I am confident that if my torments were but
considered by you according to what they are; you would rather repent them,
then perpetuallize them with so much severity. And really it is a strange thing
and almost incredible, that you had rather be cruel to those that love you,
than be served by those that adore you. For, did you but condescend to consider
the sorrow you return me in recompense of the services I tender to you, I
assure my self, that you would plainly see how in glorious it is to insult in
my ruin. I conclude this my passionate discourse, words being superfluous after
that my presence has presented you with so many demonstrations of my torments.
Look upon me only, look upon me, O beautiful occasion of all my dysasters:
least otherwise, deprived of the blessed gales of your serene looks, the
desperation which I have of my life, provoke me to solicit the death so much
desired by

ARNALDO.


THis Letter being written and sealed, I returned into the Hall, where coming
in a certain throng near to Lucinda, I put it in the slieve of her upper
Garment; and withdrew to observe how she would entertain it. But for a long
time that I had watched her, I could observe nothing: Whereupon I flattered my
self with the hope of some prosperous success to my attempt. I was therefore
so distracted with this perplexity of thoughts, that I either answered nothing,
or else besides the purpose to those who entertained me with some discourse of
the present Occurrences, either of the Ball, or Court. And he that in that
instant had touched my breast, might easily have felt the palpitations of my
heart caused by desire, and perplexing fear, the daughters of a desperate Love.

The time being come at last, that (the Ball being ended) every one retired to
their own house, observing that Lucinda would take leave of the Queen, I waited
on her, disguised in an unknown Garb, not only home to her house, but into her
Chamber, without being able to observe any thing in her that contributed so
much as an atome to my hope. Hence being little inclined to rest for that
night, I dispatched Diffilus thither at the same time, to bring me back some
news of the fortune of that Paper, which I had adventured in the slieve of
Lucinda: but he could hear nothing good or bad. Whereupon my natural vigor
diminishing by this fixed application, and my grief increasing, continually
scalding my heart in the inextinguishable flames of sighs, I became wholly
melancholy and solitary, never desiring to see the face of the Sun more, out of
my Chamber.

Hereupon Belisa my sister, moved to compassion of my misery, as one who felt a
great part of it her self; sitting down close by me one day, she weeping said.
Ah! my dear brother, I, entreat thee to acquaint me with the fatal cause of
this grief, which so much afflicts thee. See thou not that thy affliction is
my torment; and that the love I bear thee, makes me to live for thy sorrow a
most unhappy life? Thou have many times confessed thy self to be my debtor, and
that thou would recompense my love with a reciprocal affection; But you deny
me that with your actions, which you confirm to me with your words. You know
very well, that such like dissimulation ought not to have place near me: make
therefore my breast the depository of thy passions. And to whom will thou
commit them, if thou will not entrust them to me? Do but think that if thou
desire death, I will not wish for life; If thou hate pleasure, I will love
sorrow; If thou delightest in trouble, I will be displeased with repose: so
that thy malady and my torment are one and the same thing to excruciate my
heart. If therefore you desire to ventilate your passion, with whom better can
you do it then with me, that am never sparing in wishing your good? I am sure
that discharging one part of it upon me, we shall together be the better able
to bear it. For if thou have a desire to weep, I will weep: if you will comfort
your self in your grief, I will expedite my consolation: and if you desire to
conceal and nourish it, we two can be better able then thou alone to hide and
feed it. Show not, I pray thee, so little confidence in her which has nothing
in all the world that is not thine; and make it believed in the end, that thy
dissimulation cannot falsify my judgment; whilst thy tears and thy sighs, thy
sadness, and thy solitude accuse me, and too plainly discover, that which you
seek with such care to hide and conceal. It Is certain, death ought to be less
powerful then brotherly love; and that therefore death it self shall be most
welcome to me, when by it thou shall come to acquire a joyful life, since that
I see thee arrived to that pass, that thou can not long continue alive. But
I had rather you would assume the spirits of your generosity, and cheer up your
self, considering that fortune is always an Enemy of the happy, and favorable
to the afflicted: and therefore she being by nature fickle and inconstant,
whereas it befits the fortunate to fear, I would have thee accustom thy self to
hope in her vicissitude. She ever causes new actions for the trial of our
minds, because her puissance is better known by the prosperous, then by the
calamitous. Reserve not therefore thy anxious solitude to thy self alone: for,
if greater is the evil that is hid, than the evil that is manifest, thy
communicating of it to me may afford thee some succor. I entreat thee, dear
brother, I entreat thee, let the Key of my counsel open for thee the Door of
thy comfort and health; the peril that is concealed being always greater in
every occurrence, then that which is discovered. Speak to me therefore, if you
love me, and love that we should live together, whether it be dolefully or
cheerfully.

Here Belisa sighing, held her peace: I replied. Thou have so afflicted me
(dear sister) with thy passion, that in some measure to comfort thee, I must be
forced to tell thee what I am unwilling to disclose. I pray you, before I
reveal my condition to you any farther, not to trouble your self with any
superfluous care, because I shall see an end of my days, before you shall see
a beginning of the remedy to my dysasters. Know therefore (sister) that, more
by impulse of strange Fortune, then by any act of my own will, I was compelled
to stoop to the Laws of Love, by which Fortune has desired to make me acquire
so much with the merit of my service, that to my torment I have felt the
ingratitude of her I served. My misfortunes have already taken so deep
impression in my heart, that Fortune in vain forces her self with her slow
revolutions to bring any Medicine of comfort: so that if death in the end do
not succor me, relief will come too late from other parts. I will not then
despair of life, even in a continual death; and therefore I pray thee, dear
sister, rather to comfort then afflict thy self, that thou hast^ a brother,
which knows how, and is able to undergo (conquering himself) so many troubles.
For if yet you desire I should be comforted, and you would do me a good office;
let me never see thy face so deluged in tears: for if tears could mitigate my
passion, mine alone would be sufficient; whereas thine do but increase my
torments instead of contributing relief. In brief, I was born to languish, thou
to rejoice: and therefore attend to thy Jollities, which better suit to the
feebleness of thy Sex and to the tenderness of thy years; and leave this
sorrow to me, as more corresponding to virile fortitude, and to the proof of my
constancy. For if you will deport your self otherwise, I shall believe that you
love me but little whilst you persist to afflict me with your sadness,
redoubling the grief which is of it self but too heavy to be supported. Comfort
thy self yet, comfort thy self Belisa, for thy consolation will be a great part
of my redress, when I shall receive thy joy as a sign of the love thou bear
to me.

Belisa, seeing she could not get any thing out of me of what she desired,
determined to let me alone, and inform her self better by other means. But, I
having already imparted this my misadventure (without acquainting him with the
occasion) to a Knight my friend; (not so much because I held any great
confidence in his fidelity, as because of the vicinity of his house to that of
my fair Enemy: considering that from every part my pains increased, I resolved
to vent my passion to him afresh, fancying the encounter at least of some
occasion of comforting my self sometimes in the sight of her, who though I did
not see, yet had stuck so many darts of grief in my breast. I caused him to be
sent for to my Chamber, and seeing him so compassionate of my adversities, as
that he made a show he would subvert the world to relieve me; I, as one who
easily believed what I desired, said unto him.

Friend Jersus, If I go about now to discover to thee that, which I have so
long concealed, of my afflictions; yet believe that I am constrained to it by
the high confidence I hold of thy loyalty, and the love thou bear me.
Besides, if hitherto it has been a virtue to bury my griefs in silence, at the
present it is a vice; since, after so long a siege of torments, I must yield to
the assaults of Love and Death. And from what may I better request succor in
such anguish to the distraction of my tormented heart, than from thy fidelity,
and from thy courtesy, whilst that death pursues me, and that life rather
offends then helps me? This cruel assault began (dear friend) from that day on
which the father of Lucinda died, for then died in me all light of content;
never knowing what truce or peace was to an anxious mind. For, Love seeing me
so free, and disengaged from his Laws, that I derided his power, resolved to
assault me with all the force of his Empire; and though vigorous and great was
my defense, he had fought with such sharpness and assiduity, that I was
deprived of all succor of reason, or of desperation, and I saw my self come to
that pass that I was forced to render my self to the discretion of his
tyrannical indiscretion. And if thou think (dear Jersus) that I talking
thus, am out of my right senses, believe me, friend, it would be the greatest
of my felicities to be deprived of judgment; as the greatest of my
infelicities comes from the knowledge of, and inability to redress, my
dysasters: Whereas if I were deprived of understanding, as I could hope no
good, so I would fear no evil; but being free from the tumults of passion, and
the Wars of the senses, I would live full of inward tranquillity. Behold me
therefore reduced to so miserable a state, that I know not whither to have
recourse for succor in these last minutes of my life, unless to the candor
of our friendship, which, with the Arms of thy counsels, and thy courtesy, are
able to raise from about my Soul the tedious Leaguer of my living death, and
dying hopes; The adjacency of thy house to that of my fair and inflexible
Enemy, may at leastwise stand me in so much stead, as to open to me a door of
escape, either by means of hope or despair. The reality of thy Amity (which in
necessity is best-experimented and known) may be able with the prudence of thy
advice and endeavors, wholly to set me free: for I know very well that thou
have more desire to gratify me herein, then I have to entreat thee to it.

Having thus said, I held my peace, and Jersus promptly replied; Friend
Arnaldo, I might justly be offended at the diffidence, which thou show to
have so long had of my Loyalty, concealing thy troubles from me, and revealing
them just now, when by the Laws of Love thou wast bound to suppress them. What
have thou got by thy silence, which has deprived thee of the benefit thou
might have acquired, and drawn upon thee that mischief thou did not merit?
I shall nevertheless forbear to aggravate thy grief with superfluous
loquacity, being my self but too much troubled for thy afflictions, which the
sense of Pity and the bond of Amity has made common to me. Thou say, The
beauty of Lucinda destroys thy life, and she it is does also ruin my health;
for as much then, as I know no difference between my will and thine: since that
thou requirest my counsel in such an exigent, assure thy self that if my advice
might but as much avail thee, as thy malady torments me; thou would
immediately be free, from all sense of either perplexity, or pain. Yet to tell
thee my thoughts plainly, it does astonish and grieve me to think, that thou
should voluntarily consent, that the greatness of thy courage should be
foild and overcome by a thing so weak and contemptible; and that thou which
were wont to bear the victory from the bravest Cavaliers in the world,
should be overcome by a Feminine feebleness. And for the further increase
of my disgusts, I see that thy Soul is that which falsifieth thy faith, and
tenders thee in a manner a rebel to reason: for thou make thy self the
minister to thy own servitude and calamity. Fly therefore such extremes of
Love, which transport thee to an extreme unworthiness: not that I would have
thee banish it wholly from thy knowledge (there being no less peril in too
much solicitude to avoid it, then in too much assiduity to pursue it) but that
thou esteem it, fear it, seek it, and contemn it with a generosity and liberty
worthy of thy noble blood, and of thy great Soul. For if Love be of it self a
deceitful affect, do thou also deceive him; his Laws being such, that he, who
loves least, obtains the greatest recompense; and who serves most,
receives the greatest ingratitude. In sum, I consent that thou shall follow
Love, but not make thy self his Slave; and that thou despise him not, but much
less that thou trust him at any hand. Consider that hope in easy things
deceives, in difficult betrayeth; and that Fortune gives an unexpected issue
to all humane affairs: and therefore seeing it is the cause of thy sorrow, do
thou also deceive it in making it the means of thy joy. For I assure thee, if
thou would follow my counsel (now that I request thee) thou shall easily by
this means obtain that, which thou shall certainly lose by going to my house;
in which nevertheless thou art absolute master, when, and how thou please.
And certainly thou have done thy self great wrong to delay so long to
contribute to thy comfort: knowing that thou art more lord of my will, then I
am of my own house: and for that cause I am obliged to serve thee in all
occurrences wherein I may be useful. I shall say no more, for words are
fruitless, where my thought is only of comforting thee, and not to perplex
thee with talk. And therefore now, if you so please, let us go to make a trial
of my Wit, and of thy Fortune.

Thus said Jersus, but whilst I heard him talk so sinisterly of Lucinda, I
felt my heart equally to boil with disdain, and my mind to freeze with
suspicion and jealousy: Yet with dissembling speeches he sought to make me
believe that superfluity of Love would make me rave in my thoughts. So I partly
distrusted him, and partly assured my self that in regard of our ancient
friendship he would observe that which he promised. Seeing therefore that he
had so freely offered me his house, I resolved to go live there for some days:
but I soon found my self frustrated in my hopes, for with all the diligence I
could possibly use, I could not in all the time I stayed there, come so much as
once to the sight of her, for whose sake I had removed unto that Lodging.
Hereupon Belisa, afflicted in my present peril, by the consideration of my
future pain, at last investigating the cause of my malady, she changed her
course of life, and without making me in the least privy to her design, began
to frequent the house of Lucinda, with whom she had before upon some other
account contracted friendship; so that one day she being entered into discourse
with her, finding her in a good humor, she thus spoke to her.

I entreat thee, my friend, that using thy prudence thou will not blame me for
that, which I am about to tell thee, presuming rather to merit applause then
reprehension; whilst my compassion of another's misery excuses my shame. Dear
Lucinda, my deplorable brother Arnaldo, for his great affection to thee daily
increases his affliction, impaireth his health, impoisoning even those
remedies which should restore him to it. Not that I have the least intimation
from him of his Love, having always denied the true cause of his torments: but
yet I have been so sollicitous to sift out the truth, that I have come to know,
that thou only art the cause of his misery, and may become the restorer of
his life. I have for this reason resolved to strain modesty, to provide (if I
can possible) for his safety and my sorrow. And I profess, that if I did not
see his life in danger, thou should not have known the least hint of my
trouble. Moved therefore by a compassionate zeal for his conservation, and to
redress my own calamity, (because wanting him, who in the quality of an only
brother supplieth the place of my deceased Parents, I should be left solitary
and disconsolate): I come to entreat thee, that thou would not at once with
his life, annihilate my consolation, and decollate our family; acquiring to thy
self instead of a perpetual glory, an eternal infamy for thy cruelty and his
death: for certain I am, he cannot, so ill treated as he is, prolong his life
beyond the date of a few months. O consider, I beseech thee, consider, how
much thou art obliged to him, whilst the more thou slightest him, the more he
loves thee: and only desires death, because thou art displeased with his
life. Herein, while he for love of thee joys in his torments, and none know
that thou art she which so much afflictest him, thou art doubly engaged to him;
and therefore at last relent into commiseration of his so great indurance, and
permit not his fidelity to perish by thy ingratiude. What though thou art not
pleased to receive him to the honor of thy conversation, wilt not thou
therefore gratify him at least with an answer to his Letter? And if yet thou will not do it, by instinct of a grateful mind toward him, yet do it, dear
Luc^nda, for courtesy toward me: who, in so doing, of a faithful friend that
I am, thou shall oblige me to become thy perpetual slave. Let it content thee
that it is now two years, that I have languished under these sufferings, and
restore me, since thou may do it without trouble.

Lucinda presently replied: My dear friend and companion; Thou have no ground
to fear that thou have in any kind prejudiced thy Modesty, whilst the pity of
a Brother and the confidence of a Friend absolves thee of all suspicion, and
frees thee from all aspersion. For though thou have in part offended me with
thy propositions, thou have also satisfied me with thy honest innocence: there
being more cause thou should grieve at thy brother's misfortunes, than for
any fault thou might commit against my person. It exceedingly grieves me
that I cannot give thee the satisfaction which thou desire, for although the
misery of thy brother afflicts me, yet I cannot apply my self to give him a
remedy; that being a thing would reflect upon my reputation, to which I ought
to have greater regard than to his health. And thou art not ignorant, how much
the honor of a woman is diminished, when to succor Lovers they forget
themselves. Request me not therefore to do that, which thou can not do thy
self: and I would it had pleased God, that thou did not desire of me a thing
impossible for my power to effect, and thou should soon see how much I love
thee by my removing thy trouble. Heaven knows how often it has grieved me, that
this my beauty has been the occasion of so much mischief to Arnaldo: How often I
have condol'd his tears when I considered, he importuned me to a thing I could
not grant. Believe me, friend; that I have a greater desire to acquit him of
his maladyes, then thou have to request me. And if by any other means, than
that of my honor, I might give him ease; believe me, I would more freely offer
it, than he should desire it. But because his acquist cannot be, but with my
loss; he ought to content himself with the goodwill I conserve toward him (of
which I desire thee to give him assurance,) as also the grief I suffer for the
pain he indureth. Do thou also excuse me, beloved Belisa, if I concede not to
all that thou wishest; because I am not permitted, with a Salvo to my honor,
to grant thee any advantage; and rest secure that in all other occurrences,
thou shall always find me most ready at thy beck.

After some other such like passages, Belisa returned to me, and to comfort me
said, that she came from visiting Lucinda: but hiding from me her fatal answer,
she wisely endeavored to make me hope that which she had been denied. But
perfectly perceiving by her silence, how ill she had succeeded in her attempt,
it came into my mind to penetrate yet farther into the breast of Lucinda. I
feigned therefore that I had no desire to think more of her life, since she
cared so little for my duty; and prayed Belisa, that the next time she saw her,
she would give her to understand this my resolution, of seeking for the time to
come to learn to be my self, that I might not do so much to my prejudice in the
love of a person, that was to me so ungrateful. And Belisa having promised to
content me, I proceeded to instruct her, punctually to observe that Lady's
countenance and behavior upon the reception of my message; because I could
better from this then from her words, be able to comprehend the truth of her
intentions: And above all, that she should note well the change of colors in
her face; for by them commonly the affects of the mind, and impressions of the
heart do manifest themselves. From the manner also of her speech, either
deliberate, or hasty, I would have been able to draw some observations of her
thoughts; (for from speaking with leisure or liberty, with anxiety or celerity,
much may be collected of another's purposes;) which may but ill be dissembled
by the external appearance. Belisa writ these advertisements in her memory,
against she should see a convenient occasion to meet with Lucinda; and finding
her on a time alone, she bespoke her in this manner.

Lucinda, if my propositions shall as much offend thee, as they make me blush,
impute to the inconstancy of humane desires this my importunity, occasioned for
thy service, rather then the relief of my brother: who, in short, seeing that
he reaped no profit of his services, and that they increased thy contempt of
him, has resolved to put himself upon an impossible enterprise, which is, to
cease farther to incommode thee with his amorous Passions: yet, impossible as
it is, he will attempt it, making his absence a medicine for thy homicide, and
his death; for he hopes to obtain that by this voluntary exile, which thy
presence permits him not to find. But, if even thou also shall consent to this
resolution, I assure thee, friend, that I shall procure my death rather then
survive this misfortune. And thus I shall come to be betrayed by you both, whom
I so much love, like mortal enemies; dying not for having offended you, but for
having too much affected you. Can it be possible, dear Lucinda, that thou will
be so cruel to such a fidelity as my brother professes to thee, and so
ungrateful to such an Amity as I bear to thee? And how can thou ever possess
her Will entire, whose Life thou rendest in pieces? How can thou nourish a
legitimate correspondence of friendship with her, thou so inhumanely
transfixest? Oh reform at length with new Laws such thy implacable
obdurateness, which thou falsely call zeal of honor, when as that Lady
does not in the least offend her virtue, who correspondeth to the legitimate
Affection of a Knight, which loves, and serves her according to the stablished
Laws of Heaven, and Nature. I hope I pretend not to have thee decline the least
punctilio of thy virtue; but I verily believe, that if thou would grant me
what I ask, thou might glory in having, with a small benevolence, restored
to life, two persons otherwise dead. There is nothing doubtless lost of thy
reputation, whilst thou do but prevent the perdition of a Knight that adores
thee, and salve the misery of a Dame that loves thee. Make them therefore but
only to understand in two words, that thou art not pleased with his departure,
and that thou art displeased with her despair. It is but a small matter I beg,
the writing of two lines of complement, for the reprieve of two lives, without
prejudicing thy self.

Here Belisa concluded her discourse by the commencing of her tears, giving
Lucinda time to reply in this manner. I entreat thee to cease these tears, and
sweeten the bitterness of thy grief; for I shall do all I can for thy
satisfaction and comfort. But I would to God I were for the present without a
tongue, that I might not speak for love of thee a thing so opposite to reason.
Thou ought not to glory in the power that thou have over my heart; for if in
this particular I shall commit any error, thou only art to be blamed; having
with thy loving importunity forced me to do what I would not. I suspend
therefore my resentments, that I may content thee, desiring thee only to
accept my good will, and not to slight my gifts after thou have once received
them: it being an ordinary custom of men, highly to esteem things difficult to
attain, and despise them when gotten. I will write to Arnaldo, but look to it,
that he hereafter adventures not to desire any thing farther of me; for I
assure thee, that by seeking to make greater acquists, he will lose what he
has acquired. For I confess unto thee, that I repent already of my promise,
which yet, since it pleases thee, I cannot retract. Write I will, but I had
rather the earth had opened to swallow me, than it should have entered into my
mind, in this to have gratified thee. This said, Lucinda took her pen, and with
great discomposure of mind, writ to me in these words.

Lucinda to Arnaldo.
I Believe, Arnaldo, that my letter will find you more merry then it has left
me sad: But thou would not have an occasion to complain of me, if now when I
moved this hand to write, it had been dried up, rather then render its liberty
at another's persuasion to give thee, not being in the least indebted to thee,
too precious a pledge. Yet notwithstanding, I would not have thee presume, upon
my present writing to thee, that it is because thou have been offended at my
past silence. Receive this my letter therefore with moderate resentments:
wisely dissembling thy joy at this thy good fortune; as thou have done the
vehemence of thy Love. And above all, remember Arnaldo that when men go about
to publish such like Victories over women, they make a sacrifice of their
honors, exposing them to the calumnies of contumelious tongues. For if thou
know what thou stand in need of, thou should also remember, what is
fit for me to do; having always in thy eye, that to comply with thee, I am
become of a Lady a Slave, or rather an enemy to my self; for when thou shall
sing of thy glory, I shall be condoling of my faults. O how many times have I
took my hand off from this paper with a resolution not to write to thee! But
alas! what should she do, that cannot defend her self from thy importunities?
Go to, rest at last from thy troubles, take a resolution of thy doubts, and
glory in that thou have no more occasion of contrast. I have understood by thy
sister, that thou will travel into some other Country, at which I am greatly
displeased; for who cannot be isntrumental to the good of another, should
avoid all occasions of doing them harm. I yet (to confess the truth) have
judged that this thy invention, is rather feigned then real: so that if thou
intendest to deceive me, Lo now thou have done it. But I must tell thee, that
in deceiving me thou have cosened thy self: and that thou shall not be a jot
the better for the tricks you Lovers make use of, that you may triumph in
deceiving the constancy of those unfortunate maids, that trust you. Boast not
therefore in thy subtilty, and believe me not to be such a fool, as I think
thee in this particular. In short, I would have thee know, that its more out of
compassion of thy sufferings, then for any fear of thy departure, that I am
persuaded to write to thee: or rather for pity of thy Sister, whose sorrows,
as evidences of the torments she suffers for thy sake, I have been no longer
able to endure. Of all this I thought good to advertise thee by this my letter,
with which I desire you to rest content, without pretending to any further
advantage: otherwise thou may chance to lose that, which for the merits of
thy Sister thou have acquired. Comfort thy self therefore within thy self, and
suffer me in peace; for although thy departure would displease me, I intend not
nevertheless that thy stay shall turn to my prejudice: and especially have a
care it enter not into thy thoughts to desire to see, or speak with me, that so
thy importunity impose not upon me a necessity of displeasing thee afresh by my
denyals. Use thy discretion and live happily.

LUCINDA.


THis letter being writ and delivered to my sister, Lucinda withdrew, and
Belisa run to seek me, to give it to me. I received it with the same joy, a
Miser would have entertained a Treasure; or the Mortally-sick-patient, a
healthful Medicine; not being able almost to suffer my self to understand this
good Fortune. At last, I awaking out of my stupor, Belisa recounted to me the
discourses held with this Fair one; the which having understood, I set my self
with a high attention to the reading this letter: but he that should have then
seen my face shining with a new color of pleasantness, might thereby have
collected how much virtue and vivacity those inanimate characters had infused
into my dead soul. Yet this my joy was of no long durance, for I did presently
prove in my self how true it was, that high soring flights are near the most
precipitous falls, I being past from a supreme content, to an extreme
desperation. Thus I stood a good space, fighting between joy and grief, without
knowing to which part to betake me; for when I thought to take heart, the
little hope I had did not permit me; and if I thought of afflicting my self,
the good will I seemed to see in Lucinda, did not suffer me. Wanting therefore
the counsel of others, I resolved to answer her Letter in these words.

Arnaldo to Lucinda.
LUcinda, your Letter brought in its first appearance an inexplicable pleasure.
But the joy I took in seeing it, is vanished in reading it, by the return of a
greater confusion of sadness. Thus that Paper which [sealed] promised me
remedy, [open] confirmed me in my misery: so that judging by it of your
intention, I saw my ruin nearer then my relief. But if, Lucinda, you write to
me, how that you compassionate my misfortunes, wherefore do you all you can to
afflict me? your words correspond not with your actions; but as crafty as you
are, you at the same time thrust me away with your heart, and flatter me with
hope; and bespeak your self resolved never to put an end to my torments, but
with my death. Wherefore use you such dissimulation with him that adores you?
Ah! Lucinda, I had far rather that you were doubtful of my sufferings, then
that believing them you should not seek to remove them. And what am I the
better for your advice, To use your favors moderately, if you your self
cancel and provoke them, in the same instant you bestow them? If you were but
as willing to cure my maladies, as I have been patient to undergo them, my
Passion would not have any thing in it wherewith to torment me: I having
always veiled my flames with a perpetual silence; whereas your favors come so
difficultly from you, that almost as soon as they are born they languish to my
greater prejudice. If therefore it be true that you desire my satisfaction,
depose your severity: if you would that I should believe you, lay aside this
dissimulation. Content your self that you have robbed me of the better part of
my life, and that I am now running upon my own accord to death, without
desiring me by these fallacious hopes to prolong my life, to endure every
minute a centuplicated death. In short, since the more my faithfulness shows
it self, the further I am from my reward, and you have resolved that I die; die
I will. And because that in this place, seeing my self so afflicted by your
cruelty, I cannot behold others jollity without a multiplied and Tantalizing
torment; I will go die in a place so remote from all humane conversation, that
the name of Arnaldo shall never arive to the notice of any man. Yet before I
depart, I beg of you this only favor to see you; and because you shall not
think that I request any thing of you, unbefitting my Honor and your
Reputation; I entreat you to do it in so open a place that malice it self can
find no occasion to censure you: and this also more for your own service then
for my satisfaction; that so in my discolored complexion you may read the
power of your beauty; of which I am a perpetual Idolater: consecrating my self
an eternal Slave of Love, vowing to reverence and adore you to the last minute
of my life. Yet I herein deny not the Deities to be adored and supplicated.
Condescend you therefore to vouchsafe me a favor, which shall redound more to
your glory than to my content: Till then I render you most humble thanks, for
the honor done me with your Letter, and, prostrate at your feet, I humbly
kiss your hand.

ARNALDO.


I Returned this answer to the fair Lucinda, but never received the least
counter-sign, either of repulse, or acceptance of my request. I had therefore
recourse anew to the help of Belisa, to the end she might obtain me a favor so
passionatly desired. She went to her, though with some blushings; and after
many words forced her to be content to let me see her in a certain place of
great resort, where as if talking with my sister I might meet her, without
suspicion of any correspondency.

The day and hour appointed being come, what I said, and did, in that encounter
may be more easily imagined then expressed. I am sure, I felt all the time of
that expectation so great a contentment, that my misery changed into felicity,
for so much desired, and so little hoped for a victory. In sum, so jocund
apprehensions did at that time rejoice my mind, that although I had nothing, I
did not desire a more advantageous Fortune. Now judge you, dearest Stranger,
what joy I found, and felt then in speaking to Lucinda of my pains, and by
supplicating her to have pity on me, and to give me at last some honest
recompense for my constant fidelity. Our discourses though they were not long
were many, and we came to this conclusion; That I should not stir from thence,
and much less that I should let any one know my interest in her person. Alas!
I see now that this was a plot of her wonted Feminine dissimulation, that she
always desired secrecy in Love; and in vain did I comfort my self in it: and
yet it was no other then a mark of her unfaithful mind, that being not yet
arrived to the end she designed for my ultimate destruction; she would not have
my departure deprive her of the friendship of my sister, whom she used, to
deceive me; nor that the publication of my pledge, should discredit the
baseness of her intentions, whilst slighting a personage of Regal Extract,
she set her affections upon a Knight of vulgar Birth and Fortune. Such malice
lodged in the heart of a young Lady, To deceive him that loved her, to betray
him that adored her.

Arnaldo; or, the Injured Lover.
Book III.
THus saying, the Knight sighed from the bottom of his Soul, and holding his
peace some space, he continued his discourse in this manner. Dearest Guest!
already the Sun has ascended half of his Carier above the Horizon; it would be
therefore good counsel, for this time not to weary you with the Narration of my
sinister adventures, but that in the umbrage of these meadows we do a little
refresh languishing nature. Having scarce so said, he with a little
silver-whistle gave intimation to his people of what he desired, and that
Forest was in a short space peopled by the noble attendants of the Knight.
Where, near a Fountain by him made in that part, (it being his own ground) with
black marbles, sadned by the representation of tragical occurrences, the Table
was prepared. Here Arnaldo having by the mirth of the banquet, and by the
pleasantness of the place given way to some sentiments of delight, began to
ask me of the news of the world, and of the principal Courts of the Grecian
Kingdoms. And the first that appeared on the scene of our discourse was the
Duke of Sparta, with whom having had some familiarity in the quality of
Senators, he admired to hear him risen by the help of his Enemies to such a
Grandeur. It is not to be wondered at, said I, because when Heaven will punish
men for their faults, it is so ordered, that the instruments of the offense are
changed to them into instruments of chastisement. The impieties of former
Princes have been so high, that they mixed the Antidotes with the poison of
their Crimes. Woe be to the world, said Arnaldo, if the like measure should
succeed in all Principalities. And yet (added I) it seems the passages of these
ages do authorize this verity with a manifest proof. Behold Thrace, with its
King murdered and strangled! Behold Macedon without legitimate Heirs, with
Migdonia, and Thessaly revolted from the Crown. Consider Ep rus, turned upside
down with the ambition of those which the interests of State, and the obstinacy
of the late King, made to be ingrafted (injustly, as being Bastards) into the
stem of the blood Royal. Turn your eyes to the Princes of Illyrium; who being
exiled, depressed, and extinct in the prime flower of their greatnesses, all
that vast Province is desolate, and burnt up by the fiercest flames of War.
And, crossing the Seas, behold Cyprus with its Princes exterminated, (a
barbarism unused through all ages) even by the hand of the infamous Hangman:
and, thence running through all the Provinces of our Climate, ye will find
but-too-Authentick to the detriment of many people, this Maxim, That the
instruments of evils, are turned by the justice of heaven into instruments of
chastisements to Delinquents. The Knight stood some time suspended at this my
Discourse; but I, that against my will had set my thoughts and Discourse upon
such a Subject; took occasion from thence to divert my talk, and commended the
goodly fountain (which did spout out of the Horn of an Acteon, transformed into
a Stag) its sparkling Crystals, saying: Now that we treat of the mischiefs,
which so much at present scourge our Kingdoms; I know not courteous Sir,
whether you have ever made reflection on this other truth, That all the evils of
men ordinarily take rise from women, nor so much from the bad as from the good;
whence, with reason, a noble Wit w^it, From chaste Penelope as often does rise
War, famine, and all sad calamities;
As from the Spattan-whore's adulteries.


Yea, verily, I have considered (answered Arnaldo) that almost all the evils,
which at present pester our Kingdoms, if they be well regarded will be found to
take their birth from women. It Is a high consideration, said I, and worthy of
the sublimenesse of your Ingenuity. But, with your leave, let us only observe
what is represented to us, in the graceful Statue which dignifieth this regal
Forest: and it is, that the major part of the calamities of men take their
birth as did that of Acteon, from the curiosity of looking on other men's wives,
and from the wickedness withal of those Females, that Metamorphise their
husbands into Acteons. It is very right, said the Knight; Nor has the Justice
of Heaven a heavier scourge for mortals then that of Feminine wickedness: while
men in the mean time on the other side, by no other way so head-strongly rebel
against Heaven, as by the Love of women. Of which, though from a diverse cause,
I can render you most ample testimony, since that having with so much fidelity
Idolized my unfaithful Lucinda, in all that time I lived in such a dotage, I
never remembered either heaven, or my self; and I am now reduced by her means
after a thousand deaths of intolerable dysasters, to live a life more painful
then death.

Thus said the Knight; when, upon the instant, hearing a mighty noise in the
Forest, we all set our selves to guess what might occasion it. The servants of
the Cavalier had already caught up their Arms for our defense, when we beheld
to rouse on the left side of the Fountain a goodly Stag, of an extraordinary
bigness, which in a full carier fled the eminent peril, threatened him from the
persecutions of a Huntresse. But stumbling upon some Vessels for the service of
the Table, which stood in the entrance of that Track, he happened to fall
precipitously into a little pit of the Meadow, where the Huntresse over-took
him, and stuck two mortal darts into his flank and head, with such a dexterity
that like lightning at the drawing of the Bow they vanished. Having made the
blow, the beautiful Less cast her eyes on the Table, and congi'd with a
gentle smile, dying the face of the Knight with a noble blush; and began to
proceed on her way. But Arnaldo, rising to answer her courteous Salute, with
great affability entreated her to sit down, to take with us a short repast,
after that her victorious chase. The Damsel turned about, smiling with a grace
able to inchant Souls with Love, and said; Some great prodigy is happened in the
world, now that the Enemy of conversation invites Strangers to his Table. But I
cannot receive the honor you exhibit to me, being expected by my company on
the other side the River to Dinner. Arnaldo interrupted her. You will arive too
late, it being above three miles off; but if you will please to favor us with
a short stay, we will also wait upon you thither. I give you humbly thanks,
replied the sprightly Virago; but that would be too much trouble for you, to
pass beyond the confines which enclose you in this salvage habitation. But
it is a good prediction, that seeing guests now with you in strange garbs, I may
think, that you will at last put an end to this inhumane solitude, which
deprives the world of the glory of your person. This saying, with expressions
equally free and generous, she bore us company at dinner, and out of temperance
scarce tasted any of the dishes, taking a little cup of water from the
fountain, to show how little our nature is content with, and how the worth of
women is inhanced by their abstinence. This done, she took her leave, and would
not by any means suffer either the Knight or his servants to accompany her,
only saying, She recommended the prey to him; for being taken in his
jurisdiction. The fair Huntresse being gone, I was even dead with desire to
know her Quality: for the air of her looks, and the freeness of her
deportment, made me plainly perceive, she was more then a mere Denizon of the
forest; but the Knight foreseeing my curiosity, which peradventure he read in
my eyes, he obligingly said; Behold, most dear guest, our discourse confirmed
with a new proof, that from women, and from good women, are occasioned all the
calamities of men; since for so courteous, virtuous, and innocent a Maid, many
persons are at this instant endangered, and many families ruined.

This fair young-one was born in the Isle of Negroponte, of a very noble
family, and conjoined by kindred to the Royal blood. Being grown to fourteen
years of age, her parents dyed, and she remained with three sisters more, under
the tyrannical government of her brethren; who having designed her against her
will, and contrary to all reason, to a manner of life little pleasing to her,
as being a lover of Liberty, did thereby occasion to themselves extreme
misfortunes. She was for her singular beauty loved and desired, by the most
accomplished Gallants, and noblest Knights of that Court: but she, (yet
nevertheless with a soul truly generous in so young a Lady) did not
scornfully despise, but courteously refuse the service of all the other
Cavaliers; declaring her self to like only the Services of Callisthenes, a
young Gallant, noble of blood, and more noble for ingenuity; but of so slender
a Fortune, that he could scarce sustain in any splendour, the Nobility
transmitted him from his Ancestors. This application of the Damsel, highly
displeased the Brothers; for having already advantagiously married the eldest
sister, they designed to bury her, together with these younger, according to
the use of those parts, in the perpetual solitude of a secluse life in the
Country, with a title incapable of the marriage-freedoms. Nor did they long
defer this their tyrannical resolution, having confined the fair Argosthenia
and the other innocent creatures, in a house built upon the top of a mountain,
in a situation almost inaccessible, being incircled on every side with forests
and mountains of their own jurisdiction. Hither Argosthenia being come, instead
of attending the employments abhorred by her genius, she began, like a new
Diana of those woods, with her bow and boar-spear, to disturb the peace of the
wild beasts, which in great abundance sheltred themselves in that solitary and
desert place: being content, though absent from her beloved Callisthenes, with
that manner of life, in which yet at least she satisfied the natural
inclinations of her generous freedom, being far from idleness the fomenter of
vain thoughts, in the tender youth of Maids. And this her life also displeased
her brothers, which would have her in every thing conformed to their
capriccio's, to remove from her all hopes of marriage: The young Virago seeing
her self persecuted also in that honest liberty, and not brooking upon any
terms to be deprived of that freedom of mind the heavens had granted her,
conceited, inexpert as she was, that the only flying into some other part,
would instate her into such a benefit. So having before in her hunting
acquainted her self with the tracks of those forests, she got away one day
with an old shepherdess from her other sisters, and, disguised in the habit of
a young shepherd, made toward the sea-shoar; where, in a little fisher-boat,
she crossed the Straits, disimbarking in Boeotia, and accidentally met upon the
coasts a company of Ladies, which there entertained the time in disports: And
she arrived in so fortunate an hour, that, liking well the deportment of
Olympia, an ancient Lady, and free also from all the Laws of Matrimony, she
discovered to her the secret of her quality, entreating her privacy and
assistance. Olympia, being taken with the noble confidence of the Maid, carried
her to Thebes, the place of her abode, and took her into the place of a
daughter: and the greatest part of her Dowry, lying within the circumference of
this my Forest, she often comes hither with Argosthenia, delighting much, to
see her with such a freedom and courage to war with the wild-beasts.

But the Brothers mist their Sister, just at the instant that Callisthenes,
either for desperation of seeing his Princess condemned to that solitude, or
for the interest of his study, and chiefly by the impulse of his destiny, was
gone to Athens; they judged falsely, that she was fled with him, and which was
yet worse, for to marry her self, according to her inclinations. Hereupon, of
three that were there, they commiting to Aristheus the second of them, the care
of revenging upon the innocent Calisthenes the pretended injury, he past
immediately to Athens; and seeking of Calisthenes, he happened to his ill
fortune, to encounter him just as he was entering into the house of the
Ambassador of Macedonia, where he, and his three Assassinates fell upon him in
the dark to murder him. Calisthenes, which would have expected any thing in
the world, rather than to see his enemy Aristheus, being taken unprovided, he
recommended his safety to his flight, but in vain; for being struck by the
ruffians with two stabbs, one in the side, another in the head, he fell upon
the threshold of the house; where in a short space he expired, an innocent
Victim of the guiltless Argosthenia. In the interim the whole family of the
Ambassador making thither at that noise, and seeing the Law of Nations
violated, which held the persons and houses of public Ministers in sacred
veneration, they fell upon Aristheus and his confederates, with such
resolution, that though they long defended themselves, they also became a
sacrifice to the betrayed Calisthenes. The news of this Tragedy passing into
Negroponte, the Father and Faction of Calisthenes, though far inferior to that
of the Brethren of Argosthenia, raised against them notwithstanding so fierce a
tempest of civil war, that they proceeded almost to the subduing that great
City; but at last the families of Calisthenes, and the confederates with their
parents were extirpated, and her younger brother also slain; a great part of
whom, have been ever since banished and dispersed over all Greece. And these so
deplorable miseries, took beginning from this one prodigious Creature, she
having not any way contributed to it, unless by a necessary flight to conserve
the liberty of her mind.

Here the Knight held his peace, and I replied; But if an innocent Damsel be
the occasion of so many mischiefs, Of what ruins may not a lewd woman make her
self the instrument? Lucinda may in part testify it, added Arnaldo: Though yet
(Heaven be praised) she has been more unwise than unfaithful; for if she had
been only ungrateful to me, I had had no cause of complaint, Ingratitude
being a Dowry inseparable from her Sex in such a degree, That women always
love those that slight them, and abhor those that adore them. But she desiring
for her own designs to add subtilty to her infidelity; she happened to plot a
miserable ruin, not so much to the prejudice of me, as to the detriment of Her
self, and her Lover. Here the dinner ended: The Knight arose from the table;
and with a gentle pace took a walk under the shades of the Forest, through the
same track which was made just before by Argosthenia: and I seeing him taken
up, would not with my curiosity interrupt his contemplations, but left him;
when he himself was pleased to continue the Tragical narration of his amorous
adventures. Proceeding thus.

After I had parted from Lucinda, with having for a supreme favor kissed her
hand, I was in so jocund an humor, as that if I had at that instant the Empire
of the whole Universe, (and, I know, perfect Lovers will believe me) offered me
in lieu of my contentment, I would have parted with it for the one half of my
satisfaction. Whereupon Belisa also taking comfort in my contentment, for the
better continuing it, she entreated me to go, for some days, to a Country-Seat
of hers, but a league distant from the City of Thebes: whither, because the
place was very convenient for hunting and hawking, she sent many Falcons, to
try if this new exercise, joined with the favor received from Lucinda, had been
able to restore me to my former health and strength. I entertained the time a
few days in this retirement, beyond measure satisfied with the courtesy
showed me by Belisa, who investigated all the means possible to make me merry;
but it was for no long time, in regard the Fates ordained the moments of my joy
to be short, and the continuance of my misery to be lasting. It happened
therefore, that I being to go out one morning very early a Hunting; whilst I
prepared my self to mount my Horse, some sinister Auguries would have predicted
to me the vicinity of my misfortune: for the morning, of clear and serene
became on a sudden cloudy and dark; and a Gray hound which I loved exceedingly
ran between my Legs, and began a dreadful howling. But I, that was now all
jocund, and frollick for the favors received from Lucinda, valued not a straw
all these presages, but would pursue my enterprise: and took a Falcon on my
fist, and rid abroad into the fields: And here I was suddenly surprised with a
strange shivering at the remembrance, that from the time of my being in the
house of Jerson till then, he had fled my company, and looked strangely on me.
And as I did think that the melancholy life I led, might have estranged him
from my familiarity, I yet felt some confused impressions of terror in my
Soul, which pointed at some thing of more sinister adventure.

Now while I stood musing in this conceit, my poor Falcon fell dead from my
hand to the ground and now I was certain that this Omen foretold me some great
evil touching this my friend; remembering at the same time, with more then
ordinary compassion, the yelling my Gray-hound made in the morning. And
hereupon I desired to return back to the house; when, (I know not how) I lost
my way, and, casually lighting upon a little hillet, I discovered a rural
habitation of Lucinda's, from whence I thought I heard a murmuring noise of
Musical Instruments, which reverberating in the concave of those Mountains,
sent forth different Eccho's: Which thing seemed very strange to me in the
house of a maiden-Lady, especially in that season, and in such a place.
Thereupon, with my Soul more then ever clouded by the passion of sorrow which
afflicted me, I came back at the shutting in of night to the house of my
sister. Who using at other times to meet me at the inner porch, was not now any
where to be seen. I hereupon went to seek her in her Chamber, where I found her
so dejected and sad that she could not utter a word. And I, in like manner,
seeing her in that state, durst not ask her any thing, being fearful of
understanding some displeasing news. Yet at last, forced by Love, and my
obligements, I entreated her to acquaint me with the occasion of so
unaccustomed, and profound a melancholy. At which she began so vehemently to
weep, that it was not possible for her of a long time to speak distinctly. But
yet the extremity of her grief being in part diminished, by the vent she gave
it in her tears, in the end she said; My dearest brother, Jerson and Lucinda
have assassinated us both, Jerson having long served me, with pretext of
obtaining me, (for other way he knew he had none) through the merit of thy
friendship and of Love to marry him; has betrayed me to espouse Lucinda: And
Lucinda, now when she seemed most complacent to thee, has most perfidiously
deceived thee to marry Jerson. And so we are both wounded in the most sensible
part of our reputation; without possibility of pretending to a satisfaction
equivalent to such an injury. When I understood this news, Belisa being able no
longer to continue her discourse, I interrupted her with so profound sighs and
shrieks, that I thought thereby to breathe out my dolorous Soul. And I verily
believe, that it is impossible for a man to die of sorrow, since I am able to
live under the afflictions of such disgraces. Yet indeed I was wounded with
what resembled death. Anon after I returned to my self, and rent the Letter
sent me by the inflexible Lucinda into a thousand bits, entering into such
desperation, that even to the tearing my hair from my head, I committed the
most indecent acts of womanish weakness: it being but too true, That a Soul
overpassionate in the love of a woman, changes his manly courage into
effeminate cowardice. I forbear for some days to efface this grief out of my
breast, till I might assure my self of some constant resolution. Then clothing
all my family in mourning, I sent Jerson a Chartel of Defiance in these terms.

Arnaldo to Jerson.
JErson: To the end the world may know how lying and deceitful the professions
have been that thou have past to me in private, I am resolved to publish them;
that thy punishment may serve for an example to other Traitors like thy self,
not to abuse with such enormities the name and faith of friendship. Remember
therefore that among the other things of importance which I trusted to thy
fidelity, one was that of my Love to Lucinda; in which thou have many times
made such offers to transact to my satisfaction, that though thou thy self
did serve her, thou ought to have renounced her for love of me; finally,
under the confidence of a friend, thou have robbed me, fraudulently bearing
away the prize due to my services, transgressing the Laws of Friendship and
Knighthood; and, constituting thy self infamous, and a Traitor, thou art
become a blemish to the Nobility of thy blood, and a reproach to the glory of
thy Ancestors, when as the scope of thy actions should have always been Honor
and Virtue. Now, that thou may receive the condign correction due unto thy
sordid actions, I would have thee know, that with such Arms as thou shall
choose, I am ready to give thee thy death, or to compel thee at least to
confess that thou have committed the greatest villainy and infidelity, that
could fall into the thought of man. Therefore choose Arms at thy pleasure, and
when I receive thy Answer, I will appoint thee the field, and day of Decision.

ARNALDO.


Jerson received this Defiance, and pausing upon it some time, in the end he
answered me in this form.

Jerson to Arnaldo.
ARnaldo: I have seen thy Chartel, and if thy deeds shall correspond to the
vaunt of thy words, I hold my self already for overcome, and stoop to thee as
my Conqueror: But I hope, that this Affair will succeed otherwise, and thou
shall find more of strength in my Arm, than I have found infamy in thy Paper.
Thou biddest me remember our past friendship, and I, through my overmuch
remembering of it, have married Lucinda: for, knowing how averse she is to thee,
and knowing thee to be reduced to extremity, I resolved to ease thee by cutting
off all thy hope of ever enjoying her. And if, before thou had proceeded to
defame me, thou had hearkened to my reasons, I am confident that thou thy
self would have commended my resolution, undertaken for thy safety. But,
because that my words, now that thou art past to the publication of these
secrets by taxing of my honor therewith, might be falsely ascribed to the fear
of thy sword; know, that I pretend not to excuse my self in the least; and that
I am ready to quell thy haughtiness, and to defend my right, by Arms: It being
my custom with such as thou, to say little, and do as I ought. The choice
therefore I am to make of Arms, to force thee to recede from thy false opinion,
shall be thus: We will be, on Hors-back, Armed at all points, except the right
arm, which shall be bare; the Lances shall be equal, and each wear two swords.
The Horses likewise shall be barded, and have their Testerns and Guards for
their necks. Choose thou as thou please the time and place, for I will meet
thee with assured hope to tame thy pride, and make thee swallow thy lies, as
there is reason I should.

JERSON.


WHen Arms had been thus denounced against me, I went to the King, to whom
having related my cause, and the treachery of Jerson, he freely granted me the
field. The day destined to the battle being come, we both presented our selves
before the King, and took the wonted Oath, and our Arms being viewed by the
Judges, we entered into the List: where we encountered in our Carier with such
impetuosity, that we easily knew the little advantage we should get of each
other. Jerson therefore, being no less dextrous than skillful in hors-manship,
assaulted me on the arm that was naked, giving me a dangerous wound I must
needs say, I struck him only on the Visour of his Cask without doing him any
hurt. Yet nevertheless the Lances flew in pieces: then we presently took our
swords, and began to assault one another with such resolution, and our fight
endured so long, that the eyes of the Spectators were as weary of beholding us,
as we were with fighting. Yet in the end the lot fell in favor of the right,
and Jerson was dismounted and slain: and so Lucinda's infidelity came to be
known, and my cause approved. Yet nevertheless, esteeming his own honor, and
that of his house, more than life, he would not in any case confess his
default, but preferred a valiant death before a shameful and dishonorable
life. Thus Lucinda in the space of a month after her marriage, made in my
contempt, and to the betraying of my sister, became a Widow, Jerson was
chastised, I a Conqueror, right was vindicated, and infidelity punished.

Here the Knight having stayed his discourse, I congratulated with him so
glorious a victory obtained over so perfidious, together with so valiant, an
Enemy. Then the Cavalier sighed from the bottom of his heart, and said. Too
dear I paid, Noble Stranger, for so famous a victory; for in acquiring to my
self the applause of valor, I came to procure an infinite deal of sorrow:
having eternally lost her whom I hoped to win in so great a field of courage
and fidelity. For, not being yet cured of my infirmity, I made overtures by
diverse friends and kinsfolks (so was I inamoured on her) to Lucinda, that
entreating she would pardon the offense done her upon the necessity of honor
against my will, she would consent (though now she was not worthy of my bed and
company) to receive me in the room of her deceased Consort. To which being
always averse, she shut her ears, settling her self in this cruel approbation,
not only of not gratifying me with marriage, but of not surviving her beloved
Jerson. Seeing therefore that I spent all my attempts in vain, I would for my
last proof, and ultimate disgrace, make use of the person of Belisa: Who,
though she was very unwilling, yet knew not how to deny at my request to seek
to so ill-beloved a woman, but tried to see if at her entreaty she would
receive me into favor; which, besides blood, and fortune, having also made my
self a known Superior in valor to her deceased husband, I was not doubtless
unworthy in a second place to possess her affections. Lucinda understanding by
the mouth of Belisa such like remonstrances, she disturbedly said to her: My
friend, follow me, and I will give you the answer you require of me: So they
went together to a building of the Ladies, separated from the common offices of
life, and, entering the same according to the freedom of our Countries, they
came just into that part, where Jerson lay enterr'd in the hereditary Sepulcher
of her greatest Ancestors, founders of that structure. Whither being come with
her Governesse, and other Ladies of her acquaintance, Lucinda first steadfastly
beheld the Sepulcher, and after turning to Belisa, tartly said.

See the nuptials prepared me by your brother! And that saying, with a sharp
Dagger which she carried hid in her slieve, she barbarously stabbed her self in
the breast, to tranfix in her life my Soul, and the comfort of all my hopes.
She did not die presently, yet did not survive many hours, so desperate was her
resolution to be a perpetual companion in death of him, whose company she had
enjoyed but few hours in life. The horror of such a spectacle, put such
affliction and terror into the mind of Belisa, that it being accompanied with
the fear of seeing me also fall in her, as not desiring to survive this her
death, she fell into a deep swound, in which she long continued, like one
really dead; and being not able to resist so great a dysaster, she also ended
the course of her days with a short ficknesse, in the most goodly flower of
her youth, and has left me Heir of a perpetual death; few nights passing me in
which she comes not to disquiet my sleep with horrid apparitions and discourses
of death. I think therefore that the end of my calamity is not far off; for but
yesterday she appeared to me about break of day, telling me, that there would
arrive at my house, (and you are the dearest Guest) from the Western parts a
Stranger, which would one day transmit to the memory of Posterity the Tragical
History of our miserable adventures; And bring me withal a change of my
fortune, which I am certain cannot be but by changing this turmoyled life into
the tranquil repose of death.

Arnaldo; or, The injured Lover.
BOOK IV.
HEre stopped the Knight, and I subjoyned. I would have you hope for more
fortunate Auguries, which not my arrival in these parts, but the benignity of
destiny shall present you with, gentle Sir; which is that which the information
you have given me, has just now infused into my mind of the beautiful
Huntresse, through whose tracks we now direct our steps. For if I deceive not
my self in the little knowledge I have taken, more from the experience of
Mundane revolutions, than the study of any abstruse sciences; I see not only
in your looks, but read also in the internal tablet of your heart a mavelous
correspondency of Genius between your noble person, and that of Argosthenia.
And, Who knows but that Heaven, which by the means of women has effected the
greatest benefits in the World; has sent this fair Stranger out of Negropont
into Baeotia, for no other end but by the assistance of her person to terminate
your sufferings; taking you from this doleful solitude wherein you are
unprofitable to others, and a burden to your self, to transport you to a place,
and estate worthy of the dignity of your blood, and the grandeur of your mind?

Here the Knight steadfastly beheld me with silent seriousness, letting loose
unawares many profound things; whereupon I prosecuted my discourse, saying.
Negropont already bewails the ruin of the stock of its Princes, reduced into
the sole person of Doricinia: Periander, elder brother of Argosthenia, to whom
by primogeniture that inheritance does belong, has given the final period to
that family: For, rebelling in an amorous disdain against the Durchesse, who
either to conserve her self free and independent, would not marry; or for that
she knew Periander to be of too turbulent a Genius, and two tyrannical a
disposition, had refused to make him her husband; he has for the same merited
exile from Negropont, as a reward of his insurrections; and according to the
report, which goes of him is dead in the Isle of Andros, whither he had betook
himself with the deplorable Relics of his Rebellion. The eldest sister
likewise of Argosthenia is without any of the fruits of her Matrimony: so that
if Heaven permit that also the Duchess should run the great Carier of death
without legitimate issue; the government of that Noble principality would
descend directly to Argosthenia: And what would you say, gentle Sir, if you,
changing your fortune with the mutation of your life, should pass, by the
means of so prodigious a Lady, from the deserts of Boeotid to the Throne of
Calcides? And whereas now you lie buried an unprofitable burden to the world in
the Sepulcher of a Forest, you would return to live in public, to the glory
of our age? What pretend ye to with such anxiety, for an extinguished Beauty,
that you so much love her? Is it happily with hopes to revive her, that she may
again return to torment you? That Is an enterprise wholly unworthy of your
prudence; For Lucinda shall never return more to the earth. And although the
Fables of antiquity might be renewed, and she should rise again, Do you
presume, peradventure, that she with her nature changed, would rise favorable
and faithful? It would be a folly to immagine it. For a person dead, therefore,
which first with betraying you for another person, and after with dying, has
thereby confessed her self unworthy of you, would you cast away your self by
leading a life, no better than a perpetual death; depriving your illustrious
family, this Kingdom, and your self, of the glory of your prowess, to the good
of mankind? Such gifts of Heaven so prodigally showred down upon your gentle
person, ought these, I say, to be so miserably abused by a vain passion, to the
unexpressible detriment of your renowned blood, of the age, and of your self?
Ah Sir, reassume at last, reassume those generous spirits, which your birth
instilled into your breast, and by your birth, Heaven; and if so miserable a
loss of your high honors, has been overpast by a weak inamoured
youthfulness; let the glorious reparation of a maturer age, dart out of these
shaddows into the noble serenitie of brave enterprises: For if in youth its a
less shame to err; more glorious also will the redress of those errors appear,
which would environ your temples with the crown of a most noble principality.
To this mutation of life and fortune, the benign Ghost of your sister
counsels you; and to this, by the aid of Argosthenia, Destiny inviteth you;
which, for no other cause, permitted that you should be deprived of Lucinda by
her own Infidelity, but for to open you the way, which she would perpetually
have shut up to you, of passing from the deserts of Boeotia to the Throne of
Negropont.

Arnaldo seemed whilst I was speaking, by his deep sighs, and by the
admiration, expressed in his face, partly to approve my sayings; whereupon, when
he saw me silent, he added, Friend, In a short compass you have comprised
things very different, and worthy of greatest consideration. In that part
therefore which pertains to the invalidity of my griefs for an exanimate and
faithless beauty, the cause of so many miseries to me; I should easily be
brought to acknowledge my simplicity occasioned by a false opinion fixed in my
head by youthful Vanity, and a melancholy constitution that took root in my
birth, and is now almost converted into Nature, by the infelicity of my
tragical adventures. But of the novelties succeeded in the Principality of
Negroponte, of the exile and death of Periander, and his sister, and of the
right of Argosthenia to that Crown, as also of the pretension I might nourish
toward her person, it is not necessary we should discourse with such confusion,
and haste; but rather let us find out a time and place to inform our selves of
necessary contingences: For though we should suppose that I did propound, and
that Argosthenia should not reject this match; yet it would be good to know, if
the Duchess would consent, that a Lady, who is not known so much as to be in
the World, should succeed her in the Principality. And, were we certain she
would acknowledge her, and consent that she succeed her, yet is it a question
whether she would permit her to match her self into the house of a strange
Knight; which may pretend by right of blood, to the succession of the Kingdom
of Thebes.

Here Arnaldo held his peace, and I replied: Sir, He who too critically
distinguishes in grand enterprises, does frustrate them before they be half
effected. It Is good therefore that prudence take place, but yet it is necessary
to leave something to the arbitrament of Fortune.

Argosthenia already holds by birth a right to aspire, after the Duchess, to
the Crown of Calcides, nor can all the violence in the World deprive her of
this right of nature. She lives not at present at the Dutchesse's disposal,
which as yet does not know in what part of the world she is concealed; or
rather has forgot all thoughts of her person, as if she had never been born.
Let us say nothing to the young Lady of this secret, and let us only with the
help of Olympia, drive on your marriage with her; for, this done, we shall have
time enough afterward, of disclosing so grand a secret, and of imparting the
truth to the Duchess; who when she shall hear that she is already espoused to
a Cavalier so well accomplished, will have no occasion for which to repute her
unworthy of Succession to the Principality, through the suspicions which their
flight might beget in the minds of the people, as if that, for actions unworthy
of her, she had fled from Negropont. Then, as to the right of birth which you
also pretend to the Crown of Thebes; the interests of State will declare in
your favor: giving you a ground to hope one day by means of this match, if not
in your person, in that of your descendents, to unite all these Provinces under
one only Crown; For although, by reason the Kingdom of Thebes is far greater
than the Dukdom of Negropont, there might some obstacle arise from the fear of
becoming of a Sovereign State, a subsidinate Province, there would not want
opportune means to adjust such differences by assuring the Calcidonians that
they should never be commanded by Theban Ministers as subjects, but should be
always governed as a free State, by persons of the Royal Family. But such
like considerations are at present unseasonable; and it shall suffice to know,
that there never want evasions and pretexts for Sovereigns, wherewith they may
satisfy the pretensions of the people. The point on which your prudence ought
to insist, is, to rouse your self out of this unprofitable obscurity; and to
procure the alliance of Argosthenia, before that the news from Calcides of her
family do arive to her notice. Leave the rest to the care of Heaven, of
Fortune, and of your own Valor.

Arnaldo hearing this, replied: Friend, He that advises to any enterprise,
should know, above all things, how to investigate the means requisite to
execute it.

If you think a Marriage with Argosthenia, to be a good act in me; I will
confess that she already is possessed with some inclinations in favor of my
person; and that Olympia being my Mother's sister, may promise us all good
success. To you I refer my self, and because we are just at the bounds of my
Forest, and upon the passing into that of Olympia, I will return to my house,
and you may, as Conductor of my people, who carry Argosthenia her prey,
introduce your self into the acquaintance of that Lady. That will suffice, and
this will serve you for a Token of security with Olympia, that you treat with
her by my consent about such a proposition: And so saying, he took a Diamond
from his finger, and put it upon mine.

I received it, and taking my leave of the Knight, forded the Brook, with the
conduct of four servants, which carried to Argosthenia, upon a rural Barrow of
sticks, the Stagg that she had slain.

As soon as I had set foot upon the champain, I thought that the liberty of the
open air did replenish my soul with unusual resentments of joy, in such
manner, that they wholly removed the remembrances of all past dysasters, fixing
me only in the thoughts of my present occasions, giving me a certain proof of
the bounty of Heaven, being so far separated from my Native Country; in that,
though my heart was not, yet at least my fortune was changed by the altetation
of the Climate.

I came by Sunset to the house of Olympia, a proud Structure, which would
better have ennobled a great City, than such a salvage habitation; I found her
buried in an abyss of grief and tears, for the wanting, the joy of her eyes,
the fair Argosthenia; which losing her way (as was supposed) after the chase of
that Stagg, which we brought life-lesse to her house, was no more seen of all
that day. Whereupon dispatching all her people in search of her, she sat alone
with her women to condole the suspicion of some unexpected dysaster. I was so
much surprised at this spectacle, that I lost in the very entrance of my
design the thread, by which I was to weave the webb, recommended me by the
Injured Lover; for that was the name, which out of those woods was born by
Arnaldo. Yet I complemented with the Lady in terms befitting her nobility and
my duty, endeavoring to comfort her, but in vain: for night had already
enrob'd it is self in gloomy shades, and her domestics were returned from the
quest of the Lady, without any news of her person, which precipitated her into
such grief, and drew from her so great lamentation, that it would have moved to
pity the insensible hardness of stones. Whereupon, being grown desperate at
this encounter, because the summer season permitted me to travel in the night,
the servants of Arnaldo being dismissed, I disposed my self never to return
thither without having first learnt some tidings of the lost Lady. I had
observed in my walk with the Knight, the hollowings of barbarous voices in
certain parts of the Forest; but, transported by the current of our discourse,
I took no great notice of it for that time; seeing that none of the Cavaliers
followers were in the least moved at it, or expressed the least alteration: So it
came into my thought to re-passe thither. And though I wanted the clue of
Ariadne to guide me, in the night, through the Labyrinth of such thickets: yet
I made use of some observations I had made in some groves of Italy, to know the
tracks of men and beasts, and I resolved presently to depart. But I had scarce
set foot in the Forest, when me-thought I heard the murmr of passengers;
whence, not certain whether they might be men or beasts, I laid hold of my
sword, and securing my head with my Helmet, I withdrew my self behind the root
of a vast Oak, encompassed by a little thicket of young Oaks, newly grown, to
observe the passages of this encounter; it being a piece of folly, rather than
valor, to run into perils and dangers, without any reason or necessity. And
scarce was I provided with that sanctuary of security, when I perceived, more
by the sound of the ear, than by the discernment of the eye, that they were men
that passed that way, and I fancied to hear one of them say: We have made a
good booty, but it will be necessary we get out of these Purly's before day,
otherwise we run a hazard of being discovered. Hearing this, I began presently
to imagine, that this prey was no other than Argosthenia. Hereupon letting them
scarce pass so far as not to discover me, I put my self into the path they
took, to follow them.

But scarce had I gone three hundred paces, when they stopped at the mouth of a
Grott, where they endeavored to take away some impediments of loggs and
stones, which barracado'd it; the which while they were intent to do, one of
them felt himself wounded with so sound a blow, that crying he was slain, he
fell goaning to the earth. And whilst another of the knot would require of him,
What was the matter, I saw him also ran through the breast with a boarspear, and
tumbled close by the other. There remained two others, the which stepped back,
and drew their swords, putting themselves upon their defense, asking, What
Devil was descended down there, in the little space they had been gone? Then
Argosthenia skipt out of that Cave with a spear in her hand, exclaiming: Ah
Traitors! It Is the Justice of Heaven that smites you. Now I have untyed those
hands your villainy bound. And that saying, made at them, and hurt one of them
in the face: and after that, leaping over those obstacles of blocks and stones,
betook her self to flight, through those tracks, wherewith she was very well
acquainted; The two Assassinats seeing that, ran after her to stay her:
hereupon, seeing that now was the time to discover my self in relief of that
Lady; I pursued them, reproaching them with that barbarism. Argosthenia heard
me before the Assassinates, and, animated by that unexpected succor, she
turned head against them with admirable undauntedness; so that the two ruffians
being engaged betwixt the Lady's spear and my sword, they could not escape
their deserved deaths. Howbeit they did not dye unrevenged; for I received a
blow upon the forehead, upon the border of my murrion, and a deep stabb in the
left arm, and hand. Argosthenia in like manner, had a reverse so great upon the
head, that if it had fallen edgewise, as it did flat, all the hope of Arnaldo
had fallen to the earth, with that blow. Yet did she fall in a swound; whereupon,
I not knowing in so great a destitution of all things, with what other argument
to provide for her, whispered some charms softly to her, and made her come to
her self; but so ill she was, that she had no apprehension of her self. Yet in
the end re-assuming her proper knowledge, she requested me to tell her, Who I
was: and having told her, she expressed an inconceivable satisfaction, and
courteously presenting me her hand, arose from the ground, saying; Let us walk
Sir, for I being very well accustomed in the ways, will bring you in less
than an hour to the house of Arnaldo; for to that of Olympia I will return by
my self as soon as day breaks. No, Madam, answered I, It is convenient that we
go first to that of Olympia, for she is submerged in an ocean of perplexities
for fear of you. After you have obliged me for my life, you would also overcome
me in Civility, answered the Lady. But that you shall not do; for you had need
to have your wounds dressed, if you well observe your left arm, and I feel
nothing but a slight blow on the head, which amounts to nothing; so that it is
requisite, that we go to the nearest house. And beside, I would not that the
family of Olympia should see you with me, whilst the air of your face, and the
fashion of your deportment falsify the modesty, which otherwise I see in your
countenance, and observe in your manners. I then interrupted her: These
considerations are of no effect, now that I am just come from the house of
Olympia to seek you, and must treat with her about some affairs, which I hope
will succeed to your satisfaction also. Here the Lady leaping with a sudden
alacrity, said; And what is it? Perhaps you bring me some news from Negroponte?
Is it happily that the Tyrant my brother is dead? I would have you, Madam,
retain more comfortable thoughts, answered I; Be to your brother what will, you
shall not want a fortune, if you know how to entertain it.

Calamities I conceive I may expect (replied the young Lady) in this my
miserable life, only made tolerable by my Genius, which will not give place in
any respect to fortune, and as the misadventure even now happened to me may give
some proof: but of fortunate adventures I neither apprehend them, nor do I hope
for them. And how then (said I) came you into this danger? I know not very well
(said the youthful Lady) how to relate it, yet I shall acquaint you in brief,
with that which befell me: and (by the way I must tell you) I have ever
observed hitherto, that I am most merry when I am accosted with some unexpected
dysaster. Departing therefore from your Company somewhat joyed, for having
found the Cavalier Arnaldo in a manner of carriage and looks, unusual to his
lugubrious melancholy, I forgot my way: but I had not gone above a thousand
paces, when I saw these villains start out of certain craggy places; and before
I perceived my self assaulted, I found I was bound, and carried to the Grot,
whence I am now escaped. Which, having served heretofore either for an
habitation of people, or for some religious Rites, within is very commodious,
and capacious enough for eight or ten persons. Here, I had, just before I came
to you, left this my Hunting spear, and one of my upper Garments, recommending
them to a shepherd which accompanied me, to run the faster with my Bow after
the Stag, which I slew at your feet. Here also these men tied me faster then
before, that I might not make use of my hands, blocking me up in such a manner
as you might have easily observed, getting together a great number of logs and
stones, to fill up the mouth of the cave. With what intention they did this,
they would not tell me. Only I collected, that they would expect the night to
take me hence unobserved, and carry me to Thebes; for as much as I suspected
this Crime of Treason was descended from Diambres, a principal Cavalier among
the Thebane Nobility; who having long served and solicited me in vain, seeing
the ugliness of his face and the rudeness of his disposition could not
dispose me to affect him; he would have ravished me, to obtain that from me
with violence, which he could never possess himself of, by Love.

Seeing my self therefore included in this Cavern, Necessity, the wise
School-Mistresse of our safety, taught me the manner how to break my bonds; for
I drew near the edge and points of some stones, and I endeavored in such sort
to fret the cords and strings (that bound my arms to my sides) against them,
that so getting these loose first, I might break also those that tied together
my hands. Seeing my self at liberty, and with my spear, I skipt with such joy,
that I thought every minute a thousand years, that the Ruffians delayed to
clear the entrance of the Grotto, which work I often attempted my self, but I
found it altogether impossible, by reason of the too great bulk, and heaviness
of that Barricado of Trees and Stones accumulated by the strength of four men,
which a weak woman was not able to remove. Now, praised be the Heavens, that by
their benignity and your succor, I am again in possession of my liberty, for I
would certainly far rather die a thousand times, than see my self in the power
of the deformed Diambres, whom I hate more then death. I would not for that
time multiply Complements to ascribe her liberty to her own valor, more than
my slow succor; but seeing her pause at these words: But Madam, said I, all
are not Diamrbes's, so that you should desite to live always single. And even
this peril which you have just now run through, ought to advertise you to
provide for the security of your person; (which being so beautiful will be
ever obnoxious to treacheries) by choosing a husband worthy of you. Here the
sprightfull Less with an inconsiderate gesture of pure freedom, void of all
deceit, said; Sir Knight, if you peradventure be he, which by believing to have
obliged me, shall desire me for your wife; content your self, that I tell you,
that I shall ever confess my obligation; nor do your qualities a jot displease
me: but having already dedicated my Soul to another, it is not convenient I
bestow on you this miserable part of my self, which though fair that it is, may
by a light indisposition be soon deformed, and changed into ugliness. Hereupon
I rejoiced exceedingly at the so ingenuous freedom of the Lady, and added;
Madam, I assure you, I have not spoke for my self so much, because my destiny
has already bound me in other Chains, as because I am conscious of my
incapacity of such a favor, exceeding the slenderness of my fortune; but I
have spoke to other ends more worthy of the Nobility of your birth, and the
generosity of your spirit. You wrong your self said the Lady, and withal
offend my modesty; for had I my Soul at liberty, and you should then nourish
such pretensions, I would not a jot respect Fortune, but would consider your
accomplishments, and my obligements: for other then your self, I am sure you
treat not for; being a Stranger, newly arrived in this Country, and having
never known me before to day, I am confident you speak for none but your self.
Let us turn our discourse to some other matter, and content your self, that
there pass between us only a bare correspondence of sincere friendship, and
pure endearments.

You honor me too much, gentle Madam, said I! And in so short a space of time,
as I have known you; I am presented with an occasion to entreat your favor in
behalf of another. And what is he, said Argosthenia? One that perhaps will not
displease you, added I. But I would first treat with Olympia. The Lady sighed,
and said, Olympia is my Lady, but I am Lady of my self in this particular.
Therefore tell me what you are to say to Olympia; for besides that your suit
concerns none but my self, I pretend nothing from Olympia, and may pretend much
from my own family. I added, The Knight my Host is he that desires you for your
self, and that will show you the reason also of that which he expects from you.
The young Lady sighed, and gave a sudden start, saying to me, Arnaldo? Yes,
Madam, said I: At my persuasion he desires you to succeed with a more
propitious fortune in the place of his ungrateful Lucinda. So then, subjoyned
Argosthenia, I am doubly obliged; in my life, and in my contentment: without
having done any thing to oblige you to so generous, and endearing favors. It Is
the duty of all highborn Souls (said I) to procure the benefit of another,
especially of Ladies of your quality. When you please therefore Arnaldo shall
be your husband, and I a servant to you both: Brother rather, said Argosthenia;
for to a Gentleman of so noble, and generous qualities, a title so ignoble and
vile as that of servant does not agree. But how may I believe you (excuse my
indiscretion being transported beyond my self) that Arnaldo commissionated you
to such a treaty? I suddenly replied, Behold here, Madam, this Ring (and
presented it to her) which you have often seen on his finger, and this he
presents you as the pledge of his passion. The Lady took it with a smile,
saying; Now my obligements to you are so incomparable, that I want a conceit to
apprehend them, and language to thank you for them. Tell Arnaldo that
Argosthenia was born either to be enjoyed by Arnaldo, or else only by death.
Choose he what he pleases, for I am content, whether it be with him, or with
it.

You shall do me the favor to carry back to him this Collanet (and pulled it
from her neck) with my Picture, that he may keep it so much the nearer his
heart, as he is the heart of my breast, the spirit of my Soul. Then, in giving
it to me, she stayed her hand on mine, adding, Sir, Argosthenia cannot give you
a greater proof of the obligations she professes to owe you.

I then kissed that hand of this courteous and ingenious Creature, acknowledging
such honors to be infinite favors: assuring her, to the utmost of so
inconsiderable a fortune and ability, a perpetual observance and fidelity to
her person, and to the Knight her Spouse.

Whether it was the obscurity of the night, (become greater by a little misling
shower which began to bedew the tracks of the Forest); or else the
apprehension of the things we discoursed of I know not, but so it happened,
that Argosthenia led us out of the way, nor did she perceive it, till that
being tired by the walk, she took notice she was nigh to the murmr of a
Brook, which begirt the Forest about; whereat being surpised with a chillness
she said, Sir, by my carelessness, we are so wandered out of our way, that we
are above seven miles from the house of Olympia, and four from that of Arnaldo.
To return at this hour, and from this place, into the Forest would be an
exposing our selves to a manifest peril of our lives, being we must pass
through some great Valleys inhabited only by Wolves; and if we would cross
the Brook, and walk toward the house of Olympia, we must also wander three
miles in the Forest along the Banks of this River, before we can find a place
to ford it; it being very large as you see, and full of quick Sands and Rocks
in these parts. Pardon me, I entreat you, this error committed casually
against my will; and do me the favor to lend me something to cover my head,
that the rain may not ulcerate my wound, which I find to be already much
swelled. Hearing her say so, I pulled from under my Coat a large Taffaty Scarf,
and presented her with it, and also a Handkerchief, expressing my grief not to
be so much at the missing of the way, as at the pains which thereby she was put
to. Upon which the Lady replied: Yet cannot I do any thing to show the sense
your obligements impresse in me; though I would willingly dedicate the better
half of my days to return part of that acknowledgement, which the Laws of
gratitude does with justice exact for so supreme a favor, and so high a
content, as your presence has possessed me of. But that which adds to my grief,
is, that you, having need of repose, and remedy to your wounds, do by this
foggy air of the night exasperate them afresh.

Whilst she was talking thus, and her hands were employed about the binding up
and covering her head, her foot slid by reason of the slipperinesse of the
ground, occasioned through the excessive rain that had fallen, and so she tumbled
into a deep plash of water, made by the rising of the Current in that part. It
was the goodness of Heaven that she should fall directly upon her feet,
otherwise she had ran the danger of bruising her self, on certain splinters of
the stump of a tree, cut down upon the bank of that river. And it was also a
happy turn, that the charity of the neighboring stream did reflect some little
duskish light in the air, that I might thereby find out the way to recover her
from that precipice: The which I finally did, though with great difficulty; for
she through the fright of the fall was so bereft of force, that she was
altogether unable to walk. Being forced therefore by necessity, as if she had
been a little Child, I took her in my arms; and she, weeping with tenderness,
for her faster-sitting put her left arm about my neck, saying to me; Sir,
Necessity violates all Laws. I am in your arms, but I am Arnaldo's spouse; Let
it please you therefore that this imbracement be of a sister to her brother, to
whom she confesses to owe her life a thousand times. I being moved with pity,
and the generosity together of the young Lady, was almost ready to weep,
replying; I know very well Madam what a Gentleman's duty is toward a Lady of
your merit; and to a friend, of the quality of Arnaldo. Make the same account
of me, as if I were truly that which you please to term me, your brother;
since age consents not that I call you daughter. So I will, I asssure you
answered she; and resting for feebleness one cheek upon my head, made me think
her so light, that I scarce felt the weight of her body.

Walking in this manner, about half a mile, my ear was alarmed with a slow
murmur of humane voices; whereupon harkening toward that part I perceived they
were fishermen, which casting baits to the fishes stood silently expecting,
that they would run to the same to swallow them. Making therefore to the brink
of the Brook, I called them to waft me over to the Champain. They, like rude
and simple people, very unwillingly consented to it, as loath to deprive
themselves of the sorry prey which they expected in their Nets. Whereupon
perceiving this their wretched avidity, I invited them by a promise of
rewarding them with a benefit more worth then a hundred such fish. They hearing
that, turned their Boat to the place where we were, and to our misfortune
landed us on the other side. To our misfortune, I say: for having with the dawn
of the newborn day discovered at a little distance from us, the Towers of a
Castle founded upon a little Hill, just when that Argosthenia having received
part of her strength, might be able to walk, we directed our steps toward that
place with hope to find harbor and relief; I for my wounds, Argosthenia for
her weakness. But scarce had we begun to mount the rise of the Hill, when on
the instant there came toward us out of the Gate of the Castle, a tumultuous
Troop of persons, some on Horseback, and some on foot: among which Argosthenia
having discovered Diambres, with a look betwixt furious and disdainful, she
betook herself to frightfull and trembling shrieks. Ah! Sir Knight, said she to
me, We are lost. And why, said I? Argosthenia would have answered, but what
through fear, and what through anger, she could not pronounce a word. The
behavior of the Damsel put the people into a suspicion, so that they descended
toward us: but on the other side she was, by watching, and by travail, and by
the things that bound her head so transformed, that it would have been no easy
matter to know her. By this time she knew this to be the Jurisdiction of
Diambres, which removing thither to effect her rape, had just at that instant
received advice of her taking, and of her flight (with the death of his
assassins) by a Wood-man, which passing through the Forest at midnight, to
provide some Wood for his occasions, had found one of them, yet-half-living
upon the ground. He suddenly hereupon took horse with his people, intending to
pass over into the Forest, and cause the dead bodies to be buried, that his
attempt might not come to light: since the fact being committed in the
Territories of Arnaldo, a Knight of the blood Royal (besides his fear of that
Cavalier, which would defend his right with Arms) he might thereupon come to be
accused as guilty of High Treason in the blood of the Princess. Discovering me
therefore, together with her; he presently imagined the truth, for we being
fled we knew not whither, were taken in the Net we sought to avoid. Hereupon he
commanded his servants suddenly to surround us and take us; I seeing the
enterprising of an escape to be desperate, being alone, wounded, and unprovided
against a hundred persons, and being unwilling to forsake the young Lady: only
said to her, that she should not fear, but dissemble that she knew any thing
that he had been the contriver of her ravishment; and meet the misfortunes of
that imprisonment with a smiling face. Diambres knowing the Lady though thus
disguised, was transported with an inconceivable joy; commanding his Steward to
execute what was to be done in the Forest: and he returned himself into the
Castle, and caused us both to be put in Chambers apart, but yet near to one
another, coming first to examine me to know who I was, and whence I came, and
what interest I had in Argosthenia. I replied with an unmoved countenance,
telling him the truth of my condition, and as to the Lady, I said, I held no
other relation to her person then what the duty of a Knight exacted of
succouring her, finding her pursued by two assassins to abuse her, as I past
through the neighboring Forest toward Thebes. Diambres rested satisfied with
my freedom, nor would he take notice of the villains, for fear of discovering
himself, but left me with a doubtful brow, going to Argosthenia; whereupon
perceiving already that there was but a Wall between us, I set my eyes and ears
on work, to find out some crevice, whereat to hear that which past about
Argosthenia. And fortune was pleased so succesfully to assist me, that I found
under the Tapestry that the Wall was cleft, for that there had been a door
which was now made up: I began with a Rowel of a Spur to scrat away the Lime,
to make a hole. Which done, I found that the carelessness of the workmen in
stopping up that door, had thrown in some bits of stones, and rubbish, covering
them over with only one layer of bricks. I was at this transported with joy,
and seemed to leap into Heaven, promising my self now a correspondency with the
young Lady, and to observe all the proceedings of Diambres. Yet
notwithstanding, I could not for that time, without making my self heard, learn
the least intelligence of his treaty with her; but in the silence of the
ensuing night, I opened a breach by the remove of 2 stones amongst the rest of
that rubbish, and called Argosthenia to me; who told me very good news, that
Diambres, though otherwise rude and bestial, being civilized and instructed by
Love, and, as he said, by my Modesty and Generosity, had behaved himself in
very civil manner toward her, hoping to reduce her by courtesy to admit him
for her husband. Yet he had conceived a great jealousy of me, for having
observed on her finger the Ring of Arnaldo, he feared that there had passed
some kind of contract between us. I comforted, and counseled the Lady
according to that, which I judged opportune to her present condition, and so
left her with a mind, full of tranquillity, to take her repose, for whose
consideration more than for any other reason, I then became exceeding pensive.

Arnaldo; or, the Injured Lover.
Book V.
THe morning ensuing my departure, news arrived to the ear of Arnaldo, that
Argosthenia was lost, and that the Cavalier his Guest could not be found in any
place, whereupon he dispatched all his servants to seek for them through all the
Forest. Who having in vain all that day traversed those Labyrinths, could
learn no other tidings of them, than that they had found upon the place where
fell out the bloody Conflict, the Mantle and Bow of the Lady, the earth stained
with blood, and the grass so trampled round about the place, that it was an
easy matter to suspect, there had happened some hot encounter of persons that
had sharply contended for her sake. The Knight was at this relation seized with
a strange shivering; and though the night began to approach, he took with him
his Arms, and four men appointed in Garbs between courtly and martial, to go
himself out of the Forest to trace out farther intelligence of those things,
which were reported to him by his domestics.

Getting therefore out of the Forest at the time when night began, taking
advantage by the Sun's absence to usurp upon the days serenity, he came to
understand upon passing the River, that which the Fishermen had related to
diverse persons, how that they had about break of day, ferryed over to the other
shore, a strange Gentleman with a young Lady in his arms. He hereupon went in
person to that place, and finding the fishermen, he strictly examined them,
demanding of them the marks of the persons: And perceived they could be no
other then Argosthenia and Philiterus. The Knight remained at this intelligence
very sad; nor did he know what to think of me; for Argosthenia being in my
arms, put strange apprehensions of suspicion in his head of some default,
whereas in all reason, it was most probable, that either I was retired with her
to the house of Olympia, or gone away from him without her. On the other side,
understanding that we were both wounded, he comforted himself, how that yet we
could not be very far off.

Next being informed, that we were gone toward the Castle of Diambres, and
that many of the people of the place were that day seen to go into the Forest,
fording and refording of the Brook; he imagined the very truth touching that
Knight. And resolving in his mind to be revenged, he went about midnight
toward the Castle, to observe the actions of the inhabitants, and gather
something whereby to satisfy his suspicion. The Palace of that Knight was
founded above the wall of the Castle, with four Towers, in one of which that
did jet out over the Mote, that was but narrow and dry, Argosthenia and I were
confined. But I, that in those finister incounters had passed two nights
without sleep, was then buried in a profound slumber; whereas Argosthenia, kept
awake by her amarous cares, heardsome little noise of horses and men, which
surrounded the outside of the Castle-ditch. Thereupon, ravished either by
curiosity, or by the impetuosity of a Lover's Soul, which felt it self near
it is proper seat; she ran to the window, and though the night wanted the light
of the Moon and most of the Stars, as being overcast with gloomy clouds; yet
she thought she knew Arnaldo, by his mourning habit. But behold, just as she
was ready to cry out, to let him know of her being there, Diambres entered into
her Chamber, only with one woman, which lighted him; whereupon, she being
called that way by the noise, and by the light, she became the most ashamed
Lady in the world: because covered only by a pure fine smock, she discovered
from head to foot the delicate proportions of her most beautiful body.
Diambres beholding, in that her confusion, the goodliest piece that ever Nature
framed, he forgot his honest purposes, and already breathed with thoughts of
the pleasures of Love: whereupon demanding, not knowing what he said, What she
did at that hour at the window; she observing by the dejected nesse of his
looks, and by the sighs he sent forth, his intentions, courageously replied, I
looked on my husband, Where? said Diambres. Where he was, said Argosthenia.
And, Who is he? added Diambres. One, said Argosthenia, that can make thee
tremble from head to foot; and when he shall know where I am, and the wrongs
thou do me, he will make thee and this Castle fly into the air as a sacrifice
to his revenge. Is this thy husband that sleeps so near thee (said Diambres
with a disdainful smile) happily a Monarch of some vast Empire? This is not my
spouse, (subjoyned Argosthenia) he is my brother by honor and fortune. Shall
Mars or Mercury then be thy husband (replied Diambres) that you stand at this
time of night looking on the Stars in Heaven? Be he who he will (said
Argosthenia,) know, that if you, forgetting the duty of a Knight, should use
any violence to me, my spouse will revenge me of you, to the last drop of your
blood. And therefore leave me in peace, for these are not hours seasonable to
be in a maiden's chamber. Diambres knew not how to behave himself, now hurryed
on by his lust, now retained by his duty; so that for fear of sometimes one
thing, sometimes another, he could not resolve on any thing, believing that the
Lady spoke in that manner, not because she was really espoused, but in a
womanish flourish; and that if so be she were married, that fortune could
befall none but me. Here his sensual appetite being overcome by the encounter
of such beaut yes, he laid hands on the innocent Lady, whereupon she, provoked
by a rage full of real generosity, suddenly snatched the Candlestick out of the
woman's hand, and flung it in the face of Diambres, with such a force, that it
made him stagger, and thus being freed from his hands she flew out of the
chamber, and ran wandering up and down the house, till she finding a hollow
place under a staire-case, leapt in, and there concealed her self, to expect
with the day some opportunity of fortune, either to escape, or at least to dye
with a boldness worthy of her birth and courage. But Diambres finding himself
in so ill a plight, and not daring for shame to cry out, returned to his own
chamber to have his wound searched, giving orders, that without his express
command none should open the gate of his Palace, or of the Castle.

The morning following, there was a very accurate search made in every place,
but Argosthenia could not be found: which so displeased Diambres, that
blaspheming, he threatened to reduce that house to ashes, to burn her in it,
being most assuredly confident, that she could not be gone from thence. The
night being come, at the time when all were buried in silence, Argosthenia came
forth of her concealment, returning upon her own accord to her prison, and
shutting her self in, she came to call me. I having past that day among a
thousand perplexed thoughts of her loss, ran to hear her, and understood what
had befaln her; but whilst I stood musing of some plot, to save her from
eminent ruin, and all in vain: She said to me, Sir, confiding in your
faithfulness; I will sincerely tell you what I think. If you shall like it,
well: if not, I am prepared to dye, as I have lived, nobly. I desire you would
study to open a hole so big in this wall, that I may get through into your
prison. The meat they bring you, will suffice us both; and for your bed, I will
content my self with a small corner at your feet. As for the rest, I will
assure my self of your ingenuity, that you will treat me as the spouse of
Arnaldo, and your sister. In the mean time, who knows, but that Arnaldo may
have some hint of our imprisonment. I having seen him last night to surround
this Castle? Which if it be so, rest assured that he will not be wanting in his
duty to his Spouse, and to a Cavalier to whom he is so much obliged. When I saw
there was no other way for her safety, but this, I sighing, said, She should be
obeyed, putting my self also in peril of death for her safty: for as to the
preserving her secret and honest, I knew well enough what I was to do. This
said, I strove to break the wall without making a noise, which I easily did:
this done, and she having on her side gathered all the rubbish of that breach,
she crept thorough into my chamber; where being entered and got upon her feet,
she threw her arms about my neck, and weeping, said, Dear Brother, If I should
dye for you a thousand times, I could not pay the thousandth part of the
obligements I owe you. I innocently kissed her forehead, entreating her to favor
me with the continuance of the same excessive confidence, for the regard of her
own and my repose. I already know, said she, both who you are, and what I do:
Speak no more of it; nor trouble me; for I know you would sooner dye than fail
in your fidelity to Arnaldo, or in your respects to Argosthenia. Here ending
our discourse; we made up that breach in the wall the best we could, and
tempering the lime in water, so daubed up those bricks on my part, that the
fraud was very hard to be discovered. Which done because the Lady was half dead
with famine, and I was slightly served by reason of my wounds, she was
constrained for that time to content herself with a few slices of Cytron and a
little water. By which being reasonably refreshed, she lay down to sleep with a
wonderful Modesty and honesty on one side of the bed, and seeing me about to
rest my self on the contrary part, she would by no means permit me to do it,
protesting to me, that if I did, she would perpetually stand upon her feer.
Hereupon, not to contend with her, I also took a part of the bed; confining my
self between the bounds of modesty and honor, not so much as to look toward
that fide which she had made choice of for her repose.

We past away eight days in this manner, with much felicity; for Diambres
necessitated by his wound, not only to keep himself retired but also free from
the air there resorted none to my chamber, but only a Page at the hours of
dinner and supper, and a Surgeon once a day. In which time, which I ordered
to be very short, Argosthenia lay hid in a chest, or under the bed. Withal, I
had so wholly indeared the Page, a boy of fifteen years, of good extraction, of
a facetious Genius, and great Soul, that he used me with all the civility that
I could desire. He delighted above measure to hear me relate the singularities
of strange places, and had an ardent desire to travel for some time into Italy;
And because I on the other side extolled, for merit, not for adulation, his
Composures in Verse and Prose, he could have been content, to have been
continually talking with me. But I excused my self by the necessity of rest, to
which I pretended my wounds obliged me, and I kept him, for Argosthenia's
consideration, at the greatest distance I could. I omitted not nevertheless for
those few moments, which he staid with me, to ask him of the news of the place,
and came to know, that (I could not tell how) news was carried to Arnalod's
ear, that the Lady he sought, could nowhere be found, he not being able to
learn the Tyranny of Diambres, and that he accused me of her rape; and was gone
to Athens; whither Diambres to cover his own villainy had caused it to be given
out, that I was gone. This blow of injurious calumny, striking at my
faithfulness, and the honor of Argosthenia, transfixed my Soul with great
anxiety; whereupon to clear my innocence, and comfort Arnaldo with the
possession of his Mistress, I resolved to bestir my wit, to free me from that
in just and wretched captivi^y. I began, in order thereunto, to under-feel the
Page, if when Diambres should restore me to liberty, he would accept of my
company to transport himself into Italy. I would it would please Heaven,
replied he, I might be so happy. And were it so (subjoined I) that Diambres for
his own interests, would not free me from this misery, would you find in your
heart to see me always thus unhappy? Euristhus sighed, and said; When there
may be found any way, that without prejudice to my reputation, I may leave this
service, there should not be that thing in the World, which I would not do for
you. I will content my self with little enough (answered I) and I will so
dispose of things, that you shall not only depart with a Salvo to your
reputation, but also with a considerable augmentation in your honor and
fortune. And to omit, that the being isntrumental in delivering an innocent
Cavalier, unjustly oppressed by a barbarous Tyranny, might acquire you the
commendation of a more than vulgar generosity; I am able to participate to you
the glory of an act, of such a grandeur, that you your self will confess your
incapacity of such a felicity. But, because I love not to use many words, where
works of valor and fidelity are expected, resolve with your self to be my
companion, in a grand Enterprise, which though it should succeed unhappily,
will have you heir of an immortal renown; and then let us consult of the
manner to effect it. Sir, said Euristhus, I am at your devotion, Command and
you shall be obeyed. Than said I, it would be necessary you provide me some
deaf files, to file the bars of a window, and silk enough to make a ladder, to
reach to the Mote of the Castle: stick not at the cost, for I can re pay you to
your full satisfaction. Here the youth re-joyn'd, Sir, My condition of a Page
in another man's house, permits me little ability of serving you, according to
the generosity of my spirit, receiving so poor a stipend from my Father and
Master, that it hardly suffices to buy me clothes. I will receive therefore
what you please to consign me, with assurance of a faithful disbursment. What
need more words? Before three days past, with the help of Euristhus, and of
our coin, we were furnished with tools, and silk, sufficient for our design.
The files we sawed the grates with, and, of the silk, by the help of
Argosthenia, we composed the ladder for our escape; Euristhus I instructed to
go forth of the Castle, without any alteration in his deportment, and to expect
me about midnight on the bank of the Mote. Which he most punctually obeyed. And
seeing, that although the gates were shut, yet there was neither guard no
sentinel in that Castle; when about the fourth hour of the night, we heard the
signal of his arrival, we absolutely removed the bars of the window. Then
fastening the ladder to a hook, and instructing Euristhus in holding of it
steadfast to the earth: Argosthenia was the first which descended, howbeit she
courteously contested with me, to have had me gone down first. She succesfully
descended to the middle of the ladder; but lighting there upon a beam,
accidentally jetting out from a window, she so entangled her person and
garments, that she could not possibly go up nor down. Seeing so unlooked-for a
dysaster, I was almost in despair of saving her; for if there should any rumor
be raised in that part, she could not have been able to escape in such a
conjuncture, from a second and more grievous captivity, to the indangering of
her life: To call and instruct Euristhus how to assist her, I might not, for
fear of being overheard. Where upon, I resolved to venture my self, to relieve
her. So that tying my Arms, which Euristhus had privately conveyed into my
chamber, to a long string of silk, I let them down to the ground, to be ready
at hand, upon any occasion; then I nimbly made another rope of the sheets,
towell, and any other thing that came to hand, and fastened it to the bars of
the window, yet remaining, letting my self down; stopping at one knot after
other, till I came at Argosthenia, now more dead then living, with grief and
fear; and dis-intangled her, cuting and loosing her garments and hair from
those impediments; and accompanied and sustained her, till she got to the
bottom. Whither being come, and having put on my Arms, we embraced in a most
endearing manner, for mutual joy of each other's escape; and rendering
Euristhus the merited applauds of his Fidelity, we made by large paces toward
the Forest; for though it were our intent, to take the way to Athens, yet, on
the contrary, considering the faintness of Argosthenia, and how that when our
escape was known, we should be infallibly pursued, in danger of being
overtaken; we determined to secure our selves in the intricateness of the
Forrest's Labyrinths, and to go from thence straight to the house of Arnaldo,
as well to know some thing of his person, as also to provide our selves with
Horses; for I had a particular desire to recover mine, which I intended not to
leave at any rate in those woods, having traveled with him above six hundred
miles. It was our fortune, that the Brook, through the dryness of the season,
was very shallow, and that Euristhus, by long practice, was acquainted with the
easiest and securest fords. Euristhus went through barefoot first, and I
followed him, bearing that dear and sweet burden, the beautiful Argosthenia
in my arms. When we arrived on the other side, Euristhus was ravished to see
the maid I carried to be Argosthenia, I having told him at the first breaking
of the business to him, that she was a young lass of the Castle, that taken
with my person, had desired to follow me in that escape: And desiring to say
very much, he could speak just nothing through the stupefaction the strangeness
of that adventure had reduced him to. So traveling gently, because we were
unwilling to engage our selves by night in Valleys inhabited by Wolves, we
approached by break of day to the melancholy Mansion of Arnaldo, which now by
the departure of its Lord was become the fit seat of a Forest; there not being
left behind of so many people, more than the Priest that officiated in the
Temple, and those inferior servants which ordered the Orchards, and dressed the
Stables under the supervision of a Bayliffe. Here I found it confirmed that
Arnaldo, deceived in the false report of my flight, was gone to Athens to seek
me: therefore I desired only thus much, that they would furnish us with
necessaries for that voyage, and to dispatch news to Olympia of our
deliverance, with an account of the accidents befaln us with Diambres. I
desired that Argosthenia for her greater decency, and convenience, would take
along with her some grave woman; but she would not agree to it, saying; that
for the matter of her own person she alone sufficed, for other things the
diligence, and assiduity of Euristhus was more then enough; for indeed he
served her with profound affection, celerity, promptness, and reverence. So
making Euristhus to Arm himself, and taking a good Guide, we travailed
succesfully by small journeys toward Athens, till such time as coming to the
Bank of the River Asopos, we met with an unlucky accident prepared us by
malicious fortune.

Diambres being informed of my flight, and that of Euristhus, and, which seemed
yet more strange, of Argosthenia's, who by the marks left behind, was known to
have been the Guest of my prison; he determined to be revenged at any rate, not
so much for any impulse of hatred and passion, as for self-interest, to the end
we should not divulge the excesses of his barbarous incivilities; with
representing them moreover to the King of Thebes, to the extreme endangering of
his Exile, and the confiscation of his goods. Understanding therefore, either
by conjecture, or report that we had taken our way toward Athens, and
confident, that in respect of the delicacy of Argosthenia, which he presumed to
be my consort, we would go but slowly, he conceited he might overtake, and
retake us unexpectedly in the confines of the Dominion of Attica. He selected
for this purpose eight, or ten, of his bravest servants and swashes; and went
(not as yet healed of the blow on his face) with all possible velocity to that
place; and had (for his, and our misfortune) chance so propitious to him, that
he came upon us when we least expected. In the place, where we came to ferry
over it, the stream was exceeding large with many whirlepits, and shelves very
dangerous to the Passengers, so that there was no passing from one side to
another, but only with a little Boat that was there, scarce capable of a man
and a horse. Seeing this necessity, for to make way for the others, I entered
first with my horse. I would have had Argosthenia to have been wafted over with
me, instead of my horse, but the Ferry-man would not permit it, affi^ming that
it was a dangerous thing to pass over horses without the custody of their
masters. I went over therefore alone, and the Wherry was returned to fetch the
young Lady and her Palfry; but she was scarce come to the middle of the River,
when, behold Diambres, with his face, and those of his followers covered,
arrived upon the same shore: and having a sight of that which he went in search
of, he cried to the Boat-man, that upon pain of death he should return back
with the charge he conducted. Euristhus, by his voice and deportment knowing
his master, being all this while on foot, and by that means unobserved, leapt
into the water to swim: and I also perceiving that the Ferry-man amused with
the menaces of Diambres, turned the Vessel to make toward him, pricked forward
my horse into the River to impede his intention; and Argosthenia on the other
side, presented a Dagger to his breast, threatening him with death, if he did
not perform the work he had begun of wafting her over: In the same instant
Euristhus also got up to the Boat, and attempting to leap into it, he had
almost like to have submerged it with his weight. But it being held to rights
by the Art of the Steersman; I came to graple with him, and drawing my sword,
forced him to direct the Boat not to the shore, but along the stream of the
River, letting it drive at the pleasure of the current, till it came to touch
at an Islet, which I had discovered, distant about half a mile, where I
promised my self secure refuge. He obeyed, notwithstanding the cries and
protests of Diambres; and I perceiving my horse began to want ground under his
feet, spurd him back to shore, giving first to Euristhus the end of a string
that I had about me, that the Ferry-man should not deceive me, by turning as I
stood on land the Vessel to another part.

Thus we walked about three hundred paces, being followed on the opposite Bank
by Diambres. I had a thought, that the Bark should take the right arm of the
Channel, which was very broad in that place, to the end Argosthenia, defended
and hid by the Isle, might land with security, and free her self from the
eminent peril, without Diambres his being able to pursue us in our journey; but
the young Lady spying by chance a youth behind me, that carried a bow and
quiver like a hunts-man, she began to call out: To land, to land! Stay the boy,
stay the boy! I obeyed her, and stopped him, making him to stay with me; and the
Water-man, against his will, brought his Boat to shore. Here the fair
Argosthenia came out of the Boat, and with the help of Euristhus (because he
would not lend her them) took the bow and quiver from the youth, and looking
pleasantly upon me with a smiling aspect, said: Dear friend, the River is so
broad in this place, that scarce discovering my enemy, I cannot shoot at any
certainty: yet I will try my fortune. I, interrupting her, said: I beseech you
Madam, be pleased not to tempt blind fortune with any advantage; Content your
self, you are safe, and that before our enemies can get their passage over, we
shall be in a place where they cannot hurt us, the confines of Attica being
hard by: That we may do: however, said she, give me leave to let fly one Arrow.
I told her, she might do as she pleased: and she presently drew the Bow to
shoot. When just at the instant we were diverted with a nearer danger, by the
appearance of a Knight which came out of a Track, made dark by the umbrage of
Trees, and leading to the River side: he was attended by two other persons on
hors-back; which discovering us busied in that confusion, ran upon me with his
sword drawn, crying, Ah, Traitor! It was the goodness of heaven, that the
horse I rode on should hear that noise, and that voice; so that I leapt aside
that I might avoid that blow, which threatened me with death, Argosthenia hereat
lost not a with of time, but let fly at my unknown enemy the Dart prepared for
Diambres: yet the confusion and haste with which she shot it, made her miss
the mark, and instead of the Knight, to hit his horse in the head over the left
eye; wherewith, what by the smart, and what by the fright, he was put into such
a fury, that running his crupper against a Tree he tumbled himself, and the
Knight into a Ditch, which separated the road from the fields.

His Companions precipitously leapt from their horses to help him, amongst whom
I discovered the face of Cadmus, Page to Arnaldo, and by him guessing that the
fallen Knight must needs be his master, (which by means of his gray Clothes, and
his concealed face half-hid with his Murrion, was wholly unknowable at the
first sight) I alighted also to his assistance. Argosthenia cried, Kill the
Traitor; but I, that was of an opinion very different from that of hers,
seeing him buried in mire, in danger of a speedy surrender of his life; assured
his servants that I came to help, not kill him, and putting our selves upon an
attempt to draw him out of that misery, we did effect it; but he was so
bruised, and in so bad plight, that he scarce knew in what part of the World he
was.

I was at this spectacle so moved with lively resentments, of Pity, Grief, and
Love, that I could not hinder the escape of some tears through my eyes.

But, who can aptly describe the sorrow of Argosthenia, now that she knew her
espoused husband, and saw him in so deplorable estate, after so cruel an
attempt upon my person, and a hazard of his being slain by her own hand: She
knew (and perceived by my looks) that he had been deceived, whereupon flinging
her self upon him, and with tears embracing him, she said. Oh! unfortunate
Knight; what Devil has bereft you of judgment, that you go about to kill him,
to whom you are obliged for your life, safety, and honor? Do you thus pay your
engagements to this Gentleman? Wretched Arnaldo, miserable, even in your
felicicy. The Cavalier, more dead then alive by so grevious a fall, knew not
what to say, seeing Argosthenia upon him, and me so near in a posture, that
without words did accuse him of his crime, committed through too precipitate
pievishnesse, and superfluous jealousy. The first words that he could
distinctly pronounce, was to dissuade Argosthenia from so open demonstrations
of her affection: afterward re-assuming by little and little his infeebled
forces, (though he had his body miserably macerated) he strove to get upon his
feet, to walk toward the houses of the Island, where there was a retirement
destined to the use of Travelers: but when I acquainted him with the peril he
ran into of meeting with Diambres, the occasioner of all those misadventures
which we now suffered; he boiled with such resentments of indignation and fury,
that almost forgetting his pain he said: Withdraw Argosthenia a little, that I
may in this river wash off the smears of the dirt, and change my Clothes, and
then we will resolve upon the course we shall steer in our voyage.

We did so; And it chanced that the water was very warm, for that the Sun had
but just then began to decline its Meridian; so that he found some ease of the
smart, which the fall had strangely caused in the nervous part of his hips.
Refreshing, and re-apparelling himself, he would have begged a needless pardon
for his mistakes of me, and a brief Narrative of all our adventures. But
expecting every minute Diambres at our backs, I called him back to other
apprehensions, telling him; That but for the thoughts of Argosthenia's
preservation, which for that time was more opportune, I would give my advice,
to go (notwithstanding the disequality of number and disadvantages of strength)
to meet Diambres, and chastise him for his barbarous Tyranny: but because I
will not put it to the hazard of leaving her alone in an unknown Country, at
the discretion of sickle Fortune; it behooves us with the frost of prudence to
allay the ardor of generosity, and betake our selves to counsels more cautelous
than courageous. Therefore let him divert, though not for ever avert, his
merited chastisement. As near as I can judge, he is not now far off, and
perhaps by this time is landed in the Island, and ready to recover this shore:
now if we on the contrary go over to the otherside, swimming upon our horses
(since the Ferry-man is stipt away) we shall disappoint his diligence with a
journey contrary to his expectation by turning toward Thebes. And since you be
destitute of a horse, and Eur^sthus has likewise abandoned his upon the
opposite side; I will take him up behind me; and for you and the Lady
Argosthenia, her horse may serve both. Having so resolved, Arnaldo commanded
Cadmus to attempt to ford the River in the safest place.

The courageous Youth spurred his horse into the water, and having gone a little
way with great ease, he began to feel no bottom; whereupon leaving him to swim,
yet guided by Bitt and Spur, that he might not make a stop in the water, he
immediately began to set foot on land, and succesfully attained the other Bank.
Arnaldo did nor like that ford, fearing that either his beast, or mine, might
yield in swimming to the labor of so great a weight: and on the other side
Argosthenia cried that we had better, to avoid a certain danger, expose our
selves to an uncertain fortune. And I added: I know what I say, Madam; Diambres
will over take us within this half hour. For me, I but meanly prise the
endangering my life in your service, against such inequality of power and
people. But you, what would you do? My horse has forded other manner of Rivers
then Asopos, and with other manner of weights, then now he is like to carry. I
would freely offer him you; but I know that he will not well be ruled (where I
am) by the guidance of any other hand. Sir, said Euristhus take you Argosthenia
behind you, and I will swim over, for my Clothes are not yet dry.

To that Argosthenia would by no means consent, being unwilling so much to
incommode the generous Youth, to whom his former services spoke her so much
obliged; but Arnaldo desiring her to be advised by us, she obeyed. I presently
entered the stream, and Euristhus cast himself in after me to swim, and after
him entered Arnaldo, followed by his Squire My horse seemed to sport with the
stream, with such volubility did he cut and trample that water under foot;
insomuch that I was almost come to the other shore before Arnaldo had scarce
waded the third part of the way.

In the mean time the curiosity and love of Argosthenia, made her ever and anon
to look back toward the Knight her spouse: thereupon hearing him once, angrily
rating his horse, that peradventure was affrighted by the swelling of the
Torrent, which imperuously assaulted him in the midst of the stream; she turned
her self with such haste, and carelessness toward him, that she slipped from her
horse into the water, sinking to the bottom without any stay. Providence, which
would not permit her to be the food of that Element, had provided her of a help
before the danger, by placing Euristhus to swim behind us; for he diving
presently after her, drew her out of that dangerous current, as yet half-alive.
I also at the same instant feeling bottom, leapt from my horse to help, and
take her, as being far taller, and stronger than Euristhus, into my arms, and
carried her a-shoar. But Arnaldo in seeing her fall, and knowing himself far
from relieving her, was ready to throw himself for desperation into the middle
of the Torrent to drown himself; but coming to land, and seeing her in my arms,
he was ready to die of jealousy, renewing his former suspicion of our Amorous
correspondence. Yet dissembling the same, he stood without giving us a word:
nor spoke I at all to him, though I perceived his suspicion.

By this time Argosthenia coming to her self with reversing all the water her
stomach was oppressed with, she began to say to me: Certainly heaven has some
wonderful thing to do in our persons: Sir, My having received life so often
from your hands, and the series of dangers, through which I pass every moment,
makes me think, that either some very great good, or great ill, is portended to
us by this encounter of fatality. I only calling Arnaldo to hearken to what I
said, replied; Madam! Heaven is pleased sometimes to work its wonders, not
only unknown to, but despised by, the world. It has designed you to a fortune
above your hopes. Be pleased therefore to condescend to take Arnaldo for your
Spouse and Husband. Here she interupted me. Is this a time (said she) for such
an affair? Will not my word suffice, which I have already past to you? No,
Madam, said I: but it is requisite the business pass farther: Contract your
selves to each other, and then we will talk with you. This they did, with the
assistance of my self and of Euristhus; and I desiring to discharge my self
wholly of the things I was entrusted with by the Lady, presently presented the
Neck-chain, with her picture to Arnaldo; which she had commanded me to present
him with all. Arnaldo earnestly beholding it, said; Since that this Medall may
be divided, you would oblige me, Madam, if you would please to keep my picture,
which is inchased therein, and I take yours. And here he related to us, that he
had formerly made that necklace to present Lucinda with: and lost it upon the
very same day, the tilting was celebrated at Thebes. And I (added Argosthenia,)
found it upon the Seashore, at my first Landing in the Boeotian dominions, and
having made the picture of Lucinda to be changed for that of mine, I have
always worn it in my breast, for the Love of Arnaldo, till such time as it
pleases Heaven, instead of his picture, to make me possess his person.
Arnaldo therefore took only her picture, hanging it in another chain,
restoring his own to her, to wear it for his sake. Then I, interupting this
their amorous contention, said; Sirs: the night is already near at hand, and
it is necessary we provide some lodging where to refresh you, being both in
equal need of it.

Whilst I thus spoke, I discovered a Bark, that scouring along those coasts,
ran a swift course down the stream of the River. She had, at a place a little
distant, discharged her merchandise, and was returning to the mouth of the
River, for new freight. There came at that instant into my mind, a new conceit,
upon which I addressed my self to them, saying; Sirs, (said I) Our interests and
your destiny calls us to Negropont. This Bark may waft us over for this little
distance with security and commodiousnesse: and though yet there were no other
benefit to be acquired hence, this would be no little one, of avoiding the
incommodity of a journey by Land, at this time of night, and in this necessity
which you have of repast, to your bodies, and repose to your wounds. My
counsel was approved by the contracted couple: And the Bark was made
immediately to stay: which we hired to the River's mouth, with great content to
the Mariners, to whom, in regard they were discharged of their Lading, and
bound to the same place, the money seemed easily got. Being entered therein,
and the Lady having supt slightly with such viands, as they gave her, and did
provide at a Peasants cottage, as we past by; but yet merrily enough, save only
that Arnaldo was exceedingly troubled at Argosthenia's relation of the passages
under the Tyranny of Diambres: and I after supper imparted to Argosthenia, the
news of Negropont, putting her in expectation of things above her hope. The
morning following, leaving Argosthenia with the Pages in the Bark: Arnaldo and
my self, to enjoy the pleasure of the fields, would take Horse, ordering the
Pilot so to steer the Vessel, that it might be near at hand for us to retire
to at our pleasure.

Thus we walked about a league, talking and discoursing upon the expected
adventure, in the revolt of Calcidonia; till we came to a little Forest of
water-Poplers, which were casually sprung up on those shoars, by reason the
River, inclining in it is course toward the contrary banks, wearing away the
earth on that side, had left this side dry, out of which was grown up this
little Wood of Willows and Poplers. Being entered into it, and having gone
scarce fifty paces, we were presently surrounded by about thirty Ruffians, some
on foot, and some on horseback, with their faces masked, one appearing before
all the rest, showing himself to be the leader of that rout, who directed a
dart at Arnaldo to lay him dead on the grass: yet the blow failed the
Assassin's expectation; for it past between the side, and the arm, of the
Knight, doing him no other harm, but gliding along his cloths gave a little
race to his skin: But Arnaldo's blow, did not in that manner fail him; for
presently laying hand on his sword, he threw himself with such an impetuosity
upon the Assassin, that running him through and through, he fell dead to the
ground. On the otherside, being unwilling to dye unrevenged, I did what I
could; and if the hour of my death had been by Heaven decreed to have been
then, I certainly deserved it, by what I then did. But what could three persons
alone do against thirty Villains? Arnaldo's Squire was slain, and he and I were
so sorely wounded in many parts of our bodies, that we fell half dead, and as
they thought wholly life-lesse, upon the ground.

Yet I, as being less hurt, presently re-assum'd my spirits that were fled,
and opened my eyes, soon again grown sad by the sight of six dead bodies (for
of that number as yet Arnaldo appeared:) but seeing my horse close by me, as if
he had been condoling me; I gathered thence, that it was not to rob, but to
murder us, that they had so rudely handled us. Raising up my self therefore
the best I might, and searching my wounds, I found my self hurt in the thigh,
and the left side; in the arm, and right shoulder; and in the middle of my
belly; of all which wounds, only this last seemed mortal. I bound it up
therefore before the rest, and would go visit the dead body of Arnaldo, and
finding him still breathing, I comforted my self; and, bringing him better to
himself, he slowly and heavily opened his eyes, and scarce knowing me closed
them up again, as if at that instant he had breathed out his Soul. Seeing him
in so miserable a condition, I strived to get upon my Horse, to seek out some
better means for his succor: but in vain. For the Mariners hearing the noise
of the fight, and seeing perhaps some of the Rogues along the shore, had
(notwithstanding the cries of Argosthenia) with sails and oars so hastened the
voyage, that they were gone above two leagues from that place in an hour.

Being unwilling therefore to abandon the Knight in those miserable extremit
yes, I returned into the wood, and found by chance two Peasants passing that
way, with intention to rob the dead bodies, whom (though at my coming they
began to run away) I so far engaged with my carriage and language, promising
them a rich reward for that service, that they stayed: and understanding that
they were sons to two laboring men of those parts, I desired one of them,
which I thought more discreet than the other, to go and call them, to carry
that Gentleman into some convenient place, where to cure or bury him. The young
man ran, encouraged by the reward, and returned expeditiously with his father,
and a girl, who went for the good-mans daughter; which being suddenly come to
us, she flung her self upon the face of the Cavalier, and muttered I know not
what charms, so that he presently returned again to himself. Afterward she
told me, she would ask no more, but only that she might be permitted to try
her secrets, to cure that almost-dead body, being oppressed with six mortal
wounds. I saw she spoke with discretion, and that the Knight grew worse every
moment, therefore I told her, She should do her pleasure. So she searched his
wounds, but would let none see how she would cure him; for she would not accept
of any assistance; as in like manner she refused all help in dressing me,
though in a different manner, having suddenly secured our lives, without giving
us the least occasion to learn those secets. What shall I say? In four and
twenty hours I beheld Arnaldo, whom I had bemoaned as dead, healed: and I, that
was likely to live kept my bed a month, almost in despair of recovery. But the
Cavalier, though he was extremely loath to leave me alone in that Village, yet
in the end, constrained by his duty, and by my entreaties, he went toward the
Mouth of the River in search of Argosthenia; and I remained, though so sorely
diseased, to enjoy the pleasing conversation of the young Damsel, my Doctresse
and Keeper.

Arnaldo; or, The injured Lover.
BOOK VI.
THe Leader of the Assassins slain by the hand of Arnaldo, was the Tyrant
Diambres; who in the passage which we made along the little Island, where he
had for that night took up his lodging, knew by my Horse, which with those
others of our company, stood upon the fore-deck of the Ship, who was his
master, and learnt something also of the arivall and successes of Arnaldo;
whilst we stayed to sup, and whilst the Mariners were at supper (which took up
three hours time) he got before us with his attendants, to weave some new
treachery: supposing that Arnaldo would go attended splendidly, according to his
quality. So he gave notice to some vile people of those parts, that we were
exiled from Thebes, and were flying to Negropont: he moreover encouraged them
to slay us, to gain a great sum, which as he affirmed, was set upon our heads.
But he being the first that was slain, in attempting of this execrable
enterprise, and after him three of his best Soldiers, it occasioned that the
Villains, (advertised by the flight of the other retainers to Diambres, that
that affair would succeed very contrary to what he had told them*) for our good
fortune left us all, some alive, some dead upon the ground, every one retireing
to his own house, lest they should be accused of such a murder. Arnaldo being
healed as I told you, and departed in quest of his Mistress, I kept my bed
still, under the amorous and dear charge of the fair Orsina. And because her
garb, her looks, and her virtues, spoke her to be more then the daughter of a
Farmer, I desired one day to know from her supposed mother Serena, the truth of
matters, concerning her; and she with a deportment, savoring not a jot of
rural, thus spoke to me.

Sir, Since I see that this noble, and virtuous Girl, delighted by your
courteous carriage, and by the grace of your countenance and expressions, has
conceived an infinite affection for you, and desires exceedingly to cease this
pastoral life, and to go to live in an other place and employment, more
conformable to her birth, and inclinations; I will discover to you that
concerning her, which none else knows, except my husband and I; and leave you
to do as you shall please.

There went, now sixteen years ago, to Corinth, upon occasions of his studyes,
an English Gentleman, of great birth, but greater virtue: he put himself to
lodge, according to the custom of Scholars, in the house of a young and comely
woman, a Citizen, which being left a Widow in the flower of her years, with
some Fortune, in movable goods, had applied her self to this Calling, very
profitable in that City, of boarding Trans-mountanian and Trans-marine
Scholars, which were wont to become the most modest, and most studious, of all
those about our parts; whereas ours commonly abandoned themselves to all
dissoluteness. Now, as it should happen, these two, being both alike young,
and fair, they were mutually enamoured of one another; their names were Rosmond
and Camilla, and making use of their liberty and familiarity, there was both of
them this goodly child Orsina. The love of the daughter, no less than that of
the mother, detained Rosmond at Corinth some five or six years; whence at last
being necessitato depart about urgent affairs, he left about three thousand
Ducates, in assignment of Portion to Orsina, and precious gifts moreover and
above to her Mother. She notwithstanding, continued to lodge Gentlemen of such
like quality: and Orsina came by that means to learn, not only foraign
Languages, but also the Principles of the Sciences, especially Physik and
Surgery: in which professions, she is able to do strange things with only
two or three words, as what she has experimented in Arnaldo, whom she has
raised from death to life, may easily persuade you. It happened in this mean
time, that certain contests arose among the Scholars, her guests; which
breaking into blows, some of them were slain at the table, mingling their blood
with their victuals and wine. Whereat, Camilla being afrighted, and fearing to
be cited before the Judges, she packt up all her richest movables, with what
money she could presently get together, and imbarkt her self for Athens: where
not holding her self for all that secure enough, she would go into Negropont,
as being a disjunct Jurisdiction from the Dominion of Attica, and stayed her
voyage in this place, and in the end, dyed in this house; first leaving, and
recommending to my charge, this her daughter, now twelve years of age. I have
not been wanting on my part, for the bringing of her up, for this three years,
that she has been here, with the best decorum my rusticity would permit;
having my self learnt some thing in my younger days, in the service of a Lady
of Athens, which in the end married me to this Husbandman, with more regard to
her convenience, than my satisfaction, though I confess my self well enough
pleased with this manner of life, which though rude and toylsom, is yet simple,
and quiet. Now Orsina having often entreated me to carry her to Corinth, to
procure for her the Dowry, left her by her Father, and to marry her; I could
never prevail with my husband to content her; for having never gone out of the
bounds of these Villages, he fears the world will fall on his head, if he hear
but any strange Country named. If you shall please therefore, gentle Sir, to
favor this maid with your assistance, and protection, though my husband gainsay
it, yet being informed by Arnaldo of your noble quallities, I will consigne to
you that little Coin, and such Jewels as I have left in my hands by her
Mother; assuring my self, that she cannot but arive safely to the end of her
desires. She is already pleased with it; and tells me, She would account her
self happy, in being able to serve you. Do you resolve therefore, for we are
ready to execute what you shall command us.

I was well pleased with the conversation and the Virtue of Orsina, but the
taking such troubles upon my self, was a thing wholly contrary to my Genius and
inclinations: And the business of Argosthenia, had made me to know by proof,
what I might expect from traveling up and down the world with Women,
especially young and handsome. Yet the entreaties of the child being added to
the persuasions of the woman, and knowing my self obliged to her for my health,
I promised, that so soon as I was dis-engaged from the company of Arnaldo, I
would conduct her to Corinth, to her Parents house: and it fell out sooner than
I thought for: For, Euristus coming to see me with Letters from Arnaldo; I knew
not how to reward him for my liberty, which I obtained by his means, better
than by giving him Orsina in marriage, under the notion of my Daughter, with
all that deposited by her Father, as the Inheritance of her Mother, with a
considerable rise to his fortune.

The advice brought me by Euristus, was, that Arnaldo, having found Argosthenia
at the mouth of Asopos, expecting of him, they had determined to return
together to that Village, to assist me in my distemper, till I was recovered:
But having deferred it, by reason of Cadmus being indisposed, and withal, to
understand my pleasure; I, that already was aware, that Arnaldo, for all his
generosity, languished with a jealousy of me, and that this resolution, of
coming back, was a motion of Argosthenia; as it was on the other side an
invention of Arnaldo, to remit it to my disposal: and being desirous withal
to see my self at liberty, to travel the world according to my purposed
intent, I immediately dispatched back Euristhus, to entreat them both, that they
would not incommode themselves for my sake, but pursue the course of their own
fortune, and go to Calcides, to celebrate with solemnity their Nuptials, by
consent of the Duchess, from whose pleasure did depend their felicity, and
advancement: For that when I was ridd of my infirmity, I would wait upon them
in person, at a time, when my urgent affairs would better permit. Yet I should,
wherever I came, and in all conditions, of estate, and fortune, ever bear in
mind the obligations received from them both, to preserve them fresh in my
memory, to the last moment of my life.

Euristhus returned with new Letters from Arnaldo and Argosthenia, who by all
means desired me to be at Calcides, before the disclosing of themselves, being
willing to have me present at the opening of that Scene. But I resolved to
travel to Corinth, to settle Euristhus and Orsina, and free my self from this
new suggestion. And it was the goodness of destiny, so to dispose of it; for
if new accidents of adverse fortune should cross their design, I should be
also inevitably much concernd in it, without any other fruit, but only that of
a miserable constancy of fidelity, and an unfortunate amity.

They therefore hired a Bark, to transport them to Calcides: and scarce had
they put out of the Port, but they were taken by a Pinnace of Pirates, belonging
to Rhodes, who presently fettered Arnaldo, and reserved Argosthenia, upon
account of her extreme beauty, for a mighty ransom; passing to unlade their
wealthy booty at Scarpanto; where they sold Arnaldo (though he promised them
great ransoms, and let them know his quality) to a very covetous and churlish
Merchant, who notwithstanding the comeliness of his person, and the offers
made by him of vast sums, sent him to work in certain Vineyards of his, in a
Village in the Country. Arnaldo being assaulted, but not vanquished by so
strong gusts of fortune, inured himself to this course of life, in hope of
speedy redemption, having found out a way to dispatch Letters to Thebes,
letting his friends know his misery, that so he might be set at liberty, with
force of gold, and the interposition of the regal power. Yet he was in
continual apprehensions of sorrow in behalf of the unfortunate Argosthenia his
Spouse, which for her singular beauty, might be presumed subject to a thousand
accidents of adverse fortune: verifying in his person, but too much, the title
which he bore of the Injured Lover.

But from the self-same consideration that troubled him, did arise the cause of
his security; those barbarous villains, having for their more profit till then
preserved her incontaminated. She yet never ceased weeping in that her
captivity, wherein she was deprived of all comforts: and were it not that she
was loath to wish him so much unhappiness, she could in that calamity have
desired the conversation of Philiternus. After a time, the Pirates set sail for
Rhodes, and there exposed to sale that precious merchandise, the admirable
Argosthenia, as a thing desired by many, though but few were found, who durst
buy her at so excessive a price, as the Pirates set upon her, which was no
less then twenty thousand Ducats; there being none would venture so much money
on a Jewel, which, though lovely in extremity, might in an hour, change and
lose all its beauty.

But that which one alone could not do, three young Gallants together, (to
their own ruin) attempted: who being otherwise intimate friends, agreed to buy
her jointly, to possess her also together by turns. Fools that they were, not
to consider, That women were made to part, not to unite the Wills of men: and,
That the Throne and Bed detest competition. The money being disbursed, their
agreement being for eighteen thousand Ducats, they conducted the innocent prize
to the house of Antiochus, the principal of the Purchasors, where the other
two, Hermogenes and Arbant fell into a contest with him, Who should enjoy her
the first night: He treating them with very unworthy terms, said; that all
reason required, that for nobility and fortune being their better, the
precedence in that Love was his of right. Arbant, by this time grown all into a
fury, told him, that having equally dispended his money as well as he, he knew
not how to yield to him in this matter. Hermogenes, of a more tranquil mind,
was content to remit the decision of it to Lot: but not being hearkened to by
the other two, they broke out into such terms of rage, that Arbant challenged
Antiochus out of his house, and after an obstinate Combat Antiochus was slain,
and Arbant so ill handled, that he did not survive him many days. Hermogenes
as the third buyer, challenged the possession of the fair Captive, but he was
jointly denied her by the Heirs of Antiochus and Arbant, till he had repayed
them the sums contributed by the defunct parties to that mournful purchase.

But Argosthenia cut off this contention: for, engaging to her the women of
Antiochus his house, with the discovery of her quality and misfortunes, they
were moved with such a compassion of her calamities, that they helped her to
escape, being disguised in boy's apparel; having first something shortened her
hair, and discolored her face.

Argosthenia being gone, and the strife at an end, she, who found nothing about
her but her Wedding Necklace with Arnaldo's Picture, and two, or three pieces
of Gold, preserved from the rapine of the Pirates, which had been so modest
with her, as not to search, and ransack her in her under Garments; knew not how
to get out of that Isle, and return to her own Country, so lonely and forlorn
as she was, but went wandering up and down the Villages adjacent, as if she
begged Alms, fearing lest if she should show her Gold to any to work her
return, she should be either stopped, or robbed. Till in the end lighting upon a
poor old woman, but of a hearty constitution, which also went ranging up and
down the Isle, she consorted her self with her, taking a resolution at last to
disclose her self, promising any recompense she should ask, if she would assist
her in getting from thence to the Isles of Scarpanto, or Negropont.

The good old woman was content, and took her in place of her son, traveling
together to the Western Coasts, and there finding a Fisherboat, of the largest
sise that furrow the Seas on such employments; She offered them ten Ducats upon
her disimbarking on the Isle of Scarpanto. The Fishermen at first thought
themselves mocked: but the Damsel assuring them that there was those in that
Isle, who would presently pay them, and considering that they were to go to Sea
to fish, they agreed, and with a prosperous voyage arrived there the same
night. Here Argosthenia landed in the morning, leaving the old woman in the
Bark for security, and went to the house where Arnaldo was sold. But learning
he was gone to his masters Countrey-house to work, she was exceeding glad. And
because it was but three miles off, she went thither upon the wings of Love,
and of desire, in a short space; and seeking of him, she was brought to the
place with much courtesy by a certain honest woman. She found him with his
Fetters at his heels, and his Mattock and Spade going to work, and was so moved
in mind at so deplorable a spectacle, that not able to keep upon her feet, she
sunk down with sorrow and regret.

Arnaldo and the woman ran to help her, amazed with the strangeness of the
accident. But their words nothing availing, the woman ran to her house to fetch
some Vinegar, Water, and Wine, and the like, to bring her again to her self;
and in the mean time the confusion of Arnaldo much increased, thinking he knew
the features of that beautiful visage; howbeit, that her short hair, and
Olive-coloured face, and man's apparel, made Argosthenia unknowable. But she
returning to her self, and taking an opportunity when the woman was returned
with her implements to her house, she said to the Knight. Arnaldo, a person of
your acquaintance sent me to salute you from her. Here is a Bark of certain
Fishermen of Rhodes, in which I come to find you, promising them ten Ducats
upon my word; if you please to lend them me, I will leave you a pawn shall
countervail them a hundred times.

Arnaldo answered, that for money he had none, but yet he would procure some by
that woman's means to serve her upon a Chain, which he wore at his breast. And I
also, said Argosthenia, have Gold to make money of; and so saying, drew forth
her Necklace: when Arnaldo saw that, growing pale, he ask't her, Who gave her
it? Your self, said she. And is it possible that through this disguise you
should not perceive Argosthenia? Arnaldo trembled and sighed with fear and joy
at those words, and if he had not perceived the woman returning, he would have
embraced her in his arms. But, disguising the matter, he turned his speech to
the woman, and desired to procure (not on the Necklace, but) upon a Bracelet
that Argosthenia gave him, twenty Ducats for that young man to employ in his
service.

The woman mistrusting nothing, but thinking to receive some benefit to her
self, went presently about it, in which mean time Argosthenia gave Arnaldo
relation of her adventures, and of her intent to get him thence by one means or
another; for if he would but return with her in that Fisher-boat to Rhodes, he
should be sure under her conduct to find more easily some way to transport
themselves for Negropont. Arnaldo wept extremely to hear her strange fortunes,
in being born for the death of so many persons; but in particular as to the
getting out of that slavery, he could not upon a sudden contrive a way to
effect it; there being no other way to the Haven, but through the City: where
in the daytime he would be stayed, and in the night he could not get out, in
regard he was loaded with Chains. Argosthenia signed, and pausing awhile, she
said. When the Western Knight freed me from the thraldom of Diambres, we filed
asunder in two hours the Iron-bars of a Window; and, Is there no way to break
the Chains that are about your feet? But where shall we find (said Arnaldo)
such a kind of file, in so forlorn a place? Think not of that, said
Argosthenia, here is that will do the work: And pulled forth a little flat
Glass Vial, about the bigness of a Nut, saying. Before the Cavalier cut the
bars, he put some of this water on them, of which he gave me this Cruse. But in
the using it, you must have a care you touch it not with your finger, lest its
malevolent nature should hurt you. Hereupon Arnaldo pulled a little Cotton out
of the quilting of his Doublet, and, just dipping it in the water, bathed the
Lock that fettered his feet, according to the direction of Argosthenia, and he
presently saw the admirable effect; for, being made of pure Iron without the
help of a file, it flew open; whereas in the grate of Diambres, the Iron being
Steeled the help of files was also requisite.

Arnaldo seeing himself at liberty, My dear Soul (said he) let us not stay any
longer here, where we can expect no advantage: but let us leave the Bracelet to
this woman, in reward of her civilities to me. I am certain she cannot return
this hour: and by that time she does come back, the Gates will be shut; so that
we cannot enter without being seen. And this business likewise would be done
presently, in regard all the people of these parts are gone into the Mountains
to vintage, upon which occasion not so much as the little Children are left at
home, it being, at this time of vintage, permitted to every one to eat as much
as they please. And again, we shall come to the City in an hour, wherein we
shall be unobserved, for it will be about nine of the Clock. And afterward we
will follow the counsel of Philiternus, who advises that, in all Enterprises,
We must still give place to Fortune, who is always a friend of resolute Souls
Let us go Madam. Argosthenia thought it an Age, till she saw her Spouse freed
from that captivity, and therefore would not contradict him, but made use of
Fortune's favor.

What need more words? They came by happy providence safe to the Port, the
City being open, and without Guards in that hour of retirement: But yet there
they met with another accident to cross them; for Argosthenia having, instead
of the promised money, brought the Fishermen a man, in Garb very suspicious,
they would take neither of them into the Bark. Arnaldo a good while patiently
endured their impertinencies; but at last, seeing there was no other way to
persuade them, he plucked out another Bracelet of Argosthenia's, and offered it
them for satisfaction of that their service. Then the Fishermen had so much
the more suspicion of his person: and were beginning to put off from the shore,
being unwilling to receive persons that were to be suspected, either of Flight,
or of Theft. Arnaldo by this time, being enraged by necessity with an
extraordinary passion, and not usual in him, leapt into the Bark, and snatching
up an Oar, menaced with an austere, and terrible look, presently to dispatch
him that offered to oppose him; whereupon not having the courage to defend
themselves, two (of five that they were) leapt, for fear, upon the shore.
Arnaldo being hereby the better secured, took into his custody two Spears, two
Bows, and all the Arms and Swords he found; and helping Argosthenia aboard,
commanded him that sat at Stern to turn the Prow toward Candia, promising him
the recompense due to his good service, and also to chastise his villainy, if he
deceived him. The Fishermen seeing their cross fortune, re-entred their Bark:
for Argosthenia had also bent a Bow, and was ready to shoot any that should
refuse; determining to obey that cross necessity, which had yet succeeded more
favorably than they hoped for: seeing that having made Candia, where Arnaldo
held correspondence of consanguinity and friendship, he gave them fifty Ducats,
and so sent them home pleased, who came out so unwillingly.

Here, because the Cavalier would not make himself known in that condition, he
bought with the Jewels of Argosthenia honorable habits for both: and took with
him a Page, and the old woman that still followed them, sailing along the
Coasts of the Isle, till he came to Sidonia, where report went, that some
Vessels lay ready to set sail for Athens. And finding it just as he desired, he
embarked in a Western Vessel, wherein sailing prosperously as far as the
Coasts of Peloponnesus, the wind, which hitherto had favored them with benign
gales, now became treacherous, amassing Clouds in the air, and rolling the Sea
upside down, with a Tempest the more sad and dangerous, by how much the less
it was expected and feared. This storm continued three days and three nights
in its fury, during which time, what they got of their voyage by advancing
forward, they lost again by driving backward. On the fourth day, when as the
weather began to calm, they could no longer steer their Vessel, that was grown
old already with many years continual scuffling with the waves: they split her
upon a Rock right against the Province of Argos; but with so good fortune to
the Passengers and Mariners, that it endangered no man's life, and the damage
of very little of the lading. Unfortunate Argosthenia did very ill resent this
adventure, and fell with impatience and anger into an extreme distemper. And
yet there was not wanting some, who leapt on shore to free her from that
danger, which they had run in the Tempestuousnesse of the Sea.

The Captain of the ship had cast his eye on this miraculous Creature: but
respect to Arnaldo, who seemed to be of a quality not to be touched without
danger; and the turbulence of the Sea had put a stop to the licentious thoughts
of this man; who, although inured from his Cradle to that sordid kind of life,
was too flexible of heart to withstand the Amorous Darts, sparkling in the
lively eyes of incomparable Argosthenia. But being run upon the Rock through
the necessity of the shipwreck; while Arnaldo having accommodated his dear
Spouse the best he could, at the foot of a Grot under the custody of her old
servant; and taking his Page with him, was gone to seek if there were any
Harbor in that desert, or any people to give them relief; There came the
strangest capriccio into the head of the villainous Captain that could be
imagined: and it was, to ravish away the young Lady, and clap her aboard the
skiff, so to fly to the next shore, before Arnaldo should return. The
conception of so vituperious an enterprise was instantly seconded with the
execution. Thus, in despite of the remonstrance made by the Master of the
ship, which for his own interests would not consent upon any terms to his
departure; drawing to him some Soldiers and Mariners, he mounted the Schiff
with the ravished Lady, who was senseless through excessive grief, and plying
the Oars disimbarqued in four hours space upon the Coasts of Epidaurus. But
what a transport was Arnaldo in, when, returning from his fruitless quest to
shelter, he found not the puple of his eye, which was so dear unto him; but so
strange a Tyranny of fortune, ever constant in abusing him? I verily believe
that if Methrodorus, the Master of the ship, and other people that stayed with
him, had not prevented him by main strength, he would either have buried his
sword in his own breast, or would have flung himself with a more inevitable
wrack, than that he had escaped, into the Sea. But first restrained by
violence, and afterward recomforted in part by the persuasion of Methrodorus,
which promised him to put him on shore, and to overtake that fugitive Traitor
before the infirmity of Argosthenia would suffer him to arrive to the
abominated end of his designs; he desisted from his desperate determination.
Thereupon, Methrodorus collecting all the goods, both his own and others, that
having not taken wet might best be saved; he hid them in that cave, to return,
and fetch them when forrune should be more favorable, and set to build with
his company ( Arnaldo himself putting his hand to the work) of the relics of
the ship another schiff, and in less then twenty four hours equipped it out,
with all necessary rigging, putting themselves in chase of the Captain,
dis-imbarquing the same evening in Epidaurus.

Three months were already spent before that, being impeded by the wounds I
had received, and by the Nuptials of Orsina and Euristhus, I could begin my
journey to Corinth. In the mean time seeing neither Messenger, nor Express
from the Injured Lover, or his Mistress, I touched upon the Coasts of Attica
toward Negropont, to know something of their voyage undertaken for Calcides;
where, hearing a flying rumor of their Captivity, I was ready to die of grief.
Yet not knowing whither to go, or what to do in their relief; I determined to
pass by the way of Athens to Corinth. Whither being arived, and having left
the young couple among their friends, I had a desire before my return into my
own Country, to see some of the most famed Cities of Peloponnesus. I made
choice in this business (for Camrades) of Hercules and Alexander, two young
Gentlemen of Messenia, which having ended their studies, were returning home;
we went first from Corinth to Argos, where spending but two days, we traveled
toward Epidaurus. But being over-taken by night at a Village, six miles
distant from the City, toward the Seacoasts, whilst that we were seeking
amongst those Country people for a Lodging, we encountered with a Soldier, who
enquired for a Litter, to fetch from a place not above half a mile off, a sick
young Lady, which he said was ship-wrack't in the late Tempest. Alexander my
Camrade, was the most capricious man in the world; and always a desirer of
rambling adventures: Having therefore heard so much, it was needless to
persuade him to go see this Damsel. And because the Soldier said, that she
was alone with one only maid, and himself, pretending to be her servant; with
a noble freedom, he offered (seeing there was not one of those clowns that
would set foot out of doors at that time of night about such a business)
himself to serve that Lady, with his own Horse to bring her to some place of
accommodation.

The proffer of our Comrade, obliged us to tender the like courtesy; but being
rudely repulsed by the Soldier, directly refusing our civility and generosity,
Alexander persisted the the more in his humor of seeing that Lady: And turning
to me, laughing; Sir, said he, excuse my indiscretion. Night is already shut
in, and this clownish rout show themselves unwilling to entertain us. We have
been heretofore accustomed to watching in our wild night-rounds at Corinth, and
therefore it will do us no great hurt, to prolong our journey for two or three
hours, till we come to some Town, where we may meet with lodgings fit for us,
going first to see this Lady, to tender to her in person our service; and, Who
knows, but we may find her as courteous, as her servant is rude and uncivil?
I, that was born still to make my friend's pleasure my Law, readily proffered
my self to wait on him; but Hercules did exceedingly oppose it; were it that,
wearyed by his journey, he desired to take his rest, or else, that foreseeing
in his mind the approaching danger, he would give way to such an impulse.

Yet Alexander prevailing, and taking along with us, for our guide, one of those
Country-fellows, we rid toward that place: where instead of a sick Lady, we
found six men of savage aspect, and in a deportment (excepting one of them)
liker gally-slaves than Soldiers. Yet we perceived by their posture, that
either they stood in doubt of themselves, or kept some secret they desired not
to have known. And we were confirmed in our opinion, in that at our appearing,
they had either put out or hid two torches, which they carried to illuminate
the darkness of the night, which, by this time, had wholly overspread the great
face of Heaven; yet it is obscurity began to diminish, by reason of the
exceeding clarity of the Moon, than rising.

Hercules by this time half angry, said to Alexander: See here the young Lady,
which you expected to complement: Alexander laughed, and replied; Even from the
ancient Sileni, arose matters of wonder, and who knows but these Cyplop's
faces, may wait on some Venus? Yea, replied I, but there being no fire in this
Forge, we go in some danger, and instead of a Venus that we would conduct to a
logding, we may find some Vulcan, that may throw a hammer at our heads. We had,
at our first coming, dismissed our Guide, and, to give no suspicion of our
intent, we freely rode on in our way: Being at last come so near as to discern
them; and, discoursing in a tone, only understood by our selves, one of them
undertook to tell us, that we rode out of the way toward the Sea side, and not
the direct way to Epidaurus. Alexander laughing, Thus (said he) they are
served, that in a dark night follow a blind leader. We thought to have found a
Lady, but we have missed our intentions, and in a fancy lost our way. It
matters not much, said I: fot however this Lady have slighted us, the Moon
shall serve as a guide to light us. Whilst we were thus talking, we heard the
languishing voice of a weak woman crying; Ah, Sir Knight! And while we were
hearkening from whence the sound came, she sighing, rehearsed the same words:
Ah, Sir Knight, help the betrayed Argosthenia. These lamentable words pierced
my heart as so many darts, and presently calling to mind the loss of that
Lady, I concluded, that these must needs be Pirates, that had ravished her. Yet
because I would not rashly conclude of things, before I knew the truth; I
entreated him (and it was the Captain himself, her ravisher) that seemed to be
the Commander of the rest, to tell me Who that Lady was, that implored my
succor: and wherefore? His answer was, in putting his hand to his sword, and
buckler, to defend his Rape.

We were three, Six our Adversaries; and I thought, I heard some noise from the
Sea-ward, which were two Seamen his Accomplices, who hearing of our coming,
made toward us. I rid up full carier at the Captain assuring my self, that,
the head being once suppressed, the members would of themselves abandon the
enterprise. But I was deceived; for although he soon paid the penalty of his
villainy, falling mortally wounded under my Horse's feet, who dispatched him with
the fury of his kicks; his Companions so stoutly persisted in his revenge,
that, after a long contest, there was slain besides himself, another of the
enemies; and Hercules; Alexander dangerously wounded, and his horse distended
upon the earth. For my part, I knew not what I did in that night-scuffle, but
this I am certain, that I never escaped any peril with so little hurt in my
person, as in this, though so hot and long, conflict. And happily it was the
bountiful disposure of Heaven, which would not in such necessity, deprive the
unfortunate Argosthenia of my assistance.

Arnaldo; or, the Injured Lover.
Book VII.
BEing, as I told you, left with only Alexander, (who to say the truth,
deported himself like an Alexander indeed, having laid for dead two of his
enemies, and put the rest to flight) masters of the field, where there lay dead
five Carcasses; I stepped aside to the place where Argosthenia lay, more dead
than living, through sickness, grief, and fear; with her old woman by her,
little more sensible, I am sure more terrified. The young Lady seeing me draw
near, and knowing me more by my deportment, than visage, had a desire to get up
to receive me, and to give me her hand, but could not: Whereat, beholding a
Lady of that nobility, virtue, and gentleness, in so sad a condition; I stood
a good space transported by the considerations of the rigours of Fortune,
exercised over the lives of Mortals, permitted by divine Providence, for our
correction and instruction. But returning to my self, I did my best endeavor
to comfort the Lady, and enquired of her, how her affairs stood, and of
Arnaldo: she briefly related all that had befaln her, from her departure from
me, to that instant in which the Captain had stolen her away. Understanding by
her relation, that the Skiff was left tied to that shore, I desired Alexander
to ride and see if happily there were any of the Mariners left; for there being
no other way to secure Argosthenia, than by conducting her that way to
Epidaurus (moreover, it was requisite, to take care for the body of our
unfortunate Camrade, and for his own safty) thinking to win them with good
treatment, and by taking no notice of their default in that detestable
enterprise. He went, but found only the Bark: whereupon dispairing of help,
any other way, I resumed my former familiarity with Argosthenia, and carried
her in my arms unto that place: where we found some small commodity of meat,
and of a bed for the Lady. I made a fire and served her for Nurse, Physician,
and keeper, whereat she was so affected, that she continually wept for
tenderness. Next, I made use of a Secret, taught me by the fair Orfina, in
order to the cure of Alexander; And making him also to take a little rest, I
returned with the old woman to the fields, and laying the body of Hercules upon
his horse, I got him also aboard the boat, and hid him in a private place of
the same, to the end he should not with his sight trouble the mind of my
patients; and last of all closed my eyes for a little while, to essay the
dulcity of sleep, close by my horse, which that night, instead of hay and
provender, fed on biscuit and poudred bief, like a Mariner.

Day appearing, and my company awaking, we discovered a new scene of wonder
upon that shore; for Argosthenia, in the apprehensions of joy, for seeing her
self delivered from the injurious hands of the barbarous Captain, and being
again in my protection; having taken a long sleep, she feigned her self so very
much amended, that raising her self up in her bed, she darred from her face a
profusion of rays of singular beauty, as if she had never had the least
indisposition, or trouble. And Alexander on the other side, perceived himself
reasonable well of his wounds; but I desired him before he stirred to expect
the operation of the receipt, and with the woman's help prepared our repast,
between merry and sad; merry, for the recovery of Argosthenia, and hope of
restoring her presently to Arnaldo: sad, for the death of Hercules, a
Gentleman, for his worthy qualities, deserving a longer life. This done, and
having procured from the places adjacent, with much trouble, and large
promises, two Fishermen, that undertook to carry us in that Schiff to
Epidaurus; whilst we were making ready dinner, there came thither-ward a Judge
in matters Criminal, with his Court, that were come from the City, upon the
information of the Peasants there abouts, to take cognizance of the passages
the night before, and to visit the dead bodies, which still lay in the field.
This pleased not me a jot; for although right was on my side, yet having
learnt, to my great cost, what I might expect (though secured by my innocence,)
among such kind of people; I took a resolution not to imbroyl my self with
them. Thereupon, making my horse to be brought into the Vessel, and turning
loose that of Hercules; I bid the Fishermen to put off from shore, and to
steer toward the rock where Argosthenia hinted we should find her shipwrackt
Arnaldo. The Fishermen would by no means obey, saying, They were only engaged
to land us at Epidaurus: besides, there was no security to pass with but two
Oars, and such a burden, through the main Sea. When Alexander heard this,
starting up from the place where he lay, and overcoming with his terriblenesse
my complacency, which would have appeased them with entreaties and rewards, he
threatened to kill them presently, if they did not forthwith fall to their
Oars. They seeing so troublesome a tempest to arise, turned their course the
way, that against their wills he made them steer; but whether it were their
villainy or their ignorance, after that we had spent the residue of that day, in
tossing to and fro in the Sea, about three hours within night, we arived at the
rock, whence Arnaldo was departed six hours before, for Epidaurus.

Meeting therefore with nothing but the fragments of the split Vessel, and the
chips made about the new Schiff, I was thereat excessively vexed and
confounded; not knowing which way to go to find Arnaldo, and deliver him his
Spouse; for as yet she was not his Wife. But Alexander fell into so great a
fury, that if Argosthenia and I, had not put a stop to his frensy, he would
have thrown the Fishermen into the Sea, to whose crime he attributed our
tarriance. Being unwilling therefore, to put to Sea in a new Voyage in the
night, with so unfaithful guides, and in so small a Boat, we acommodated our
selves the best we could in that place. And lest that, whilst we were asleep,
the Fishers should deceive us, we so bound the Bark with chains, and cables to
the shore, that we were sure it could not stir thence, without our consent. But
this prevention was to no purpose, for they expected when we should be asleep,
having learnt already, that in those grotts there were hid some goods after the
ship wrack; and softly getting a shore, they robbed some chests, upon which
they did swim back to their own shore. The first that waked upon break of day,
was Argosthenia, and, without looking on any thing else, she also landed about
her own affairs, and there found scattered on the ground, diverse fardles of
goods and writings, either fallen by chance, or slung there on purpose by the
Fishermen, as being things that might impeach them. Whereupon, being a Lady of
a vivacious and nimble ingenuity, she gathered up the papers, and untying the
bundles, found a box of Oriental Turchoises, worth about two thosand Ducats,
and some five hundred Ducats in ready money. She laid them up in safety, for
her own use against any misfortune that might happen, and so returned into the
Schiff. And by this time, the Day having assumed it is proper splendor, she was
much troubled to miss the Fishermen; and instantly awaking me, she showed me
what she had found, and advertised me of their flight. But by reason I was
unwilling to humor Fortune so far, as to express any alteration at so great
an act of her Tyranny; I put a smile upon the matter, and looking on the
Stones, and restoring them to the Lady, to dispose of them at her pleasure; I
had a curiosity to turn over those Papers. By the rusling whereof Alexander
being awakned, I with a smiling action, told him, Camrade: If fortune has for
some dayas confined us to this cliff, she has also provided us matter of
entertainment. We have here biscuit, and wine; flesh, and fish, for above a
month: Wood we shall not want; either for fuel, or to defend us, if need
require, from the incommodity of the season, which was in the latter end of
Autumn, toward the beginning of Winter. Courage yet, that, let the worst come
that can, we shall live even in this Desert.

Alexander smiled, and said; You have a brave time on^, Sir, and you have good
reason so to esteem it; for in the company of so noble and virtuous a Lady, you
might style your self Happy, though reduced to greater hardships. But I, what
shall I do, in so desolate a place? Dear Alexander, said I you make too bad a
construction of my heart, since the service I owe to this Lady, is the only
thing that troubles me in this solitude; not, but that I esteem it a glory to
be able to serve her; but because I cannot see her in so much misery without a
sensible affliction, nor call to mind the Knight her Spouse without
apprehensive disgusts. But these are only words: the business is, that we
must think upon our safety. Here we cannot hold our selves secure; for ships
never sail this way, except that of our unfortunate friends: and were it so,
that some should by chance come, we should be still uncertain of our lives. To
think to get to land of our selves, having never in all our lives touched Oars,
or Sayls, would be a piece of solemn folly. I have already computed that we
have provision to serve us for five, or six weeks. This confidered, let us
dispose our selves to pass away the time, since it cannot be with much joy,
yet with the least annoy that prudence will permit; and accustom our selves
every day to manage these Maritime Pens, that we may learn upon this great
Book of the water to Write our selves an immortal name. Sir, said Alexander
command what you please, for I will make you free and absolute master of my
will.

Having thus concluded of things, my first thought was to make a Coffin, to
bury there the body of Hercules; and there was no great difficulty in it, for
there was relics of Wood, Iron, and Pitch, sufficient to have raised an ample
structure. This done, and leaving the old woman to dress Dinner, and look to
my horse, we walked till Dinner time to view the Rock; and Argosthenia making a
Bow of green wood, and some rustic Arrows of dry splinters, found her self an
excellent divertisement, by shooting such Birds as flew thither, from the
adjoining continent. Having dined, we spent the rest of that day, part in
merriment, and part in raising a Cabin to lie in a-nights. The day following
we spent also in those, and such like other new recreations, having learned of
the woman how to angle with the hook and line; who was therein most dextrous.
On the sixth day of this our Hermetical course of life, about noon we
discovered a Fly-boat making toward us; whereupon drawing our Bark ashore, we
fortified our selves so, that we could have defended our selves with ease, from
a greater number in that Mountainous and impenetrable Fort; especially with the
assistance of Argosthenia, who being perfect in Archery, could have sent death
at a good distance to our Enemies.

They of the ship perceiving our design, put forth a white flag in token of
peace and friendship; Alexander, for all this, as being always a Lover of
blows and quarrels, would not agree that we should trust them to approach us;
but Argosthenia having discovered amongst them the Master of the ship-wrack't
Vessel, she took occasion to treat him courteously to get some news of Arnaldo:
We made therefore to understand at a good distance, that we intended to let
none land but only himself and one companion. He readily accorded to our
pleasure, being the Commander of all the rest; but coming on shore, he stood
like one half dead to see Argosthenia, with a countenance more resembling a
Goddess then a Mortal; and, but that he saw her ravished, and carried away
with his own eyes, he would have sworn she had never stirred thence. The first
word we asked him was, What was become of Arnaldo, and he told us, that having
learnt by the Process formed by the Criminal Court, the death of the Captain
her Ravisher, and that she was put to Sea for some other place with two young
Cavaliers in her Company; whereas before he was comforted with the death of
that Traitor, he now received a greater affliction in this new separation;
having a conceit that one of those young Gentlemen was the same Knight who,
said he, was destinated by heaven, perpetually to oblige him, so that he could
never live in quiet within himself for him; having therefore now three days
since departed toward Corinth, in hope to find him there together with his
Spouse. But three days after his departure, he the said Methrodorus had heard
some rumor, that we were upon that Rock; for two Fishermen of those Coasts
being accused of having sold goods that were prohibited, and being apprehended
by Justice, and having confessed against themselves, where they had done that
robbery, they were likewise accused of their error in abandoning us in that
manner. And that he was come thither to fetch away the residue of the goods hid
in those caves, and to see withal if he might meet with the happiness of
being able in any measure to serve us. I knew what construction Arnaldo's
turbulent nature would put upon my actions, but I reserved my thoughts to my
self, thanking Methrodorus for his courtesy, and saying, that we would only
trouble him once more so far as to borrow some of his Mariners to go as far as
Argos, or Corinth; for that we intended to go thither in search of Arnaldo.

Methrodorus presently made a voluntary offer to wait upon us himself to that
Port with two of his Mariners, which attended him in that Flyboat. Then
Argosthenia with a Soul truly generous took him aside, and showed him what she
had found in Money and Jewels, asking him, If they were his. He answered, they
were; but that he presented her with them: and because she should not think
that he was so liberal of things that were lost, giving her that which was not
in his power, he took his other riches out of the Cave, and made her an
exceeding noble Present of Clothes, both Silk and Gold, of Oriental workmanship
very beautiful and costly. Then lading his Bark, he kept with himself only
some of the preciousest things, and he sent her under conduct of his Mate
toward Athens, whither he before was bound, that he might stay himself with us
to guide his Skiffe.

Then I complemented Alexander, entreating him to acquaint me with his
intention, for I thought it not civil longer to impede his return into his
Country. But he being offended by my Courtesy, said, He knew not in honor
how to desert us, till he saw us in a place of security. So we both mounted the
Skiff, which was excellent well provided for all occurrences, steering with a
prosperous wind toward Corinth; and coming to fall upon a discourse about the
writings found by Argosthenia we came to know, that Methrodorus was not what he
appeared to be, a Master of a Cretan ship, but a Knight of Calcides, father of
Calisthenes, formerly spoken of as the Lover of Argosthenia, treacherously
slain by her brother Aristheus in Athens. Whereupon the insurrections of
Calcides ensuing, which had almost put the whole Isle into a revolt, he was
forced to depart thence with the confiscation of his goods, and went to Candia,
where he built the ship that was cast away, and had so good success in the
management of that employment, that he was at that present worth little less
then twenty thousand Ducats, which he had in Athens. Argosthenia wept
exceedingly at the dolorous remembrance of her betrayed Calisthenes; nor was
Methrodorus less moved when knowing her for the innocent cause of all his
losses and misfortunes, he understood, moreover, that she was already
contracted to Arnaldo, a Knight of the blood Royal of Thebes; and might one day
ascend the Throne of Negropont. He respected her therefore thence-forward as
his Lady and Mistress, and he entreated her, that at her return to her own
Country, whither he offered to carry her, she would please to think upon his
ruined family, and restore it by some act of beneficence. Argosthenia promised
that when it should be in her power she would remember him, not so much for
being the father of Calisthenes, and injuriously persecuted, as for the
Courtesies shown her in that her necessity. In such kind of recognitions,
remonstrances, and promises, it grew toward the evening, when Methrodorus
advised us to land at a little Castle between the confines of Argos and
Corinth, where he assured us we should find good accommodations. Here therefore
we landed, and rested that night, when upon the next morning going out of my
Chamber to visit Argosthenia, I met the Host, which attended to present me with
a Letter. I knew it presently to be from Alexander, and opening it with
exceeding great commotion of spirit, I found that it said,

Alexander to Philiternus.
SIR,
I Account it my happy fortune to have had an occasion to serve you, together
with the Princess Argosthenia; for the adventures that accosted me within this
few days have given me advice, what I may hope from the World, and of that
which I ought to procure to my self in Heaven. Argosthenia being born to be the
innocent occasion of ruin to many, I will make use of it as a just motive to
provide for my own safety. I confess, Sir, that her prodigious beauty has
made a deep impression in my heart; but were it so that she had not been
espoused to Arnaldo, her being in your company would have taught me to behold
her with a mortified eye, that so I might not offend, so much as in the least
thought, either her reputation, or my own fidelity. Yet I would have esteemed
it my great happiness to have served her, though with this necessity of
looking upon my self as dead; had not the relations of Methrodorus, and our
late accidents opened my eyes, and let me see, that by this way I took,
together with the troop of a thousand other Wretches, I precipitated my self,
for her sake, into the exteamest abyss of Calamity. I determined therefore to
cease following her, not through cowardice, but discretion, it being a manifest
madness to dye in a complement. Amongst the Papers of Methrodorus, I read a
relation, that in the coasts of Marmarica, there is a solitary Society of men,
separated in customs from the confines of humanity, for to live according to
the use of Heaven. Thither I go to be buried alive, with the body of Hercules,
which shall serve me for a profound Lecture of celestial Philosophy. Pardon
me, Sir, if I depart thus abruptly; since I did not conceive it good, to
confront my debility to your most friendly conversation, which would have
detained me in the shackles of a content, too sensible for me to have
disingaged my self from, without an insupportable resentment. I carry the Skiff
of Methrodorus away with me, and one of his Mariners, which is willing to
follow me in so generous a resolution till death; and I will make use of my own
hands, in the voluntary labor of the Oar, learnt for the necessity of our
bodily safety, to acquire to my self the precious reward of a celestial life.
I reverence the Lady Princess, dearly embrace Methrodorus, and confirm my
self, Sir

Your Perpetual Vassal ALEXANDER.


THe sense of friendship rendered this deprivation of Alexander, inconceivably
grievous; but Prudence lessened my affliction, thinking that he had chosen the
better part, and I began to desire, to visit my self one day, the Deserts of
Marmarica. I imparted this passage to Argosthenia, and Methrodorus; and they
seemed rather to blame, than commend it. And Argosthenia said, that, Cavaliers
of Alexander's quality, born into the World for the profit of Mortals, ought
not to deprive themselves of the means to employ those Talents, to the common
benefit, which Heaven had lent them, for this very end, to serve to mankind in
general: I defended the resolution of my friend, alleging, that all those who
had obtained from Heaven the rare qualities of Wit and Valor, were not obliged
to employ them to the benefits of others, with a manifest peril to themselves.
For, Heaven is also wont, to deprive men of the favors conceded them, as a
punishment of their ingratitude and unworthiness, seeing Virtue is for the
most part rather persecuted than acknowledged. Again, the resolution of
Alexander well considered, his retiredness, may prove to the World a greater
benefit than his commerce with men, whilst that, in conversation, by reason of
his capriccio's and adolescentiall vanities, he was injurious and prejudicial
to many, and in sequestrative solitariness, he may be able with this integrity
of his life and conversation, to come forth for an universal benefit into the
World.

Well, said Methrodorus, Who knows, but that even this resolution may arise
from a fantastical humor, and not from the invitation of Heaven? It concerns
not us, replied I, to penetrate into these secrets; in the mean time, we know,
that Heaven sometimes makes use of such like means, to extract a generous
Virtue out of a constrained necessity. We ought always to censure well of
those things, which ever appear good in themselves. For although the iniquity
of man convert these into the worst, yet it does not follow, that the good is
not still good in it self; although the perversity of some, do sinisterly use
it. Certainly Alexander has done well, to prefer his own safety to others
benefit, for so exercising his proper goodness, he shall live without injury,
yea, rather with commodity to others: whereas in a Knightly life, although he
might have profited some, that could hardly ever be without the prejudice of
many. For although he merited sometimes in defense of Innocence, and in
chastisment of Villainy; yet it more frequently came to pass, that he undid
himself and others, in a vanity, in a humor, or in a complement.

Thus I argued: but I saw that this Philosophy little liked Methrodorus,
immerg'd in the thoughts of recovering his House from the dysasters, occasioned
by the Loves of Calisthenes and Argosthenia; and it did as much displease
Argosthenia, fearing that I also intended to desert her, to follow the track of
Alexander: and therefore I changed discourse, desiring Methrodorus to advise
us, concerning the manner of our Voyage; for that being as yet uncerrain of
finding Arnaldo at Corinth, and being loath to disturb Argosthenia with a
journey by Land, I judged she might transport her self commodiously by Sea to
Athens, and stay there in a house which I kept there till such time as I had
overtaken Arnaldo, which by making long journies over land I might soon do.

Methrodorus was pleased with my design, but Argosthenia would not agree to it,
fearing still that I contrived pretexts to abandon her. But having promised,
(whether I found Arnaldo or no) to be at Athens, within the space of fifteen
days, to wait upon her, she condescended, though in my judgment it was still
very unwillingly.

This being resolved on, we proceeded to act it; Methrodorus hiring a Bark, and
putting out instantly to Sea; and I began at the same instant, by Land, my
journey toward Corinth. And just as I entered the house of Euristhus, I met full
of sorrow and sadness the fair Orsina; and after many throbs and sighs, she
related to me, that the Injured Lover had been at that City to enquire of me
and Argosthenia, and Euristhus had entertained him at his house, where hearing
how much I took to heart his dysasters, and what diligence I had used to learn
his captivity, to set him at liberty, it partly mitigated, if not wholly deposed
the malign suspicions of his Jelousy, that held him in a continual torment,
to attend a while among those, to whom I was continually writing some thing or
other of news, concerning me. But seeing that, contrary to my custom, I had now
let pass ten days, without writing to them, or sending any message, he went
thence that day, upon a certain rumor, that, sailing toward the Island of
Aegina, I was cast away with a Knight and a Lady in my company; and fell into
such a passion, that incontinently leaving Corinth, he swore he would not
survive the death of his unfortunate Spouse. Wherewith Euristhus being also
extremely affected, he went presently to the haven and hired a Feluca for
Epidaurus, to inform himself of the truth of that Adventure. Understanding
this, and being glutted and sated with so many rigours and errors of Fortune
and Love, I comforted Orsina the best I could, in such an intervenience of
affairs; yet she would not let me depart (at least, till Euristhus his return;)
but because I would not fail in my word to Argosthenia, nor omit any thing on
my part, to satisfy my debt of Amity with Arnaldo, I presently left that City,
and having gone about six miles, I was thinking to turn my course toward the
Province of Megara, when, behold, I saw a Currier and his guide, coming full
speed down a hill before me, to whom I advanced, and demanded, From whence he
came posting with so much have. He gave me no answer, but still put on in his
way. But, I, know not by what spirit instigated, crossing the way before him
with my Horse, worth twenty of his; I renewed my request. He answered, that
such Queryes and Affronts ought not to be offered to public Ministers; and I
replied that I had not in the least offended the public liberty, with a
request of mere complement; besides that, being the rode to Boeotia, I was so
concerned in those quarters, that I was interested in the knowledge of such
novelties as Fortune might there have plotted. He looked steadfastly on me,
asking, If I were not a foraign Gentleman, dwelling in Attica, and accustomed
to be sometimes at Thebes: And understanding that I was; he proceeded to beg my
name: with which being satisfied, he added; It is you Sir, that I am in search
of; for by the King's Commission, Olympia, the Aunt of Arnaldo, has sent me to
you, with these Letters, directed to Corinth, to the house of Euristhus and
Orsina. Now Heaven be praised, that I have shortened my journey by many miles. I
took the packet, opened it, and there found Letters to Arnaldo and
Argosthenia, both without any seal, together with this, directed to my self.

Olympia to Philiternus.
SIR.
HAving understood by yours, and Argosthenia 's Letters, the accidents befaln
you, with the Traitor Diambres; and, afterward by that of Euristhus to his
friends, the contract of Argosthenia and Arnaldo; and lastly, by that of
Arnaldo, the captivity of both: I have been so long suspended with these
apprehensions, that I verily believed I should have dyed of grief. But I have
had some respit of comfort, within this few days, by the news come hither from
Peloponnesus, that Arnaldo was seen at liberty with Argosthenia in Candia, and
that you was with Euristhus and Orsina at Corinth. So that imparting the news
to the King, his Majesty has commanded me to write to them both, and consign
the Letters to your care, knowing you to be a real friend of Arnaldo, with
whom it was to be supposed you held a continual correspondence. By the
enclosed Letters you may see, Sir, what we have thought fit to write to my
Nephew, and his Consort, and I entreat you, by the Love you bear them both, and
by your native courtesy, to interpose your interests with Arnaldo and
Argosthenia, that being now dis-ingaged from their misadventures, which have so
long oppressed them, they would apply their minds to those hopes, to which
their births and divine Providence has called them. If you gain no more
hereby, yet you may rest assured, that by your service and satisfaction herein,
I shall for ever be engaged to be more then all others, generous Sir,

Your most particular Servant OLYMPIA.


Arnaldo's Letter spoke thus.

Olympia to Arnaldo.
Worthy Nephew, and dear Son.
YOur Letters from Scarpantum, came to our hands, later than we could have
wished, with the unwelcome advice of your Captivity, and that of Argosthenia.
Yet I imparted the affair to his Majesty, who instantly gave order, that all
means should be used for your deliverance. Now we are exceeding glad to hear,
that before we could effect any thing, you had the Fortune to get free,
together with your Spouse. Upon this advertisment, the King has commanded me
to write to you, that notwithstanding Argosthenia 's pretention to the Crown of
Negropont, you should come hither with all speed: and that his Majesty would
lend you all possible assistance to maintain her right, now that that Isle was
in such combustions; for the Duchess Doricinia, refusing to marry the Count
of Litharre, the most potent Lord of that State, he had raised against her so
hot a rebellion, that having chased the Duchess from Calcides, he proceeded
to subdue to his obedience, the most considerable places of the Isle. So much
shall suffice to have hinted, to make you resolved to come forthwith unto us;
entreating you above all, to procure, if it be possible, the company of that
Cavalier, from whom you ought entirely to acknowledge all your happiness,

Your most affectionate Aunt, rather Mother, OLYMPIA.


BUt the Letter to Argosthenia, was only full of feminine tenderness,
condoling, and congratulating, with referring her in the conclusion, to what
she had writ to Arnaldo and Philiternus, as to the business of her return to
that house, which was now doubly hers. This news, though it came not to me
altogether unexpected, yet I was thereat greatly perplexed, for it bereft me of
my rest, and greatly troubled me; in which I was constrained to Combat more
with domestic than foreign Enemies; for it seeming impossible to me that the
fraternal confidence Argosthenia had in me, should not always retain a
continual apprehension of suspicion the ever jealous, and ever amorous spirit
of Arnaldo, threatening to break out one day into some great disorder; as also
on the other side loving that gentle Cavalier with a most cordial affection,
and being by him truly rebeloved: for I knew very well that to such suspicious
spirits even the Atoms in the Air are wont to occasion trouble and
inquietude. Yet I forbore this thought for that time, and dismissed the guide
that accompanied this messenger, taking him with me toward the City of
Eulixis, where I held some interest and correspondence, gathering of him as I
went, perfect information of the news of Boeotia and Negropont. Being come to
Eleuxis, I was encountered with a strange accident of Euristhus being condemned
to death, and Arnaldo's being a prisoner with that Governor.

Furisthus having gone to Egina, and finding no intelligence of what he desired
about my person, he was persuaded by an Eleuxin Lady, that had means lay in
that Isle, to serve her with his Feluca to Eleuxis; Euristhus knew nothing how
that she was confined thither by the Governor, upon occasion of her husbands
being slain by one of her Lovers. He came therefore with all security by
midnight (the very time elected by Liviana, that she might not be known) to the
City, where walking freely up and down, he casually met Arnaldo the next
morning, as he was just departing for Athens, in the same desperate condition
as we have said, for the presumed shipwreck of Argosthenia and Philiternus. He
walked with such distraction and astonishment, that although he met Euristhus,
he so little regarded him that he did not know him. But Euristhus awaking him
by his civility out of that profound trance, and imparting to him something of
what Fame muttered in our prejudice, he invited him to stay awhile in the house
of that Lady, with an intention of waiting upon him with his Feluca to Athens,
whither he designed to go the better to inform himself of my proceedings in my
own house. The Lady made great entertainment for the Knight, and perceiving him
to be notwithstanding his trouble and melancholy (that had so injured him) the
goodliest person in the World, in a flourishing age of twenty five years, and
again having dedicated her self to sensuality, she took a conceit to allay her
dissoluteness in this her familiarity. She invited him therefore to Dinner; an
occasion, proper, by the intervention of Bacchus, to introduce the interests of
Venus; and began with her procacious glances, and gestures, and licentious and
lascivious words, to instill into the mind of the Cavalier the incentives of her
lust. Arnaldo, who had always loved more like a contemplative Philosopher then
a carnal Amorist, not yet knowing what the malice of women was, smiled to
himself at such pretentions, and preserving in his external actions a modest
affability, he with a mavelous sweetness deluded her. The woman hereat not a
jot discouraged, or deterred from giving her designs a birth by the Midwifry of
some better machinations, prevailed so far, with the help of Euristhus, that
she got the Knight to stay there a night longer. Which come, she deposed all
feminine modesty, and went to find him in his own bed, to throw her self naked
into his embraces. But not being entertained, but rather disdained by the
generous Arnaldo, which would conserve the faith of Matrimony immaculate to his
spouse; she was moved with such scorn, that, like a dissolute woman, she
converted her lascivious desire into inveterate hatred, contriving for revenge
of her repulse, the strangest villainy that could possibly enter into the heart
of woman. She made it be signified to the Governor, that when he had revok't
her banishment, she would put into his power her husband's murderer.

The Governor accepted the offer, desiring to get that Traitor into his hands;
and she detained Arnaldo with sundry inventions, hiding his horse's furniture
in her house: but yet at last being offended with such entertainment, and
preparing to be gone, the Provost of the City at the same instant broke into
the house with the greatest fury in the World with all his Officers, and beset
the Knight to carry him to prison: Generous Euristhus seeing this, put himself
upon a daring, but imprudent Enterprise; bearing away no prize of honor by
contracting with such a rout of Catch-poles, from whom only to fly was
honorable; and ran his sword through the breast of the Provost with such a
resolution that he fell senseless at his feer. But all this audacity could not
prevent Arnaldo from going to prison: and he himself was also stayed and
carried by force to the Magistrates: To whom the fact being attested, they
condemned him, as guilty of Treason in the person of a public Officer, to lose
his head upon a Scaffold.

In this state of things I arrived in Eleuxis, and understanding the passages
by a Gentleman my friend, at whose house I had lay'n; without taking great
thought for Arnaldo, knowing assuredly that the Injured Lover could not be
guilty of such a Crime: I was extremely surprised, and confused at the name of
Euristhus; because my friend representing his case to me as of a very comely,
and courageous young man, I immediately suspected him to be my dear Euristhus,
husband to Orsina. I rid therefore straight to the Palace, where the young man
was preparing himself to his last departure, and at my request, I was permitted
to see him: but I was so transported, that I was nearer death then he, finding
him in so wretched a condition, upon which the last minutes of his life
depended. On the other side, Euristhus rejoiced to see me, and was beyond
measure ashamed, that I should find him in that condition so unworthy of his
generosity: Yet having not lost the brisk spirit which was so natural to him, I
apprehended the quality of his Crime, and that of a certain the Injured Lover
was the imprisoned Knight, with the presumptive stain of the murderer of
Liviana's husband. I ran in all haste with Euridamas, the Cavalier my friend,
to the Governor, to whom having disclosed the quality of Arnaldo, I entreated
him also to suspend the execution of the sentence of Euristhus, for having done
this in the company of a Knight of so high birth, and innocence, his own
reputation would suffer, both in the imprisonment, and death of his Camrade.

The Governor remained exceedingly suspended at the discovery of Arnaldo, nor
would he (at least as he fained) give credit to my testimony; whereupon that I
might not lose a minute of time to Euristhus's prejudice, I showed the Letters
just before received from Olympia, and produced the Currier himself that
brought them me, plainly to prove the truth of my depositions. And here arose a
new mountain of difficulty, for the Governor (having begun to fear, lest
Arnaldo once got out of prison, and gone to Boeotia, might plot some revenge
for that injury) would not set him at liberty till he had first acquainted the
Senate of Athens with these proceedings. I perceiving this fear of the
Governor, took upon me, (having something to lose in the Dominion of Attica)
to assure him of the person of Arnaldo, for that all the punishment of his
affronts falling upon his false accusers; he could not with any reason be
agrieved with the public justice. This difficulty being overcome, I must of
necessity press yet a little farther, to defer also the sentence of Euristhus,
for the getting him out of all danger was almost impossible without a miracle.
But seeing my prayers and remonstrances profited little, I ran to the
Governor's wife, a comely and discreet Lady, with the whom I had some years
before past some services in Athens; and so importunatly entreated her, that
she interposed her own authority with her husband, and obtained three days
time of respit for his reprieve; for so much served for my design; which was to
get an order (though there was no need) from the Supreme Magistrates of Athens
to inhibit all proceedings in that cause, and to adjourn the judging of it to
the same Tribunal. Which done, and Euristhus being returned to prison, I went
with the Judge Criminal to the prison of Arnaldo, where the Cavalier being
examined upon my depositions, and sound innocent; the Governor commanded that
he should be entertained in the Palace, desiring at his wife's instigation to
satisfy with courteous treatment, that oversight of a constrained imprudence
toward him.

Arnaldo; or, The injured Lover.
BOOK VIII.
BUt, Who can recount the transports of Arnaldo, when knowing of his liberty,
he knew also by the Judge, that it was I that had obtained the Reprieve of
Euristhus, and procured his freedom? And, Who can express his raptures when as
he saw me, and heard that his Argosthenia was gone to Athens some days before
with M throdorus, to stay at my house, and was not ^a^^ away nor dead, but
merry and in health? He had a desire to enterchange with me many endearments of
condolings, congratulation, information, excuse, gratitude, and offers of
service; but could not, having abundantly supplied all with tender Caresses of
friendship. The Governor in the mean time gave order for the apprehension of
Liviana, as a violater of his edicts, and as a calumniator of an innocent
person in so heinous a Crime; but she being pre-advised that a Gentleman was
come to Town, that procured the liberty of Arnaldo, fled away with the Boat of
Euristhus.

This advice came to the Palace, whilst we were complementing Isabella the
Governor's wife; who himself also, the more to vindicate himself and to agrade
us, was present at that Visit. She took occasion to request of Arnaldo, Wherein
he had angered that woman, that she should plot so enormous a treachery? To
which he having modestly given satisfaction with the honest blushes of
Isabella, we past next to discourse of Argosthenia, and of the news of
Negropont. Whereupon Isabella, who desired to be at Athens, for the celebration
of some feasts, with pretense of seeing Argosthenia, offered us with
unspeakable courtesy the same Feluca which she had made to be prepared to do
us the honor to permit us to wait on her in that voyage. Having returned the
acknowledgements due to so grand a favor, whilst the Governor had withdrawn
to give orders for the entertainment of Arnaldo: Madam, said I to her, the
civilities we receive from you are truly worthy of an Isabella, there is only
wanting the freedom of Euristhus. You know Sir, said Isabella, and sighed, that
I have a desire upon all occasions to repay you the Obligations I owe you: but
this is a difficult case, the Crime being against the person of a public
Minister; therefore I fear that it lies not in my power to get him out of
prison. Alas, Madam, said I, it is very easy for you to do. Two words of
yours to the Keeper, to charge him not to hinder me from visiting him at my
pleasure, shall suffice to carry him in your Feluca to Athens. You will do some
of your miracles, said she, and laughed; but have a care, The Pitcher goes so
often to the Fountain that at last it comes broken home. Madame, said I, my times
are past: let others do what they can, for I can work no miracle. You are not
to be trusted, said she, for your eyes betray you; But rell me a little, What
course of life have you led since you left Athens? For I have heard diverse
relations of it; and it is reported that being inamoured of a handsome creature
of Anaplistum, you have renounced the profession which you made of a Platonic
Lover, out of complacency to her corporeal beauty. I confess, I gave no credit
to it, having experimented your modesty to be greater; but yet length of time,
and variety of occurrences often changes opinions; and it is often seen that
he that is not frolic in youth, raves in old age. I laughed, and replied. Fair
and softly, Madam! though there is a few false witnesses here on my head that
accuse me, I am not so old yet. This very thing (said she) testifies against
you; for if you count age an injury, you thereby let us know, that you are come
from being a spiritual, to be a sensual Lover: for we know very well, that
Lovers of this nature, make themselves seem young, lest they should be
rejected. For else, measuring my age with yours, from my first acquaintance
with you to this hour, I know you cannot be old, not having happily seen thirty.
But this is nothing. Tell me, I entreat you, How this news of the Gentlewoman
of Anaplistum came up: for I have had no good success in defending you against
some Ladies, who abused me when I celebrated the miracles of your modesty.

Isabella was silent, and I rejoined; Madam, It was only a novelty that fame
spread abroad by an Ignorant Amourist, that breaking open the seals of some
Lettes which he understood not, interpreted them according to his ignorance,
and published them conformable to his malice. That Gentlewoman is married, and
by this time a Mother; and I never knew her farther than to have done her some
slight services. Isabella smiled, with a grace peculiar to her self, and said:
You tell me she is Married, and a Mother, (and so saying* she called for her
woman:) See, said she, that Gentlewoman now in a widow's habit. I sighed, and
she fell on weeping at that encounter: and I extremely desired to know, what
cross wind of Fortune had disturbed the tranquillity of her state: But because
that was not a time for such matters, I suddenly had a conceit, how I might
save Euristhus, by her means. I therefore entreated Isabella to grant her me
for two hours, before her departure, and I obtained her without reply: Arnaldo,
and I, were invited to dinner by the Governor; Isabella exempting her self,
that she might make ready all things for her departure, and to take care about
what we had agreed upon, for the safety of Euristhus. Here it was, we
understood by public information, that the Count of Lithar, uniting the Army
of the Rebels, was gone to lay seige to Caristum, to beleaguer the Duchess
therein, and that she had for that cause dispatched one of her Gentlemen to
Athens, to demand assistance of that Republic, whereupon the General at Sea
was commanded to set sail for that place forthwith: we took a resolution, not
to lose that opportunity of serving Arnaldo, by transporting our selves in the
same Armado to Negropont. And in the interim he had an opportunity of sending
to Boeotia, Olympia's messenger, with advice of his resolutions, and to
petition the King, to let his succors on the other hand march to that Isle.
This being dispatched, we returned to the Governesse, to impart these things to
her, entreating that she would so favor us, as to accept of our service. She
made a civil return to our complement, saying, that if we would dis-imbroyl
Euristhus, she would be presently ready in the Bark, to expect us. So I took
with me Lisa the young widow, and retreated to the house of Euridimas, and made
her to put, under her woman's habit, man's aparrell, and provided my self of a
long mourning garment, and in this manner we came to the Prison of Eu^^st^^^;
and leaving Arnaldo, Euridamas, and other friends, to stand Centinell at the
Gates, I passed only with Lisa, being assisted by his Keeper, who having been
pre-advertised by Isabella of that visit, he attended me with great civility:
Euristhus and Lisa were so alike in age, in looks, and in deportment, that when
I saw her, thinking I beheld another Euristhus, the contrivance of this conceit
came into my head. And because I might freely dispose of Lisa, as having
brought her up, and given her in marriage, and again being a woman of a great
soul, and of very resolute courage, she was easily induced to second this
enterprise. Being come into the Prison, I dismissed the Keeper with a formal
complement, and bid her to put off her woman's weeds; with which having dressed
Euristhus, and advised them both of my design; I held discourse with a Camrade
of his, to whom I promised (and did observe it,) to prevail in reward of that
service, that Isabella should manumit him: Euristhus went out in woman's
apparel, with a countenance, that in the darkness of such obscure dwellings,
would have deceived curiouser eyes than those of a rude and simple guard: and
assisted by his Companion to the Gate, I took Lisa up under my mantle, for she
was so little, that we past almost un-discerned, and I went out in the
obscurity of those walks very happily: But being got to the principal Gate, in
the open light, and under other Sentinells, they saw that I walked slowly, and
with some luggage under my long mantle, and began to suspect some fraud: but not
daring to open their mouths, because Arnaldo and the other Cavaliers, stood in
a posture able to terrify more daring souls; they opened the Gate, out at
which Euristhus suddenly leapt, sans complement, I followed her, seconded by
Arnaldo, and our other friends, with so much alacrity, that Lisa putting back
one of her feet, falsified the secrecy of the Mantle. Now the Keepers plainly
perceived our design, and having neither courage to cry out, against persons of
such quality, nor to stay an hazard of being questioned for that escape; they
flung away the keys, and betook themselves to their heels; and ran faster than
we into some other place: For we mounting upon the Carroche of Euridamas, past
happily to the Feluca of the Governesse, which attended us ready to weigh
Anchor.

So Euristhus being delivered, and every one falling to some discourse or
other, I would have had Lisa took her woman's cloths again; but she with a
comely smile said, If that the Lady Isabella so please, since my Fortune has
brought me whither my election formerly led me, be you content, Sir, that I
continue as I am, to accompany you to see the war of Negropont. And you shall
not need to fear I shall want the company of women, for I will wait upon the
Princess Argosthenia. Your company, said I, since the Lady Governesse is so
content, shall be very welcome to us, provided it be in an appearance and garb,
becoming your quality and my reputation. Do what you please, said Isabella, for
that: I took her to be near me for the Love of you, and to you I consign her,
now that she is at liberty. I thanked Isabella for her courtesy, and added;

But, How came Antonello to dye so soon, said I, being so sprightly, and lusty?
She may better tell you, (answered Isabella, laughing) than I, as better
acquainted with it. Yet for the present, know that Antonello is dead, because
he was not worthy of the company of so handsome a maid. He was become so
infinitely Jealous of her, that she could not stir out of doors, to go to the
Temple, nor so much as see the air at her window, without his grumbling, and
beating her. You know what is wont to happen to such Animals; but the goodness
of Lisa, has never desired (though she might) to pay him in the Coin he
deserved: howbeit not being able to live in so miserable a slavery, she found
out a way to free her self by placing herself in the Palace near my person.
Whereat Antonello took such distaste, and fell into so furious a rage, that
meeting me one day at a feast, he had the sauciness, to vent his resentments
publicly treating me with unworthy names. Whereby those Cavaliers, at whose
house the feast was celebrated, were so moved, that under pretense of
communicating something to him, they drew him aside and slew him, having
learnt, by his death, all such rash fellows, to observe the respect due to
Ladies of my quality. In sum, Antonello is dead, and Lisa lives ever at your
dispose; I having no longer any desire of this charge, to keep her for you.
Dispose of her therefore at your pleasure, she being yours; but look well to
it, that you provide her no more Jealous husbands, for I know not whether she
may be always so good as not to deal with them according to their deserts. The
rest of the company laughed, but Arnaldo sighed at these words of Isabella,
though it was only observed by my self, that sat next him, and knew the
peccant humor of his profound melancholy. He asked me, Who that fair young
creature was? And I satisfied him, that being a Noble Lady of Anaplistum, which
fell, by the death of her Parents, into a miserable condition, I had took her
into my house, and married her to a young man, well descended, of Eleuxis, who
perished in the misfortune re-counted by Isabella: whereupon, he expressed a
desire to have her go along with Argosthenia, that so he might repay to her
part of the obligations, which he acknowledged to my person. Perceiving whereat
he did drive, I complied with him, seeing that together with freeing him, in a
great measure, from the inquietude of his jealousy, I came also to ease my
self of the burden of farther caring for her. Answering, that he was her
Master, always provided that she was satisfied; because I was always far from
offering Violence to the liberty of another's will. In this kind of
entertainment we came with a felicitous voyage to Athens; where Fortune had
prepared for us a new vexation. After we had waited upon Isabella to her house,
we took our way toward my own; where instead of Argosthenia and Methrodorus,
we came to encounter with the perfidious Liviana, who, without knowing who I
was, had landed there with the Feluca, and with a Page of Euristhus. Which
Page, being brought up in my house, by reason of his new Masters misfortune,
was fled thither. Argosthenia and Methrodorus, hearing by the boy of Arnaldo's
imprisonment, and the condemnation of Euristhus, yet knowing nothing of the
cause, but only of the death of the Provost; they instantly went for Eleuxis,
to provide the best they could, for that occurence. But, how amazed was Arnaldo
and Euristhus, when they saw Liviana? and how confounded was Liviana, to behold
Euristhus and Arnaldo; I leave for others to imagine. She having re-assum'd her
banished spirits from her sudden fright, betook herself to my Closet, and
hastily shutting herself in, fell a plotting her own death, to free herself
from the feared ignominy of some scandalous punishment. Whereupon I, not
expecting any other from so furious a Female, knowing that Arnaldo and
Euristhus, were too generous, to seek to revenge themselves upon a Woman,
which, agitated by Love, or by hatred, knew not what she did; entered into the
Closet another way, and snatched out of her hands the mortal instruments, which
she had prepared to take away her life, and left her at liberty, to go whither
she would; assuring her upon my word, that she should not be prejudiced in the
least, by her adversaries. She being comforted a little by my words and
demeanor, entreated me to let her remain for a few days in that Retreat,
being in great danger if she should be seen. But being unwilling to incur such
a scandal, I caused a Bark presently to be hired, and sent her ( Arnaldo and
Euristhus never knowing of it) the same night back to her confinement of
Aegina; where, instructed by her misfortune, she reformed the lubricity of her
Genius, living and dying (O strange alteration of Heaven!) with a fame very
different from that of her former life.

We being in the mean time in great incertitudes, whether to return to Eleuxis,
in search of Argosthenia and Methodorus, or else lest we should once again lose
our labors, to expect their return, or some advice (for they might easily
learn there, that we were come with the Governesse to Athens) supped with much
confusion, because also Euristhus was not secure whilst he was in Athens
(howbeit he desired to accompany us to the War of Negropont, we resolved that
he also should return by Sea to Corinth, to comfort his wife with his presence,
who was disconsolate peradventure in regard of the sad news, which might fly
thither of his death. He was no sooner departed, but there knocked at my Gates a
servant of Isabella, which presenting me with a Note from that Lady, took his
leave and went another way. Being troubled at such a novelty, at that time of
night, I presently opened the Paper, and found that it said

Isabella to Philiternus.
SIR.
Just now my Husband is arrived hither from Eleuxis, pretending to be angry
with me for having been assistant to the escape of Euristhus: and intended to
complain to the Supreme Magistrates against those Cavaliers which have aided
him in that Enterprise: but in truth, it is for that he is transported with a
jealousy conceived against you, for the past troubles and for my present
coming away with you in this manner. I beseech you therefore to provide
according to your prudence some expedient to these disorders, lest there arise
hence new occasions of vexation to you, and of inquietude to

ISABELLA.


I Valued not the design the Governor had to disquiet me, and my friends, upon
such a quarrel; having power in my hands to make all his attempts that way to
vanish into smoke. But that which did extremely trouble me, was, that Isabella
might hereby be a sufferer, to whom professing so many singular Obligations, it
was my duty to remove from her any thing that might occasion her discontent. I
made use therefore of this occasion to leave Athens once again, and
participated my designs to Arnaldo, beseeching him to stay in my house with
Lisa, to expect Argosthenia and Methrodorus, or some news from them before that
he did resolve on any thing. Arnaldo would by no means permit that I should go
alone; but I being glad that I had encountered an opportunity convenient for the
pursuit of my intent of traversing the World, and compliance with my humor of
travail, resolved to leave Athens before morning, being wafted over by a very
swift little Bark to Eleuxis; where providing all things necessary for the
interests of my friends, and informing my self of Argosthenia and Methrodorus,
and having heard that being deceived by a false report, that Arnaldo and I had
set sail on our way for Thebes, they were gone thither; I took with me
Euridamas being well practiced in that course, and put my self in pursuit of
them with such speed, that we overtook them upon the Banks of the (to
Argosthenia) so fatal Asopos; with what resentments of the Lady, may be easlyer
imagined than described. She wept a great while for joy, and seeing her to
trouble her content with condoling the many malicious fortunes which separated
her from Arnaldo, I took occasion to divert her thoughts unto more sublime
apprehensions, persuading her to go presently for Calcides. Methrodorus feared
such dangerous counsel, for that the City being in the Rebels hands, it would
be to precipitate her into the jaws of destruction. But revolving in my head a
consideration of State, upon which the fortune of the Lady and of Arnaldo
depended, I persisted still in this resolution, alleging, that there was no
way so secure, not so facile as this to enstate Argosthenia in that Grandeur,
to which her birth and destiny gave her just pretensions. Methrodorus and
Euridamas desired me, that, to encourage them to accompany me in so hazardous a
service, I would declare to them the secrets of my defigne. But I would not
discover my self in a thing that depended more upon events than upon discourse;
telling them, that if they thought the enterprise desperate and perilous, they
might stay at Arclides to be spectators, and I would go with Argosthenia, her
woman, and only one Page, to Calcides. They would not consent to that,
alleging that being my companions, in the voyage, and in the service of
Argosthenia, they would also partake with me in the hazard, and in the glory
of so strange an adventure. This being concluded on, and, giving the name of
Erintha to Argosthenia, I called my self Polydamas, a Knight of Corcira, and
gave out, that, being banished for a matter of honor by the Prince of Epirus,
I was come into those parts to seek my fortune. Euridamas, and Methrodorus put
themselves into the disguise, this of Usher to Argosthenia, that of Gentleman
of my Chamber; And I sent two servants belonging to those Knights (for that we
would not have such mean persons about us in a business of that moment) to
wait our pleasures at Arclides: and so we travailed by Land to Calcides: where,
learning by the common vogue of the people, that the Count of Lythar, proceeded
vigorously in the siege of Caristum to reduce it, before the Athenian Armado
should relieve it; and that the Metropolitan City Calcides was left to the
Government of the Count of Olorita his brother, or indeed rather to his wife,
who, being a Lady of a great Soul, had the greatest share in the management of
all Affairs: I took the name of the Countess as an auspicious Omen, and
instantly dispatched this Letter to her for the orderly disposal of my designs.

Polidamas to the Countess of Olorita.
THe misfortune which persecuted me in my own Country, has forced me to seek
elsewhere for protection to my self and family. For that being desirous to
defend my honor in the person of my wife, I was banished from Corsira by the
Prince of Epirus my Lord: so that my family having in former times had
correspondence, and relation to some in this City of Calcides, I have had
thoughts to inhabit here with my wife. To which, I have been very much
encouraged by understanding, that it is at present governed by the Lord Count
of Olorita, your Worthy Consort with the assistance of your counsel; confident,
that both my wife under your Worthy Protection shall have occasion to live
contentedly even in exile, and that my Lord Count will accept in my person, the
obsequy, and fidelity of one of his most devoted, and most obliged servants. I
would have come immediately my self to have received your most welcome commands;
but because in the present conjuncture of Affairs it is not permitted to
strangers to come to this City without a Pasport from the Lord Count, I humbly
entreat this favor, for my wife and self only, and four servants of our
attendants. And here I resign my self, Illustrious Madam,

Your ever most humble and most obliged Servant POLYDAMAS. A Cavalier of
Corsira.


HAving written this Letter, and informed Euridamas of my thoughts, I sent him
to present it to the Countess, together with a Necklace of Turchoises, wrought
in Gold, composed by Argosthenia in her idleness at Athens. The quality of the
present, more than the style of my Letter, and the curiosity together of seeing
my presumed wife, which Euridamas commended for the most beautiful Creature in
the World, easily persuaded the Countess to grant me more than my request,
making us an offer of her own Palace, till such time as we were provided with
Lodgings. But being unwilling to engage my self, I took the first empty house,
which I stumbled upon, and shut my self up in it, and that night went with
Argosthenia to the Palace; not only to complement with the Count and Countess,
but to observe their proceedings, and the manner and quality of their
Attendants. The Caresses which the Countess gave us, (desiring perhaps to get
some other present out of us), were indeed without measure, and yet without the
least affectation, for that she was a Lady truly sprightly, vivacious, and
magnanimous. This foundation being laid, and having for ever captivated the
heart of the Countess to favor us; I advertised Methrodorus that he should
begin by little and little to discover himself to his Kindred, Friends, and
Allies, which he knew disgusted the present Government; ye^ declaring he was
arrived at Calcides, upon assurance of the fall of the Royal family which had
so persecuted them. With this diligence we collected in a few days twelve
Cavaliers of the Prime of the Nobility of Negropont: some of which, though
dissatisfied with the Duchess and the Princes past; yet would not admit to be
governed by persons whom they had conversed with as equals in Fortune, and whom
they had treated as inferiors in Nobility. We could easily have mustered a far
greater number; but fearing by delay to give fortune an occasion of discovering
something of these agitations; and doubting that in a greater number such a
secret might be endangered; we summoned them every one to meet at an hour
unobserved in my house; and having taken of them a solemn Oath toward the
Duchess their legitimate Lady, for whose service I had gathered them together
in that assembly, I began in this manner resolutely to speak.

My Lords, I suppose that you have already understood by Methrodorus your good
Friend and Kinsman, to what end you were called hither, which is to consult of
the way to eject the Rebels, and Tyrants from this City, and to put it into
the hands of the Duchess Doricinia, to whom by right of primogeniture, and by
your election, you be obliged in a perpetual obedience and fidelity. I know you
think it strange, that I, being a young man, and a stranger, should upon my own
motion venture my self, and incite you to an Enterprise of so much difficulty,
and danger; But I shall not be the first among men, which although a weak
instrument my self, have been able to give a motion to grand machinations. But,
though others moved by covetousness, have attempted enterprises above their
fortune; I may be thought to be come to this resolution by the only impulse of
Justice, Friendship, and Love. She, My Lords, which here you behold with the
name of Erintha, and in the appearance of my wife, is Argosthenia, a noble
branch of the Royal Stem of your Princes, to whom, after the Duchess your
Mistress, discends the inheritance of this most flourishing Principality. Nor
is she my wife, but my Lady by merit, and Sister by fortune: and is indeed
lawful Spouse of Arnaldo, a noble person of the Royal Line of Thebes, which is
ready to come in a few hours with the Armado of the Republic of Athens in
relief of the Duchess. There will not be wanting neither, on the other side,
the succors of the Theban King, who stays but for our notice, to haste over
with his Forces to these parts. But if it be lawful for me freely to declare
my thoughts; I do not at all like these Auxiliaries, because I am afraid it is
but the taking a Serpent into our bosom, to our suppression, rather than
relief. For, if that Commonwealth, and this King, make themselves Masters of
the strongest places of this Dukedom, to which they have so ancient and so
strong pretensions; I know not when they will be content to resign them
willingly; ( Princes never wanting pretexts, to usurp, and detain the
possession of other States;) And, to compel them by force, we shall be always
too weak of our selves; and to call other Princes to our assistance, would be
an opening the sluices to our total inundation, changing this Country into a
seat of continual War, for strangers, to consume our wealth, annihilate our
families, violate our honors, and to impose reduplicated chains of vassallage,
upon this, at yet, free Principality. I would advise therefore, that with
Spirits, and Resolutions, worthy of generous Knights, and Loyal Subjects, we
do attempt with our own hands, to re-establish the Crown of this Dominion, upon
the heads of our legitimate Princes and Masters. Nor is this so difficult a
matter to effect, if it be well managed. Resolve therefore to acknowledge for
your Princess (with a Salvo always to the right of the Duchess our
Mistress) Argost henia, and to unite your selves for her, in this testimony of
fidelity; and hereafter, we shall not want either time or occasion to consult
the manner also of turning the Rebels out of the City, to establish her in the
possession of her lawful Dominions.

Those Cavaliers for a good space stood astonished, by the unexpected coming of
Argosthenia, and by such an attempt of a young Knight, alone, and surrounded by
a City of Enemies. But afterward certified by Methrodorus, and by their own
eyes (which discerned in the face of ArgOsthenia, the features of Doricinia,
and her deceased brothers) of the truth of her person; and encouraged also by
the rehersall of the adventures she had happily gone through, under my conduct,
and of her Contract with Arnaldo, they ran all to kiss her hand, pronouncing
her (after the Duchess) for their Lady; and disposed themselves in every
particular, to follow my directions. Hereupon, I lost no time, but desiring
some of them to stay in that house, till the contrived Design had taken effect,
I thus continued to speak to them.

My Lords: This is my design; And he that has any better way, let him speak,
and procure the public and private benefit of his Country, of his Prince, and
of himself. You shall, if you please, take a rude supper with me, to stay hid
till my designs be ripe, to lead you elsewhere. In the interim, I will send
Euridamas to entreat the Countess to sup to night with my wife, desiring to
impart some matters of concernment to her, out of the noise of the Palace. I am
confident she will come presently, out of a desire to get some Present out of
us, having an opinion, that we are exceeding rich in Jewels. When she comes,
we will secure her attendants, and return with her and Argosthenia to the
Palace; of the which having made our selves Masters, with the imprisonment (if
he will not freely surrender himself) of the Count Governor, we will proceed
with his Orders and Signalls, to seize the Marketplace, and the Port, without
noise or blood. And this I assure you, my Lords, on the word of a Gentleman,
(which is the only recompense of merit, which myperills and counsels may
acquire me) that there shall not be spilt the blood of any Subject, although a
Rebel; nor of any Stranger, although an Enemy; except it be in our necessary
defense. I only shall ask, that the Count and Countess Governors, may be
left to my protection, to whom being otherwise obliged, and drawing the
Countess to my house, I desire and entreat the Princess Argosthenia to
engage, that she will never hereafter on any occasion, or under any pretense,
punish them for this default of the Rebellion of the Count of Lythar their
brother.

Having thus said, and having received from the Princess and Lords, their Word
and Oath; and having left them in an unobserved place of the house, I
immediately dispatched Euridamas to invite the Countess to Supper; who failed
not to come a while after, with a very slender retinue. We supt reasonable
well; and forasmuch as being discomposed with the plots in my head, I was ever
and anon silent and pensive, and sometimes beholding her with much attention,
she entered into a suspicion of me, as if I contemplated her out of a liking of
her beauty; and began to observe my face, and behavior, and remained a little
suspended and changed. But supper was hardly done, when I was informed by
Methrodorus and Euridamas, that they had, in a pretense to entertain them,
carried the Attendants of the Countess into a place whence they could not
stir, and that the Confederated Lords were in a posture ready to march to the
Palace. I started up, and, with a countenance between merry and serious; Gentle
Madam (said I) It sensibly agrieves me, to stain the mirth of the Table of
hospitality, with a necessitated incivility toward you; but because I am more
obliged to Argosthenia your Princess, and my Lady, than to the courtesies
received from your urbanity, I beseech you pardon the error, that, with
reason, I commit against Reason. Madam, you are my prisoner, and all that I can
comply in to your Merits, and my Obligations is, to assure you, in the name of
this your Princess, and my Mistress, your life, honor, and estate. Be
pleased therefore to change your title of Governesse of Calcides, into that of
a Subject and Servant of Doricinia and Argosthenia, and to remain in my
custody, not stirring a step from me; for if you stir, and receive some
affront, I have discharged my self, having already satisfied the debts of
Friendship and Honor, not only in advising you, but in preserving all that
which you ought in justice to lose, as of course, with your Husband, guilty of
a High treason, impardonable upon any other account, unless that of the
unparalled Clemency of this generous Princess.

That the Countess remained astonished with such a change of Scenes in the
Theater of Fortune, questionless is not to be doubted; She would at first have
showed her resentments, and have cried out to her servants; but seeing the
confederate Lords to enter the room armed at all points, she now requested,
what I had formerly voluntarily proffered, to preserve her honor, estate; and
life. Then I lead her, and Argosthenia, into her own Coach, and made some of
the Lord's servants, to put on the Liveries of her Pages, and Lacquyes, who had
already rallyed a great number of friends and Accomplices, going in this posture
quietly, till we came to the Palace; giving her in the mean time, particular
information of Argosthenia, and of that affair; that she might Cancel her
former crimes, by her present good service, cooperating (herself) to the
setlement of the State, in reducing it to the obedience of it is legitimate
Governors. The Countess (as she said, being obliged with such modesty and
courteous treatment,) offered her self to do miracles in this particular,
seeing no sinister adventure of Fortune obstructed her.

Being brought with such like discourse to the Palace, and having deluded the
guards, by first dividing them by her order, and then they being made to
dis-arm by the Servants of the Lords, we ascended to the uper appartements
(possessing our selves of all the posts as we went) and into her own Chamber,
where her Husband was expecting her to go to bed.

But, seeing me appear with her, and Argosthenia, Methrodorus, Euridamas, and
the other Lords, in no peaceable posture, he would have cried out, and have
called his Gentlemen and Guards to help him.

Then the Countess, stepping out before the rest, said, My Lord, you also must
acknowledge Argosthenia for your Princess and Lady, and put your self, as I
have done, under the protection of this Knight, or resolve to die presently
without any remission. These usurped Grandures, as unfit for us, are soon
vanished: It remains that we submit with patience and fidelity, thereby to
deserve the favors we have already obtained of pardon for our Crimes; with the
safety of our lives, riches, and honors. Surrender therefore to this Lady, who
is your Princess Argosthenia, your pretensions of Command, and the Signals for
the possession of the Port and Fleet. She is Mistress, and you are no longer
Governor of Calcides.

He being in part satisfied with these Remonstrances of the Countess, the
absolute controuler of his heart, and regulator of his affections, did all that
we desired: and we instantly committed the charge to the Lords our
Confederates, recommending to Euridamas the Guard of the Palace to Methrodorus
that of the Piazza, or Marketplace; to the Count of Armenum the investing of
the Port, to the Count of Lagia of the Fleet, and to other Lords and Knights
other Charges, according to their merits and capacities. There were likewise
called to the Palace the old servants of the Duchess, which had stayed at
Calcides; but I my self stirred not from the Princesse's side, not to confound
the orders, which depended on my direction, and to look to the persons of the
Count and Countess, and get out of them such things as were necessary to be
known for the regulating my actions in the present conjunctures.

The night being thus spent without sleep, the morning following, all that vast
City beheld it self recovered out of the hands of the Rebels, without the
loss of any man, except one only Captain, and a few Soldiers of a Corpse du
guard: which would have refused obedience to the Count of Armenum. Day being
come, all the Nobility and Citizens repaired to the Palace to do Homage to
Argosthenia, and to demand the death of the Governor and his followers, for an
expiation of that Rebellion. And seeing the old Counselors of the Duchess,
and the other Ministers of State advised that they should be delivered,
notwithstanding the Princesse's Oath, that so the people might not be denied
that satisfaction, which might be a means to make them the more resolute in
defending themselves against the Count of Lytharre, when he should march
thither with his Army to revenge them; and being unwilling that my faith should
be broken, I carried the Count and Countess with the Princesse's permission
secretly to my house, and there disguising them in Lacquyes apparel, got them
safe out of Calcides. Then afterward leaving the Princesse's instructions in
writing for the perfecting the design of the work begun, and bidding Adieu to
the Cavaliers, my friends, I got incognito aboard a very expeditious Bark, and
hoisted sail for Athens, to bring in person the first news of these Revolutions
to Arnaldo. Who standing a long while astonished thereat, as at a thing he
esteemed impossible; in the end threw himself about my neck with large
acknowledgements of infinite Obligations, and would have carried me back to
Calcides, with large promises of sharing his fortunes with me. Argosthenia
concurred in the same instances with reduplicated Letters, and re-iterated
Ambassages: but being content in having satisfied my Obligations of friendship
to Arnaldo, and of brotherhood with Argosthenia, I would not again leave the
doors of my own house, to hazard my self in the Tempests of the Court. And so
having recommended to them both, Euridamas, Methrodorus, and Lisa, who merited
their esteem, I continued constant in the quietude and tranquillity of my mind
and fortune: howbeit, I was very much troubled in the passions of my Soul, for
the untimely, and much to be lamented deaths, which a little after happened to
Isabella, for whom I had already suffered so much in the Kingdom of Love and
Fortune; and likewise of the Count of Olarita, now become my most Cordial
friend; which left me heir of a great trouble, with recommending to me in the
place of Sister, the fair, and sprightfull Countess his Consort.

How afterward Arnaldo went to Calcides, how he was acknowledged for husband
of Argosthenia, how he rallied a potent Army of faithful subjects, and
adventurous Soldiers; How he relieved the Duchess, overthrew in battle the
Count of Lytharre, who fled, and ended his days at Byzantium; And how the
Duchess being returned to Calcides, confirmed Argosthenia, after a solemn
Marriage, in the Dignity of Hereditary Princess, with the other Adventures of
these married Princes; Some more fortunate Pen than ours, will perhaps give
notice to the World; here being concluded the dysasters, and afflictions (the
subject of Phil^ter nus his relation) of the Injured Lover.

FINIS.

