A TESTIMONY Against the QUAKERS False-Doctrine, And the IMAGE they have set
up. Being a Defense of the Book called Antichrist Transformed. In Answer to a
little Book, published By Giles Barnadiston. And for better Information, the
IMAGE is hereto annexed Verbatim, with the Subscribers thereof.

Published by Geoffery Bullock.

LONDON. Printed for the Author, and to be sold by Francis Smith, at the
Elephant and Castle in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange, 1677.

A Testimony against the Quakers false Doctrine, and the Image they have set up.
A Testimony against those Quakers, and their false Doctrines, who call
themselves Elders and Ministers; and also their new invented Image, and all
that joins with it and owns it; because that those Elders who call themselves
Ministers, look upon themselves and their Image to be equal in Power and Glory,
both with the Father and the Son. This Book is given forth in Answer to a
little Book, given forth in the name of Giles Barnadiston, which I look upon to
be but a pretended Answer to my first Book.

Friends, When Israel had forgotten God their Savior, then Aaron the Priest,
with their Jewels made them a Calf, and they danced about the works of their
own Hands. Psalm. 106. Exodus 32.

But you say in the beginning of your Book that Antichrist's Transformation
within, is setting it self above the Light within in J. B. Now that is
impossible, that ever that Spirit which fell from God, and so lost its
Habitation in God, should ever have Power to exalt himself above God again in
the Sons of Men. But now this agrees with the Doctrine you Preach: for you say,
that the Seed must be raised, and God must arise, and none can keep him down,
and that the Seed must come up and take its Dominion. So that according to your
Doctrine then, both Man, and the Darkness too, have Dominion over the Light,
who in himself is God blessed for ever; but the Devil both was and is the
Author and Father of this Doctrine of yours. For Adam in the day of his first
Creation was above in Eden, and the Garden was in God, then might Adam see what
was in his Temple, or Tabernacle: for there are four distinct things, or
Beings, to be seen in the Temple; that is, the Light, and the Darkness, the
Tree of Knowledge, and also the first Man Adam; who received a Command from God,
that he should live in Obedience to God, and not feed upon the Tree of
Knowledge; but in the day that he broke the Command of God, then he fell from
God, and lost his Habitation in God; and so the Power of Darkness took Dominion
over him, wherefore it is the first Man Adam that came under the Power of Death.

Wherefore it is the first Man Adam that is to be both quickened and raised by
the Spirit of Life; as the Scripture says, The same Spirit that raised up
Jesus shall quicken you; and the Apostle says, you has he quickened, who were
dead; So it is not the Seed God, nor Christ, that is to be quickened, and
raised, but the first Man Adam, who dyed from that immortal life wherein he was
at first created.

And you say, that I am making War against the Light, page the fourth, and that
I am pushing at it: but this Lie remains upon your own heads; and my first Book
is a witness against you, wherein I have already declared, that all
Sovereignty, Dominion, and Glory, belongs to the Light that is in every Man;
but I do declare, and disown all such, who look upon themselves to be equal
both in Power and Glory with the Light.

And Friends, you say in your Book, page the fifth, that you are able to judge
of Spirit as well as Flesh. Now this I have seen, and known by my own
Experience; that in one of our Quakers Meetings, that one of those called
Quakers has both Preached and Prayed; and that some of those called Elders and
Ministers, have publicly disowned the Testimony, as not having Unity with that
Spirit that Preached and Prayed. And at another time, the same Party has been
exercised in Preaching, and Praying, and several of those called Ministers have
been present, and they have both owned the Testimony; and also had Unity with
the Spirit that spoke, and have encouraged the Party to go on in the work of
the Lord, not fearing the Face of Man, nor regarding their Censures, nor
Judgments: and is not this confusion in Babylon, you tryers of Spirits, who so
plainly contradict one another in your Censures and Judgments?

And you say that I am angry, because that Judgment is gone forth against me;
and yet in the beginning of your Book, you say that I went from you. Now that
is very true, that I first left you, and I also at the present time, gave forth
a Testimony against you, what were the reasons that I left you, the which
reasons and grounds are Printed in my first Book.

And you say, in page the seventh of your Book, that I have made use of my
knowledge to serve Lucifers Interest, and that he is become my Teacher and
Leader.

Now Friends, I was a Son of Adam by Generation in the Fall, and also a Son of
God by Creation, and I was also a Child of wrath, being under the Spirit of
degeneration; then was the Serpent in many things my Teacher and Leader, but
now I think that in my measure I am made partaker of the Spirit of
Regeneration. But Friends, I shall forbear declaring any state that is to be
enjoyed in the Spirit of God, least the Boaster should get up, as I fear he is
gotten up in those who call themselves Elders and Ministers, who say they sit
in the Heavenly places in Christ Jesus. But Friends, there is none sits there
with God and Christ, but those that are free from Sin as God is.

Again, you say in page the fifth of your Book, As the Father sent the Son into
the World, so has the Son sent you, that ye may be one as the Father is one,
and the Glory which the Father gave him, he has given them, and has
Sanctified them through the Truth, that they may be one with the Father and the
Son. O you high Boasters, how is it possible, that ever any Man, who is
begotten by Generation from Adam in the Fall, to be equal with him who never
fell, in whom dwelt the fullness of the Godhead bodily: And he was begotten by
the Holy Ghost in the Womb of the Virgin, and so he was the Son of God by
Generation from God; and so it was impossible that ever he should Fall: and all
his days he was a Man free from Sin. But all you who call your selves Elders
and Ministers, have been under the Dominion of the Man of Sin, as well as I;
but Christ never came under that Spirit nor Power.

Therefore, remember what the Prophet says, That the Lord's Sword is drawn
against the Man that is his Fellow. So Friends, I fear you are exalted upon the
Mountains of Imagination, and the Light stands in Judgment over you, and also
your Book will be a Witness against you, and the Spirit of God in all those
that seriously read it. Friends, I think it had been more suitable for you to
have looked back, and to have considered some of the Patriarks, and holy Men of
God, who in their day and Generation did err.

You might have remembered Isaac the Patriark, who when he had lost the Spirit
of discerning, grew blind; and then he was resolved that Esau should have the
Blessing, although it was Jacob's right to have it. And you might have
remembered Jacob, who from a wrong Spirit rebuked Joseph, when he told his
Father he dreamed the Sun, the Moon, and the eleven Stars should bow before
him. And you might have remembered Aaron and Miriam, who from a Spirit of Pride
withstood Moses; and said, Has not the Lord spoken unto us as well as unto
thee? And you might have remembered old Ely, who from a dark Spirit rebuked
Hannah, who was a Woman of a sorrowful Spirit. And you might have remembered
Job's three Friends, who undertook to Judge Censure, and Condemn Job, but had
not Power to convince him.

And Friends, you write against me in page the fifth and sixth, because I said,
whatever is written to those called Churches, it ought to be written in and
from the Holy Ghost; for if Paul did at any time speak by permission and not
the Lord, it is but a Man's Commandment; and no Man is bound in Conscience to
follow it: for Paul says, Be ye followers of me, as I am of Christ. Now Paul,
he Baptized, and he also Circumcised, but yet he had no Commission to do it:
And so in time he preached it down, as John did his Baptism; but Christ in his
day neither Baptized, nor Circumcised any Man: wherefore none are to follow
Christ, as having Paul for their Example; but all are to follow Christ, their
Light within as their only Rule to walk by. Neither ought any Quaker so called,
Man or Woman, to follow the Light within, as having your Orders and Dictates,
as a Rule and Guide for them to walk by. Again, you write against me, because I
said, whatever is written from a sight, or sense, or sensible part, and not
from the Spirit of Revelation, it is not to be owned by the Churches; and you
write thus, and say in your Book, that implies contradiction, as much as if the
Spirits Revelation should put out Sight, and Sensibility, and so I would have
blind Elders and senseless Ministers.

But Friends, it is the Devil that has Power to blind the Soul and
Understanding of Man, and the sensible part; wherefore none are to write from
that part in them which the Serpent has Power to blind, for it is the Soul and
Understanding of Man that receives the Sight. But all are to write both in and
from the Spirit of Revelation, which alone has Power to give the Creature
sight, and to make people sensible of their state and condition. And this is
the Holy Ghost or Spirit of God, which gives the true Sight and can never blind
it; for that is the Devils work, to bring blindness over the Minds of People;
wherefore if any speaks, or writes, as pretending to teach others, it ought to
be in and from the Holy Ghost; for Christ said, It is not you that speak, but
the Holy Ghost. And the Apostle says, If any Man speak, let him speak as the
Oracle of God; and it is the Spirit, says Paul, that makes Intercession with
Groans that cannot be utered; for it is the Invisible Soul and Understanding,
that is to be Baptized with the Holy Ghost. Now the thing Baptized, that is not
to speak in the Church, because it has been both in Error, Sin, and
Transgression, but the Invisible Man, Christ, he is to speak in every Vessel,
who redeems the Creature out of Transgression, and not the Soul, nor yet the
Sensible part, which has been in Transgression; for the Priests of England,
they are sensible Preachers, who declare against the manifestation of the
Spirit; and deny also all Revelations from God, and yet they tell People, that
if they be sensible of their state and condition, it is an evident token of
their Conversion. But I say, that all People that come truly to know God, they
must witness a Being, gathered into that Spirit which makes them truly
sensible; and this is a Child's state, which has past the Tree of Knowledge, and
does witness in measure of being possessed of the Tree of Life.

And you say, that I run on in my senseless Stuff, because that I said, the Soul
is the Woman in ever Visible Man. For you ask me, whether I have not presumed
above what is written in the Scripture?

Friends, I perceive that you have left the Quakers first Rule, which they were
to walk by as their only Guide, which is the Light or Spirit of Revelation
within; for when I was first convinced and believed in the Light, then you
said, the Light within in every Man was the only Rule, the Grace within, the
Mystery of Life within, or Gods Spirit of Revelation, or his Law written in the
Heart; that was to be the only Guide for the Quakers to walk by. But now I do
perceive, that you have set up your Image, or Paper of Orders, Dictates, and
Forms, that they should join with them as their Rule and Guide.

Friends, I perceive you are determined, page the seventh, to set up your
selves, and also your Image and Superiority amongst the People called Quakers;
and likewise, to Maintain those Doctrines amongst them, that he that is not
justified by the Witness of God in Friends, is condemned by it in himself; and
that those that are unreconciled to the Church, are unreconciled to God,
wherefore this I have to say, and to all ancient Friends: Remember, the first
Testimony that was then founded amongst the People by the Quakers, it was thus,
All People mind the Light within you, turn to the Light within, believe in the
Light, that does both convince and make manifest Sin; and all own the Judgment
of it; for that is the word of Eternal Life, and also the Savior of the Soul,
and the Salvation of the ends of the Earth; and that this was Gods Spirit, by
whom the World was made; who was in the Beginning, and before the Beginning,
and also without Beginning of Days, or end of Life. And this they said was the
true Light, that lights every Man that comes into the World; and that this
Light was both God, and Christ, and the only Savior of Man, and they exhorted
all minds to turn to it, as their God and Savior.

Now you say in your Book, that those that are unreconciled to the Church, are
unreconciled to God.

But now, the Church in God, that is Invisible as God is Invisible, although it
does consist of Visible Bodies, and Invisible Souls, who are Invisibly redeemed
from the Earth by the Spirit of God, to an enjoyment of God, who is Invisible;
and these are the Members of the Church in God, who are only known to God, and
not Man, and such are the Members of the true Church that is in God.

And in every Nation, Those that fear God and work Righteousness, are accepted
of God; and those that are accepted of God, such are at Unity with the Spirit
of God in their own particulars, and those are the Members of the Church in
God, let them be either Barbarians, Sythians, Bond or Free: for the Church of
God is Universal, as the Spirit of God is Universal; so that in every Nation,
People, Language, or Tongue, those that walk according to the Law written in
the Heart, such are at Unity and Peace with God.

But now, there are many Visible Separations in the World, which are called
Churches, who do not know whether they be in God or no; and these are the false
Churches, who make a Profession of him, and yet know him not. And Gods
appearance to them is as their Judge and Condemner.

Now Friends, Christ he is the only Head of that Body, or Church, that is in
God; and I am sure, that those only attend upon the Spirits teaching that is
within them; for God is able to teach his Church that is in him, better than
you can, although there were a thousand times more of you then there are. Now,
many of you have been Watchmen of the Night, to inform People of their
Darkness, and also to direct them to the Light. But remember what Solomon
says, who was but a little past the Watchman of the Night, and then he saw him
whom his Soul loved. Now the Church in God they are past all Visible
Counselors, and all Fathers, yea all Judges; for they are come to God the Judge
of all, And to the wonderful Counselor, the everlasting Father, and the Prince
of Peace.

Now I own my self a Member of that Church in God, that gives all Authority,
and Superiority, and Subjection, both to God and Christ, her Husband. For the
Church in God is compared to a Woman, clothed with the Sun; and the Church is
also compared to a Man's Wife, that lives in Subjection to her own Husband, and
is willing to own him to be her Head; and so does every true Member that lives
in God.

Now the Church consists of Souls and Bodies, who are truly subject to the
higher Powers, as Paul says. Now your Image and Paper of Orders, that may
serve those Quakers who are unstable, and delight to gad abroad from God, and
Christ their Husband within; but it can never be owned by the Church in God, by
such who are faithful to God, who as a chaste Virgin, delights to keep with her
Husband at home.

Now Friends, I would desire to know what People or Congregation of these
called Quakers, it was that did empower you, or set you at work to make them a
Paper of Orders, or a Rule or Guide for them to walk by? or, was it not a thing
of your own Invention? and if some had not seen an evil in your carved Image,
and so put a stop to it before it came to its Journeys end, it had not lain hid
so long as it has done already; if you could have found out a way to have set
it up sooner, for you intended that it should have gone to all the Quakers
Meetings: but now your work goes on apace, (the words that run round about this
Image are these;) They that are unreconciled to the Church, are unreconciled to
God; and also, those that are not justified by the Witness of God in Friends,
are condemned of it in themselves: And about this Image here danceth those that
call themselves wise Men, and Prophets, Judges, and Counselors, Fathers, and
Sons of God, Elders, and Ministers, who are at work to set up this Idol upon
its Feet.

But if it be true what those say, who call themselves Elders, and Ministers,
and Sons of God, and that they are the only true Church in God; and that none
are like to be justified of God, or reconciled to God in their own particulars;
but those who own them to be the only true Church in God, and so bow down and
Worship their Image, which they have set up, and they are resolved shall stand
upon its Feet: Then it will be sad for all the Sons and Daughters of Adam, who
do not own and Worship this Image. For if it be true, as you say, then it will
be a thing of necessity for all People to enquire after this Image, that so
they may come and worship it; because those that have set it up, say, that God
has given his Power to the Church, and the Power that they say they have
received from God, it is both to justify and also to judge of Errors; then this
Church must needs be as Infallible as God is. So that there is no People shall
need to fear their being led into Error, if they believe as the Church
believes, and own the Image which they have set up, which is their Paper of
Orders, and the rest of their Inventions; then such by them shall be admitted
to Preach according to the Faith of the Church; and this is Pope-like, who has
set up his Image, the Massbook, for the Kings and Princes, and their Subjects,
as a Rule for them to walk by.

Now every breaking forth of the Light, or dawning of the day of God within
those in whom this day have dawned; they, in the Light that has appeared, have
seen many of the Errors that were in the World, among those called Churches,
both as to their Doctrines and Practices; but their Souls not abiding Humble
and Low in the Spirit of God, which appeared in their Understandings, and gave
them a true sight of things, but having gone out from God in their own
particulars, and then those heaps of Teachers they have set up an Image of
their own invention, as you have done, and their Souls have been so blinded,
and their Understandings so darkened, by the Spirit of Error, that they could
never discern any evil that there was in their own Image, that they have set up
by their own inventions.

Let this thing be taken into Consideration by those that call themselves
Ministers and Elders.

Now your Book says, in page the seventh, That these that are unreconciled to
the Church, are unreconciled to God; but the Scripture says, that God was in
Christ reconciling the World to himself. And again, your Image, or Paper of
Orders, declares, That he that is not Justified by the witness of God in
Friends, is Condemned of it in himself: But the Scripture says, He that
believes, has the witness in himself. And if Gods witness in a Man justifies
a Man, his Witness and Justification is greater then yours; so that the words
of your Image are false, and contrary to the Scripture, and form of sound Words.

Friends, you should do well, if you can, to vindicate both your Doctrines, and
Practices, by some evident proof; either from the Spirit of Truth, or the
Scriptures of Truth; and if you cannot prove your Doctrine, and the setting up
of your Image, Orders, and comely Forms, as you call them, in those which you
call your Churches, either from the Scriptures of Truth, or by the Spirit of
Truth, and so prove them by Revelation from God, and make God to be Author of
your false Doctrines, and also the Father of your Image, otherwise, they must
be held forth, and also managed by Satan in you transformed into an Angel of
Light. But now I do believe that those Doctrines and Practices of yours which I
have writ against, were never revealed to you from Heaven by the Spirit of God,
but they rose out of Hell.

Now in page the eighth of your Book, you write against me, because I deny the
Resurrection of the Power, or the arising of the Seed or God in Man; the which
Doctrines I did deny in my first Book, and do still deny them: for it was
neither the Seed, nor God, that fell from Heaven into Bondage and Captivity in
the Sons and Daughters of Man, but it was the first Man Adam that fell both
Soul and Body; and we were his Generation, having been in the Fall as well as
he. And you also say that Christ descended to bring Man out of the Fall. Then
according to your own confession it is the first Man Adam which God created and
made, that fell into Transgression: so then it both was and is the first Man
Adam that is to be both quickened, and also raised by the Spirit of Life, that
never sinned, the which is God manifesting himself in these earthly Tabernacles
by his own Spirit. But now the Holy Ghost never descended into the Virgins
Womb, for the raising the Seed or God out of Bondage and Captivity, but the
Spirit of God does descend in the Sons and Daughters of Men for the bruising
the Serpents Head, and for raising and bringing of them both Soul and Body to
an enjoyment of God again. But yet I do own the Power to be both the
Resurrection and the Life, as he is in himself; and he is also Man's
Resurrection and Life, as he comes to believe in the Light, and obey it; so Man
comes to be quickened, and also raised from under the Power of Death by the
Spirit of Life, and so brought into an enjoyment of Light and Life again.

For the Seed did never descend in Man for the quickening and raising up of the
Seed in Man; neither does the Spirit of God descend to raise up God in Man, nor
yet Christ within never descended to raise up the Spirit of Christ in Man. Now
you do suppose the Resurrection of the Power, because the Light descends and
appears to Man whilst he is in the Fall: but yet it abides not with Man whilst
he is in the Fall, but only to convince him of his Sin, and also to condemn him
for it. But now if Man hears the Spirit, and believes in the Light, and obeys
it, then Man is both Quickened and Raised, and brought up to God again, by him
who is both the Resurrection and the Life. Wherefore now look back and remember
that God called to Adam in the cool of the Day, after he had eaten of the Fruit
of the Tree of Knowledge, and had broke the Command of God; then God cursed the
Serpent, and also drove Adam out of the Garden, because of his Sin and
Transgression; And he also placed a flaming Sword against him: But still God
abode in the Garden, in Dominion over all to Adams Condemnation.

But now in page the ninth of your Book, in contradiction to what I have
written, you say, If God be above in all the Sons and Daughters of Men, he is
taken in his proper place, and the Devil is in his, and I might have spared my
pains. But now I did never read, or heard that God was out of his proper place:
for God is in his proper place, and his Throne is established in Justice and
Judgment over wicked Men, to their Condemnation, Psalm 11. as well as in Love
and Mercy over those that hear him, and obey him.

But now the Devil and Man both left their Place and Habitation in God, and the
Serpent has had the Dominion over Man and Woman: for the Scripture says,
Darkness has covered the Earth, and gross darkness the People.

And because the Prophet says, Behold, I am pressed as a Cart is pressed with
Sheaves. Again, because the Scripture says, Let God arise, and his Enemies
shall be scattered; therefore you do conclude, and also believe, that the Seed
of God is underneath, and must arise. And indeed I once heard once Preach, and
in his Declaration did exhort all that had believed, to feel God to arise, and
none to keep him down: from which I do conclude thus much, that the Creature is
in dominion over his Creator, and also has Power to keep him down. And another
said, All feel God to arise, and take the Dominion over all; which does
conclude that he is not yet in Dominion over all.

But now consider a little; Wherefore did God swer in his Wrath that Israel
should not enter into his rest? And why did God strive with the old World by
his Spirit? was it because his Spirit was in Bondage and Captivity in them, and
so stood in need of help and deliverance from them? Or, wherefore did God
strive with us by his Spirit in our youthful days? was it because his Spirit or
Seed was in Bondage and Captivity in us, and so stood in need of our help to
raise him up out of Bondage and Captivity? or, was it not we that were in
Bondage and Captivity both Soul and Body, being under the Power of Death and
Darkness, and so stood in need both of help and deliverance by the Spirit of
God: for the Apostle says, Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead,
and Christ shall give thee Light. So then it is we that have slept the sleep of
Death, that are to be awakened, and also quickened; and it is not the Seed, nor
God, that is to be quickened, nor yet that are to arise out of Bondage and
Captivity in the Sons and Daughters of Men. Therefore you must find out some
other interpretation for these Scriptures: For is it not written, that the Seed
of the Woman shall break the Serpents head? then must not the Seed of the Woman
be uppermost, and above the Serpents Head in all the Sons and Daughter of Men?
for the Seed of the Serpent, as it is written, shall but bruise his Heel.

And is it not also written, that God is the higher Power, and every Soul must
be subject to him?

And in page 10. of your Book, you say, that I do deny the traveling Seed. Now
this I do deny, that neither the Seed, nor God in Man, travels for their own
deliverance; because that neither God, nor yet his Spirit were ever in Bondage
or Captivity; but Man both Soul and Body has been under the Bondage of
Corruption: So it is we that are to be delivered out of Bondage and Captivity;
its we that are to make War in the Spirit against the Power of darkness, and
also to travel in the Spirit, that so by the Spirit of God we may come to be
delivered from the Power of Death, and brought into the liberty of the Sons of
God: for they that overcome, as he overcame in the days of the Flesh, they
shall inherit all things. Now the Son of Righteousness did arise among the
Jews, according as it is written, with healing under his wings, According to
the promise of God to his Prophets of old, that so he might put an end to all
those things by which they did expect healing or remission of Sins.

Now in page 7 of your Book you write against me, because I said the Books were
paid for out of the Poors Collection. Now as concerning the Quakers buying of
the Books when I first opposed the thing, which is about three years ago, or
more, since I opposed the buying of them; but if the Quakers had continued
their buying of them still, then you should not have needed to have ordered
that they should be paid for out of the Poors Collection? but the thing was
true, and I can prove it out of some of their own Mouths. And in the same page
of your Book you say, that I contend against the Truth, and yet you say, that I
am crying up the Light: Is not the Light and the Truth all one? And is not this
Confusion in Babylon? Take it into your Consideration, and let God's Witness
judge.

And in Page 9 of your Book, you say, that he that was dead, is alive, and is
risen over Death and Hell. Now God who both was and is a Spirit, was never
dead: for he is without beginning of Days, or end of Life. But now we have
been dead, as to the enjoyment of the Spirit of Life in us: for the Power of
Death and Hell has had Dominion over us, both Soul, and Body, and
Understanding; but yet the Power of Death was never over, nor yet above the
Spirit of God in us, neither was ever God or Christ under the Power of Death
and Hell in us. Wherefore it is neither God nor Christ that is to arise in us;
but we are to be raised by the Arm of his Power revealed from Heaven. And
again, you say, his Power is risen in thousands. Now I do believe many have
been quickened, and also raised by his Power from under Deaths Power: For the
Lords Spirit or Trumpet has sounded, and the dead have heard it; As the
Apostle says, Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead, and Christ
shall give thee Light.

And you say in page 11. Was not that the Light of the World that died, by
which Men are condemned? Now Christ said of Himself in the Days of his Flesh, I
am the Light of the World. And his holy Life was a Witness to his Words, as he
was a Man, begotten by the Spirit of God; and he also said of his Disciples, ye
are the Light of the World; but yet they were not the Salvation of the Ends of
the Earth. But now God says, Look unto me all ye Ends of the Earth, and be
saved; for I am God, and besides me there is no Savior, Isa. 43. and 45 chap.
and Hos. 13.4. And it is God that shows to Man his Thoughts, as says the
Scripture. Now Christ, as he was the Son of Mary, died, he being made of a
Woman, made under the Law, died to redeem them from the Law that were under the
Law. The which Law, or Dispensation, the Gentiles were never under, nor yet had
any Command for the Observation of them. But now Christ as he was God by
generation from God, he died not; for the Godhead died not, as I have formerly
written. And the same God that ever was a Savior and Salvation to the Ends of
the Earth, now is, and not another; and his Appearance throughout all Ages
among the Gentiles has been by his Spirit to the Gentiles, the which Spirit,
Law, or Light within, both was and is the Gentiles Schoolmaster, and Rule to
walk by.

And in page 10. you query, How came the War in Heaven if the Devil could never
get into Heaven? Now as concerning my Saying, that the Devil could never get up
into Heaven; the thing both was and is true: I or Christ in the days of his
Flesh he then dwelt in Heaven, and in the Power of his Father made war against
every Temptation of the Man of Sin, and so in the Power of his Father he kept
him out of Heaven; and so did John, who was born of the Spirit of God. And as
concerning the Scripture saying, that the Devil is exalted above all in the
Temple of God, above all that is called God; Christ says to the Jews, Is it
not written in your Law, I said ye are Gods? And Moses was to be instead of a
God to Aaron, as says the Scriptures. But now the Devil he has been exalted
in the Temple of God above all that is called God, or that is called of God, or
made by the Power of God in the Temple of God, but yet he is not exalted above
God Himself. And

You say, We are glad for the Truth and our sakes, that I printed what I did
print. And you say, That the true Doctrine that Rome and the Priests own, you
own it also; but the Antichristian Doctrine you deny. Well, Friends, if this
Doctrine be true that Rome and you own, that is to say, Justification and
Condemnation by him that died without the Gates of Jerusalem; then without any
further dispute your Image must down: For your Image says, That he that is not
justified by the Witness of God in Friends, is condemned. So this Doctrine can
never stand; for Rome and you say both, that Justification and Condemnation is
by that Christ that died. But and if the Old Christ keeps his Dominion and
Authority as to the Justifying of People, then your new invented Doctrine and
Image can never stand opon its feet long.

Wherefore Friends, seeing you do acknowledge to own some of Romes, and also of
the Priests Doctrine; I query of you, Whether you do own these following
Doctrines, which Rome and the Priests of England do own?

1. Whether the Kingdom of Heaven be above the visible Firmament? And also Hell
to be underneath the visible Earth which Men walk upon?

2. Whether Christ's visible Body, that once was upon the Earth, be now above in
the visible Heavens, at the right hand of his Father, and there making
Intercession to God his Father for Sinners?

3. Whether there be three Persons, as Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, which they
call the Trinity, above the visible Heavens?

4. Whether you do believe, that the Souls of Men, Women, and Children be
immortal, and shall abide for ever?

5. Whether when Men and Women die, and Soul and Body parts, whether the Soul
does ascend above the visible Heavens to an Enjoyment of Glory? or whether it
shall descend into Hell, a Place of Misery and Torment?

6. Whether you do believe the Resurrection of all the visible Bodies that have
died ever since our first Parents Adam and Eve, yea all that were before Noah's
Flood, and all the World that was drowned at the Flood, yea and all the visible
Bodies of Men and Women which have died both by Sea and Land, from a day old to
the longest age that ever Man lived; and that every one of these visible Bodies
shall arise and come to Judgment, and receive their Reward in Misery and
Torment, or else in Glory and Happiness, each one according to their deeds done
in the Body; yea Children that never knew what Sin was, nor yet what their
Souls and Bodies were?

7. And whether you do believe that Christ shall descend from above the visible
Heavens, where the Priests and Professors, and Rome also believe he now
sits, and from thence he shall descend with his visible Body, and shall come
and judge the World, both Men, Women, and Children?

8. And whether you do believe that this visible Earth shall be destroyed by
fire, and that the visible Heavens shall also melt with fervent heat?

Now Friends, seeing you do not deny some of the Doctrines of the Church of
Rome, nor yet of the Priests of England, but only that which is Antichristian,
and these are those Doctrines that both the Priests and Professors own.
Wherefore I would desire you to give forth a plain Answer both to the World,
and me also, which of these forementioned Doctrines are according to the
Truth, and which of them are Antichristian and Erroneous, and so write an
Answer in plain words, that every one that can read may come to understand; for
the Truth is not ashamed of the Articles of its Faith.

Now in page 11 of your Book you say, that I do exclude the Manhood. Now I do
not exclude the Manhood out of his Place; for the visible Man Christ was the
Son of God, by generation from God, full of Grace and Truth. But yet there is a
Distinction to be made betwixt the Godhead, and the visible Body in which the
Godhead dwelt; for Christ himself made a Distinction, and said, that his Father
was greater than he. And again he said, My Doctrine is not mine, but his that
sent me. And he said to the Jews, Destroy this Temple, and in three days I will
raise it up again. Now they had no power to destroy the Godhead that dwelt in
the Temple, that both was and is a thing impossible.

Now you say in page 12 of your Book, That I contradict my self because that I
said that the Man in the Mystery was the Woman's Part, that was his Soul and
Body. Now the Mystery that dwelt in Christ's Body, that was the Godhead; and
the Godhead died not, as I writ in my Answer to the Baptist. Now as Christ was
God, or the Seed of God, or the Son of God by generation from God, he never
died: for the Holy Ghost died not, neither had the Devil power to tempt him as
he was God: for God cannot be tempted, as says the Scripture. But as he was
the Son of Mary, the Devil had power to present Temptations to his Soul, even
whilst his Soul dwelt in the Godhead. But the visible Manhood, which was the
Seed of the Woman as well as the Seed of God, who dwelt in the Godhead, he was
empowered by the Godhead to bruise the Serpents head in all his appearances and
temptations; and so the Seed of the Woman did bruise the Serpents head, and so
he never came under the Devil's power, where both we and our first Parents Adam
and Eve have been. So that Christ, as he was Man of the substance of his
Mother, he died; but as he was God, and of the substance of his Father, he died
not; for the Godhead died not. But as for our Souls and Bodies, they, like Eve
their Mother, have been in Transgression; but as for Christ's Soul and Body, it
never consented to Sin, nor yet joined to the Spirit of Corruption.

And again you say, His goings were of old from everlasting. Friends, are not
the Lords goings by his universal Spirit among the Gentiles the same now as
they were in the days of Abraham? for then God appeared to Abimelech, King of
the Philistines, by his Spirit in the night; and was not he a Gentile as well
as we? and did not God by his Spirit make known Himself to Job and Elihu? were
not they Gentiles? And had not the Samaritans the Spirit of God in the Days of
Christ's Flesh, as well as we have it now? And was God not to be worshipped in
his own Spirit then, as Christ said to the Woman of Samaria?

And in page 12 of your Book you say, that Christ's Blood had a Testimony in it
toward the Remission of Sins. So then according to your own words, there was
no real Remission of Sin by Christ's Blood that was shed upon the Ground. Then
I would desire to know what benefit the Gentiles have by that Blood, if they
had not real Remission of Sins by Christ's Blood that was shed upon the Cross,
without he Gates of Jerusalem.

And in page 13 of your Book you say, that I do not tell you by whom Eve
conceived the Man of Sin, who was the Son of Perdition. But now I will tell you
by whom Eve conceived, it was by the Serpent, who had a Conception in her Soul
when his Temptation entered her; and the same Spirit of Darkness that brought
Death over her, has brought Death over us, we having been the Children of Adam
and Eve in the Fall, and having been captivated by the same Spirit of Darkness
as they were. And you also write against me, because I said, there are two
Christ's. Now did not the true Christ say, that there shall be false Christ's,
and they are the Sons of Perdition, who are one with the Spirit of Antichrist?
And are there not two Spirits, two Powers, two Gods, two Princes, two
Mysteries? And is not the one Light and the other Darkness? The one is called
the true Christ, and the other is the false Christ, which is Antichrist. And
yet they bear all one Name in Words, although they be different in Works.

And you also say, that I do directly oppose the Scripture to say, that Christ
came not of David, nor Israel. Now the words in my Book, page 23, run thus; Now
Christ be neither came of David, nor yet of Israel according to the Flesh, not
as to his outward appearance as he was a visible Man, but he came of David and
Israel both according to the Spirit. And in the 18 Page of my Book it is
written thus, Now Christ he was not the Son of David by generation from David,
as he was a visible Man; for Mary she was a Virgin, and knew no visible Man.
But Christ he was the Son of David by generation from God, he being begotten by
the Spirit of God in the womb of the Virgin, and this was the flesh of David,
and this was David's Lord. Now let all that read and understand consider
whether this is not a true Declaration according to the Scriptures, concerning
the Flesh of Christ, and of his Generation also.

Again you say, That I and my Brethren are Judges of wholesome Orders, and
commendable Forms in the Church. Now both Rome, and those that are called
Priests in England, they say that they are the true Church, and that their
Forms are both in Order, and commendable. But now the Quakers in the days of
their first Convincement, they in the Light did see an evil in all invented
Forms, both in their own as well as others; and in obedience to the Light they
denied the Form that was acted by others, and their own also. Now that Spirit
that sets up the Form of Prayer, or that acts the Form, and requires People to
bow to the Form that is acted, that is the Spirit of Antichrist. Now the Spirit
of God being in all, God requires all to bow to the Spirit, and to worship him
in the Spirit; and not to worship the Form that is acted, although it may be
performed by the Spirit of God. There is no such Scripture that I know of.

And in page 14 of your Book you say, that I have been a shame to you. But if
those words be true, that I have been a shame to you; then why did W. D. R. D.
G. W. G. B. and others of the Quakers labor so much with me to keep me still
among them?

And you do also accuse me as if I were an Hypocrite. Now If I had given up my
Faith to your Church, and to have believed as those called Elders and Ministers
believe, then I must have been an Hyprocrite. For then I must have believed
what your Image, or Paper of Orders says; that is, that I must be reconciled
to the Church, and that I must also be justified by the witness of God in
Friends; the which I cannot believe. Wherefore I have disowned both you and
that Doctrine, and also other of your Doctrines likewise.

And you also write against me, because I am for marrying with the Nation, and
for my saying, that God has made all Nations of one blood. But you say in your
Book that the Nations have polluted themselves, and are gone from God's make.

But I will ask you one Question, and answer me; Has King Charles polluted
himself by his marrying of a Portugal Woman? Or did Moses pollute himself by
his marrying of an Ethiopian Woman? Or did the two Sons of Naomi pollute
themselves by marrying of a Moabitish Women? And had not Moses God's universal
Spirit within him, to be his Rule for him to walk by, when he took the
Ethiopian Woman to Wife? And was not the Law Spiritual greater than the Law
Moral, or the Law Ceremonial? And has not King Charles a measure of the same
Spirit given him for a Rule for him to malk by, as Moses had before he received
the Law outwardly? And is not the Spirit of God in all the Sons and Daughters
of Men, given them of God to be their Rule and Guide to walk by? And had not
King Abimelech the Spirit of God as well as Abraham, and did not he obey the
voice of God concerning Sarah, Abraham's Wife? And was not the Law Moral, and
also the Law Ceremonial ended? And does not the Law Spiritual remain in all the
Sons and Daughters of Men to this day?

And again you say, That you are Witnesses to the Matches in the Land of Israel
Now was there ever a more wicked Match in the Land of Moab than there was in
the Land of Israel, than the Match between David and Vriah's Wife? And the
Prophet in the Spirit of God was a Witness against it. So that your Witness and
God's do not agree.

And in page 15 of your Book you say, That God is raising up Judges and
Counselors as at the beginning, Men fearing God, and hating Covetousness. Now
if Buyers of Corn to sell again, and Transporters of Corn, and Managers of
great Brew-houses, and Men entering into other Men's Trades, and Men being
greater Maulsters than ever they were before; if these be the Marks of Men
fearing God, and hating Covetousness, then some of the Quakers Ministers are
the Men.

And you say, I do not understand my own Queries, because I said, the Book of
the Scriptures is part of the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge. Now I knew that
the Book of the Creation was before the Book of the Scriptures: but if you own
what I say, that the Book of the Scriptures is the Fruit that the Tree of
Knowledge bears, then why do you feed so much upon them as you do? For let all
that read your Book, and also the Letter that was given me, which I disowned,
(which Letter is printed in my first Book) and they may easily perceive that
the Line of your Testimony is in the Letter and Book of the Scriptures, and not
in the Light and Law written in the Heart; from which Law or Light within,
which was before time was, and from which in time the Scriptures came. And is
not this Light, Gods universal Spirit, the only Rule for we Gentiles to walk
by? And was not the first Testimony that was sounded by the Quakers to direct
People to the Light within? And they told us that was the only Rule. But now
your Images Dictates and Orders, and comely Forms, as you call them, they must
be the Rule for King Charles's Subjects to walk by. But as Paul says in his
Epistle, Col. 2. so say I to the People, Touch not, taste not, handle not. And
they were Gentiles as well as we.

And because I said in my Book, I was an Informer, therefore you write against
me, and say, I may take my Place among the Informers. But now I desire no
greater place among the Sons of Men, than to be an Informer against Antichrist
in his Ministers. For God Himself was an Informer, for he informed Moses
against Israel, because of their wickedness; and would also have destroyed them
because the People had made a Calf, and worshipped it, and they also danced
about it. And there was also a Man of God, who in the Word of the Lord was an
Informer against both the Altar and the Calves that Jeroboam had set up, both
at Dan and Bethel, for the People to worship at. And was not Paul also an
Informer, when he wrote to the Corinthians, and told them that Satau was
transformed in his Minister into an Angel of Light? And John also in the Spirit
of the Lord was an Informer against the Churches of Asia, when they were gone
from God, and fallen into Apostasy, then he in the Spirit wrote both against
them and their Ministers, and told them that they were grown lukewarm, and had
also left their first Love. And has not God in the Ages and Generations past
discovered the Sins of his own People? witness Adam and Israel of old, and also
David, whose Sins are left upon record?

And further, you say in the end of your Book, You have omitted many gross
Absurdities, Confusions, and Follies. But I think that you should have done
well to have made both my Error, gross Absurdities and Follies manifest in your
Book, that People might have known them; else how can people believe what you
say to be true?

And so here follows some Queries for you Elders and Ministers, so called by
the Quakers, to Answer.

First, Whether the Light in every Quaker be not sufficient to justify them,
although you say it is the Light in you that condemns them?

2. Whether the Light in any Man, or Men, be able and sufficient to save or
justify any other Men but themselves?

3. Whether Men cannot be reconciled to God, except they be reconconciled to
the Church, called Quakers? and whether a Man may not be reconciled to your
Church, and yet not be reconciled to God?

4. Whether the Light in one Man, or Men, has power to open the Understanding
of another Man, seeing that God has placed a measure of his own Spirit in
every Man?

5. Whether there be not both Darkness and Light in every one that is called a
Quaker, as well in those called Elders and Ministers, as any others?

6. Whether the Light and also the Darkness has not been, and also is in all
the Sons and Daughters of Men, ever since the first Man Adam's Transgression?

7. Whether the Light in every Man be either the Soul or Spirit of a Man, or
whether the Light is not a distinct Being by himself?

8. Whether People are not wholly to depend upon the Light, or Spirit, or
Christ within for Life and Salvation?

9. Whether the same Light or Spirit was not in the Gentiles in those days when
Christ was in the World in that Body which the Father had prepared for him,
although the fullness of the Godhead dwelt in Christ's body?

10. Now where was that Flesh and Blood, and what was it that Christ told the
People in the days of his Flesh, that they must both eat and drink, or else
they could have no life in them?

11. Whether the Visible Man Christ who was Crucified without the Gates of
Jerusalem, whether his Body or Temple, which was like unto ours, Sin only
excepted, was dissolved or changed into a Spirit, and that Spirit now
manifested in the Gentiles? or where do you believe that Christ's Body now is?

12. Or whether there was any Visible Church so called, or separation among the
Gentiles which have not been bewitched, and also led into, error by their heaps
of Teachers?

13. And whether those heaps of Teachers by gathering of themselves together,
and by their Consultations and taking Counsel one of another, have not brought
in Errors and False-Doctrines in and among the Separations of our Churches of
the Gentiles, ever since the Night of Apostasy even to this very day?

14. And whether those heaps of Teachers who have had a sight given them from
Gods Spirit to see the Errors of other Teachers among the Gentiles that were
before them, and yet have not themselves also run into Errors as well as
others? But yet they would not believe it, the Devil had so blinded their Minds
and Understandings, and that with a zeal too, even as he did the Jews of old.

15. And has not all Persecution risen from a blind mad Zeal both as to Words
and Actions in matters of Conscience, under a Notion of Profession of both God,
Christ, and the Scriptures?

16. Whether Men must come to the Scriptures and outward means first, before
they can know their duty toward God? And whether they must not first come to
the Light and Manifestation of the Spirit within them, before they can learn
their duty toward God, or what God requires of them to do?

17. Whether God be changed, or the way of his making known himself be changed?
And whether any Man or Men can come to the knowledge of God, as to Life and
Salvation, but in and by the Spirit of Revelation? Or whether Men did not know
God before the Scriptures were?

18. Whether any of your Writings, although they should be given forth in and
from the Spirit of God, are an Instrumental Means to bring People to the
Knowledge of God as to the Souls Salvation in these days, any more than the
Scriptures did bring the Jews to the knowledge of Christ in the days of his
Flesh, or Paul in his days? Or by what outward means did you at first come to
see beyond others? or was it not the Light or inward Manifestation of the
Spirit, as a free gift from God, that gave you to see beyond others, and not by
any outward Writings?

But yet one of your Ministers, so called, said, that Friends Books were
Instrumental to bring People to the Knowledge of God. But if that be true what
he said then, is the way of God's making known himself to the Sons of Men
changed? For Men knew God before there was either Scriptures or Writings by any
Man; Neither do I read that ever the Scriptures brought any Man to the Knowledge
of God. So that your Writings must have Authority in them beyond the
Scriptures: For Man at first never knew God by the Scriptures, but God has
ever made known himself to the Sons of Men by his Light or Spirit that was in
them, that is by revealing himself unto them

Wherefore I would have all People that read my Book, take notice of these
following particulars, which are owned by the Quakers which I do disown.

First, That none can be justified by the Light or Witness of God in those
called Ministers and Elders amongst the Quakers, but all must be justified by
the Light in their own particular, or else they are condemned.

Secondly, It is neither the Light, God Christ, nor the Seed that is to be
quickened and raised up in the Sons and Daughters of Men; but it is the first
Man Adam that is to be both quickened and also raised up by the Arm of God's
Power revealed.

Thirdly, It is neither the Soul, nor yet the sensible part or Understanding of
Man, that is either to Pray or Preach in a Meeting; but it is the work of the
Holy Ghost to speak in every Man. Therefore what do you minister from, and what
do you minister to in the Sons and Daughters of Men? Or what is that which is
to attend your Declaration in those that hear you? Therefore examine your
selves by the Light, what Spirit it is that speaks in you.

I have written this to the Elders and Ministers of the Quakers: because there
is nothing to be put to print amongst them without their approbation; as their
Image, or Paper of Orders, says.

And also because your Book is written in the vindication of the Practice of
the Body of the Quakers in general.

And because the Image or Paper of Orders may be known to the Quakers in
general, I have here inserted it word for word, with the names of the eleven
Elders that signed it.

A Testimony from the Brethren, who were met together at London, in the third
month, 1666. to be communicated to the faithful Friends and Elders in the
Countries; by them to be read in their several Meetings, and kept as a
Testimony among them,
WE your Friends and Brethren, whom God has called to labor and watch for the
Eternal good of your Souls: at the time aforesaid, being through the Lord's
good hand, who has preserved us at liberty, met together in his Name and Fear,
were by the Operation of the Spirit of Truth, brought into a serious
Consideration of this present state of the Church of God; which in the day of
her return out of the Wilderness, has not only many open, but some Covert-
Enemies to Conflict against; who are not afraid to speak evil of Dignities, and
despise Government: without which we are sensible our Societies and Fellowship
cannot be kept holy and inviolable.

Therefore as God has put it into our hearts, we do communicate these things
following unto you; who are turned from darkness to light, and profess with us
in the Glorious Gospel throughout Nations and Countries: Wherein we have
traveled, as well for a Testimony against the unruly, as to stablish and
confirm them, unto whom it is given to believe the Truth; which is unto us very
precious, as we believe it is also unto you, who in love have received it, and
understood the Principles, and felt the Virtue and Operation of it. In which
our spirits breath, that we all may be preserved, until we have well finished
our Course and Testimony, to the honor and glory of our Lord God, who is over
all blessed for ever.

1. We having a true sense of the working of the Spirit, which under a
Profession of Truth, leads into a Division from, and Exaltation above the Body
of Friends, who never revolted nor degenerated from their Principles, and into
marks of Separation from the constant Practice of good and anitient Friends,
who are found in the Faith once delivered to us. And also unto a slight esteem
of their Declarations or Preaching, (who have and do approve themselves as the
Ministers of Christ) and of the Meetings of the Lords People, whereby, and
wherein Friends are, and often have been preciously revived and refreshed.

And under pretense of keeping down Man and Forms, doing down the Ministry and
Meetings, or encourage those that do the same. We say, the Lord giving us to
see, not only the working of that Spirit, and those that are joined to it, that
bring forth these ungrateful fruits; but also the evil Consequence and Effects
of it, which are of no less importance, than absolutely tending to destroy the
Work of God, and lay waste his Heritage. We do unanimously (being thereto
encouraged by the Lord, whose presence is with us) declare and testify, That
neither that Spirit, nor such as are joined to it, ought to have any Dominion,
Office, or Rule in the Church of Christ Jesus, whereof the Holy Spirit that was
poured forth upon us, bath made us Members, and Overseers. Neither ought they
to act, or order the affairs of the same: But are rather to be kept under with
the power of God, till they have an Ear open to Instruction, and come into
Subjection to the Witness of God; of the increase of whose Kingdom and
Government there shall be no end.

2. We do declare and testify, That that Spirit, and those that are joined to
it, who stand not in Unity with the Ministry and Body of Friends; that are
constant and steadfast to the Lord, and to his unchangeable Truth, which we have
received, and are Witnesses of, and Ambassadors, have not any true Spiritual
Right, or Gospel-Authority to be Judges in the Church, and as the Ministry of
the Gospel of Christ; so as to condemn you and their Ministry: Neither ought
their judgment to be any more regarded by Friends, than the judgment of other
Opposers, who are without. For of right, the Elders and Members of the Church
(which keep their habitation in the Truth) ought to judge matters and things
that differ, and their judgment which is so given therein, ought to stand good
and valued among Friends; though it be kicked against and disapproved by them
who have degenerated as aforesaid. And we do further declare and testify, That
it is abominable Pride, which goes before Destruction, that so puffs up the
mind of any particular, that he will not admit of any judgment to take place
against him: For he that is not justified by the Witness of God in Friends, is
condemned by it in himself; though being hardened, he may boast over it in a
false Confidence.

3. If any difference arise in the Church, or amongst them that profess
themselves Members thereof; We do declare and testify, That the Church, with
the Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ, have power (without the assent of such as
dissent from their Doctrine and Practices) to hear and determine the same. If
any pretend to be of us, and in case of Controversy will not admit to be tried
by the Church of Christ Jesus, nor submit to the judgment given by the Spirit
of Truth in the Elders and Members of the same, but kick against their
judgment, as only the judgment of Man, it being manifested according to Truth,
and consistent with the Doctrine of such good ancient Friends as have been, and
are found in the Faith, agreeable to the Witness of God in his People; Then we
do testify in the Name of the Lord ( if that judgment so given be risen
against and denied by the party condemned:) then he or she (and such as so far
partake of their sins, as to countenance and encourage them therein) ought to
be rejected; And having erred from the Truth, persisting therein
presumptuously, are joined in one with HEATHENS and INFIDELS.

4. We do declare, That if any go abroad hereafter, pretending to that weighty
Work and Service, who either in Life or Doctrine grieve good Friends, that are
steadfast in the Truth, sound in the Faith; so that they are not manifest in
their Consciences, but disagree to the Witness of God in them; Then ought they
(whatever have been their Gifts) to leave them before the Altar, and forbear
going abroad and ministering, until they are reconciled to the Church, and have
the Approbation of the Elders and Members of the same. And if any that have
been so approved of by the Church, do afterward degenerate from the Truth, and
do that which tends to Division, and countenance Wickedness and Faction (as
some have done) then the Church has a true Spiritual Right and Authority to
call such to Examination; and if they find sufficient cause for it, by good
testimony, may judge them unfit for the Work of Gods Ministry, whereof they have
rendered themselves unworthy; and so put a stop to their proceedings therein.
And if they submit not to the judgment of the Spirit of Christ in his People,
then ought they publicly to be declared against; and warning given to the
Flock of Christ in their several Meetings, to beware of them, and to have no
fellowship with them, that they may be ashamed, and Lambs and Babes in Christ
preserved.

5. And if any man or woman, which are out of the Unity with the Body of
Friends, print, or cease to be printed, or published in writing, any thing
which is not of service for the Truth; but tends to the scandalizing and
reproaching of faithful Friends, or to beget or uphold Division and Faction;
then we do warn and charge all Friends that do love Truth, as they desire it
may prosper, and be kept clear, to beware and take heed of having any hand in
printing, republishing or spreading such Books or Writings. And if at any time
such Books be sent to any of you that sell Books in the Country, after that
you, with the advice of good and serious Friends, have tried them, and find
them faulty, to send them back again whence they come. And we further desire,
from time to time, faithful and sound Friends may have the view of such things
as are printed upon Truth's account (as formerly it has used to be) before
they go to the Press; that nothing but what is sound and savory, and that will
answer the Witness of God even in our Adversaries, may be exposed to public
view.

6. We do advise and counsel, That such as are made Overseers of the Flock of
God by the Holy Spirit, and do watch for the good of the Church meeting
together in their respective places, do set and keep the affairs of it in good
order; beware of admitting or encouraging such as are weak, and of little
faith, to take such trust upon them: for by hearing things disputed that are
doubtful, such may be hurt themselves, and may hurt the Truth, not being grown
into a good understanding to judge of things. Therefore we exhort, That you who
have received a true sense of things, be diligent in the Lord's business, and
keep the Meetings as to him, that all may be kept pure and clean, according to
that of God which is just and equal.

We also advise, That not any be admitted to order Public business of the
Church but such as have felt in a measure of the Universal Spirit of Truth;
which seeks the destruction of none, but the general good of all; and
especially of those that love it, who are of the Household of Faith* So, dear
Friends and Brethren, believing that your Souls will be refreshed (in the sense
of our spirits, and integrity toward God) at the reading of these things, as
ours were while we sat together at the opening of them; and that you will be
one with us on the behalf of the Lord, and his precious Truth, against those
who would limit the Lord to speak without Instruments, or by what Instruments
they list, and reject the Counsel of the Wisemen, and the Testimony of the
Prophets, which God sanctified and sent among you in the day of his Love, when
you were gathered; and would not allow him liberty, in and by his Servants to
appoint time and place, wherein to meet together to wait upon and worship him,
according as he requires in Spirit, and calling it Formal, and the Meeting of
Man.

We say, believing that you will have Fellowship with us herein, as we have
with you in the Truth, we commit you to God, and the Word of Life, which has
been preached to you from the beginning (which is neither limited to place, nor
time, nor persons; but has power to limit us to each as pleases him) that you
with us, and we with you, may be built up in our most holy Faith; and be
preserved to partake of the Inheritance which is heavenly, amongst all them
that are sanctified.

Richard Farnsworth. Alexander Parker, George Whitehead, Josiah Coal, John
Whitehead. Thomas Lo, Stephen Crispe, Thomas Green. John Moon. Thomas Briggs,
James Parkes.


This Book is given forth from one who has born the Name of a Quaker this
twenty years and more; who was a Son of Adam by generation in the Fall, but now
an Informer against Antichrist in his Ministers, and also a Member of the
visible Creation amongst the Sons of Men, wherein God dwells, called by the
Name of

Jeffery Bullock.
This Book was given forth by Jeffery Bullock, whose outward Being is in
Sudbury in Suffolk, in the Year 1677.

