A BRIEF REPLY To Two Papers given into the House of Lords, since my Book was
given in: The one called The Christian Faith, etc. Signed by G. Whitehead and
17 more, the other styled The Ancient Testimony, etc. not Signed at all
In the First to the Lords the QUAKERS declare. That they believe in and
confess to Jesus Christ, both as he is true God and perfect Man. 2ly. That they
own the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament to be given by Divine
Inspiration, etc. Next follows their contempt of Christ and the Scriptures,
which shows the fallaciousness of their now pretending to own them.
A Quest. to Professors, etc. p. 33. Now the Scriptures do expressly distinguish
between CHRIST and the GARMENT which he wore between HIM, that came, and the
BODY in which HE came; between the SUBSTANCE which was VEILED, and the Vail
which veiled it: There was plainly HE ( say the Quakers) and the BODY in which
HE came; there was the OUTWARD VESSEL and the INWARD LIFE, this WE CERTAINLY
know, and can never call the BODILY Garment Christ: But that which appeared and
dwelt IN the Body, p. 27. is not the Substance the Life, the Anointing called
Christ wherever it is found: And does not the Name (Christ) belong to the
whole Body; and every Member in the Body; as well as to the Head, etc. The
Sword of the Lord drawn, etc. page 5. Your imagined God beyond the Stars; and
your carnal Christ is utterly denied, and testified against by the light; To
say that Christ is God and Man in one Person, it is a Lie; for more of this,
see The Quak. set, etc. p. 43. to the end: News coming up, etc. p. 14. Your
word is carnal the Letter; so dust is the Serpents meat; their Original is but
dust, which is but the Letter, which is Death; so the Serpent feeds upon dust:
And their Gospel is dust, Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, which is but the
Letter, etc. as more at large in the Quak. set. etc. p. 46. If any object on
their behalf, and say; possibly these Passages might be wrote in their mistaken
Zeal; but if they will now retract and condemn the same; and steadfastly own
their New Confession; might not their former errors be buried in Oblivion.
Answ. That Is granted, for who is it that has not erred: But if they shall
prove pertenacious, and stand to maintain and defend those errors, as wrote by
the Eternal Spirit and Infallible dictates thereof; then it is the duty of every
Christian to reject their counterfeit confessions; which they make use of to
serve a turn only.

As to the second Paper not signed, it seems fallacious from top to bottom; for
what credit can be given to a Paper not signed, only said to be given out at a
Meeting in London. The King's Proclamations are said to be given out at his
Court at Whitehall, but not without his Name W. Rex. But it seems the Quakers
conceive themselves of that Credit, that they need not Sign their Papers;
that is below them: Or else it must be to leave room for an excuse, when time
serve: I grant they say they pray for the King, but what King they do not tell;
No? that is a secret; they also say, they cannot Sign the Association, and
thereby declare the King their Rightful and Lawful King for Conscience sake:
And yet they tell you that their not Signing, is not in opposition to his being
declared the Rightful and Lawful King; who says so? no body; for there is no
Name to it, nor from what Meeting it was given out; whether Yearly, or
Quarterly, the Six Week Meeting, Monthly, or second day Meeting; or whether
from 2 or 3 Quakers under the Hedge.

Again, You cannot Sign the Association, in regard you cannot take revenge for
your selves nor others: That Is strange, was there not lately a Quaker murdered
on the Road, between Kingstand and Shoreditch; and did you not proffer 50 l.
Reward for the Discovery of the Person, which did it; was he not found and
tried at the Old Bailey, and hanged in Chains near Stone Bridge; and all this
Prosecution by Quakers: And can you revenge your selves of the Blood of a
private Person; and can you not Sign the Association to avenge the Blood of
your Prince, for Conscience sake: Are your Consciences so nice that you can
neither say nor do; any thing for the Public Good, what can you receive
benefit and protection from the Government; and can you not defend it for
Conscience sake: You may remember how frequent it was with you to Address the
Late King James: And also you know, you never made an Address to His Present
Majesty, see New Rome Unmasked, etc. p. 27. No, your Conscience will not allow
you, neither to Address, Sign the Sociation, nor Sign your Paper, wherein you
pretend to pay some kind of Respect for the Liberty you enjoy: You could tell
Richard Cromwell, that if he chose the Lord to be his Counselor, he should
prosper; and that you would be a strength to him, and stand by him in the day
of trouble, and DEFEND him in his just Government, etc. for more of this, see
Burrough's Works p. 252. 273. 274. But you cannot Sign the Association, and
thereby stand by and Defend King William, for Conscience sake; what Conscience
is yours, that thus differ from the Lords and Commons, and all other Dutiful
Subjects of our Sovereign Lord the King 5 or has no Body any Conscience but
you, Signed in Concurrence with the Loyal Association by me

FRA. BUGG. Senior.
Dated March 27. 1696.
IN answer to the Quakers Printed Case concerning Swearing, etc. And to show
that the Heads and Chief Ringleaders of them can Swear for their own Interest,
I shall give one Instance, amongst many others, which may be produced in the
Courts of Equity. George Whitehead the great promoter of this Act, had a Bill
exhibited against him in the Lord Majors Court of Equity, by Tho. Daniel and
Eliz. his Wise the 9th. day of April 1695. to which he gave his Answer upon
Oath, as Follows,

GEORGE WHITEHEAD'S OATH.

You do Swear that so much of this your Answer as you set forth, to be of your
own knowledge, is certain and true. And so much thereof as you set forth to be
by relation of others you do believe to be true. So help you God.

This Oath, in open Court, was read to him, the Book being put to his Mouth, he
submitted to it without gainsaying, and it was accepted and remains upon
Record. By which it appears that they have no cause of complaint.


