A PLEA FOR Mr Strong's Church Members; Showing they ought not implicitly to
submit to his unnecessary and doubtful Rules, Although for it he threaten to
debar them from the Lords Table, or to leave them altogether.

By Thomas Bakewell.

1 COR. 15.58. Therefore my beloved Brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable,
always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as you know that your
labor is not in vain in the Lord.

LONDON, Printed for John Dallom, and are to be sold at his shop in black
Friars, near Carter-lane. 1650.

A Plea for Mr Strong's Church Members; Showing they ought not implicitly to
submit to his unnecessary and doubtful Rules, although for it he threaten to
debar them from the Lords Table, or leave them altogether.
THe Cause moving me to speak my thoughts of those Rules was this: A friend in
that Parish told me, that M. Strong had imposed some doubtful Rules on his own
examined and approved Communicants to subscribe, and till they do it, he is
resolved to debar them all from the Lords Table, if not wholly forsake them,
although their Consciences be not satisfied touching the lawfulness of it;
hereupon I wrote my opinion of those Rules, intended for Mr Strong: But another
told me it was in vain; for some Ministers had written to him about it, to whom
he will give no answer, nor yet dispense the Ordinance, as if he were the Lord
of Gods Ordinances, to dispense or refuse at his pleasure, yea to his own
approved Communicants, and also having the Pastoral charge over them. But is
this to feed the Lambs of Christ? and as a Nurse, to impart if it were possible
his own Soul for the Babes in Christ? or as a faithful Steward, to feed the
Lords family, to monopolize Gods Ordinance, he being but an Ambassador or
Messenger of it from Christ to them? Or is this to have the tongue of the
learned to speak in season to the weary Soul, to impose such penalties on the
Conscience unsatisfied? Now for their satisfaction I thought good to publish my
thoughts of those Rules.

The first Rule, Christ has instituted particular Churches under the Gospel;
and it is the duty of Saints to gather themselves into such Societies.

To these two Propositions, I would know of him, what Churches those be into
which the Saints are not yet admitted, and into which it is the Saints duty to
gather themselves: Is there any Churches without Saints, or into which the
Saints are not yet admitted? Only it is their duty to gather themselves into
such Societies. This kind of reasoning is much like as if he had said, Christ
has instituted Bodies without Members, and its the Members duty to gather
themselves into those Bodies; or Christ has instituted Trees without Branches,
and it is the Branches duty to gather themselves into those Trees: Therefore I
demand again, what be those Churches into which the Saints must gather
themselves? I hope you will not call your self the Church, one man cannot be a
Congregation, into which the Saints should be gathered, nor the Church to which
they should be added: The Ambassador of Christ should beseech men to be
reconciled to God, not to himself, as false Prophets draw Disciples to
themselves, Acts 20.30.

To the other Proposition, what be those Saints without the Church, whose duty
it is to gather themselves into it? Do you mean some among the Turks,
miraculously wrought upon with true saving grace, that they should hasten
themselves into the visible Church? If so, why do you not go amongst them, and
seek for such, and bring them in, to make known the mind of God unto them.

As for baptized Christians, they need no gathering into the Church, they are
children of Zion, Psalm. 149.2. It shall be said, this and that man was born in
her, Psalm. 87.5. The Christian Church shall travel, and bring forth more
children to God, then the Jewish Church did, Isai. 54.1. And all her children
do seal their admission into the Universal visible Church at their Baptism,
which comprehends all particular Churches, which are but as branches and
members of it; this Universal Church was instituted by Jesus Christ, into which
all Ministers, both extraordinary and ordinary, are placed, 1 Cor. 12 18. and
into which all Christians sealed their admittance at their Baptism, both those
children that are born of baptized parents, and also those converted from
Heathens and Infidels without, these are all added to that one Universal
Church, Acts 2.45, 47. Not to Peter's or Pauls-Church, or any one single
Congregation, for then in case of removal to another, they would need again to
be baptized, and their Ministers again to be ordained, yea as often as they
remove into other Churches; but Baptism signifies ingrafting into Christ, and
the new birth: But as a man can be born but once, and the sience ingrafred but
once; so a Member can be but once admitted into the visible Church, which is
already done, and sealed at their Baptism.

The second Rule, Churches instituted by Christ are to be a company of visible
Saints, united into one Body by mutual consent, to enjoy a constant communion
among themselves, partaking in all Ordinances, according to Gods Order, for the
edification of one another.

Ans. It is true, that those of age, who are real Members of Christ, and also
have sealed the Covenant of Grace and their admission into the visible Church
at their Baptism, those I grant are true Saints, yet sometimes no more visible
then those 7000. who had not bowed the knee to Baal: Gods people are called
hidden ones, Psalm. 83.3. They have that white stone, and that new Name written,
which no man knows, but he that receives it, Rev. 2.17. Again, the best cannot
enjoy a constant communion, there was a breach between Paul and Barnabas, Acts
15.39. And for partaking in all Ordinances, we know sometimes those that
believe in Christ are cast out, Joh. 9.34. and the incestuous man partaking in
all Ordinances, 1 Cor. 5.1, 2. and the Churches of Asia had left their first
love, and had a name to live, and was dead, and held the doctrine of Baalam,
and of the Nicholaitans, and suffered Jesebel to seduce the servants of God,
and yet still they are true Churches. Again, suppose they had none of those
open abominations, yet they might have hypocrites, which are incapable of the
forementioned privileges, yet all those are visible Members, till they are
discovered, and judicially cast out. Again, many of the members may be infants,
which may have true grace, as John and Jeremiah had, yet not capable of
communion, or of public enjoyment of the Ordinances, yet members, having
sealed their admission by Baptism to the parents profession, which is the only
form of all Christian Churches.

The third Rule, Saints are only such, who being of age do profess faith in
Christ, and yield obedience unto Christ, according to the Rule of Faith and
Life taught by Christ, and his Apostles, and of such only should particular
Churches consist, and of their children.

Ans. The most of this was contained in the second Rule, and there answered: I
shall hear take notice of this Rule contradicting it self, saying, Saints are
only such, who being of age do profess faith in Christ, and yield obedience
unto Christ, etc. and also of children: But can children be of age, and profess
faith in Christ at the same time? it is impossible; and yet he says, those
Saints on which the Church consists are only such, and also their children; so
that if children be admitted to be members, it is, without all that profession,
flat against this Rule, which says, the Church only consists of such; or else
if children be not admitted, then also it is flat against the last clause of
it. Again, if these children shall be admitted members for their parents
profession, then why may they not also be admitted members, having sealed their
parents profession by Baptism? If any of that Root be holy, so are the
branches, Romans 11.16. unless he turn Anabaptist, and so make their Baptism null
and void; and if so, then they must be again baptized at their new admission
into his Church, and renounce all their Christianity they had before that last
admission. Again, I would know what need there is of a second admission, unless
there had been a cutting off by Excommunication, but they are not so cut off,
only it is his hard thoughts of godly Christians to esteem them without cause
to be such; but for those he is pleased to admit into his Church, it seems
their children shall partake of the Lords Table without any examination,
because they are members, although flat against this Rule; and in the very next
age the Ordinances of Christ will be more polluted, then in any age under the
very Prelates, who did appoint Catechizing, in order to prepare children for
that Ordinance; yea, some of those Churches have admitted members more for
money then for fitness, holding the poor to hard terms, although never so
godly, and the rich to easy terms, although never so profane; and being once
admitted, they will not cast them out, if rich, when as sufficient proof has
been made, that they were common liars, common swearers, common drunkards, and
Cheaters of the State.

The fourth Rule, The Union of Church Members among themselves is not their
co-habitation, but their consent to unity, in the forementioned ends.

Ans. Their Consent was given by sealing the Covenant of Grace, the Sacrament
of their Admittance into the Universal Church, by which they have a right to
all the forementioned Privileges; and this their consent was further ratified
by their constant communion with the Church in all public worship, and a
continual practice of holiness, both in their general and particular Callings,
which shows their approbation of their former profession, and all this is known
by other of the Church co-habiting near to them, and they near the place of
public Worship; but if they did not co-habit near together, and also near the
place of public Worship, they could neither perform those public and private
duties, nor could others observe them, neither could the Shepherd take care of
his flock, nor be an example to the flock, as he is commanded, if the sheep
might wander where they list, and as far from his fold as they please. But why
should he break the bounds of co-habitation, if it were not to break the
Assemblies of public Worship also? much like to the Prelates admittance to the
Lords Table, who if they brought them money for their Tokens, they neither
cared where or how they lived; but the Scripture speaks of a Sabbath days
journey, Acts 1.12. which is so far, as with convenience they may perform all
duties to God, both in public and private, yet not as if co-habiting only made
them members, so that if a Turk or Heathen should live in one of our Parishes,
that for he is so living there he is a member of that Church, this is far from
our thoughts, for he must first be admited into the Universal Church, by
professing the Christian Faith, and sealing to it by Baptism, and this we say
gives him right to all the Privileges of the Christian Church in any
particular place where ever he shall inhabit; but till this be done, we do not
look upon Turks and Heathens as Church members for living amongst us, although
never so godly.

The fifth Rule, Admission into these Churches are to be by men, according to
the Rules prescribed by Christ, and their Admissions and Ejection are no
further ratified by Christ, then they do agree to these Rules.

Ans. Church Officers being lawfully called, have power to act by virtue of
their Call, although they do not come up in holindss to the Rules prescribed by
Christ; so did Judas, and Demas, and others, whose calling, and not their
holiness, gave them power to act; also I grant that these Church Officers have
power to admit Jews and Turks into the Christian Church, upon their conversion
to the Christian Faith manifested to them, and also to admit Christians that
are cast out of the Church by Excommunication upon repentance, and satisfaction
made to the Church for that offense for which they were cast out; but to make
Admissions and Ejections, receiving in and casting out of those that have
sealed their admission into the Church, and their ingrafting into Christ, and
as yet never forfeited their admission, or at least the forfeiture was never
taken, nor they cast out, this were cruel Usurpation, with a witness, to make
the hearts of Gods people sad, but God will deliver his people out of their
hand, Ezekiel. 13.22, 23. and so much the sooner, when men express so much pride
of heart to say, Christ will no further ratify their Admissions and Ejections,
then they agree to these Rules, as though Christ were more tied to their
inventions, then to his own Institution.

The sixth Rule, The men employed in this work are Officers, to whom with the
Body the power of the Keys is committed.

Answ. All bodies both natural Political, and Mystical, are guided by their
head, and also all power in Government, whether in Church or State, is
committed to the Governors thereof, therefore says Christ unto Peter, in the
name of all the Apostles, I give unto thee the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven,
Mat. 16, 19. and likewise to all the Apostles, What ye shall bind, or loose
upon earth shall be done in heaven. John 20.23. and after their decease they
left others to set in order things that were wanting, Tit. 1.5. and when any
thing is amiss in the Churches of Asia the Angel thereof is charged with it:
again some must rule, and some obey them that rule over them, Heb. 13, 7.17.24.
1 Timothy 5.17, But if the keys were given for all to act with them, over whom
should they rule, neither could there by order or decency observed, as is
required Tit. 1.5. 1 Cor. 14.40. Col. 2.5. For all are masterlesse where all
are masters: again, the Scripture says, this punishment of Excommunication,
was inflicted by many, 2 Cor. 2.6. not by all, as Independents would have it,
nor by one as the Prelates would have; again, if in any Society the governed
have power to cast out the Governor, as the Governor has power to cast them
out, this would soon be the bane of all Societies, the servant may then as well
cast out the master, as the master the servant, Hagar may as well cast out
Abraham, as he cast out her, and so the son may cast out the father, as the
father the son, which would be the ruin of Church and State immediately, yea
of all Families and civil Societies.

The seventh Rule, Church Officers are to be chosen by their Church Members.

Ans. It is true, that Church Members, and not Turks and Infidels, are to
choose Church Officers, but through some defect all the members cannot choose
them, for children, and sick persons, and those in a journey, and excommunicate
persons cannot choose them; nor women, who may not speak in the Church, nor
servants, who do not contribute to their maintenance, may not choose them, yet
all in the Church, who are not hindered by such like impediments, may choose
their Officers, yea out of themselves, they may choose their Elders and
Deacons, for says the Text, Look you out from among your selves seven men of
honest report, and full of the Holy Ghost, and Wisdom; and they chose Steven,
and the rest, Acts 6.3.5. But those were only chosen for that particular
Society where they lived, and for no other; they were not placed in the
Ministry, nor in the Universal Church, so that if they remove to another
Church, they cannot take their office with them, therefore their power to
choose, and also to be chosen, reaches no further then their own Society or
Congregation: But a Minister being chosen to be placed in the Universal Church,
a particular Church cannot choose them for the Ministry, because, I say, their
office is not there confined; but if they shall remove to another Congregation,
they take their office with them; yea if he should be cast out among the
Heathen, he may preach and baptize, and so dispense all the Ordinances to them,
if they will embrace the Christian Faith; but if multitudes of other Christians
were cast amongst them, they can act but as private Christian. The Jews being
returned from Babylon, found that they had no Ministers, did not make Ministers
of other men, but sent to Iddo, and his brethren, and desired to send them
Minsters for the House of God, and they sent them a man of understanding, of
the Tribe of Levi, Ezra 8.17, 18. And so should other Congregations send to the
University for the like blessing: When Samaria had received the Christian
Faith, the Apostles heard of it, and sent them Peter and John, Act. 8.14. But
the Congregation can give the Minister no power to act; they cannot put him
into the Ministry which are not in it themselves, nor give him power to act in
other Congregations, where they have no power at all. It is not said the
particular Church, but the people of the Land shall choose the Watchmen, and
not out of their particular Church, but out of their Coasts, Ezekiel. 33.2. Now
those people of the Land may be Ministers in the University, coming thither out
of all parts of the Land, and yet out of their Coasts, or national Church; so
that hear we grant them to be Church Members, although not members of their
particular Society; and it is a gracious promise, that all Governors in Church
and State shall be chosen out of the midest of them, that is, of thy brethren
by Nation, and not strangers, Jer. 30.21, 22. Also I grant, that a Congregation
may choose their own Ministers in relation to themselves, being already in the
Ministry, both elected and ordained by Ministers before for the Ministry; but a
Congregation may not elect and ordain a Minister into the Ministry; Matthias
was chosen by a hundred and twenty names of men, that is, Officers, Act. 1.15.
When two or three are in the Name of Christ having his Authority, they are
Church Officers, with the power of binding and loosing, Mat. 18.17.20. so that
120. was made up of the 70. and 11 Apostles, and other preachers, which were
with them from the Baptism of John, Act. 1.21, 22. The Officers of Antichrist
falling, and said to be 7000. names of men, Rev. 11.13. and Ministers must be
ordained by the Presbytery, 1 Timothy 4.14. and not by the people; yea when
Deacons were chosen out of themselves for their present Society, yet they were
ordained by the Apostles, they prayed, and laid their hands on them, Acts 6.3,
4. Thus far I grant, that the Members of a particular Church have power to
choose, and to be chosen, for Church Officers, but no further.

The eight Rule, The Officers instituted by Christ in the Church are Pastors,
Elders, and Deacons, whose callings and qualifications are plainly laid down in
the Word. Now to this last Rule I shall willingly subscribe, if you do not
limit and restrain your Officers from acting, and make mere Ciphers of them,
having but the bare names of Officers, and yet give the least Member in the
Congregation, as much power, if not more, to act then he, making them to punish
those whom every member but themselves shall think fit, giving them no power at
all to judge and censure, but to execute the censure of all other members,
whether he thinks the censure just or not: but Ministers are sometimes called
Elders in regard of their Power in the Church, and the rest charged to obey
them, Heb. 13.7.17.24. Tit. 5.17, and sometimes they are called Pastors to feed
them with knowledge and understanding, Ier. 3.15. and sometimes they are called
Bishops or Overseers, in regard of their pains and labor, vigilency and
aptness to teach the flock, 1 Timothy 3.1, 2. and also to defend them from Wolves
that would devour the flock; and likewise to maintain the Office of ruling
Elders, who also are placed in the Church to strengthen the Disciples and to
take care that the poor be provided for of that society, and that the
Collections be gathered and disposed by the Deacons, as they shall appoint, for
to them should the stock of the poor be committed, when relief was sent to the
Churches in Judea, it was committed to the Elders, Act. 11.30. and also their
work is to deside controversies, when private Brethren cannot do it, then says
the Text, tell the Church, Mat. 18.17. that is, her Officers, and what they
bind and lose shall be done in heaven, ver. 18. now this cannot be the whole
body, because two or three may do it in the name and power of Christ, ver. 20.
nor any two or three had not that authority, for then the offending and the
offended brethren had it, but they had it not, nor two or three more, for it
was the third gradation, and yet but two or three, which could be none but the
Officers or Eldership, which is the highest appeal in a particular Church. Thus
if you allow of their Offices, as well as their names, I shall subscribe to
this last, but I doubt you will not, unless you do renounce the latter part of
your sixth Rule.

Imprimat.

J. D.
August 22. 1650.
FINIS.

