Antichrists Transformations within, Discovered by The LIGHT within.
THis is given forth to all Friends and Brethren who look upon themselves to be
Elders and Teachers of others, who think that they have both a right and a
power to be Judges in the Churches called Quakers, in matters of Religion,
Principles, and Practices; which thing only belongs to God, in the Worship of
God in matters of Conscience.

Friends, I do deny that man has any Rule, Power, Dominion, Government, or
Authority, either given or committed unto him from the Lord, as pertaining to
the Conscience in things relating to the worship of God; for all Power in
Heaven and Earth, Rule, Authority, and Dominion, belongs unto Christ the
Light, the invisible power which dwells in all Men and Women as pertaining to
the Conscience; and all Glory and Honor, Praise and Thanksgiving is to be
given by man to Christ the Light which is in them, because he is the only
Redeemer, and the Savior of the Souls, and the Salvation of the ends of the
Earth; and so there is no glory to be given to man, although he be born of the
Light; but all is to be given to Christ the Light in Man, unto whom alone it
does belong, who is the true Minister, and has power in himself to teach all
the Sons and Daughters of men, who hear his voice and obey him. Wherefore,
whosoever does exalt Christ the Light, who is the true Minister, before
themselves, by Christ the Light within shall those be exalted, otherwise, by
the Light within they must be overturned; for it never was Antechrist in the
heart nor yet Antechrist in those which meet together to wait upon God in true
silence, the which brought in false Doctrine, Error, and Heresy among us
Quakers, or other Sects whatsoever; but it was Antechrist in the Priests and
false Prophets, which was the instrumental cause by the which the Jews of old
were lead into Error; and it was Antechrist in those heaps of Teachers, that
lead the Churches of the Gentiles into error in the Apostle Paul's days, and so
read down from the Apostle Paul's days to this day, ever since the night of
Apostasy came over the Churches of the Gentiles; and it has been Antichrist in
and among the Gentiles Teachers, the which has had dominion over all, both
great and small, who have given their power to the Beast.

Friends, This is my Judgment, Faith, and Belief, that whatsoever is written
to the Churches called Quakers, by either Man or Men, Elders or Bodies by way
of Exhortation, Advice, or Counsel, or Admonition, or by way of dehortation, or
for warning them of Evil in matters of Conscience, which thing belongs to God,
it ought to be written to the Churches, both in, and by, and from the Holy
Ghost, which is Gods infallible Spirit, and the word of Eternal Life, and also
the Spirit of Revelation, yea and all Declarations, all Preachings and Prayings
in the Churches called Quakers wheresoever, it is the Holy Ghost which is to
speak in every Vessel; so that no Man or Woman is either to Pray or Preach, or
cause any thing to be Printed and sent among the Churches, but what comes in
and from the Holy Ghost, otherwise it is not to be owned by the Churches, for
Moses he received the Law from the mouth of God, before he delivered it to the
Children of Israel, and Paul he wrote his Epistles to the Churches of the
Gentiles, in, and by, and from the Spirit of Revelation, and John he was in the
Spirit of the Lord when he wrote to the seven Churches of Asia. Wherefore your
Paper to the Churches, it is not to be owned by the Churches, in as much as it
was written from a sight, or a sense, and from the senceable part, and not in
and from the Spirit of Revelation: now whatsoever is written declared, or given
forth in the sight, or in the sense, or from the sensible part, it is not to be
owned, for the senceable part is that which has been in the transgression with
the woman, with all her sights and senses, in every visible man, and this is
she which feeds upon the fruit the which the tree of knowledge bears; for
things being opened to her in the understanding, by the Spirit of Truth, she
having received the sights and the openings, Antichrist being near, the mind
not being kept in the Watch, his work is, to draw the mind from him which
opens, into the mysteries which are recorded in the Book of the Scriptures,
which mysteries are opened to the Woman by the Spirit of Truth, and thus
Antichrist has cheated thousands; for the Woman is the sole mind or heart in
every visible Man and Woman, which is accompanied with an understanding part,
and a knowing part, and a sensible part, and an affectionate part, and a
comprehending part; for it has been the work of that old Adversary which is
called the Devil, in ages past to steal the mind from him which opens into
those things, the which are opened by the Light within that is to say, to draw
the mind and inward senses from the Light into the Letter, and from the word
into the words, and from him which opens, into the things which are opened;
and if Antichrist has thus but once captivated the mind, then he will soon
finish his work, and the Creature shall not discern it for the present; for
Antichrist he will bring a Vail over the understandings of Men and Women, and
yet they for the present cannot perceive it; and thus the Woman, which is one
with the sensible part, both in the Male and in the Female, she having received
the things which were opened by the Spirit of truth, she assuming authority to
her self to speak in the Church, not from him which opens, but from those
things which are opened, Antechrist being transformed in the mind and
understanding: Now this Woman she is not permitted by the Law, which is Light,
not to speak in the Church with a vocal voice, neither is she to pray in the
Church, but she is to return to Christ, who is the Light within, who daily
discovers her state and condition unto her, and also makes manifest her sin;
and her place is to obey the Light, and to be made willing to dwell in silence,
until the Light within has redeemed her from under the power of death and
darkness within, and then the power which has redeemed her, he is to speak in
the Church, and not the Woman; but her place is to wait at the feet of Christ
the Light within; for she is neither to preach nor pray in the Church, although
she be redeemed: but if she lacks any thing, she is to ask her Husband at home;
for there is an invisible woman in every visible man, and there is an invisible
man in every visible woman; and the man Christ Jefus, who is the Light of the
world, he is in them both, and it is he which is to speak in the Church, and
not the woman, for her place is to be obedient, and in subjection to her
Husband; for the first visible man God formed of the dust of the ground, and
God created and made the first invisible man Adam a living Soul, and he was
under the dominion of the heavenly power and spirit, and then he was a heavenly
man; but he lending an ear to the Serpent when he spoke in the woman, and by
his receiving of his counsel, the Serpent beguiled him, as he had done the
woman, and so he lost the enjoyment of the heavenly power, and so he became
like the woman, he being brought under the dominion of the earthly spirit and
power, and so he lost his habitation in God, and was brought under the power of
death.

Friends, I do not own the judgment and opinion of those Ministers, nor yet
their superiority, who says, he that is not justified by the witness of God in
friends, is condemned by it in himself: now Justification is by Christ alone,
who is the head in every member, and the only rule for them to walk by; and if
they sin against him, then he is their reprover, and also their condemner and
chastiser.

And again, you say in your paper, that none are to minister, but those who are
reconciled to the Church, and have the approbation of the Elders. Now the
Scripture says, that God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, and
not to the Church, I do remember no such Scripture. Now Christ the Light
within, he will not give his power and authority out of his own hand to any man
or men; for unto him alone is all Judgment in Heaven and Earth committed in
matters of conscience; but you say it is abominable pride in any who will not
admit of any Judgment to take place against them whom you do look upon as an
offender; but I say, all power both to judge and to condemn, and also to
justify and to reconcile, it properly belongs to the Light, who is the head in
every member: Wherefore this is my testimony, that you never received your
authority from God, who is the Light within, neither will the Scriptures
justify your authority: Wherefore I would have you in Gods witness seriously
to consider, what you have done in putting that writing of yours upon record,
for that may prove as great a snare to the generation of the Quakers in ages to
come, as the authority of the Church of Rome has been to the Papists in ages
and generations past, and is to this day.

And Friends, this I have further to bear my testimony against, that is, your
imposing such Books upon Friends, as you shall think good to put to print. When
these Books came first into the Country among the Churches called Quakers, then
every member was left free, either to buy them, or to let them alone; and if
Friends did not buy them, nor they could not be sold to others, then they were
to be returned to the quarterly meeting again, and then the thing was well; but
now it is not so: for now the Churches must take them off, and that which is
almost as bad, is this, that the money which is gathered as collection amongst
us, for the relief of the poor, out of that money the books must be paid for,
and so the old English Proverb is fulfilled, the poor must pay for all.
Friends, this is a thing I do believe, was scarce ever heard of, that some
should print packets of several books, and enjoin others to buy them: Friends,
in these things you do not only put a yoke of Bondage upon your Brethren, but
you also rob God of his honor, whose right it is alone both to rule and reign
in the Churches, and to have the dominion over them, because that he by his
invisible spirit and power at first did gather them; for there is so much of
his spirit and power both manifested and given to man and woman, that if they
hear the spirit, and own Christ the Light within, and believe in him, and obey
his voice, that then he will manifest his power, in the redeeming their Souls
from death to life; for it is not Christ the Light in me which can redeem
neither man nor woman; neither is it Christ the Light in any man or men,
neither Churches nor Bodies which can redeem my Soul from death to life;
wherefore your dictates and impositions is no rule for me to walk by, except
that Christ the Light in you can do these things following for me, which Christ
the Light in me, is able to do for me, and also for all that hears his voice
and obeys him. For Christ the Light within me is able to bruise the Serpents
head, and he is able to break down the partition Wall that separates between
God and my Soul, and he is able to open my understanding, and to open the book
of the Scriptures, and also rend the vail of my understanding, and he is able
to make me wiser then all my teachers, he is able to cleanse my Soul from sin,
and to give me true rest and peace, and he is able to sanctify both Soul and
Body, he is able to redeem my Soul to himself, and to keep me in the greatest
hour of temptation that can come upon me, and the Light within is able to
reconcile both man and woman to God again, and Christ the Light within is able
to lead him into captivity who has captivated my Soul, and he is able to give
life to my Soul, and to raise it from under the power of death and darkness,
and to translate it into the Kingdom of Light and Life, he is also able to
break, and he is also able to bind up that which he has broken, and to heal
that which he has wounded, and to convince the whole world of sin, and he is
able to Justify both man and woman.

If either Men, Ministers or Elders, Bodies or Churches, are able to do any of
these foregoing things for me, then shall their dictates and impositions be a
rule for me to walk by.

Now I do believe, that God who is Light, and shows unto man his thoughts, that
he is infallible, and that there is no fallibility attends him, but there is a
fallibility attends all those who are regenerated and born of the Spirit of God
who is Light, and that it is possible for them to err from the Light again, the
enemy which is the power of darkness presenting to them the fruit of the tree
of knowledge whilst they are in Eden, their minds taking delight in it, and
they feeding upon it, the enemy has power to draw their minds out of Eden
again.

Wherefore I do believe, that I ought not to subject my self to what the Church
imposes; for then I must believe, that it is God in them which does impose
those Yoakes of bondage upon their Brethren, and also that the Church is
infallible, and cannot err, which thing I do not believe, for then I must
believe these several particulars following.

First, I must believe that they are as infallible as God is, and that it is as
impossible for them to err, as it is for God to err. Secondly, That no man
nor woman shall ever attain to any higher measure of the grace of God then
they, and that they are come to the highest Revelation that can be attainable
by the Spirit of God. Thirdly, And that there is no more to be made known by
the Spirit of God, in the Sons and Daughters of men, but what is already made
known to them. Fourthly, Or if there be any thing more to be revealed by the
spirit of God, that God will make it known to them, and to none else: the which
thing I cannot believe.
Friends, I would have you seriously to take into your consideration some of
your Doctrines and Principles which are commonly preached amongst us, how they
can stand with Gods Sovereignty, Dominion, and Glory, that either the Seed or
God should arise in man.

Whether the Light or Spirit, Seed and God, be not all one and the same thing?
And how came this Seed of God to be under, or beneath in man? And by what shall
this Seed or God in man, be raised again? and from whence shall that power
come, the which shall raise up God or the Seed in Man into his Dominion again,
if he has lost his Kingdom in man, seeing that you preach, that the Seed, of
God must be raised in man?

And whether the appearance of God in man, to man by his Spirit, be not for the
quickening and raising of man, both Soul and Body, out of a state of bondage and
captivity; and not for the raising of God or the Seed out of bondage or
captivity, for the Light or the Creator has not been in bondage and captivity,
but the whole Creation that God made in man, that has been both in bondage and
captivity, being under the power of Darkness, for God has not lost, but the
Gospel has been hid in God, whilst man and woman has been lost.

You see, and if you can either vindicate or justify some of your Doctrines or
Practices, and also your Authority, either by the spirit of truth, or the
Scriptures of truth, or the form of sound words, otherwise it is high time for
you to lay aside your preachings among the people called Quakers, and come and
sit down with them in silence again. Let the Eleven Elders, or any of them, or
any that join with them, write me an Answer for the vindication both of your
Authority, Doctrines, and Practices.

For man in the beginning was created in the Light, and the Darkness was near
him, but yet the Light had dominion over him, and it was his habitation; but
Adam went out of Eden in the day of his transgression; and then God cursed the
Serpent, and he also judged man for his disobedience, and he was driven out of
the Garden because of his sin and transgression: but still God kept his
dominion in the Garden over man to his condemnation; and he placed the flaming
Sword at Edens gate, to keep the way of the tree of Life, against the first man
Adam, so long as he did abide in a state of sin and transgression.

Friends, the Kingdom of Heaven is within all men and women, and Heaven is
above Hell, and the Light is above Darkness, in all the Sons and Daughters of
men, and Life is above death, and truth is above error; and God that made the
world, is in the world, and above the God of the world; and the Light is the
higher power, and Gods Throne is above the Devils in all the Sons and Daughters
of men, yea in the wickedst of men, the seed in both man and woman, it is both
God and Christ, and it is above the seed of the Serpent in all, as he is in
himself, and his dominion is over all, who is God blessed for ever.

The seed is to redeem, and not to be redeemed, the soul is to be awakened, and
to be quickened by the seed that never sinned, and to be raised from under the
power of death, and to be brought up into dominion by the spirit of Life over
the power of death; for the seed within must bruise the Serpents head within,
and deliver the Soul from under the power of death within: for the seed is to
quicken, and not to be quickened; and God is to raise, and not to be raised:
Gods Throne is established in Justice and Judgment in wicked men over them to
their condemnation, because of their sin and transgression, and his Throne is
also established in love and mercy over them that obey him.

The Light is to descend, and the day spring from on high is to visit the souls
of the Sons and Daughters of men, for they are to be lifted up by the arm of
Gods power revealed from Heaven, for man had his habitation in God once, but
man lost his habitation in God, but God kept his habitation in man: for the
power of God in man, he is above the Devils power in man; for God that made man
is in him, and man is not above his maker, nor the Creature is not above his
Creator. God who made all things by the word of his power, and man also in his
power, this God was never disthroned, but man was dispossessed of his
habitation in God, in the day of his transgression against God; for the Mount
Sion is above Mount Sinai, and the heavenly Jerusalem is above the house of
Bondage, and God who is the Judge of all, he is in all, yea and above all, that
is in man, or ever was in man, who is God comprehended in himself, blessed for
ever, Amen.

For God never lost his Kingdom nor Dominion in man, although the Devil and man
both lost their first habitation in God; and the Devil is never like to enjoy
his again; but there is hopes for man and woman, through their believing in the
Light, and receiving of the truth, for them to receive life again: Wherefore I
do own the Light, the Life, the spirit and power in man to be both the
resurrection and the life, as he is in himself, and he is also both man and
woman's redemption, as by his power within their souls comes to be raised from
death to life again; but I deny the resurrection of the power and spirit of God
in man or woman, or that ever the seed, which is Gods spirit and power, that it
ever came under the Devils power in man or woman, or that ever the Devil had
dominion over God; wherefore God is not to arise in man nor woman, but we are
to be raised by the arm of his power revealed from Heaven within, for the
man-child has been caught up to God in this long night of Apostasy which has
been over the Gentiles; wherefore Christ the Light within, stands in need of no
blessing, for he is everlastingly blessed and happy in himself, without either
beginning of days, or end of life; and there is a blessing to be revealed from
Heaven in the seed, unto all that believe in God and obey him, which is Christ
the Light within; for Friends, the Light in man was never blinded, neither was
the seed by the earthly power never covered, but the Light has all along
discovered man's sin unto him, neither has man's mind been blinded, so that he
could not see, nor yet behold that glory, the which was to be revealed in the
Light, and his mind also was blinded, so as he could no way find power against
sin, that so he might escape the wrath which was due unto him for his sin and
transgression.

For Friends, the power of darkness, which is the Devil, ever since the day he
was cast down from Heaven, he could never get up into Heaven since, although he
may have assumed to do such a thing, but he had power to draw our first Parents
out of Heaven, but it was by their yielding to his temptation, that it came to
be so with Adam and Eve, and so he got the dominion over both their Souls and
Bodies, and all that God had made by his power within them, and if the Serpent
could never get up into Heaven again, then I am sure he could never get above
Heaven, nor yet above the Seed, nor yet above the Life which is the Light in
every man and woman; but the Devil has had dominion over us both Souls and
Bodies; for we being by sin and transgression made partakers of his nature,
were Children of wrath as well as others. Wherefore the Seed is not to arise in
man, nor yet to be brought up into his Kingdom, except God had lost his Kingdom
and power in man, the which he never did: and if he had lost his Kingdom and
power in man, from whence shall that power come, that shall bring him up into
his Kingdom and power again: but man and woman they are to be awakened by the
Lords Trumpet, which from Heaven within has sounded, and the Souls which have
been dead as to God (and buried in the grave of sin and death, which both was
and is, the power of darkness, which is the Devil) they are to hear the voice
of the Son of God (from within) who have slept the sleep of death under the
power of sin, they are to arise from the dead by hearing and obeying the voice
of the Son of God within, and so read Lazarus the Figure, who had been buried
four days, how the Trumpet sounded from Heaven, and Lazarus was raised, and so
must we be raised, by the same voice, spirit, and power, must we come both to
feel and witness Christ the Light within, to be our resurrection and our life,
by feeling and receiving his power revealed from Heaven within, to the raising
of our Souls out of the grave of death and sin, the which both our Souls and
Bodies have been buried in; for it is we that are to be raised from under the
bondage of corruption by the Spirit that never sinned, nor yet saw corruption;
for its we that have been sown in weakness, that are to be raised by the arm of
Gods power revealed; for its we that have been sown in dishonor, which are to
be raised up by the spirit of Glory; for its we that have born the image of the
earthly man, who are to bear the image of the heavenly man, as our Souls come
to be raised from death to life again: for it was the first man Adam who was
made a living Soul, that was degenerated, and by reason of his sin and
transgression from the life, was alienated, and he also by the power of death
was captivated; therefore it is the first man Adam that is to be both awakened
and quickened, and raised by the arm of Gods power revealed from Heaven within;
and he must also receive power from the second Adam, who is a quickening
spirit, and the Lord from Heaven, by which he comes to be made willing to put
off the old man and his deeds, which is the power of darkness. And so the first
man Adam comes to be restored to God again, by his putting on the new man, as
he witnesses, being regenerate and born again of the spirit of God.

And so here follows a relation of something that passed between Thomas
Manning the Baptist and I, and also a declaration of the ground and main
difference that arose between some of the Quakers and I, before I did disown
the body of the Quakers; it was, because that I said, that I did not own
Justification nor Condemnation by Christ, that dyed without the gates of
Jerusalem.

And here follows the Copy of a Paper, the which Giles Barnadiston gave to
me, signifying, that both he and others did disown my words, and also my answer
to the paper which he gave me, the which were all sent to the quarterly meeting
at Ipswich; And also the answer that they sent me, and also the several
particular causes; for the which I both did and do, disown my self to be a
member of the Body or visible Church called Quakers.

And also 23 Questions or Queries for any of them to answer, who question the
work of God in me. I will ask them one Querie, and let them answer me; and let
them ask me another, and I shall answer them; any of those who look upon
themselves to be in the Ministry, and own the Authority or Superiority of the
Eleven Elders.

Thomas Manning,
I own Salvation by no other Christ, but by him that dwelt in that Body when it
was upon the Earth, who, through the Eternal Spirit, offered up his Body a
Sacrifice once for all, that so he, by the Grace of God, might taste death for
every man, and so became Eternal Salvation to all them that obeys the measure
of his spirit revealed in the Light of Christ which is in them; and so I own
him to be the Christ and the Savior to the ends of the Earth: and this both
was, and is Christ the Light within, the hope of Glory.

Jeffery Bullock.


This testimony of mine, as concerning him who both was and is the salvation of
the ends of the Earth, was owned both by William Dewsbery and Robert Duncon,
who are two as ancient Friends as most are in England, and as well approved of
in their Ministry by Friends.

Jeffery Bullock,
I have received thy testimony and declaration of thy Faith, but as soon as I
looked on a few words, I soon espied thy Subtilty. Thou say, that thou ownest
Salvation by no other Christ but by him that dwelt in that body when it was
upon the earth, how can thou prove that Christ in that body, to be Christ
without that body; for both that body and spirit in that body, makes that man
Christ Jesus. For if that spirit in that body, be Christ without that body,
then that Eternal Spirit dyed upon the Cross, because Christ dyed for our sins
according to the Scripture; but I think thou will not say the Godhead is dead,
because thou say, it is revealed in every man; so then, if that spirit in
that body, be not Christ without that body, but both body and spirit make that
man Christ Jesus. And thou ownest salvation by that spirit only without that
body, thou ownest not salvation by Christ. O Jeffery! why wilt thon deny the
Lord that has bought thee with his own blood, and bring upon thy self
destruction? for the Godhead dyed not, as I have told thee, but that body was
made a curse by dying that cursed death upon the Tree, to take off the curse
from them that believe that sacrifice for sin, which was a sweet smelling
savor to the Lord. By which body offered up, he has for ever perfected them
that are sanctified; which sacrificed body and offered up blood, if thou
reject, how can thou have thy cursed sins pardoned, thy defiled conscience
purged; for without shedding of blood there is no remission. But I will tell
thee my Faith, I do own salvation comes alone by that man Christ Jesus, the
only Son of God, who was born of that Espoused Virgin Mary, who was Crucified
at Jerusalem; by which cursed death, he did there make an atonement for all,
and full satisfaction to God the Father, for the sins of all that believe in
him from the heart, and obey his holy will revealed in his word, the holy
Scriptures of truth that are able to make the man of God wise unto salvation, 1
Pet. 2.24. Heb. 10.14. Joh. 20.31. Mat. 7.24,25. Gal. 3.13. I could mind thee
with many more Scriptures, if thou would hearken thereunto.

The holy Spirit of God I own and esteem; for it is that which, First, made me
to see into my sins, and my cursed estate by sin, according as is made known in
the Scriptures of truth. 2ly. It did shed the love of God abroad in my soul,
how that Christ had dyed for my sins. 3ly. He did help me to lay hold upon the
hope set before me, without whose help I can do nothing. 4ly. He did work in my
Soul a cruel hatred against all known sins, in thoughts, words, and works. 5ly.
He did work in my Soul a great love to my God, and to his Son Jesus, to his
Children, to all known good, in words and works, in my self and others. 6ly. He
did assure me of redemption of my soul, and forgiveness of my sins through the
blood of my Lord Jesus, that was shed upon the Cross for me. 7ly. He did seal
home the promises of Eternal Glory to my Sonl, promised in the Scriptures of
truth to the Sons of God. 8ly. He did work in my Soul holy reformation, and
godly resolutions, to do and obey whatever my God shall make known unto me to
be his will and mind by his spirit and word the Scriptures, and that unto
death. 9ly. It did fill my Soul with praises to the God of my life night and
day, praising him in the spirit, admiring his love to my soul, in redeeming it
with so great a price, as the blood of his own Son. 10ly. The holy spirit did
also comfort me and quicken me, and made me greatly to rejoice, with Joy
unspeakable and full of Glory; the which spirit of my God still is with me, and
gives me that peace no man can take from me; by whose help, my desire is to my
God, I might still be preserved, and hold fast the precious faith which I have
attained, through the Grace of God, and my Lord Jesus Christ, until he shall
come in flaming fire, to render vengeance upon the wicked, and punish with
everlasting destruction from his presence, them that obey not the Gospel of
Christ; and be admired of them that believe.

Thomas Manning.


This Testimony of mine is owned by God the Father, by his Son Jesus, by the
holy Spirit, by the holy Scriptures, by the holy Prophets, by the holy
Apostles. Thou provest thine by two of thine own Friends, God the Father I
know, his Son Jesus I know, his holy Spirit I know, the holy Scriptures I know
to be the mind and will of God; but who these thy Witnesses be I know not; but
if they be Angels come from Heaven, if they despise the blood of my Lord Jesus
Christ, or declare any thing contrary to his will revealed in the Scriptures of
truth, I do not own them.

Thomas Manning,
I received thy paper, and thou say, as soon as thou had looked on a few
words, thou said thou soon espied my subtilty, Friend, I had no subtilty in
my heart, but I plainly wrote the things I own; thou ask me how I can prove
Christ in that body, to be Christ without that body: I can prove it both by
Paul's testimony, and also by the same spirit of God the which Paul did prove it
by, who told the Corinthians, the Fathers drank of the Rock that followed them,
and that Rock was Christ; and he also told the Colossians, that the mystery
which had been hid from ages and generations past, was Christ within, the hope
of glory, and also Christ's visible appearance came in that present age; but his
invisible appearance had been hid from ages and generations past; for Christ
was with his Church in the Wilderness.

Again, thou say, that body, and spirit in that body, makes that man Christ
Jesus. Now the spirit in that body was the Godhead, and thou say, that the
Godhead dyed not, and thou speak true, for so say I: so then it was only
that part which the Holy Ghost took from the woman, the which died, and not the
Godhead which both was and is the spirit of God; for it was God and the Woman
that made the visible man Christ; for he was made of a Woman, made under the
Law, as says the Scripture; for Mary she knew no visible man.

Now cursed be that spirit that shall deny the blood of Christ, or the end for
which Christ's body was offered up, and blood was shed: for I do believe that
all the world were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, and that all men
were freed from their outward offerings for sin, by that one offering; and that
after the shedding of the blood of that visible man Christ upon the Cross,
there was to be no more outward killing the sacrifice, nor yet shedding of
blood for remission of sins.

But this was not the flesh and the blood which Christ speaks of when he was
upon the earth, when he said He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, he
dwells in me, and I in him: and he was then upon the earth, as a man, like
one of us, sin only excepted, when he spoke these words. So Friend, if thou
know no other body, nor blood to feed upon, but that which dyed and was shed
out of Christ's body without the gates of Jerusalem, thy Soul may perish, for
all the knowledge which thou have of the Scriptures. Now Christ, in the days of
his flesh, exhorted people to believe in the Light, and to bring their deeds to
the Light, that so they might be made Children of the Light; for he knew that
they were Children of the Darkness, and God he is Light, and shows unto man his
thoughts, who said, look unto me all yea ends of the earth, and be saved, and
some of these words were spoken by the Lord in his Prophets before Christ's body
came into the world, and the same that ever was, the Savior now is, and not
another; for God is not changed, neither is his salvation changed.

Again, thou say, thou know est the Father, and thou know the Son, the
holy Spirit. Friend, consider well what thou have written; and let Gods Spirit
in thee try thy words, whether thou have thy knowledge of God, and his Son, and
holy Spirit, in and from the Spirit of Revelation, for Christ says, no man
knows the Father save the Son, and he to whom the Son reveals him; and Paul
says, it pleased God to reveal his Son in him; so then there is no true saving
knowledge, of neither Father nor Son, but in and through the Spirit of
Revelation: so consider, and let Gods witness judge in thee, whether thy
knowledge stands in the Light, or in the Letter, in the mystery, or in the
history, in the word, or in the words, the which were given forth from the
word, for the words were given forth in time, from the word which was before
time was. And so remember what the Jews said to Christ (who had the Scriptures
before the Gentiles) how they said, that they were Abraham's Children, and God
was their Father, and they were Moses his Disciples, and that God spoke to
Moses. But they speaking concerning Christ, said, as for this fellow we know
not whence he is; and these were the blind professing Jews who had the
Scriptures; but they had neither heard the voice of God at any time, nor yet
seen his shape, as Christ in plain words tells them; and yet how great was
their boasting; and all this while they had but a blind zeal, for a vail of
thick darkness was over their minds and understandings.

Again, thou say, the holy Scriptures thou know to be the mind and will of
God, then thy soul, and mind, and understanding, they must be in the mystery
and spirit of God which gave forth the Scriptures; and if it be so with thee,
then I would desire thee to tell me these following questions.

1. What is Eden? and where is it? and what was the Garden wherein God walked?
2. What is the tree of knowledge, and where it is? and what is the fruit it
bears? and from whence does the fruit come? and what is that which feeds upon
the fruit which the tree of knowledge bears? and what were the eyes that were
open in Adam and Eve after sin and transgression by them were committed?
And what were the Books which are to be opened? and how many Books to be
opened? and what is the Vail which Paul speaks of, which is to be done away?
and what is the enmity which God has put betwixt the Woman and the Serpent?

Jeffery Bullock.


Friend, Paul's Ministry stood in the Spirit, and not in the Letter, and he
desired only to know Christ according to the spirit, but not after the flesh;
for that which is born of the flesh is flesh; and that which is born of the
spirit is spirit, as says the spirit of God.

This following was given me (from the Quakers) to subscribe, which I refused
to do, for reasons inserted.

FOr the clearing of the precious truth of God, professed by us his people
called Quakers, from the occasion of reproach and stumbling, given by Jeffery
Bullock, his pernicious doctrine, in affirming, That he neither expects
Justification nor Condemnation by that Christ that dyed, or was put to death at
Jerusalem: These are to certify all Friends, and Friendly people whom it may
concern, that we testify against this Doctrine, as stated by him, as both
pernicious and Antichristian, and contrary to plain Scripture, and the constant
testimony faithfully born amongst us from the beginning; for neither do we
profess and preach two Christ's, nor yet own Justification by any other Christ,
or in any other Name, but by and in the Name of that very one Christ of God, to
whom the holy Prophets and Apostles gave witness in the scriptures of truth,
who was miraculously conceived by the Holy Ghost, overshadowing the Virgin
Mary, and was Crucified, and put to death in the flesh (without the Gates of
Jerusalem) but quickened by the Spirit, whom God raised from the dead, 1 Pet.
3.18. We must confess with the holy Apostles, that even by him, (to wit that
very Christ) all that believe, are justified from all things from which they
could not be justified by the Law of Moses, Acts 13.30,39. and that remission
of sins, Justification, and Salvation, as then preached in the name of the same
Lord Jesus Christ, and by his Eternal power and spirit of God, so the same is
constantly believed and witnessed amongst us. And although the best fense that
we can suppose, or gather, as aimed at by the said Jeffery Bullock, is, that it
is not only by the suffering and death of Christ, nor by a mere literal
knowledge of him, as after the flesh, that men can be either completely
justified or saved from sin and death, any more then the Apostles or primitive
Christians were; but by his life, spirit and power, operating in them. And so
by a living and spiritual knowledge of Christ, as after the Spirit; which
though the truth of this we cannot but own and justify, yet this cannot excuse
the aforecited Doctrine, as laid down, which denies both Justification and
Condemnation by that Christ that dyed; for that supposes another Christ for
that end, and so two Christ's. And therefore the said J. B. ought to see his
error, and call back and recant of his words, which have given occasion of
stumbling in Sudbury. Whereas, the very Christ, the Son of God, is but one,
though he has often and variously manifested himself from the beginning, as
both before he came in the flesh, and in the fullness of time in the flesh, viz.
that body that was prepared for him to do the will of his Father in; and since
in spirit for the everlasting comfort and salvation of all them who believe in
his name and power, which by his divine Light within is livingly revealed; And
we confess, that this Son of God, our Savior Jesus Christ our Lord was made of
the Seed of David, according to the flesh, and declared to be the Son of God,
with power according to the spirit of holiness by the resurrection from the
dead: Romans 1.3,4. And that that very Christ that came of Israel, as concerning
the flesh, is God over all, God blessed for ever, Romans 9.5. So that he is truly
and inseparably God and Man, according to the Scripture: And even that very
Christ who was crucified and slain, has God lifted up with his right hand, to
be a Prince and a Savior, Acts 5.30,31. And God will judge the the world in
righteousness, by that man whom he has ordained, Acts 17.31. So we must
confess with the Apostles, that to us there is but one God, the Father, of whom
are all things, and we in him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all
things, and we him: And further, we cannot own any such Doctrine or Words, (by
whomsoever spoken) as tend to undervalue the sufferings, death, and blood of
Christ, Romans 5.10. for not only a reconciliation was declared and made through
his death, but all his suffering and his being the one universal Offering and
Sacrifice, did contribute to man's redemption, and the salvation to all that
truly believe in his Name, Heb. 2.17. though without the washing of
regeneration, and being born again of the living word and spirit of life, none
do really partake of eternal salvation, or that redemption which is obtained
through the blood of Christ, who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us
from all iniquity.

This is a true Copy. Giles Barnardiston: John Cutler. William Welsh. Joseph
Ridlesdale. Samuel Cooper. John Cornwell.


Friends, What you have written in contradiction to my words, it is both Romish
and Antichristian Doctrine, and contrary to the Scriptures of truth, and form
of sound words.

Now it is no where written in the Scriptures, that we shall either be
Justified or Condemned by that Christ which dyed without the Gates of
Jerusalem; but it is written, by Grace ye are saved, and by Grace ye are
justified; and it is also written, by the Light of the world ye are condemned;
and not by Christ that dyed without the Gates of Jerusalem.

Now the same spirit which quickened that body of Jesus when it lay under the
earth, yea, and the same God that raised up that body, do I own to be both my
Justifier, and also my condemner, if I sin against him. Yea, the same God which
raised up Lazarus out of the Grave, who dwelt in Christ's Temple when it was
upon the Earth, the same God do I own salvation by, that is he the which both
did and does, show unto man his thoughts, who said, look unto me all ye ends of
the Earth, and be saved; for I am God, and there is none else; and he did not
bid the ends of the earth look to him that was to come, but unto him who was
already in them, and did show them their thoughts; and this was not Christ's
outward visible appearance, but it was Gods invisible power which was in the
Sons and Daughters of men: the fullness of which power and spirit, dwelt in
Christ's body when it was upon the Earth. And this is God who was in the
beginning, and also before the beginning, and also without beginning of days,
or end of life; and this is the salvation of the ends of the earth, who never
dyed, otherwise you must conclude the Godhead dyed, as well as the visible man
Christ; the which is blasphemy for any to affirm; and it is quite contrary to
the Scriptures, the which says, that he, through the Eternal Spirit, offered
up himself a sacrifice once for all; and he also gave up his Soul an Offering
for sin: And I do also believe, there is something of God in me, that is both
without beginning of days or end of life; and this is a measure or
manifestation of the Spirit of God, the fullness of which dwelt in Christ's body
when it was upon the Earth; and this is both my God and Savior, and Justifier,
if I obey him, and also my condemner if I sin against him. Now the Law of Moses
that was never written to the Gentiles, neither had the Gentiles any command
from God, for the observation of it, therefore the Gentiles they could never be
Justified by it, because they had no command for the keeping of it; but on the
contrary, the Gentiles were reproved by Paul for the observation of it* Now God
was in all those visible appearances amongst the Jews, yet it was by his
invisible power by which he wrought those signs and wonders amongst the
Egyptians; and it was by his invisible power, by the which Aarons rod budded,
the pot of Manna was preserved: And it was the Lords invisible Glory which
filled the Tabernacle, and unto Israel he appeared as a Fire by night, and as a
cloud by day; and after this God spoke to Moses within the cloud, and after
these things he invisibly appeared, and dwelt in Solomon's Temple; and then at
last, the Holy Ghost overshadowed the Virgin, and God prepared a Temple for
himself by his invisible spirit and power, the which Temple was the Son of God,
by generation from God; in which Temple there dwelt the fullness of the Godhead
bodily; and when the Son of God, or the Lamb of God, had finished his testimony
in this world, he then did, (through the Eternal Spirit which dwelt in his
Temple) offer up himself a sacrifice once for all. Then was all outward Temple
worship ended; for the glory of God out of Solomon's then departed; For then the
Vail of the Temple was rent in twain, and also the worship was ended, although
the Lord once gave the Jews a command for the observing of it. But as for the
Gentiles, they never had no command from God for the practicing of those
things; therefore what they did, they did it by imitation, and not by
commandment.

Now Christ he was not the Son of David, as by generation from David, as he was
a visible man; for Mary she was a Virgin, and knew no visible man: but Christ
he was the Son of David by generation from God, he being begotten by the spirit
of God in the Womb of the Virgin, and this was the spirit of God in David, from
which spirit David received power to be regenerated and born again; and this
was the flesh of David, and this was David's Lord.

For Christ he was not the Son of a visible man, but he was the Son of a
visible woman, he being begotten by an invisible power and spirit: now if
salvation be by that Christ that dyed without the Gates at Jerusalem, then are
all the Gentiles perished that were in the world before that body came into the
world; for I do not read, that ever any of the Gentiles saw the coming of that
visible man Christ, whenas the world had continued near four thousand years
before he came into the world: yea, all the Jews that were in the world before
that body came, and did not see the coming of that body, nor own it when it did
come, they likewise are perished; yea, all both Jews and Gentiles, the which
have been in the world since those days, who have not owned him to be the
Christ and the Savior of the world, who dyed without the Gates of Jerusalem,
they likewise are all perished; but, and if salvation be by him that shows unto
man his thoughts, and reproves man, and also convinces him, and condemns
man and woman for their sin, and shows unto them their state and condition,
then the Savior and Salvation of the ends of the earth, has been both within
man and woman ever since the day of their first creation.

For, although the Lord came in Abraham, and begot the type in Sarah, when it
ceased to be with Sarah after the manner of women, even so the Lord, when the
fullness of time was come, he, by the Holy Ghost, overshadowed the Virgin Mary,
and he begot the Antetype in her, who was the end of all Types, without her
having any knowledge of a visible man, but these things did but little concern
the Gentiles, although we have the history of them, only all the world was
freed from their offerings for sin by that one offering; and also they were
outwardly reconciled to God by the death of his Son, and so there was to be no
more outward offerings for sin, but we must be redeemed, justified, and also
saved by a measure of the same life that dwelt in the Son; in which life, the
Son of God offered up his Soul and Body to be crucified to the death, a
sacrifice once for all, then no salvation to the Souls of the Sons and
Daughters of men, by him that dyed without the Gates at Jerusalem, but in and
by him alone, who was both without beginning of days, or end of life, a
measure or a manifestation of which spirit, is given to every man, wherein
alone stands man's Condemnation, Redemption, Justification, Life, and Salvation,
Restoration, and Sanctification; and this Salvation was in the world before
Christ's body came; and the same that ever was the Savior, now is, and not
another: so he that dyed without the Gates at Jerusalem, was the man in the
mystery, the mystery being in him, he being one with the mystery, was
comprehended by the mystery; and so he was the Christ of God, being one with
the Spirit of God, but it was the woman's part that dyed, that was his Soul and
Body; for it was Eve that had been in the transgression: but the man's part,
which was the Godhead that dwelt in that body, he never sinned, nor yet saw
corruption; therefore he never dyed, and that both was and is he, which ever
lives, and was without beginning of days or end of life.

Now Christ, as he was a visible man, and made of a visible woman, made under
the Law, he internally dyed, as to his Soul and Body, and did put an end to all
outward external sacrifices and services. But the Christ, the mystery, the
light, the life, and the word of eternal life, and the salvation of the ends of
the earth, the which dwelt in that body, he never dyed. Now I do deny, that
ever any man or woman, either was or shall be, redeemed from death to life by
that blood, the which was spilt without the Gates at Jerusalem, or that ever
any did drink of that outward blood, or that ever any were inwardly cleansed
from sin by that outward blood, and what are all outward cleansings, if so be
the heart and conscience be defiled. Wherefore every one that comes to be
inwardly cleansed, it must be in and by the receiving and enjoying a measure of
the same life, the fullness of which life dwelt in Christ's body when it was upon
the earth, the which spirit God has poured forth upon all the Sons and
Daughters of men, wherein alone, Life and Salvation, Justification and
Condemnation is placed, and this is Gods own spirit, and the invisible man
Christ, whom God has by his own right hand exalted in the Sons and Daughters
of men, both as a Prince and a Savior. First as a Prince, in manifesting his
power to condemn both man and woman because of their sin and rebellion, and
disobedience against him: And secondly, as a Savior, both to redeem them,
justify them, and also to save them, if they come to have their minds turned
to him, and to believe in him, and obey him.

Now it is the man's part, wherein the first man Adam was created, the which God
has exalted as a Prince and a Savior, that is he which never sinned; and not
Eve the woman's part, which by the Serpent was lead into sin and transgression,
that part has not God exalted as a Prince and a Savior; for she was to be
redeemed both Soul and Body; and so it was Eve the first woman which was in the
transgression, and not God, who made the first man Adam a living Soul, which
Soul was lead into transgression, by yielding to the council of the Serpent in
Eve, the first woman; for there is a Soul, or an invisible woman, the which God
did make and place in every visible man; and this is she that has born the
image of the earthly man, and has been one with the Serpent, and now she is to
be begotten, regenerated, and born again of the Spirit of God, who is the
heavenly man; and this is the seed, the which every invisible woman, in every
visible man, is to bear, which seed alone has power to bruise the Serpents
head in every visible man and woman; and this must be done before she can truly
bear the image of the heavenly man again.

For Eve she was a visible woman, but she conceived and bore the first
invisible man, who was that son of perdition; and the power of darkness, which
brought death over all that God had made in the Sons and Daughters of men, as
to the invisible creation of God; but the Lords promise both was and is, that
he would create all things new, and the Lords new Creation it is invisible; for
although Mary did bear that visible man Christ, who was begotten in and by an
invisible power and spirit; yet she stood in need of God to be her Savior: for
she says, her soul did magnify the Lord, and her spirit did rejoice in God
her Savior; and I do believe, that after she was delivered of that visible man
Christ, that still her God and Savior did remain in her, although that visible
babe was outwardly separated from her; and so I do believe, that whatsoever was
given forth in time among the Jews, as concerning all outward worship, in time
it was ended when Christ's body was offered up, and the belief and faith of all,
must stand in the mystery of that Light and Life which God has now in the
Gentiles revealed; and Antichrists faith and belief, which he has brought in
among the Gentiles in this night of Apostasy, that must be overturned both root
and branch, by the Light which God has revealed.

Friends, I do believe that this writing of mine, that it is written from the
testimony of Jesus in me, and I would willingly hear your Judgment as
concerning it, at our next monthly man's meeting at Sudbury; for it is generally
reported amongst many of the chief Inhabitants of this Town of Sudbury, that I
am disowned by the Quakers, or at leastwise shall be, if I be not already,
because of my blasphemous Doctrine. And that Giles Barnardistons Wife did tell
Dr. Bucher further, that the blasphemy that I held, she trembled to hear it.
This Dr. Bucher told me; so I rest your Friend,

Jeffery Bullock.

Friends, What you have written in contradiction to my words, it is both Romish
and Antichristian Doctrine, and contrary to the Scriptures of truth, and form
of sound words.

For it is no where written in the Scriptures, that we shall be either
justified or condemned by that Christ which dyed without the Gates of
Jerusalem; but it is written, by Grace ye are saved, and by Grace ye are
justified; and it is also written, by the Light of the world ye are condemed,
and not by Christ that dyed without the Gates of Jerusalem,

Now that there is two Christ's, it is plain according to the Scriptures; for
there is both the true Christ, and Antichrist. Now Christ's visible appearance
among the Jews, he was called Christ, who through the eternal spirit in
offering up his body, he ended all the visible dispensations among the Jews;
but it was Gods invisible appearance throughout all ages, the which brought
unto the Sons and Daughters of men, salvation to their Souls, and he is called
Christ within, the hope of glory, and the mystery that had been hid from ages
and generations past. Now the Prophets they did foresee the coming of that
body, which was the Son of God, who was to be the end of all those bodily
sacrifices by which the Jews did expect remission of sins. Now the same God
that raised up Lazarus when he was dead, and also raised up Jesus, or the body
of Jesus, do I own to be both my God and Savior.

Now as concerning the Law of Moses, it did not at all belong to the Gentiles;
but the Gentiles were justified by the Law written in their hearts; and so must
we, or else we must be condemned: for the Law made nothing perfect, as to the
Jews, who had a command for it, therefore the Gentiles could have no advantage
by it, who had no command for the observing of it; but on the contrary, they
were reproved by Paul for observing the Jewish Ceremonies: but where the
Dispensations began, there they also ended.

Now we do no where read of the name Christ before that visible appearance came
into the world; but God said, look unto me all ye ends of the earth, and be
saved, for I am be that shows unto man his thoughts; and he did not bid them
look unto him that was to come, and this was God, who prepared a body for
himself, the which was the Son of God by generation from God, and as a Son he
was obedient to the will of his Father, even unto the death.

Now Christ, he neither came of David, nor yet of Israel, not according to the
flesh, not as to his outward appearance, as he was a visible man; but he came
of David and Israel both, according to the spirit; and this is the spirit whom
God has exalted both as a Prince and a Savior, first as a Prince, to manifest
his power, to condemn both man and woman because of their sin and rebellion,
and disobedience against him; and secondly, as a Savior, both to redeem them,
and justify them, and also to save them, if they come to have their minds
turned to him, and to believe in him, and obey him; for the Virgin Mary knew no
visible: but now, far be it from me, and cursed be that spirit that shall
undervalue the sufferings, death, and blood of that holy, just, and innocent
Lamb of God; but yet I do not believe, that ever any were redeemed from sin, or
purified, cleansed, purged, sanctified, or saved, by that visible body that
dyed, or blood which was shed, without the Gates of Jerusalem.

Now Paul, he that was the Apostle of the Gentiles, he defired to know no
Christ after the flesh: Now the Jews in the days of Christ's flesh said, that
they were Moses his Disciples; but as for this fellow, we know not whence he
is. Now in the Apostles days there was certain Pharisees that had believed,
who taught the Brethren, that except they were circumcised, and kept the Law of
Moses, they could not be saved, Acts 15. Now the Church of Rome says, that we
must be justified, and also saved, by that Christ that dyed at Jerusalem; and
so says the Priests of England, and so also says the body of the Quakers.

And Friends, Antichrist he strives to bring in his Doctrine, and also to be
head over all those invisible appearances that comes from God; but the spirit
of truth says, that Condemnation, Justification, Redemption, and
Sanctification, and Salvation, it is by God alone, who is Light, and shows
unto man his thoughts.

Now Paul's testimony was in the spirit, and not in the letter, but the
Pharisees, the life of their testimony it was in the Letter or Law of Moses,
who with their Doctrine bewitched the Churches, and led them into error, as
you may read Paul to the Galatians, and also to the Corinthians, how he tells
them, that Satan was transformed in his Ministers; for the Book of the
Scriptures both was and is, the fruit which the tree of knowledge bears, both
in their days, and also in ours, they being opened by the spirit of truth.

Friends, it behooves us all to look to our standing, for Antichrist is already
come in amongst us, and Satan is already transformed into an Angel of Light
amongst some of our Ministers, as certainly as ever he was amongst the false
teachers in the Apostles days; and if you will not believe what I have written,
then mind well the writing of those Brethren which call themselves the Eleven
Elders, to the Churches called Quakers, and see if they do not put themselves
into equal power and authority with God. Friends, first the form, and then
Antichrist appears in the form; but if there be no conformity to the form, then
there is no unity to be enjoyed with them that uphold the form. So Friends, my
dear love is remembered unto you all, who expect life and salvation from God,
who is Light, and is invisible, and not from any visible appearances, although
they were good in their time.

I have written you an answer to a paper that was given me by Giles
Barnardiston in short, and I have also sent you another more at large.

The Answer from the quarterly meeting at Ipswich, the 28 th. of the first
Month, 1676.
In the Quarterly Meeting, the papers sent by Jeffery Bullock of Sudbury, were
publicly read; and the meeting of Friends did unanimously own the paper given
thee by Giles Barnardiston, and also subscribed by other Friends to be sound,
and according to the Scriptures and Doctrine of truth held forth by us; but as
to thine in answer to it, the whole Meeting did unanimously judge it to be
erroneous, and contradictory to it self, and full of Confusion and Darkness,
and thy spirit manifest to be wrong. Given forth from the Quarterly Meeting, to
be sent to Jeffery Bullock in Sudbury.

I do disown my self to be a Member of the visible Church called Quakers, for
these particular reasons and causes following; neither do I desire to have
unity, nor to seek to have peace with the Church in those actions wherein they
set up themselves as Judges among, or above their Brethren, as the Eleven
Elders called Quakers, have done.

First, I disown all superiority of men, Ministers, or Elders, in the Churches
called Quakers, or any who assume Authority to themselves above the rest of the
Members, to judge and determine things in matters of conscience, the which
thing only belongs to God in every ones own particular. 2. I disown my self to
be a member of that Body or Church, which says, He that is not justified by
the witness of God in Friends, is condemned by it in himself. 3. Which says,
That none are to Minister or Preach, but such as are reconciled to the Church,
and have the approbation of the Elders and Members. 4. Again, I do disown both
the censures and judgment of that body or Church, who look upon themselves,
that they have both a right and power to judge of errors, and yet have not
power to convince the parties of their errors, before they pass judgment upon
them for those things which they call errors; for Christ, he convinces both
man and woman of their evils, before he either judges them, or condemns them
for their evils. 5. Again, I do disown my self to be a Member of that Church,
who will not admit me to take the liberty of my Conscience, in matters of
Doctrine and Principles in the Worship of God, the outward life and
conversation, that being blameless, and I being satisfied in my own conscience,
that the thing is both right and true, which I do own. 6. I disown my self to
be a Member of that Church, who will not admit me to believe and speak, what
God by his Spirit makes manifest in me; for the Articles of your Church, Faith,
and Belief, they are concealed from me; so that in plain English words, with
sense I cannot them neither read nor understand: so that I question, whether
this practice of the Church does not surpass plain Popery; for they have given
forth the Articles of their Faith, as concerning Doctrine. 7. I disown the
resurrection of the power, or the arising of the Seed, or God in man, or that
ever the Seed or God, was either in Captivity or Bondage, or that it was ever
lost, or that the Light in man was ever blinded, or the Image of God defaced,
or that the Seed has been under the corrupt heart of man, or that ever
Darkness were over it, or that ever God lost his Kingdom in man, as he was in
himself. 8. Again, I disown that to be any true Ministry for God, who in their
declaration, do exhort both Friends and other people to come to a sense, and to
wait in a sense, and to abide in a sense, and continue in a sense; for God is
not a sense, neither is his spirit a sense; for the senses are things that were
made by the power of God; and in the power which made them they are to be
exercised; and so such Doctrine, it is not only unsound, but it is contrary to
the Scriptures, and also the spirit of truth and form of sound words; for it is
old Antichrists Doctrine the which Satan brought in among his Ministers, in
this long night of Apostasy among the Gentiles, when the Churches lost the
enjoyment of the Grace, Manifestation, or Revelation of the Spirit of God, then
they preached from a light and a sense; for the Beasts of the Field, they have
both senses and knowledge; and what pre-eminence has a man above a Beast, if
he be not in God that made him; for all things the which a man enjoys below the
Light, they are accompanied both with vanity, and also vexation of Spirit: for
there is no other God, Savior, Angel, nor Spirit, to be known in and amongst
the Sons of Men; but the Light that shows unto man his thoughts: besides, the
Spirit and Power of Darkness, and what God made in man in the day of his first
Creation. 9. Also I disown my self to be a Member of that Church who are gone
from Christ, the Light of the world within them, the power which God revealed
from Heaven in this our age and generation, wherein alone Life and Salvation,
Justification and Condemnation, is to be known, and are returned back again to
the professors Christ and Savior, who dyed without the Gates of Jerusalem, who
make it their work to declare against all salvation, both by God and Christ the
Light within, the which, the professors of this our age and time do. 10. I
disown all yoaks of bondage, dictates or impositions whatsoever; I disown your
printing of several Books, and imposing them upon all Friends Meetings
throughout this Nation, and enjoining them to take them off; a thing that I
never heard of before amongst any people. 11. I disown your enjoining one
Friend to match with another Friend, or else you will not admit them to come
together; whenas God has made all Nations of one blood: and so remember, that
Moses took an Ethiopian woman to wife, contrary to the command of God, and yet
God justified him for it; and he also condemned both Aaron and Miriam for
speaking against Moses for so doing. Again, the two Sons of Naomy, they either
of them took a Moabitish woman to wife, and I never read they were reproved for
their so doing; and Ruth she proved a good woman.
So Friends, I leave you to the witness of God that is in you; for I little
thought that ever Antichrist would have appeared with such an old Vizard, as to
raise up a body of Judges among us Quakers, in matters of Religion and
Conscience, whenas we had suffered so much already by outward Judges, because
we made use of the liberty of our Consciences in the things of God. Friends, a
thing which was never practiced among the primitive Christians.

Friends, 1. What is the Tree of knowledge, as it is in it self? and what is
the fruit it bears? and from whence does the fruit come? and what is that which
feeds upon it, seeing it is desirable to make one wise? and whether the fruit
be all the same now as it was in the beginning? 2. What was the Eden wherein
the first man Adam was placed? and what was the Garden wherein God walked after
Transgression entered, when he spoke to Adam in the cool of the day? 3. What is
the Enmity which God put between the Woman and the Serpent, and between his
Seed and her Seed? and what was or is the Woman? 4. What was the Man that was
drove out from God into the Earth because of Transgression, seeing the visible
body did remain in the visible Creation, after his transgression, as visible as
it did before? 5. What is the Image of God? or what is the Soul of Man; for
there is a distinction between them; for the one has been Corrupted by the man
of sin, but the other never saw Corruption, nor yet never consented to sin? 6.
Whether Death had any Dominion in the Tree of Knowledge before Transgression?
or whether he took his Dominion in the Tree of Knowledge by man's transgressing
the Commands of God? 7. And what were the Eyes that were to be opened in Adam
and Eve after the Devils temptation had entered them, and they had broken the
Command of God when they became as Gods? 8. Whether the Seed of God, that never
sinned, has been under the bondage of Corruption, and so is to be redeemed
from under Corruption, although he never sinned, nor yet saw Corruption; for
the Seed is God himself? and whether it is not the Soul of Man that has
transgressed, that is, to be redeemed by the Seed, and not the Seed to be
raised, nor yet redeemed, it being both God and Christ? 9. And whether the Lamb
of God was slain before the foundation of the World, or since the foundation of
the World? or what was the Lamb of God, or is the Lamb of God, which was and is
slain, seeing that Christ is without beginning of days or end of life, and he
is the same now that he was in the beginning, and he ever lives, and never
dies? 10. What is the partition Wall? and what does it separate betwixt? and
where is the place it stands? 11. What is the Vail, as it is in it self, which
is over the understandings of people who are in outward profession? 12. And how
shall a man rightly understand, and come to have a certain knowledge in
himself, manifested unto him, whether his Soul feeds upon the fruit of the Tree
which Knowledge bears? or whether it feeds upon the Tree of Life? or how he
shall really come to understand, whether his Soul be under the Dominion of
Life? or whether Satan be Transformed in his Mind, Knowledge, and
Understanding? 13. Whether there be a will or power, in either Man or Woman, to
believe in Christ the Light within, or to receive the truth, they having lost
their first state wherein they had power, but now are found under the power of
darkness by the Light, and in a state of degeneration from God? 14. When is
that Resurrection to be known that Christ speaks of, when they neither Marry
nor are given in Marriage; but are as the Angels of God seeing our visible
Bodies shall ever abide in the dust? and what is that honorable Marriage the
Apostle speaks of, where the Bed is not defiled through Lust? 15. And what is
the Dead that is to be raised in the Sons and Daughters of Men, seeing the Son
of God never dies, but the dead is to hear his voice and live? and how shall
the dead come to receive power to arise? 16. And what are the Two witnesses
that John speaks of, which the Spirit of Life is to enter into before they can
bear a true Testimony for God? 17. Whether the Two Adams are not in the World,
yea, and the man of sin too, who is the Son of Perdition? and whether something
of these Three are not to be found in every Man and Woman? 18. And whether the
Woman that has been in transgression, both in the Male and Female, ought not
to be kept in silence, although redeemed out of transgression; and so the power
of God to speak in all, and she to be kept under subjection by the power that
has redeemed her; and so all to feel the Woman kept in silence, until the
power of God is declaring the work of God in them, which power has redeemed
her? 19. What was the work of the Spirit and power of God in Christ's Body,
whilst his Body was upon the Earth? and what is the work of the Spirit of God
in our Body whilst we are upon the Earth? and whether the power of Darkness
were not in his Body, yea or nay? 20. Whether the power of Darkness, which is
the Original of sin, be not in every Child when it is first born and come into
the visible World, and the power of God also, and yet the Child not guilty of
Original sin? 21. Whether a Man or Woman may not receive the truth, and so by
it come to have their minds, knowledge, and understanding, Baptized with the
Holy Ghost, and yet after this, Satan may transform himself in the hearts,
minds, and understandings of such, as before had received the truth? and
whether such may not have a strong persuasion begotten in their minds, that
they are feeding upon the Tree of Life, whilst they are declaring of words to
others, and yet all this while they are but a feeding upon the Fruit that the
Tree of Knowledge bears, or upon the Scriptures, that were given forth from the
word of life in the days of Old? 22. And whether the power of Darkness does not
remain in a Man or Woman, as he is in himself, after that they are Regenerated
and born of the Spirit of God? 23. What are the Books that are to be Opened,
which John speaks of? and how many Books are there to be Opened?


This Book is given forth by one who has born the name of a Quaker about 20
years, or more, and he still owns the Light in every Man, to be the only rule
for man to walk by; but I own my self to be neither Priest nor Prophet, Apostle
nor Elder, Pastor nor Teacher, Bishop nor Deacon; but an Informer against
Antichrist in his Ministers.

This Book is not to be Sold, but freely given by the Author (he having freely
received this Testimony from the Lord)

Jeffery Bullock.

ERRATA.
Page 1. line. 28. for heart r. hearers, p. 2. l. 38. for sole r. Soul, p. 7.
l. 3. add, And so I would have, p. 8. l. 38. after the word been, add these
words, so blinded that he could not see his sin by the Light; but man's mind
has been, p. 14. l. 35. r. books are there to be opened, p. 15. l. 28. r.
Spirit of our God, p. 16. l. 25. r. and we by him.

POSTSCRIPT.
MY intention in giving forth this Book is That Men should learn to honor the
truth before themselves; and also, for the overturning of all such who look
upon themselves to be equal in power with the truth; and for the discovering
both of your Doctrines and Practices which are contrary unto the truth; and
also for the discovering of the Transformations of Antichrist and his Ministers.

Friends, You do show more Homage, Reverence, and Obedience to the form
outwardly, then you do to the power of God inwardly. Now God requires, that all
men should both Worship, Honor, and Obey the Spirit of Truth, which he has
placed in every man, and has given it them to profit with all: for God has
placed man's Salvation in it. But Friends, in this you do both Worship and Adore
the form outwardly, beyond the power; for when you are come together to a
Meeting, then you can sit down together in silence with your Hats on; and as
every ones mind is turned into the Spirit of Truth, and also kept under
subjection by the power of God; here every one is kept in the true worshipping
of God, although there be never a word declared nor spoken; and yet the men may
keep their Hats on if they please; but, and if any amongst you pretend to be
moved by the Spirit to go to prayer, then both Men and Women, they either stand
up, or else they kneel down, and the Men they all pull off their Hats, which
owns your form of prayer; and herein you do both worship, Reverence, and Adore
the form outwardly, and the words, more then you do the word of Life in your
own particulars, wherein alone the Souls salvation is placed; and thus it has
been the work of the Spirit of Antichrist throughout all ages, to lead people
to give more honor to the form of founding Brass, or tinkling Cymbals, more
then to the power of God that's in them, wherein alone man's happiness stands: So
Friends, I would have you to vindicate this practice of yours if you can,
otherwise it is high time for the Quakers in general, to lay aside their
worship in reverencing and adoring the form outwardly.

But yet I would have none that read this Book to rejoice because that I have
written against the Quakers Ministers; but let those that think they stand take
heed lest they fall. Friends, whatsoever is written or given forth from me in
this Book, which is on my part, it is written either from a measure of that
Spirit which has power to open my understanding, and also the Book of the
Scriptures, or else it is given forth from Satan in me transformed into an
Angel of Light; wherefore to the Light that shines in all your Consciences that
read this Book, do I refer this Book for Judgment. But the Quakers from their
general Meeting say, That I writ from an erroneous and dark Spirit: but that
lies upon them yet to prove. I have yet another Book that is written in and
from the Spirit of God; the tendency of which Book, is for the overthrowing of
all Antichrists Ministers in this Nation, the which will abundantly tend to the
Honor and Glory of God, and also greatly to the outward advantage of the chief
Men of this Nation, and also will bring a Blessing both upon them and their
generation.

If any one has freedom to be at the Charge to Reprint this Book, to give it
away when he has done, he may freely do it.

Jeffery Bullock.

This following is an Abstract of what George Bishop writ against that PAPER of
ORDERS (aforementioned) which was subscribed by Eleven of your Ministers,
(viz.) George Whitehead. John Whitehead. Thomas Green. Thomas Briggs. Alexander
Parker. Josiah Cole. Richard Farnsworth. Thomas Lo. Stephen Crisp. John Moon.
James Parkes.


IN the Apostles days were Pastors, Teachers, Elders, etc. but in this day the
Spirit it self is the Pastor, Teacher, Elder, etc. So that if the Spirit move
any to Declare or Speak, that is the Apostle, Teacher, Elder, etc. So that we
have not now things in the disposition of Persons, nor according to Persons,
but in, or according to that power which moves in every one, which being kept
too, preserves out of the Apostasy, so I know no Pastor, Teacher, Elder, etc.
But as I find moving in any, to any of these things, for that is the Elder, the
Apostle, Teacher, etc. and that which would be otherwise then this, leads into
the Apostasy, and will seek to bring dark night in again, and so will place the
Thing to the Person, and not the Person to the thing; and for my part, if that
day should prevail, or those things which Your PAPER seems to hold forth and
enforce, I have no other Expectation, but that the same exercise we shall
receive at your hands, as we received at the hands of those who would have held
us in Captivity in the day that the Lord first visited us.

The Seed is come, and the Heir in many, who is not to be under Tutors and
Governors, which must not be limited, to turn unto which, or for the good of
which the Ministry was sent, and in which it is to end, it being the end of the
Ministry unto which its Crown is to be laid down, as to that which is worthy;
and this is no derogation to the Ministry. Now for You, because You have
Ministered, and the presence of the Lord has been with You for the good of
those that are to be Heirs of Salvation, to think to settle Your self in the
place of the Heir, and to enforce Your Orders as instead, or over that; this is
not to allow that the Seed is Come, or that it is of age for to abide in the
House for ever. You must not think, that because the Lord has wrought by You,
that therefore he will not work otherwise. This is the Error into which all
have fallen that are turned from the Truth. Therefore seek not to undervalue
that to which You were sent to Minister; nor endeavor to keep under the Seed,
for that will Break You to pieces. The Revelation of God is to his Seed, and
his Secrets he reveals to it, for which he made the World, and for whose sake
it is continued; and now the Seed is raised to reign over all, which will Cast
You out, and the Parable of the Husbandman will be fulfilled upon You. It is
my Love that gives me this plainness of speech; for I am Jealous of every thing
that may bring dark Night over again, or that may hinder Your Work, or lose
Your Reward with the Lord; for the Son must abide in the House for ever, but
not the Servant; therefore take heed how You set up Your Laws and Constitutions
over his Dominion, or how You take upon You to make Laws to his Dominion, who
lives for ever. Many have attempted it, and have been Broken to pieces: and if
You do the same, the same will be Your Portion from the Hand of the Lord.

The END.

