Doctor Chamberlain VISITED WITH A Bunch of his own Grapes, Gathered out of His
own Packet of Letters: To know whether my Answer to his Question gave
satisfaction, and that by his Reply to partake of those rare Gifts of the
Spirit, which he proffered to publish in Blackfriars Church.

Also an Answer to Dr Chamberlains Reply, concerning Sprinkling the Baptized.

By THOMAS BAKEWEL.

DEUTERONOMY. 32.32. Their vine is of the vine of Sodom: and their grapes are grapes
of gall, their clusters are bitter.

London, Printed for John Dallam, and are to be sold at his shop in
Blackfriars near Carter-lane, 1650.

A Visit to Doctor Chamberlain, to make Reply, if he be not satisfied, that the
censure of his Dream fall not on himself, to be left hardened in blindness.
SIR,
SInce I wrote my Answer to your Question, concerning Sprinkling the Baptized,
you have published all your Letters, which you sent to Doctor Gouge about it;
and also a scurrilous Libel, full of railing language, you have Printed with
them.

This railing Rabshakeh says, That this reverend Minister of Jesus Christ
knows not of what spirit he is, and that he has not the Spirit of Christ, nor
of a private Christian; he is none of Christ's Minister, but a Worldling; he is
dumb, and dare not speak; he is not fit to have the charge of Souls: he is
devilish minded, and ought to be cast out, or healed: Christ will not have such
spirits to be Ministers of his Kingdom: He is more for the world, and his own
ease, then for Christ, and your good: He chooses to keep his people in
darkness, lest a stronger then he should come in, and dispossess him, by
bringing in the glorious Light of the Gospel. Thus terming our Ministers to
evil spirits, and himself and his Faction to Jesus Christ, who only is able to
cast them out, and to take possession of the Soul, being the Redeemer of it.

But what is the offense given by Doctor Gouge, for this man thus to rail on
him?

Answ. Nothing but this, Christ, says he, answered all question, and so should
he. But Sir, why did not you come to him for an Answer? How can you endure to
hear this man to rail thus, before you have tried the Doctors faithfulness?
when he so lovingly invited you to come unto him, and if you pleased, to bring
a Friend with you: But your motion was rather for his Pulpit, then for his
Answer, more for division then for satisfaction: rather presuming to teach the
Doctor, then to be taught by him. Now Christ would not answer those that came
to cavil at his Doctrine, Joh. 18.19, 20. nor those that questioned his
Authority, Mat. 21.27. nor his accusers before Pilate, Mat. 27, 12, 14. Also
his Ministers are forbidden to cast pearls before swine, or to give holy things
to dogs, Mat. 7.6. or to reprove scorners, Prove. 8.7, 8.

But this railer goes on, not only against him, but against all other
Ministers that are faithful to Jesus Christ, saying, They are all his fellow
spirits, they are all agreed, and they must all be cast out, and enter in no
more, but into a swinish generation, who dig their way to Hell, with whom they
shall run violently headlong to the deep: Therefore, says he, they are deaf to
hear the Word of God, and dumb to speak the truth thereof, though upon it they
will speak till they foam again: But, says he, see that they do not deceive
you, for they are evil spirits, seeking to devour you: And so he concludes,
saying, Receive this, as from Christ.

Now whom this Railer is, I know not, yet some think him to be one Evins, that
was in Newgate for professing himself to be Jesus Christ; and not unlikely, for
says he, Receive this as from Christ: And also, that stronger man, who alone
is able to call out evil spirits, he applies to himself, or some of his
Faction: But then he seems to recant of all the evil that he has spoken
against the Doctor, saying, Not that I hate him, for I have many Reasons to
love him in truth. But I say, if all were true here spoken by this Railer, what
Reasons can he have to love him in truth? or if false, what a horrible wretch
is he thus to reproach him? But God has made his own Conscience to check his
railing tongue, confessing to have Reasons to love him in truth, and yet they
must not be made known.

Now I shall show that you are led by the same spirit, for these Reasons:
First, You say, That this Raler is a Messenger come from Christ, and that no
man can deny it: which shows, that the same spirit rules in both. Secondly,
This Railer says to you, Set these things in order, and send them to Black
friars: and this also you have done, although with some difficulty, because as
you say of the illiteratenesse of his composure, which he left for you to
perfect; which shows, that you are led by the same spirit. Thirdly, This Railer
says to you, Write, and print, and send them; and this also you have done.
Fourthly, This Railer says to you, See that you use not my name; and
accordingly you have concealed it, although it is very likely you know it.
Fifthly, He rails upon this reverend Minister, notwithstanding be has many
Reasons to love him in truth: so you argue the Doctors friendship, his age his
learning, his exemplary retiredness and strictness of living; yea, and expressly
you say that you love him; and yet one Dream, suggested by the Devil, will make
you to leave him, as you say hardened in blindness, which comprehends all that
the Railer has spoken. Sixthly, You have given such way to this foul spirit,
as to defuse what he has suggested; for the Doctor answered to your question,
concerning Sprinkling the Baptized, that you might come to him, and also bring
a Friend with you, if you pleased: But to the other question, whether it should
be disputed in his Church, he would be better advised, and well he might; for
what Shepherd would suffer the Wolf to dispute among the Sheep? But you, like a
false witness, apply his Answer to the wrong question, and from that false
ground take an occasion to insult over him, and dare him to take advice with
several Divines, and also with the whole Synod, and make it as pulique as he
would: Thus you have published your pride and vanity with less discretion then
your approved Friend, this railing Libeller, who is sensible that his name is
contemptible among the people.

Sir, Having no Reply to my Answer, I shall make bold to speak unto you in your
own words, and language, expressed in your Letters, thus, Was your question to
Doctor Gouge a matter of Salvation, or was it not? If not, why did you so often
reiterate your Letters, with such vehemence for an Answer? and that he would
deal clearly in this business, as he valued the Souls of men? On the other
side, If it was a matter of Salvation, why did you not come to him, when he so
lovingly envited you to come, and if you pleased, to bring a Friend with you
also? Again, either you were ignorant of that point, or not: If not, why did
you propound that question! Is it not your own inference to say, He that asks
advice, is ignorant of the thing he asks advice in? So that if you were not
blind, you would not ask whether it be day. Do not you also say, That all
doubts are for want of Faith or Knowledge? Or did you only propound this to try
the Doctor, whether he was willing to give you an Answer? and the mean time you
remain unwilling to come unto him for it? Will not this be a greater shame to
you, then if you had never propounded that question to him who formerly was
your Shepherd?

Sir, The Railing Libeller, whom you say comes in the name of Christ, says,
That this is a profound question, and most necessary to be cleared, and put
forth, by one who sees the Ax laid to the root of Religion, and the Watchmen
asleep, at this time of distress and distraction amongst the flock of Christ;
some denying this Fundamental Ordinance, to be of any effect, and others deny
it to Infants as lawful, and others deny sprinkling to be of God: Now a full
Answer, says he, to this question will clear all, and heal all doubts and
distractions: Therefore remember your Charge; he has showed that you have set
your hand to the Plough, and if you look back, he says, You are unfit for the
Kingdom of God.

Sir, I long to see those excellent virtues and operations of the Spirit, which
you boast to have received, since you turned Anabaptist: Let not those
transcendent gifts be put under a Bushel, but set those New-Lights on a
Candlestick, to give Light to all that are in the House. Sir, You promised and
proffered to show those gifts to Doctor Gouge, to teach him knowledge; let me
request the same favor also, I hope you will be no respecter of persons in the
things of God: I have waited long for your Answer, therefore rather teach Babes
then Doctors, rather Sheep then Shepherds. Now if you should claim the Popes
title, to be a Shepherd of Shepherds, to teach the Shepherd, and not the Sheep,
I should much doubt that those admirable gifts are but the depths of Satan, as
they speak, Rev. 2 24. whereby he frequently deludes Anabaptists.

Sir, You say, that you wrote to the late King, and I see that you have written
to a Doctor of Divinity: But I hope you do not think it to be a disparagement
to write to them of meaner quality: Is your matter so excellent that no other
men may partake of it? Suppose you were a King, or a Doctor not cast out of the
College, I hope sometimes other men may hear some of your admirable matters,
which only becomes Kings and Doctors to hear.

Sir, I hope your transcendent gifts are not of that quality to perish in the
using: If they be divine gifts, they will increase by using. Now if yours be
such, what hurt is it to impart with them for advantage? If you keep your
Talent in a napkin, you will offend the Lord, who gave it to be improved for
the good of your self and others; but it seems you know this already, and have
told your loving Neighbors of Blackfriars, how that you, being converted,
ought in duty to strengthen your Brethren. Now I hope you will not make such
construction of the word Brethren, as to shut me out of that Brotherhood. Sir,
the Messenger of Christ, as you call that railing Libeller, I hope, has made a
better construction of your Dream, then to leave me also with Doctor Gouge
hardened in blindness; therefore let me hear from you, whether my Answer gave
satisfaction, or not; and if it did, give God the praise: and if it did not, I
desire to know wherein it was wanting, because I desire to have more charity of
you, then to leave you hardened in blindness.

BY Thomas Bakewel.

An ANSWER to Doctor Chamberlains Reply, concerning Sprinkling of the Baptized.
UPon the 24. of March I sent my first P^per to Doctor Chamberlain, that now is
published, and he that received it, promised an Answer in two days; and now
upon the seventh of April his Reply came to me so stufft with Sophistry and
falsity, that it is enough to terrify a gracious heart even in he Repetition
of it.

His first page is a bundle of falsities: He says, That he sent four times to
my house, to return me an Answer, and that I either was not, or would not be at
home: These are all false, he sent but twice; The first time I was at Church,
the second time the Messenger spoke with me, not to return me an Answer, but to
ask me these questions, Why did you not come to hear your Letter read? and why
did you not come to justify it? and did you write it your self, or did some
other help you? Then he says, That I call the seventh of April, being the
Lords day, Palmsunday, which he never heard me; and the Sabbath, which it seems
he will not: and that I tell my friends that I have defied Israel; and that I
should say, none durst answer me; which are both false: And that I should say,
He promised to answer; which also is false, although there was a promise made
by another that it should be done. Then he says, He had no copy of what I
printed, when as there was a whole quire sent him, besides the manuscript that
I sent him; yet he says, He had not known of it, had not another given him
one. But to what purpose are all those falsities, if he were not given over to
the Father of lies? They concern not the point in Controversy. But Mr Doctor,
are these the gifts of the Spirit you boast so much of, to have showed
publicly in Doctor Gouges Church? It is true, they are the gifts of those
lying spirits in the mouths of Ahabs Prophets, 2 Chronicles. 18 21. But Sir, Be ware
of the liars portion, Revel. 21.8.

Then you say, That I am the Cats paw, dabling in Greek: I suppose you speak
comparatively, which having no resemblance, shows your weakness of learning;
for a Cat to dabble in Greek cannot, and in water will not, or at least as
seldom as you dabble in the truth: but I must leave dabling.

Then you trouble your self that Mr Downame should give me his Imprimatur, and
that our Ministers should suffer a Layman to take upon him their Function: How
now Mr Doctor! what do you reprove another, and do the same things? Thou that
say, another should not steal, do thou steal? Thou that judge another,
condemnest thy self for doing the same things: See Romans 2.1, 21. But yet Mr
Doctor I do not take upon me the Ministers Function: Was I ever the mouth of
God to the Congregation, by preaching unto them? or their mouth unto God by
prayer? or did I ever administer the Sacraments to the people? If not, these
are falsely spoken of me, although your self, and other Laymen amongst
Anabaptists, frequently do them: But cavilling Anabaptists have always
something to say against those that are truly orthodox. If our learned
Ministers write any Tract, then they say they have nothing but Humane Learning,
they have not the Spirit; and if any illiterate man shall write against them,
then he wants Learning: but if for them, then say you in your first Letter, God
gives poor Fishermen the Spirit, which he does not to learned Clarks.

Then you would make the world believe that you are of a very humble spirit,
and you deserve not the title of Tyrus: But Pride breaks out, and spoils all,
saying that which you falsely charged me withal, That our Ministers durst not
answer you, there was none so bold; yet still you would have me bear the name,
and keep the vice your self, saying, I presume to answer for Doctor Gouge,
supposing my self the abler man, which will not follow, although it may be
more willing, because it is like he knows the temper of your spirit better then
I.

Then you say that I except against you for asking Dr Gouge a question, because
he is ancient, when as multitude of years should teach wisdom, Job 32.7. and of
whom should we enquire, but of them that take upon them the Office? should not
the Priests lips keep Knowledge? Mal. 2.7. But here, like Corah, you say, he
takes the Office upon him; but beware of Corahs Judgment: See Numb. 16.3.35.40.
You charge him, but condemn your self, doing the same thing: But why did not
you come to learn at his mouth? which is your duty from that Text, Mal. 2.7.
Neither do I except against asking the Doctor a question, because he is
ancient, but because you more required his Pulpit then his Answer; to make
division rather then to seek for satisfaction: Neither is it fit, I say, that
ancient Ministers should be daily troubled with all the vain queries that
Anabaptists may put unto them.

But then you are troubled that I should not give you leave to state your own
question, which was so stated, that the answering of it, as it was, would start
up more questions, which would be endless: Therefore it was my desire to
confine the question only to Sprinkling the Baptized, and leave Infants for
another question: at this you cavil, asking, Whether they must first be
baptized, and then sprinkled, which shows of what spirit you are: as if I
should say, Such a man has married a wife, for which you should accuse me, for
saying, he married her that was a wife at that time to another man. Then you
say, That Doctor Gouge does acknowledge, That Sprinkling and Baptizing Infants
is but a Tradition of the Church: I question the truth of it: But I say they
are such Traditions of the Church as that they are not man's Inventions, nor by
man to be abolished.

Then you come to my first Argument in these words, The Lord foretold, that in
the times of the Gospel his People should be sprinkled with clean water, Ezekiel.
36.25. To this you propound many queries, thus; Whether Sprinkling here be
meant Baptism; or, by clean water, the elementary water; and you be meant
Infants, and the time then be meant the time of the Gospel with the Gentiles,
or the time of the glorious Calling of the Jews: or whether Sprinkling do not
allude to that Sprinkling under the Law, they not knowing John's nor Christ's
Baptism, and whether pure water be not meant the Holy Ghost in the language of
Christ?

To this I answer; Let them be Jews or Gentiles, in respect of Country, bond
or free, male or female, Infants or of full age; all in the Christian Church
have right to Baptism: Neither can this Text look back to the Jewish
Sprinklings under the Law, because it is a Prophecy or Promise to come
hereafter: neither can this be meant of the Essence of the Holy Ghost, to be
sprinkled, which is uncommunicable; and for the graces or operations of the
Holy Ghost, promised to be bestowed in the latter days, they are no where
promised to be by sprinkling a few drops: But, says the Lord, it shall come to
pass, that I will pour out my Spirit, Joel 2.28. I will pour water upon him
that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground, I will pour my Spirit upon
thy seed, and my blessing upon thy offspring, Isa. 44.3. Now see the Apostles
Exposition of these Texts; It shall come to pass says God, that I will pour
out my spirit, Act. 2.17. And, says Christ himself, Out of his belly shall
flow rivers of living water; but this spoke he of the Spirit, Ioh. 7.38, 39.
Neither is it likely that the Promise of Grace, in the fullness of Christ's
Kingdom, should be no more but a few drops sprinkled, which they had when
these Promises were made; so that it remains, that this Sprinkling here
foretold to be with clean water, is the Elementary water sprinkled upon the
Baptized as the outward form, which may signify all that abundance of grace
promised to be then bestowed upon the Christian Church. And Mr Doctor, these
things I am confident shall be accomplished, although you tax me with
Lay-ignorance, and to be talketive; and you believe that these mistakes will
make them to keep the staff in their own hands, and not to suffer such, though
never so zealous and devout, to betray their cause: To this, I know not whom
you mean, but God forbid, that for any private cause, any Power on Earth should
suppress the Truth, although they have the staff of power in their hand. But
then you conclude, All that can be said upon this place is only a Promise what
God will do, and not a Command what man must do. Ans. It may be the outward
form of Baptism by sprinkling of water, for all that; for God may do it by
Instruments: The Pharisees heard that Jesus made and baptized more Disciples
then John, though Jesus himself baptized not, but his Disciples, Ioh. 4.1, 2.
And they came to John, saying, He that was with thee beyond Jordan, baptizeth,
Ioh. 3.26. but not himself. But admit it was Christ himself that baptizeth, yet
it is with the Holy Ghost, when John baptizeth with water, Mat. 3.11. Thus
Christ makes the outward Form by Sprinkling effectual, by sanctifying and
cleansing his Church with the washing of water by the Word, Ephesians. 5.26. And thus
Christ, when he washed his Disciples feet, washed and cleansed their Souls from
sin, or else they had had no part with him, Ioh. 13.8. and yet not without that
outward Form.

But then you are troubled that I should say, That water in the Sacrament
signifies the Blood of Christ, saying, Where does the Scripture say so? But I
say if you take away the thing signified from the Element, you destroy the
Sacrament much like the Papist, who will have the Element of Bread turned into
the very Body of Christ: But in so doing you spoil the Ordinance, as well by
plunging as sprinkling; and yet at the end of this Section, you confess, That
sprinkling the Conscience with the blood of Christ, and washing the body with
water, from the same Text that I quote, Heb. 10.22. comprehends the two
complete parts of baptism; and yet you would drown the sense by the Jewish
washings, saying, They had sprinkling with water, Lev. 14.7. Number. 8.7. distinct
from sprinkling with blood, Exodus 12.22.29.21. and both distinct from baths and
washings, Levit. 15.5. to 27. in diverse other places: And we have under the
Gospel Baptism distinct from the Lords Supper, and the Holy Ghost is punctual,
Ioh. 19.34. But that text only proves, that Christ is our Sanctification and
Justification, signified by that water and blood: see other Texts parallel, 1
Ioh. 5.6. This is he that came by water and blood to be Righteousness,
Sanctification, and Redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. but not punctual to distinguish
the two Sacraments, for one of them to Justify, and the other to Sanctify;
and least of all punctual to distinguish the outward Forms of the two
Sacraments; for suppose you say, here is water, the outward Form of Baptism,
yet Mr Doctor, here is no bread and wine, the Form of the other Sacrament:
Then you say, If the Jews had confounded the sprinkling of water with that of
blood, they would have been negligent: in those things they were to be exact;
and if we should do so, we should soon arrive at spiritual Babel, which is rife
with many who think themselves spiritual. But Mr Doctor, our difference is
between sprinkling and plunging, and we shall distinguish the two Sacraments,
as well as you: And you confess, that the Jews did keep them distinct, that
of water and that of blood, although both were administered by sprinkling: How
much easier is it for us to distinguish between drinking wine, and sprinkling
with water, at our two Sacraments? and yet although the outward parts of the
Sacraments differ, yet thethings signified do not so differ; for says Mr
Perkins on Galat page 214. line 32. Water resembles Christ crucified with all
his merits: The blood of Christ cleanses from all sin, 1 Ioh. 1.7. And also
faith he, The water resembles the inward washing by the Spirit, and both by
Justification and Sanctification, 1 Cor. 6.11. Tit. 3.5. and other signs, as
death, and burial of sin, and resurrection to newness of life: And this is all
that can be gathered both from the Jewish and Christian Sacramental washings
and cleansings, under the Law, and under the Gospel, which does not at all take
away sprinkling the baptized, but rather confirms it to be of God, and not of
man.

Also, you have confessed, That the outward Form and the thing signified
should go together, from many Texts, Matt. 3.11. Mark 1. Luke 3. Act. 1.5. and
2.58. and 10. Yea, God will not do the one without the other; the outward
washing, and the inward sanctification, ought to go together; not the outward
washing alone, but the inward answer of a good Conscience toward God, through
Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 3.21. And yet I smell a design you have in those
expressions drawn from that Text, Mat. 3.7. The Pharisees and Sadduces without
fruits of Repentance were not admitted to the Baptism of water: Hence it may
be you will gather, That fruits must appear on all, before they shall have
the outward Form of Baptism, that you may exclude Infants: it is true, these
Sectaries John refused, as unworthy of admittance till Reformation; but all
other that were willing, were admited: And besides, the case of Infants, whose
Parents are admited, is not the same with those that are converted from
Judaisme, or Heathenisme, to the Christian Faith; the Parents and their seed
are set apart for holy uses, as members of the visible Church; although they
want real infused Holiness, they have a right to the Ordinances: yea, if but
one of the Parents be admitted, the children are holy, faith Paul, 1 Cor. 7.14.
But this point has been so sufficiently cleared by others, that I shall wave
it.

You come to my second Argument: The sign must be visible, to put us in mind
of the thing signified: The token of the Covenant shall be seen, Genesis 9.11,
14. The People being sprinkled, must behold the blood of the Covenant, Exodus
24.8. The senses must be exercised, Hebr. 5.14. but he that is plunged under
water, can neither hear the words of institution, nor see the sign, therefore
unfit to use that Ordinance.

To this you say, Sprinkling is but lately allowed of by the Directory, but not
by the book of Common Prayer: But what of that? Does antiquity of error make
it ever the better?

But you ask, whether by our Rule we do not make a face Christian, yea a
speckled faced Christian, by sprinkling here and there a drop? as if the water
in Baptism were of a staining, and not of a cleansing nature: moreover, says
he, if we allow Baptism, to signify the washing away of sin, as all Catechisms
imply, would you wash the face and outward appearance of sin, and so make an
outside Pharisee-Christian? But I say, would you have the Elementary water go
any further then the outside, you that plunge all over, yet all is but the
outside; and the more of outside in any duty, the more you are Pharisee-like:
and that the outward Form of Baptism by water signifies the cleansing from
sin, I grant; but yet one drop applied to the body in that Ordinance, may
signify the greatest cleansing from sin: and if you stand so much upon your
measure of water in this Ordinance, let me in your next know your quantity,
and by what measure you try the fullness of that quantity, or else I shall
suspect that you hold him most worthy to come to the Lords Table that will
drink most wine, as well as to hold, he is best baptized that is plunged in
most water: The mean time I shall hold, a drop on the face may signify more
grace in the Soul then ever any Anabaptists attained unto. Again, Circumcision
on one part signified mortification of sin in all parts: or else, by your
Argument, when they circumcised one part, they should have flayed the skin off
all over, and where it was not so flayed, the sin was not mortified. These
are your excellent gifts, it seems, you would have published in Doctor Gouges
Pulpit.

But you get you back to the Common Prayer Book, made by the Pope and
Prelates, and to them it seems you will stick: And then you say, It was the
practice of Christ and His Apostles, and those that we call Fathers: But Mr
Doctor, we must have some Proofs; Old Birds will not be catched with Chaff.
But then you ask, Would we have our faces buried with Christ in Baptism, and
baptized into his Death, and have our face only rise with him? or would you
have only an outside death to sin, and resurrection to life in Christ? Col.
2.12. Romans 6.3, 4. Or would you make Christ only a vizzard for your face? But
Mr Doctor, although the Death of Christ and his Burial be called Baptismes,
Luke 12.50. and washing the body when dead be called Baptism, 1 Cor. 15.29.
This cup, says Christ, ye shall drink of: we shall be baptized with those
Baptismes, Mat. 20.23. But I hope Mr Doctor you will not kill your Disciples,
and wash their bodies, and bury them, this is something harsh; it is well it is
but one Doctors Opinion: I thought I had cleared this upon Page 7, and 8. of
the Dippers Plunged.

But you ask, If Infants can behold the sign, and make that use of it; will
they not rather shut their eyes?

Ans. First, All are not Infants, some may be converted from the Turks and
Jews to the Christian Faith that are of full age, and these having their
senses, they ought to use them: although Infants, through the defect of nature,
cannot make use of the sign, nor of the words of Institution; yet it is
damnable for them of full age to stop their ears like the deaf Adder at the
Word of God: see Prove. 28.9. Psa. 58.4. Mat. 13.15. Revel. 2.7.

Again, the words of institution are to be spoken in the act of baptizing;
Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Mat 28.19. Now
for a man or woman to be under water all that while, it may drown them, and he
that shall place these words either before or after, it is his own invention,
and none of Christ's institution: But you harp upon this string, to exclude
Infants, saying, Those that are baptized according to the Scriptures, do both
hear and know them, before they are plunged, although pronouncing the words do
not the work, but the obedience of being baptized in the Name of the Lord. It
seems by these words, that you hold a baptizing in the Name of the Lord before
the outward Form of baptizing by water, flat against the Scripture: see Act.
10.48. and 19.3, 5. And John says, I baptize with water, and he that comes
after me baptizeth with the Holy Ghost, Mat. 3.11. And says he, I baptize with
water unto Repentance, that is, in order to Repentance, in the same Text: And
all that were baptized with water, were not before baptized with the Holy
Ghost, as Simon Magus, Demas, and others: This design is but to exclude
Infants, but I wave it.

You come to my third Argument, for Sprinkling the baptized, because that many
were baptized in their Houses, where Plunging could not be, as Paul and
Cornelius, and others, Act. 9.17.18.10.22.27.48. To this you say, that I do ill
to Father so many untruths in print upon the Scriptures; the Scriptures say
not, that Paul was baptized in the house, but that Ananias entered into the
house, and putting his hands on Him, and immediately he arose and was baptized;
But are you a Teacher in Israel, and know not this? Can you teach others, and
not teach your self? Did Ananias enter into the house where Paul was, and lay
His Hand upon him, and immediately he was baptized? What say you to this word,
Mr Doctor, immediately? or at the twinkling of an eye, or at the very same
instant of time, he was baptized? I think the subtillest Plunger amongst you
cannot find time, out of that word immediately, for Paul to go out to be
plunged in some Pond or River: and besides, Paul was fallen upon the earth, and
was three days without sight, and did neither eat nor drink, Act. 9.4, 9. Now
Mr Doctor, what do you think of this man? was he able to go out? You show
your self a very unskilful Doctor, if you say, Yea; deserving to be cast out
of the College for a Novice: What, neither eat nor drink for three days
together? and in this condition you would have him plunged into a river. Well,
it is a mercy that we have other Doctors of better Judgment, that we may not
depend upon such Novices. But you say, Paul was not to sit still to be
sprinkled, but, says the Text, rise up, why tarryest thou? arise, and be
baptized, Act. 22.16. But where is your Syllogism Mr Doctor? because he being
fallen on the earth, and Ananias hastens him to arise and be baptized, therefore
he went out to some River with his Hands upon him? and all this in the
twinkling of an eye. Well Sir, consider, and lay to heart, who it is that
fathers untruths upon the Scriptures.

And for Cornelius and others, the Text misquoted, which should be, Act. 10.22,
23, 27, 48. where it is said, That Cornelius being warned of God by an Angel,
to send for thee, meaning Peter, to come into his house, and to hear words of
thee: Then called he them in, and he went in and found many that were come
together, and he commanded them to be baptized. Now Mr Doctor what will you do
to evade this truth? I have proved, that they came into the house of Cornelius:
but a Conclave of plunging Doctors cannot show me that they went out to be
plunged: but you say Peter reasoned the business, and then said, Who can forbid
water? he commanded them to be baptized: but it is not said, where, or when: so
then you grant that here is a Command to baptize, being in the house, and no
Command to go out: then which is the way to fulfill the Command, but to baptize
them where they were? and that is in the house of Cornelius: but then you say,
If this was done with water, as is expressed, the Apostles must carry it with
them in Aquavitae bottles, or Rose-water-bottles, to dash them in the face as
soon as they had been taken confessing of Christ: But Sir, how will you make it
out, that Cornelius had no vessels in his house for water till Peter came with
his Aquavitae bottle, or Strong-water-bottle? we look for proof, Mr Doctor,
else you had as good say nothing: But all your hopes is of the Jailer, whom you
suppose is the most likely to be plunged; for you suppose that I have not read
the 30 verse of the 16 Chapter of the Acts, for there it is said, And brought
them out; but I demand to know out of what, for it is said, verse. 32. They
spoke unto him the Word of the Lord: And in the same hour of the night he took
them, and washed their stripes, and was baptized he and all his, straightway,
verse. 33. And when he had brought them into his House, he set meat before them,
verse, 34. And the Magistrates sent to the keeper of the prison to let them go,
and they refused: Therefore that first out of ver. 30. was but out of one room
into another, and the keepers house was in the prison; so that from first to
last the Apostles were not out of the prison, till the last verse, then indeed
they went out of the prison, and entered into the house of Lydia. Now, Mr
Doctor, who speaks contrary to the Text? then you say, the blood of Paul and
Silas: Absurdities must not be put upon the Scriptures: Here you would say
something, although you see an error in the printing, naming the 48 verse, when
as there is but 40 in the Chapter, yet from this you say, that my partiallity
appears in not asking the same questions about washing Paul and Silas, as about
the Baptism of the Jailer and his household, as what vessel had they? and who
fetched the water? and how often emptied? Did Paul stand in the vessel? How
many times went he in? or was he in at all? But here I see that you may
mistake, or the Printer, for you mentioning Paul, when I speak of Peter: only
this I say, Who fetched all that water the same hour of the nigh for the Jailer
and his household, they being still in prison, and at midnight, and all that
speaking the Word of the Lord, and washing their stripes, was done the same
hour, being unpossible, if they had gone out to be plunged with Lanthorns and
Torches, and all little enough to escape drownding: but I say, all the rest is
spoken of Peter baptizing 3000 persons together after his Sermon, Acts 2.41.
Now you do wisely to wave this Text, being no ways able to evade it: in your
next, I pray you, speak your mind on that Text, and you shall hear further from
me; also you should have made Answers to those Queries, but it seems you could
not.

Then you come to my fourth Argument, which is this, The Sacraments must be
administered where the Word is preached, because preach and baptize are put
together, Mat. 28.19. And many were baptized in their houses immediately after
Jesus Christ was preached unto them, as Cornelius, and others, Acts 10. and
2.41. To this you say, the Word is Discipline, or make Disciples baptizing
them: But I say, the same Commission by Mark is, Go ye (...) to all the world,
and preach the Gospel, Mark 16.15. He ordained twelve, that they should be with
him, and that he might fend them forth to preach, Mark 3.14. Now set these
Scriptures together, and the result will be, to make Disciples, by preaching;
this one truth, if well observed, would confound all the Sectaries
Convincticles, who admit members on other terms then by preaching the Gospel,
by a private Confederacy among themselves, to admit the rich on easy terms,
and hold the poor to hard terms, yea to admit for great sums of money, so did
not the Apostles: But you go on, denying my Argument, saying, Both John the
Baptist, and Christ, and his Disciples, went up and down preaching in the
Wilderness, and about Galilee, and in a Mountain, and in a Chariot, but they
baptized in Jordan in Aenon, etc. To this I answer, All those were traveling,
as you say; now their case and ours is not the same: as for example, the Lord
says, He that is eight days old let him be circumcised, Genesis 17.12. But the
case was not so when they were traveling in the Wilderness, yea it was laid
aside all that time, Josh. 5.7. but they must not do so in Canaan: Now I am
speaking of Canaan, and not of the Wilderness, and also of those Ministers who
are confined to a place, and charged with one Flock; and if you can show me
that such do preach in one place, and baptize in another, you say something, if
not, you must not imitate our fixed Ministers for a subsistence only, when your
judgment is for those universal Ministers; but rather a way to other parts,
having but one coat, no chrip, nor money in your purse, and eat what is set
before you, and in this condition carry no Aquavitae bottles, nor
Rose-water-bottles with you. Hapy is he that condemns not himself in the
thing that he allows: He that doubts, is damned if he eat, because he
eats not of faith; for whatsoever is not of faith is sin, Romans 14.22, 23. Do
not trouble the fixed Churches of Canaan to bring them back again into the
Wilderness, such Ministers are not for the welfare of Sion.

I come to my fifth Argument, showing the inconveniences of Plunging: If a man
stand on the bank to plunge the baptized under water, in so doing he may break
his neck, if the water be shallow, and drowned him if it be deep; and if one
stand in the water to save him, there must be two to baptize one man, flat
against all examples in the Scriptures. To all this you say, that I sprinkle my
self with holy water, and rest in a contented ignorance: Now for your censure I
way it not, it is but one Doctors opinion; but yet I will show you my ground
for this Argument: You will grant, that the Ministers of the Gospel have only a
right to administer the Sacrament of Baptism, which you will confine to
plunging, and not sprinkling, therefore you say, they must plunge them into the
water, they may not go into the water themselves, but the Minister must plunge
them in, or else he does but half his duty and God will not accept any work
that is done by partiallity, 1 Timothy 5.21. God will make those Priests
contemptible which are partial in his Law, Mal. 2.9. Are you not partial in
your selves, and are become Judges of evil thoughts, Iam. 2.4. Therefore either
leave pleading for plunging, or else do as you plead for shame, and stand on
the bank and plunge them in, as they fling a dog into a ducking Pond, he must
not wade in, the Minister must plunge him in.

But I follow you to the sixth Argument, against plunging the baptized, if
naked, it is against modesty, 1 Cor. 14.4. The Spouse of Christ must be comely
as Jerusalem, Cant. 1.5. And it is a temptation; David was tempted by seeing a
naked woman washing her self, 2 Samuel 1.2, 4. And Christ has taught us to say,
Lead us not into temptation, Mat. 6. Neither may they have garments for that
use consecrated as Aarons breeches, Exodus 28.42, 43. This would be as bad as
the Prelates Surpless, and for women to wear them, being man's apparel, it were
an abomination to the Lord, Deuteronomy. 22.5. Nor in their wearing clothes: The
Jailer feasted the Apostles straightway, Act. 16.34. Neither do we read, that
they shifted themselves before, nor after, nor that they sat dung wet at meat
with them: therefore to avoid all these Absurdities it must be granted, that
they in Scripture were all sprinkled with water, and not plunged under water.
To this you say, What will I think of Circumcision? but what you mean by it I
know not, unless you mean that they were circumcised naked; if this be your
meaning, where is your proof? All is not gold that glisters with him that has
his touch stone always by him: but suppose you think that they circumcised them
naked, yet the case is far different between the Jews and Christians. First,
They circumcised only males, but females are also baptized, Acts 8.12.
Secondly, They circumcised privately, but we baptize publicly. Thirdly, The
father of the child did circumcise, but the Minister must baptize; so that you
see this will not help you at all: And it seems you are sensible of it, and
therefore you fall to your prayer for me, but your prayer is to pervert me, and
my prayer shall be, That God would be pleased to convince you of your error.

I come to the seventh Argument, wherein I have showed you the mistake of the
word baptize with water, not in water, Mat. 3.11. Joh. 1.33. Ephesians. 5.26. Heb.
10.22. yea, to read in water, when it is said with water, is as great an error,
as to bow at the Name of Jesus, in stead of in the Name of Jesus: for mark the
Scriptures well; Paul says, When thou come, bring my cloak with thee, not in
thee, 2 Timothy 3.16. Abraham said to the young men, Abide here with the Ass,
Genesis 22.5. not in the Ass; so baptize with water, not in the water: So on the
other side, Levi paid tithes in Abraham, not with Abraham; He was in the loins
of his father, when Melchizedec met him, Heb 7.9, 10. not with his loins, when
Melchizedec met him, and Christ says, You believe in God, believe also in me,
Joh. 14.1. not believe with God, and believe with me: and so to baptize in the
Name of Father, Son and Holy Ghost, not baptize with the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost; Christ never gave such power to men: John says, He, that is, Christ,
baptizeth with the Holy Ghost: So where it is said, Sprinkle the door posts
with the blood, not take the door posts and plunge them in blood.

To this you say that I affirm another untruth, for want of the knowledge of
the Tongues, owning the error of the Translator, where John is made to say, I
baptize with water; and you bid me ask my Teachers, who know the Tongues, and
they will tell me, that the Greek word signifies in water, and not with water,
yea, you will show me two Texts for it, Ephesians. 5.26. and Heb. 10.22. with the
washing of water in the Word; but this is counterfeit coin by my touchstone: I
must search the Scripture, and see whether these things be so, as the noble
Bereans did, Act. 17.11. I must take nothing upon trust without trial, and by
my trial I find it thus, that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the
washing of water by the Word, Ephesians. 5.26. not in the Word: And the other Text
is, with pure water, Heb. 10.22. not in pure water. Then you say, it were well
if those errors which are caused, for want of more exact Translation, were
taken away by a new Translation; and till you are able to be an Interpreter,
it is good to be sober in making your own conclusion upon matters of
Interpretation, but yield to those that are better able: To this I shall
submit, but I doubt you will not do so your self; if you did, you would never
turn preacher, nor gather a Church out of a Church, like sheepstealers, to
make up your own flock, and think your self worthy of a better Calling then
God has appointed for you; certainly the end of such will be miserable.

I come to the eighth Argument, Anabaptists who plead for plunging, condemn
themselves by their own practice, while they suffer the baptized to wade in
half way, or to the middle, without their Teachers help, and then they plunge
in the other half: Now either they must acknowledge, that the party does and
may baptize half himself, or else grant that the lower half was not at all
baptizd, for their Minister did not put that under water; but our Minister,
holding the water over the baptized, does put the baptized under water. To this
you are most troubled at the word Anabaptist, and would have me to understand
better what that word means, before I undertake to condemn any under that
notion.

And you say, when I understand the true signification of Baptism, then I will
not exact brick, and allow no straw, nor bid a man cut meat without a knife,
nor expect that men should be baptized, and not suffer them to come into the
water. Sir, if I keep sentinel, show me your warrant from Jesus Christ for your
going into the water, or you pass not here; for we have many now adays that
run from their Rulers upon designs of their own, and it may be you are one
of them, I may not let you pass into the water, neither is it meat that I keep
from you, but poison; neither do I exact any more from you then I allow you
power and means to do; use those few drops according to the custom of all
Christian Churches, and it is sufficient; and he that shall advise you further,
tell him we have no such custom, nor any of the Churches of God, although some
will be contentious, 1 Cor. 11.16. Then you compare sprinkling with Hocus
Pocus, and call it ridiculous, but without proof, and that our Ministers would
not plead that as an Argument, when as you see your reverend friend Mr Downame
to own it; therefore I pass by these also as counterfeit coin.

And so I come to the last Argument, showing, That sprinkling one part is
sufficient, because one drop is as truly water, as the whole Ocean Sea, and
that no measure is prescribed, only it must be water, and the baptized may be
under one drop, as well as under a tun; yet not as if there were any necessity
to be under it, only it must be applied to the body, that our Faith may act
upon the thing signified by it: But here you demand, For what is one drop
sufficient to feed Whales, to bear great ships, or to water the earth? Ans. One
drop is sufficient to show unto us that it is water; yea, that Element which
Christ did appoint for the outward Form of Baptism, when set apart and
consecrated for that use by prayer: and it is our work to observe the
properties of water, and compare them with the thing signified, thus, As water
cools the heat, quenches thirst, cleanses away filth, makes the Earth
fruitful by watering of it; so the Spirit of Christ cools, satisfies,
cleanses, softeneth, makes us fruitful in good works. But Sir, if you will
have that water into which you will be planged, to do all this, it were good
you would plunge your Disciples in the Ocean Sea; for it cannot be that a
River or Pond, which some plunge in, should water the Earth, etc. But you think
to carry all away with Sophistry, thus; As one drop of water is water,
therefore one part of the body is the body, and a hand is a foot: I am ashamed
of your Logique; yea, you deserve to be cast out of the College for a Novice.

But you go on; If one drop be sufficient to show that it is water, as well it
is sufficient to make dowe: But are these your rare gifts, which should have
been published in Blacke-fryers Church? Surely you would have been hissed out
with shame enough; and you are much bound to them that prevented it. But you
say, John was in Aenon baptizing, because there was much water there: Hence it
seems you would infer, that he plunged them into that water: But where is your
Syllogism Mr Doctor? Will it follow, because that John was baptizing in that
Country where was much water, that therefore they were plunged into the water
he was baptizing in Aenon, not in the water that was there.

But you say, That I to little purpose say, the baptized may be under a drop,
as well as under a tun: But I say the thing is a truth; yet, as I said before,
there is no necessity to be under the water, only it must be applied to the
body, for faith to be acted on the thing signified. But you say, If the dead
were covered but with one grain of earth, each mostrial would soon complain
there were not sufficient: It is true, if you speak of that Baptism, but I
hope you will not bury folks alive, if you do, you are no Doctor for me, nor
any friend of mine.

I come to the Conference Christ had with Peter, about washing of his feet,
Joh. 23. Peter says, Thou shall never my feet, Verse. 8. But, says Christ, if
I wash thee not, thou have no part with me: which shows that this washing was
Sacramental: then he would be plunged all over, Verse. 9. But, says Christ,
that needs not, because he is clean every whit, Verse. 10. Hence I gather,
that to neglect the duty is abominable, and to plunge all over is more then
sufficient: Here you find a word mistaken by the Printer, saying, Thou have no
part in me, which should be with me; which could be no design of mine in it:
but for this you say, almost all the Scriptures that I quote, I mistake
something, which shows the rankor of your spirit, but I pass it not. But then
because I say, that washing was Sacramental, you say, Why then do not your
Ministers wash the feet of Infants, rather then sprinkle the face, which
Christ never did? Ans. Although it was Sacramental, to show the signification
of Baptism, yet to wash the feet was not given in charge as a Rule for the
Church, but on what part the Church should see most convenient. Now the face is
most convenient to be sprinkled; First, because it is always bate, there needs
no stripping, nor shifting for it. Secondly, It is the most honorable part,
therefore the fitter for so honorable a service. Thirdly, The face does as it
were represent all the man. Fourthly, On the face, to show that we are not
ashamed of the covenant, bearing as it were the seal upon our face as an
ornament or as frontlets between our eyes, as Job speaks. And besides, this
Sacrament was only for the present occasion, as the red sea, the Cloud and the
Rock was to Israel, 1 Cor. 10.2, 3.

Object. Now whereas Anabaptists will say, when Jesus was baptized, it is said,
he went out of the water, and Phillip and the Eunuch went both into the water,
therefore they were plunged under water: My Answer was, that every pit or River
in those hot Countries was not always full to the brim, but sometimes a man
might go down into the pit or River to the water: But suppose they did wade
into the water, yet that is not plunging under the water: and to wade in till
they came where it was clear, and then to sprinkle them in the Name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, may very well stand with the Text.

Then you fall to your prayer, to be delivered from the pit where no water is,
namely, Ieremiahs pit, although not rightly quoted, which is, Ier. 38.6. as
well you might have added Joseph's pit without water, Genesis 37.24. for these
prisoners of hope, with the rest of Gods People in Egypt and Babylon, were
brought forth, and double rendered unto them, Zach. 9.11, 12. for they as
prisoners are gathered in the pit, and shut up in the prison, yet after many
days they were visited, Isai. 24.22. Thus God afflicts for our profit, to make
us partakers of his holiness, and to show that he loves us, and that we are his
children: Then why pray you so earnestly to be kept from the pit of affliction,
I doubt you had rather have the bastards portion; see Heb. 12.6. to 11. I fear
you have chosen iniquity, rather then affliction, Job 36.21. But if you cause
the righteous to go astray in an evil way, you shall fall into your own pit,
Prove. 28.10. And I doubt it is the same with that of Oats, in Essex, out of
which there was no deliverance, but present death, by drowning, for which at
Chelmsford Sizes he had been hanged, if he had not made the better friends;
therefore the pit of affliction is rather to be chosen, then the Anabaptists
plunging pits, from which we shall ever pray, The Lord deliver us.

2. But they will say, That many came and were baptized of John in Jordan, Mat.
3.6. and the Greek word shows that was by plunging.

Answ. As before they might wade in, and yet be sprinkled, and the Greek word
as well signifies to sprinkle as to plunge; but in regard plunging is
accompanied with so many absurdities, sprinkling is rather to be chosen then
plunging.

To this you say, That all the Scholars in Europe cannot find it so in any
Greek Author, nor others: Here is a bold challenge, such another as you made to
Doctor Gouge, when you dared him and all the Synod, to answer you: Now it were
something a hard task to seek for the judgment of all the Scholars in Europe,
yet I have one at hand, Mr Perkins in his Comentary on Galat. says, That
baptizing signifies not only washing the body by diving, but also by
sprinkling, page 214.26, 27. and I hold his judgment not inferior to Dr
Chamberlains: But you say, If it were granted, hear would follow absurdities,
such as these, In those days came John the Sprinkler, and sprinkled in Jordan,
and John was sprinkling in Aenon, and as many as have been plunged into Christ
have put on Christ: But Sir, I hope you would be contented, if your Bible were
thus translated, John the Plunger came preaching, and they were plunged of him
in Jordan, and John was plunging in Aenon, and as many at have been plunged
into Christ, have put on Christ. This is your new Light that should have been
published in Black-Fryars Church.

Then you say that I am not contented with these Absurdities about plunging in
water, but that I could add more, thus: Either this Ordinance must be laid
aside all the Winter, when as Christ never said, Baptize in Summer and cease in
Winter, which would be a great prejudice to the Church; or else if observed, it
would endanger the lines of those that should be so plunged. But you betake
your self to your old refuge, the Common Prayer book, and there you find a
present Remedy for those dangers, which is to baptize at Easter and
Whitsuntide: But I say, then you would have many to be plunged together, and it
may be some of them may have issues, or running sores, or other loathsome
diseases, frequent with Anabaptists, who hold all things common, and it may be
some of them are not very cleanly, and so not fit to plunge the faces of some
where the talls of others were newly washed in; this is not decently, nor in
order, Mr Doctor.

3. But we are said to be buried with Christ by Baptism, Romans 6.4. therefore
the baptized is to be plunged under water.

Answ. In this Text is no mention made of baptizing with water, which is the
outward form of Baptism, only we are said to be baptized into the death of
Christ, and after death buried with him by Baptism: Now Jesus Christ a long
time after he was baptized of John in Jordan, says, I have a Baptism to be
baptized with, Luke 12.50. which was his death and burial; and he says to the
sons of Zebedee, Ye shall drink of my Cup, and be baptized with my Baptism,
Mat. 20.23. that is, they shall dye, and be buried, and rise again at the last
day; and also in this life they shall receive the things signified, that is,
the body of sin shall dye by the death of Christ, and their sin shall be
buried or covered by the burial of Christ, and they shall rise to newness of
life by the Resurrection of Christ; and these are all expressed in that text,
Romans 6.2, 4. This is the doctrine of Baptisms, spoken Heb. 6.2. but I say here
is no mention of the Form of Baptism, therefore no warrant from this Text to
plunge the baptized under water. Now if we should bring all those Texts that
speak of Baptism, to prove the outward Form, we should run into such a
labyrinth, that we should not be able to get out: as for example, Paul
speaks of baptizing the dead, saying, If the dead rise not at all, why are
they then baptized for the dead, 1 Cor. 15.25. Now although here be more in
this Text to prove the Form of Baptism, then in that Romans 6. yet we may not
at all ground any Form of Baptism from it: first, because the party is dead,
and so unfit to make a member of the Church by that solemn admitance.
Secondly, Any woman may wash the body when it is dead, but none may baptize any
Christian with that Form of Baptism given to the Church, but the Ministers of
the Gospel, which are sent to preach and baptize, Mat. 28.19. Thirdly, This
washing the dead carcass was done without any words of institution, therefore
not the Form of Baptism given to the Church: Therefore from such Texts as these
we have no warrant to plunge the baptized in or under the water.

To all this you say, when I bid my man wash a cup or glass, does it signify
nothing, unless I bid him do it with water? Let him that is diligent so read
and satisfy himself with the Texts, Romans 6.4. Col. 2.12. 1 Cor. 1.6. Answ.
Baptism does not always signify washing, but Death and Burial, and sometimes
Doctrines, Act. 18.25. neither does washing always signify baptizing, for then
if you should say to your man, wash my cup, it were all one as to say, baptize
my cup: and so your wife might say to her maid, baptize my dishes, when they
are foul. But these New-Lights are nothing but palpable darkness from the
Prince of Darkness.

Then you tell me, that you will not be at the charges of printing a
Satisfaction to every one that scribles, having spent and lost so much for the
Public, and repayd with so much Injustice and Ingratitude; nor will you
meddle at present with the lawfulness or unlawfulness of your Ministry, not
His it seems: Now if your losses be so great, why did you print at all? and
who do you blame for your losses, and that requital of Injustice and
Ingratitude? And then you beg a praise of your patience, and excuse your
pride, and pray to win me to the Trueths of God in Christ: To this Prayer I
shall join with you in that word Amen, and then I am sure, if the Lord hear
and grant it, I shall never turn Anabaptist.

May 2. 1650.
Imprimatur,

I. D.

FINIS.

