SIX DREADFUL ALARMS IN ORDER TO THE RIGHT IMPROVING OF THE GOSPEL, TO THE
SUBSTANCE OF A SERMON

Preached by Mr. Michael Bruce Minister of the Gospel.

Matthew. 7.24 Therefore whosoever hears these Sayings of Mine, and does them.
I will liken him unto a Wiseman which Built his House upon a Rock: etc. THE
TEXT.
Matthew. 7.24. Therefore whosoever hears these Sayings of Mine, and does them,
I will liken him unto a Wiseman which Built his House upon a Rock: etc.
THERE is Two Questions I would Propone to you the Day, and I desire an Answer
to them both: The First Question I would Propone to you, is this, What have ye
done with all Christ's Sayings that ye have heard? And what have ye done with
all the Preachings ye have gotten? Have ye letten them all go by you as things
that ye have no more ado with? Or are ye among the number of these, that is
Hearers and Doers? I trow when then the Question comes to your Door, it shall
put many of you in a Gast; What have ye done with all Christ's Sayings? And what
have ye done with all the Preachings that has been preached among you?

A Second Question I would Propone to you the Day, and that is, How are ye
fitted for a Stress of Weather that is coming by the Preachings that ye have
heard? Here is a strange stress of weather, the Rain falls, the Floods
descends, and the Wind blows; that is an uncouth stress of weather, such a
stress of weather that many dies in the midst of it and wins never to the
shore: The storm is to fall upon Godliness account, and the storm is to fall
upon Religions account: This is the House that ye have been Building. And now
the Question I Propone, is, Whether or no have ye this made sure, and founded
upon a Rock? when the stress of weather comes, that it may stand and not move:
That I may put you to it, to prepare for a stress of weather, therefore I have
chosen this Text. In the former part of this Chapter, our Master has laid many
very concerning Truths at this Peoples Door, and He shuts up all His long
Preachings with this, as if it were the most concerning Truths of all.
Therefore whosoever hears these Sayings of Mine, and does them, I will liken
him to a Wise man which Built his House upon a Rock: etc. which is the words of
my Text; Wherein ye have these three things considerable.

First, A Duty supposed, or rather Proposed; which is hearing and doing by the
People of GOD. 2. Ye have that Duty Commended, and it is Commended from both.
First, From the advantagiousness of it. 2. It is Commended by laying it over
forgainst the opposite of it: for then a thing shines ay best, when it is laid
over forgainst the opposite.

A Third Thing is, The Way how this comes in with a therefore: Therefore
whosoever hears these Sayings of Mine, and does them, I will liken him to a
Wiseman which Built his House upon a Rock: etc.

For the Illustration of this Similitude, I shall speak more particularly to
it, as I go throw the Doctrine: I shall here give you some few Observations
from the Connection, and then come to the words more particularly.

And the First Observation from the Connection shall be this, That it is the
Goodness of our Master to His Followers, that as He gives them Preaching, so He
Schools them in the right use making of preaching: Or ye may take it thus, That
as our Master desires to have His People hearing, so He will have them schooled
in the right improvement of Preaching when heard. Therefore this Lesson about
right improvement of Preaching is the thing that He shuts up all this Excellent
Sermon with: Therefore, this is the Great Bussiness ye have ado, as to hear
preaching, so to improve preaching. Well then, that I may speak a little to
this; I will let you see from the Text, comparing it with the Context, what Way
CHRIST Schools His Hearers in the right use making of preaching. 2. I shall let
you see wherefore CHRIST takes pains to School His People in the right
improvement of preaching. 3. We shall give you a Word or Use, and go forward.

First then, How Schools He His People in the right use making of Preachings?
Ye will see Him from the Text, together from the Context, Schooling them Two
Ways. First, By giving them Dreadful Alarms. 2. By giving them Seasonable
Instructions: And therefore, and ye will take a view of my Text, ye will find
six Alarms in it, and all for improving of Preaching; and gife ye will take a
view of my Text, ye will find six Instructions for the right improving of
Preaching; and as ye will be answerable to the Great GOD for the Preachings ye
hear, take both the Alarms, and the Instructions with you.

The First Alarm that lies in the bosom of my Text, together with the Context,
is this, That People may be living under a Preaching Ministry all their Days,
and yet when all is done, CHRIST and they never ken other. O! then take home
the Alarm, and be not ye among that number; take the Alarm home, and improve
Preaching better. O sirs! may these two stand together living under a Preaching
Ministry all their Days, and yet CHRIST and they never ken other; Should not
this be an Alarm to you to improve preaching better.

A Second Alarm lying in the bosom of my Text worthy of your Observation, and
that is, That People may get a Delusion unner the Cross, and under Preaching,
that may stick to them, not only throw a storm, but may gang in to Eternity
with them, and no less than Eternal Rejection convincing them of that; and then
that Delusion is our of time. GODS Eternal Wrath and Vengeance in Hell will be
the first Cure that some of your Delusions will get. There may be a Delusion
blecked in your bosom under the Preaching, that not only will go to Death, or a
storm with you, but it may gang into Eternity with you; and GODs Wrath in Hell
the Cure of it: This may be a Dreadful Alarm to you.

A Third Alarm I shall give you from the Text, and it is this, There is a
stress of weather coming, and as ye would be out of it, improve preaching
better: for very few will bide it out; but the Man that improves preaching.
Here is an uncouth Stress of Weather coming, the Rain falling, the Floods
descending, the Wind blowing, and the Man that improves not preaching, he is
like the Man which built his house upon the sand, and whenever this stress of
weather comes, his house falls: This may be an uncouth Alarm to you, to put you
to improve preaching better.

A Fourth Alarm to put you to improve preaching in the bosom of my Text, is
this, That Folk may be a Work, and at meikle Work under preaching for building
of a House, and yet when all is done, loss both their Profit and Pains: Here is
a Great Work, it comes to a House Building, it comes to the Ripeness of a
House, and yet Pains and Profit and all is lost, whenever the Storm comes, the
House goes on, because it is not Builded on a Rock. This may be a Dreadful
Alarm to you to improve preaching better, and to Build upon a Rock; without
which ye loss both your Profit and your Pains: This may be a Dreadful Alarm to
you to be upon your Watchtower, and to see what yeill do with the Preachings
that ye hear: For ye may be at miekle Pains and Travel to hear a Preaching, and
Venture your Life for it, and yet when all is done, the storm may ding all
down, and ye loss both your Work and your Pains; This may be a Dreadful Alarm
to you.

A Fifth Alarm lying in the bosom of my Text, and that is, That Folk may have
their Light bettered by Preaching, and Folk may win at a bigg Profession under
Preaching, and yet when all is done, they and their Profession both bulk little
in Christ's Bosom; and their Light and their Profession both be casten over the
Bar, and themselves at the taill of it: Here they are Enlightened Folk, for
they can say, LORD, LORD, they could not have said that, if they had not been
taught it by Preaching: Their Profession is likeways made bigg by it, for they
themselves, and all the Country-side takes them for the Servants of GOD, and
yet CHRIST professed that He never knew them: This may be a Dreadful Alarm to
you.

The Last Alarm, is this, That it is not Single Persons only that is in this
Condition; but they are many of them, and since they are many of them, look
that ye be not among the Multitude; and not only will they be many of them, but
these many would give all the World to have one Preaching again to improve
better, and it will be denied to them. Their poor Bodies that cried, LORD, LORD,
open to us, would have given all the World for a Day of the Gospel again; but
it was gone, and there was no more Time for them. May not this be a Word of
Warning to you, to try how ye guide preaching, for all these six Alarms lies at
your Door; They are Christ's Alarms to you from His Word; and I think then,
since they are given you from Christ's own Word, every one of you should take
them Home, and start to your feet.

Secondly, Ye will find Six Instructions lying in the Bosom of my Text, for
your guiding of preaching.

And the First is this, Never think ye the Work of Preaching is done, when the
preaching is ended; for when the preaching is ended, your work about the
preaching is but to begin: Therefore our Master tells them at the ending of
this Excellent Sermon, that their Work was before their hand; Doing was but to
begin: The Stress of Work, and the Stress of Weather was before their hand. It
is a sore matter Sirs, many of you, you think your selves well enough exonered
at GODs Hand on a Sabbath day, that ye have heard two bits of preachings such
as they are; for ye have heard a bit of a stolen preaching some Night, and ye
think your Work is done; but when the preaching is done, your Work is but to
begin. O but I love the Hearer of a preaching well on a Sabbath Day, that ay
the nearer night it grows, his Work grows the thronger upon his hand; And I
like that Improver of preaching well after a Sabbath, that divides the Week,
and the first part of it he improves for the use making of what he has heard;
and the second part oftit, he improves for preparing, and fitting himself for
what he is to hear the next Sabbath Day. O Sirs, Are there any Dividers of the
Week among you? Did ye ever divide the Week in two, for right improving of
preaching?

A Second Instruction, is this, Then preaching is rightly improven, when
improven for bringing you the nearer CHRIST. The Hearer and the Doer, he is ay
upon the height of the Rock with it, he is ay building himself on CHRIST, and
Conforming himself to Him: For my part Sirs, I love not the improving of
preaching that many Folk has; for hear preaching as they will; Nearness to
CHRIST is never studied by them.

A Third Instruction for right improving of preaching, and that is, When
preaching is well improven, when improven for fitting Folk for foul-weather,
that thereby they will prepare for a stress of weather, so that when that
comes, their Ship shall be sound below their Mast strong, their Taklings fast,
and their Sails spread, gang the World as it will.

A Fourth Instruction, is this, Then Preachings is well improven, when improven
for bettering and building of a house for CHRIST in thy bosom; preaching is
never well improven, but when there is some pinning put in this his House, or
some stones laid on the Wall, or something done thereby for putting forward the
House for CHRIST in thy bosom: Well, what is the result of the many preachings
heard in this Generation; Folk gets the Time put off, in telling over Tales out
of preachings that they hear; but few of them improven for building a House for
CHRIST in their bosom. There is little of this kind done by hearing of
preaching among them: Preaching is never well improven, as long as a House for
CHRIST in thy bosom is not going up by preaching.

Fifthly, Then preaching is well improven, when every preaching thou hears
shines in thy Work and Practice betwixt Sabbaths. I love that improver of a
preaching well, that Folk will not need to Spear what the Minister was on in
the Sabbath; for it shines forth in his Practice through the Week; What need
you Spear what the Minister was on in the Sabbath? read it in yon man's practice
throw the Week; Holiness was much pressed on the Sabbath; See ye it not
engraven on you Man's Walk and Practice through the Week. Heavenly-mindedness
has been much pressed on the Sabbath, see ye it not in you Man's Walk and
Conversation, as if he were in Heaven already. Mortification has been much
pressed on the Sabbath, see ye it not in you Man's using the World, as if he
were hanged to the World, and the World hanged unto him.

Then Lastly, Preachings are well improven, when improven for sitting us as for
that day, (What day?) that day mentioned in the 22. verse, CHRIST calls it that
Day Preachings is well improven, when improven for fitting us for that Day,
when we must all appear before the Tribunal of GOD; so that whenever we come,
we shall be Welcome: When our Master will Welcome Lasses and Lads for improving
preaching, and take them in by and clap their heads, and say, Well done good
and faithful Servant, I never lost a preaching by you; and I never lost a
preaching by thee, thou gathered it ay up to the least Crumb. It is a strange
thing to me Sirs, CHRIST will be at the Day of Judgment with them before ever
he has done with his Preaching, to tell us this much, that every preaching we
hear, we may not have our acquaintance to make with JESUS CHRIST when we appear
there. Well then, these are the six Alarms upon the one hand, and six
Instructions on the other hand for right improving of preaching.

The Second Thing to be spoken to, is, Wherefore does our Master take so much
Pains to School us His Hearers in the right improving of preaching? It is upon
two Accounts.

First, Upon this Account, That all that he does, and says, is lost Labor,
except it be improven: And do ye think that ever our Master will take it well
off a Peoples Hand to have all His Preachings lost, and all His Pains lost?
Will He take it off your hand well (think ye) to have all His Ordinances and
Preachings on Sabbath Days lost? Will He take it well off your hand to have
Fast-days-preachings, and Communion days-preachings lost? And will He take it
well off your hand to have many a stolen nights preaching that we have gone far
for, and ventured your Life for lost? But alas, we have lost all; What will
come of us?

Secondly, He is serious: For it is upon this Account, that he may testify to
all His Friends and Followers, that the right Guiders of Preaching, is ay
bulksom in His Bosom: but all the Pains thou takes upon hearing of preaching
without doing, will never make thee bulksom in Christ's bosom,

The Use I would have you to make of it, is this, Will ye tell me, Sirs, Have
ye been at Christ's School yet? Have ye heard all these six Alarms, and taken
them home for your misimproving of Preaching? And have ye made use of all the
six Instructions for that same end, and traveled through them all. But if ye
will take a view of my Text more particularly, ye will find two things very
remarkable.

First, That a Christian must be reasoned into the right improvement of
Preaching, ere ever he fall on it: Ye must reason your selves into that
Exercise. So CHRIST here, He begins this Verse with a Therefore; Holding out a
Reason for that Conclusion of doing, at the back of hearing.

Secondly, Ye will see this in my Text, That ye must evermore keep the
Lovesomness of doing, or the Lovesom side of doing in your Eye; or ye will grow
ill-improvers of Preaching: And therefore here He casts up the Beautifull-side
of that Exercise to them: The Man that hears and does, he is like a Man that
builds his House upon a Rock; and what ever storm comes, his House stands, etc.
Telling us this much, that, and we keep not the Beautifull-side of doing in our
Eye, we are fair to be shaken in a day of the Cross. But we come to the Words
more particularly.

And First from the Duty imposed, or rather proposed, and that is, Hearing and
Doing by the People of GOD: And the Observation, is this, That it is a Duty
that the LORD lays at all your Doors that hears the Gospel, to be doing as
well as hearing; Ye must do His Sayings, as well as ye must hear them, John
13.17. If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them. The Observation
imports two things.

First, The Observation imports this, That Blessed JESUS has knit Hearing and
Doing together, and since He has knit them together, GODs Vengeance will be
upon that Man that will loose that Knot, since He has knit Hearing and Doing
together: Therefore upon your Immortal Souls peril, do not ye break that Knot:
For He has knit Hearing and Doing together, and upon your Peril be it, i. ye
undo what He has done.

Secondly, It imports this much, That it is a Doing-Christian, or the Christian
that does best, is ay bulksome in CHRIST'S Bosom. Well now that I may speak a
little to this, for I think it is the Plague of Scotland; whatever hearing we
hear, there is no doing among us: And therefore I say; that I may speak a
little to this: I Will First Let you see what doing is, that ye must be at, if so
be ye would be approven of GOD: For there is meikle doing among many Folk, that
Ille no give meikle Silver for. Secondly, I shall speak a word to this. Wherein
lies the Commendableness of this, to be doing Christ's Sayings. Thirdly, I shall
give you a word of Caution. And Lastly, A word of Use; and go forward.

The First Thing then to be spoken to, What is this doing that they should be
at? It is a doing of the Sayings of CHRIST with these seven. O ken ye the doing
of the Sayings of CHRIST that has these seven with it? First, It is a Doing
upon the back of Hearing of Christ's Sayings, whereby the Christian in all his
Doings, labors ay to be Conformed to the Rock CHRIST, and brought near Him;
and if ye be not Laboring by your Doing, to be brought near the Rock, and
conformed to Him, Ille not give a gray Groat for your Doing; Ille no give
meikle Silver for many Folks Doing: For they never win to Conformity to CHRIST
by their Doing. Secondly, It is such a Doing upon the back of Hearing of
Christ's Sayings, whereby not only a Good Foundation is laid, but the fullness of
the measure of the stature of a perfect man in CHRIST is aimed at by the
Christian, as well as the laying of a Good Foundation. For my part Sirs, I
think it is a poor Bussiness, we say ay we are Doing. Christians, and yet a
Good Foundation is never laid by us, and we say that we are Doing- Christians,
and yet the Sydwall of a Buiding gangs never up with us; We say ay that we are
Doing- Christians, and yet the fullness of the measure of the statures of CHRIST
is not the End that we aim at in our Doing Thirdly, It is such a Doing upon the
back of Hearing of Christ's Sayings, whereby at the back of thy Doing, thou
Erects a New Walk, with these four cleaving to it: O have ye all these four
cleaving to your Doing. First, Such a Walk as has Spiritual-mindedness in the
midst of it, Romams 8.1. Who Walk not after the Flesh but after the Spirit.
Therefore every word of a Preaching that I get, I make Use of it for keeping me
Spiritually-minded in my Generation, Philip. 3.20. Our Conversation is in
Heaven, from whence we look for a Savior. Why is thy Conversation in Heaven,
poor Body? Even because my Master is there, and where should I be but where my
Master is? A Second Thing that this Doer Erects, ye may take it out of Acts
9.31. Walking in the fear of the LORD, and the comfort of the Holy Ghost:
Therefore my Walk has ay two Flowers strawed over it, the fear of the LORD,
and the comforts of the Holy Ghost; and every one of them plays to others hands
in my Walk. A Third Piece of Walk that this Doer Erects at the back of my
Hearing, and that is in Micah 6.8. He Walks humbly with his GOD: And therefore
ye shall never find my Head higher than the Dust; and ye shall never find my
Head higher than the Ground, humbly with my GOD shall my Walk be all my days. A
Fourth Walk that is to be Erected upon the back of Hearing of Christ's Sayings,
and that is, Such a Walk wherein the Christian has Holiness and Exactness
engraven upon every stap of his Walk, 1 Peter 1.16 Be ye Holy, for I am Holy.
The Men of the World says, What a sorrow aills this Man's Holiness, or that Man's
Holiness, that it may not gain you? There is no Man's Holiness that we are to
write after for a Copy to us; but the Holiness of GOD: Holy, as He is Holy,
must be our aim. The Men of the World says, it is enough and we Profess to be
holy: Yea, yea, in that day when CHRIST speaks with Folk, if there be no more
but a professed holiness, it will be casten over the Bar, and themselves at the
taill of it. For I assure you holiness bulks much in Christ's bosom; but a big
Profession make it as bony as ye like, will not bulk much in Christ's bosom, and
there be no more. These are the four Walks that ye are to Erect at the back of
your hearing of Christ's Sayings.

There is a Fourth Piece of Doing at the back of hearing that the Christian is
to have, and that is, A doing with these three Harmonies in it. First, A
Harmony betwixt his Doing the Duties of the First Table of the Law, and his
Doing the Duties of the Second Table of the Law in his Walk; never one of them
wrongs another, never one of them shuts another to the Door; but every one of
them plays to others hands in his Walk and Practice: What think ye of that
brave harmony? Few of you has that excellent Walk in your Doing. A Second
Harmony in this Man's Doing, and that is, A harmony betwixt his Light and his
Practice, and never one of them Justels against another; he brings up his
Practice to his Light, and never one of them thorturs with another: he lets no
thorturing be betwixt these two: This may be the matter of our Mourning, that
thorturing with Light is like to be Scotlands plague. Thirdly, This Man keeps a
harmony betwixt his own part in doing, and GODs part in doing, and he never
lets one of these croses and thorturs answer, but he gives GOD the Glory of all
his Doings; all the Supports, and all the Comforts, and all the Upholdings and
throw bearings that GOD gives him, he gives GOD the Glory of it all; he steals
nothing of GODs Glory from Him; but he levels all at GODs Glory, and takes to
himself Shame and Confusion of Face: GODs Glory is the Butt we are to aim at in
all our doings. Therefore it is a sore matter in this Generation that these
three Harmonies is gone, and away in our Practice. Our doing the Duties of the
First Table of the Law, wrongs and Justels against the Duties of the Second
Table of the Law; and our doing the Duties of the Second Table, wrongs and
justels against the Duties of the First. For in doing of our Duties, many times
we aim at GODs part, and leaves our own undone; or when we win any length in
doing, we take all the Glory of it from GOD, to our self; and our doing
thorturs our Light, and our Light thorturs our Doing. O Sirs, and it were kent
how much we have thortured with GOD, we would be a Wonder to our selves; we
have thortured with GOD, and we have thortured with the Light in our bosom; and
we have thortured one with another; and we have thortured with the Bible; and
in our Doings we are like to thorture with all the Testimonies of the Saints;
we are a shamed, shamed, shamed Pack: there is nothing but thorturing among us.

A Fifth Piece of Doing that the Christian is to study in his Generation at the
back of Hearing of Christ's Sayings, wherein the Christian is to mark his
short-comings of his Duties, and Mourn over them; and mark his speed-comings,
and bless GOD over these, and take an Argument from both to foster doing upon
his hand: Is not that a piece of Royal-work in a day of the Cross? Therefore
whenever a Minister has preached up my Duty, I never rest until I win at
doing, and I will not let GOD want neither the Glory of my short-comings, nor
of my speed-comings; and I bless GOD for that, and Ille take an Argument from
both to feed doing and hearing upon my hand. The Men of the World says, What
have we ado with Religion now? It is ill spoken off everywhere? Ille tell you
News; Ille get as much in the Practice of Religion and in Doing, as will keep
me warm against the coldest blast that can blow upon the Christians in
Scotland. Many thinks it is their Duty to grow Lukewarm in GODs Matters, and
they call that Prudence. The Lukewarmness that GOD has said, He will spue out
of his Mouth; Men and Women will call that prudence: Shame and lack come upon
that prudence. GOD will tirll us out of that prudence ere He has done with us.

Sixthly, This doing is a doing wherein the Christian is much troubled with the
Bands that lies upon his Spirit, and hinders him from doing what he would, for
the want of encouragment in doing, are staps in his Way; The Bands on his
Spirit troubles him more than the want of the blessing and embracing and
dandling on the Knee of his Master here away: Therefore the Christian has a
sore heart; Why? not because he wants the Countenance of his Master. But would
ye ken what aills him? Here is his Complaint, Alas! I do nothing in Doing; the
Bands on my Spirit makes me have a sore heart. What aills thee, O Christian, to
break thy Heart? Is it for fear thou be not well, or is it for fear thou win
not to heaven? Or is it for fear thou never be admitted to follow the Lamb
above? Or is it because thou gets not anew of His Visits upon the Earth? No.
What aills thee then poor Body? Alas it is because I do nothing at the
Doing-Trade, and that breaks my Heart.

Lastly, It is such a doing as has these five Motives cleaving to it; O ken ye
the five Motives of the Doing-Christian.

The First Motive of this Doing-Christian, is this. He does timously; no sooner
is his Heart warmed with the hearing of Christ's Sayings; (but if I may say so)
his fect is as soon warmed with the Practice of them, presently he puts them in
Practice; he never lets his heart cool, till he practice them; Well kens he to
strick the iron while it is hot. I wat not Sirs, I trow many of us lets our
selves cool, ere ever we put Christ's Sayings in Practice. What is the reason
that there are so many stiff lithed Professors in Scotland; Here is the
Reason, we gate a kindly heat; but alas! we got a sudden and unkindly cool upon
the back of it. A sudden cool upon the back of a great heat, makes Folk stiff
bound and sweer to gang: We got a kindly heat under out swearing of a Covenant,
and under a Work of Reformation, and a lively Ministry; But alas! we put it not
in Practice, when it was at our heart; but we sat down upon it, and that gave
us a sudden cool at the back of our heat, and that makes our Bones stiff; we
dow not draw a Limb to us. O the sudden cools that the Ministers and Professors
in Scotland has given themselves, that makes them Walk in the Ways of GOD, as
if all their Bones were broken: Even like a poor Traveller hot on his Journey,
and when he meets his Neighbor in the gate, he says to him, sit down Gossop
and rest you there; and the poor Man having sitten a while, when he rises, he
dow not draw a Leg after him. O Sirs! it cannot be told how many makes stiff
Bones among you; that that makes them Walk as if all their Bones were broken:
But the Man that is an acceptable Doer, he does timously upon the back of
Hearing.

A Second Motive of this Doing-Man, and that is, As he does timously, so he
does orderly; he begins with Substantials, and for Circumstances, he puts them
in their own place, though he will leave none of them undone: He begins with
that, that is first in GODs Count-book, and for other doings, he puts these in
their own Room: Therefore it is a well wailed word of David's in the 119. Psalm,
Order my Goings in Thy Way, and I shall keep Thy Testimonies to the end. I
cannot tell what to do, nor what to begin at; bat if Thou will order my (...),
I will keep Fyle and Rank to purpose. But O but the Christians in Scotland is
ill Sojors in this Christian-Warfare, for they can neither keep Fyle nor Rank;
What will word of you Sirs? Will ye not all be broken?

A Third Motive of this Doer, and that is, He will not be holden back from
doing, neither by Friends nor Foes: And therefore, when he sets to his Duty,
will he let Flesh and Blood hinder him; No. In that first of the Galatians 16.
Verse, immediately said the Apostle, I consulted not with Flesh and Blood: Flesh
and Blood will never be the Members of His Parliament, he will consult none
with them about the Bussiness; but he will set all these once to the Door. Will
he not let the Counsel of Christian-Friends hinder him? No. Therefore that 21.
Chapter of the Acts 13. Verse, What mean ye to Weep and break my Heart (says
the Apostle) I am not only ready to go to Jerusalem and be bound; but to Die
for the Name of the LORD JESUS. Woes me! are there not enew to break our
Hearts, albeit Christian-Friends break not our Hearts; I am-not only ready to
gang to Jerusalem for my Duty; but to Sacrifice my Life for that Cause that I
Preach: Therefore the poor Man gangs in the Bands of the Spirit to Jerusalem,
knowing nothing but one thing, that in every Place and Country that he geed to,
he was ay for to get a sore skin; but he could promise himself no other
Success: This is ay the Comfort that a poor Minister has to gang out and
preach to a People and Country-side. Would ye ken what he can promise himself?
nothing: But this, he is sure of the fury of the Magistrate in the Place he
comes to, and he is sure of the fury of the Curate in the Parish; and he is
sure of the fury of a whean Graceless Folk; and he is sure of the Censure of a
whean Old Jobb-trot-Christians that has joined with the Curats, and if there
be any Dunts in dealing, he will get his share of them; yet go they must, and
do their Duty they must. I think and Paul had lived in our Time, he had been
the rankest Fool that ever ran thereout. What can ye promise to your self Paul,
in following out of your Duty? Bands and Afflictions in every place, I can
promise my self that, and a redding stroke ay when Dunts comes a Dealing; Will
thou gang Man for all that? yes, Gang I must; I ken no other faer, yet gang I
must, though the Spirit binds Hands and Feet; and when the Spirit binds, I dar
not louse. And as Peter says, and O but he Reasons well; What am I (says he)
that I should withstand GOD, in that 11. of the Acts 17. Verse. They are ay
abusing him for going to preach in that place and neock of the Country where
they thought he had no Warrant to gang and preach; but he lets them all hear in
the deafest side of their heads, that he had a Warrant to gang there; Who am I,
that I should withstand GOD? Let all the Prudent Men in the Country-side Answer
this, and Ille quatt the Bussiness.

A Fourth Motive of this Doing-Man, and that is, He does constantly; ye will
never find him out of doing; it may be he be put far from his Point, and may be
he be put far from his Intention; but be put als far from it as he will, he
falls ay a doing again. Well then, my Advice to you Sirs, is this, that ye fall
a doing with it, and Labor twelve hours, for the Night comes, when no Man
sees to Work.

Lastly, It is such a Doing wherein four pieces of Spiritual-Wisdom kyths in
all his Doings.

The First Practice of Doing, wherein Spiritual-Wisdom kyths, is this, That any
Attainment that he gets, and any Receipt that he receives from his Master for
it, he puts ay a prize upon it, and blesses his Master for it; but he so puts a
prize upon it as undervalues himself, and gives himself that Name in the 17. of
Luke 10. Verse, An Unprofitable Servant; that shall evermore be my Name.

A Second Practice of Wisdom this Doer has, and that is, He gives ay the
Sayings of CHRIST a right Seat, and then when it has a Right Seat, it will
break out in many Springs. What is the Right Seat of the Sayings of CHRIST?
David kent well what it was; The Right Seat of the Word of GOD, I hid Thy Word
in my Heart, that is a Right Seat for the Sayings of CHRIST: Even the Heart of
the Christian, and having it well seated there, it will convey Streams through
all his Members. A Right seated word of CHRIST will break out at the Eye; and a
right seated word at the Heart will break forth at the Door; and a right seated
word at the Heart, will break forth at the Mouth, and at the Hand, and Foot,
and will convey it self into all the Members: It cannot be told how many
Streams the right placing of a word at the Heart will have.

A Third Practice of Wisdom this Doer has, and that is, as he Places the Word
of Christ Right in his Heart, so he places himself Right, and gives CHRIST
the Chief Room; and as long as ye give not Him the Chief Place and Room, ye
will be but Bumblers at doing: Therefore this Doer, he sets ay Christ's Chair at
the Table-head, and when he has set Him there, he has three words to hear: O
ken ye the three words the Doing-Christian has in the day that he has CHRIST
set at the Table-head.

The First word he has, is this, LORD, What will Thou have me to do? The
Second word, is this, LORD, help me to do. The Third word, is this, Not unto
me, not unto me, but unto Thy Name be all the Glory: When ever he wins any bit
forward in doing, then he says, Not unto me, not unto me; but to Thy Name be
all the Glory.

A Fourth Practice of Wisdom this Doer has, and that is, He takes ay GODs
March-stones, and GODs March-dyke to be the Rule of his Duties doing in
Practice, and no other: Therefore it is not what March-stones the Lords and the
Lairds has set to be the Rule of my Practice and Duty; and it is not what
March-stones this Prelate and that Prelate has set, that is the Rule of my
Duty. But it is what March-stones the LORD Himself has set. Wad ye ken one of
Christ's March-stones, there it is, Be ye Holy as I am Holy, 1 Peter 1.16. Vow
Sirs, but that is a long March-dyke, there is many Aikers of Land within that
March-dyke: O Sirs, there is meikle Work within that March-stone; keep your
selves within it, and follow no Man's March-stones: but as I Walk, Walk ye.

The next Thing to be spoken to, is this, Wherein lies the Commendableness of
this to be doing at the back of hearing of Christ's Sayings: And First, The
Commendableness of it lies in this, this is the thing, to be doing at the back
of hearing that has Blessedness intailled on it, John 13.17. Happy are ye if
ye know these things; but blessed are ye if do them. But Secondly, The
Commendableness of it lies in this, this is the thing that Honors your Master,
this is the Exercise that puts Respect and Honor upon CHRIST. Thirdly, The
Commendableness of it lies in this, That this is the Exercise that will not
only make thee to fend under the Cross, but outlive it with Commendation; this
will put thee in a Capacity to outlive a Storm with Commendation. The Men of
the World says, That they will make a Storm and Stress of Weather blow all our
Religion from us yet; but I hope to see them all beguiled. But they say, They
shall gar a New Storm blow our Giddy-headedness and Phanatizism from us, and
they shall blow a Covenant and a Work of Reformation from us. Indeed there is
over many has this blown from them; but brag at leasnre, the Doing-Christian
shall keep his Religion, his Godliness, and his Covenant, and ye should gang to
the sorrow: Ye may win to my Estate, and to my Body; but for my Religion, ye
shall never win at that: Ye may gar me leave House and Family, and may make me
bide many a cold blast, or ye may uncover my Roof, and send all my Bairns a
begging; but for the bony House that I have been Building under a Lively
Ministry, ye shall never get a hole in that; for the bony bit House that they
call Religion, which I have been making up under a Covenant, and Work of
Reformation, there shall never a drop of Rain win in that House, come the
Floods as they will; and there shall never an air of Wind win in, in that House
blow from what airt it will: Ye shall never see a hole in the Wall of that
House, and ye should wait while your Eyes rote out of your Head. But Fourthly,
The Commendableness of it lies in this, That of all Men and Women in the World,
the Man and the Woman that is Doers at the back of hearing, is bulk somest in
Christ's bosom, and is not that a Commendable-Exercise, that makes me so bulksom
to Him? It is a fore matter, Sirs, we cannot be bulksom in our Masters bosom in
their Days. Well then, Ille tell you what we will Resolve on, we will Resolve to
be Doers of Christ's Sayings, and then we shall throw His Grace be bulksome in
GODs Sight, and this will pay home the loss of the little bulksomness we have
among them whom we live among.

Lastly, Ay the more thou studies doing at the back of hearing, the more thou
keeps a Good Conscience: For as long as thou keeps this Dish upon thy Table,
heartsom must thy Life be; for thou has a Dish upon thy Table that all the
Prelates in Scotland has not the like of it. Thou that has broked thy Religion
by doing, has a bra Dish upon thy Table; if so be thou has been at a doing of
Christ's Sayings, thou has a bra Life of it. But I think there are many of the
Professors of Scotland, has tried the doing of many Assayings, that is not
Christ's Sayings: For they have tried Popery, and they have tried Quakerism, and
they have tried a Profession of Religion; and now they are at Atheism where
they began, and I think that they shall be there. Well Sirs, Doing at the back
of Hearing is heartsom, and if ye hear but little do the more; and if ye be
Doers of the thing that ye Hear, this Doing shall bring more to your Hand, and
ye shall yet gang on Grass to your Eyes Holes, for the bare going ye have
gotten; so do and wait for Him in His own Way, and ye shall have a brave Life
of it.

Let us pray


