The good Old way: OR, PERKINS IMPROVED, In a PLAIN EXPOSITION And SOUND
APPLICATION OF Those Depths of Divinity briefly comprised In his SIX
PRINCIPLES: BY That late painful and faithful Minister of the Gospel, CHARLES
BROXOLME In Darby-shire.

Jer. 6.16. Ask for the old paths, where is the good way, and walk therein, and
ye shall find rest for your souls. LONDON, Printed for John Rothwel and Thomas
Maney, and sold at the Bear and Fountain in Cheap Side, and near
Baynards-Castle in Thames Street. 1653.

TO The Right Honorable, The LADY KATHERINE BROOK, Dowager to the Right
Honorable Robert Lord Brook, Baron of BERCHAMPS Court.
Right Honorable,
THis Exposition of famous Mr. Perkins's Catechism, was the work of Master
Charles Broxolm; a good man, who was well known to your noble Lord; whose great
favors conferred upon him, has engaged me upon the account of his wisdom (my
dear Aunt) to dedicate it unto your Ladyship.

The Authors Ministry was honored, by the Conversion of many souls, both at
Gunthwait in Yorkshire, (where he was Patronized by Mr. Godfery Bossevile,
Brother in law to your worthy Lord) and also at Buxton and Belper, and other
places in Darby-shire, who are his Epistle Commendatory, and will be his glory
at the day of Christ.

Madam, This Book had sooner been brought into public view, if the
Controversies of our broken times had not discomposed peoples spirits, to give
due entertainment unto such useful Treatises. Many in these latter days, have
woefully disputed away the life of Religion, and power of Godliness; whence it
is, that their Spiritual Appetite to salubrious Truths, is extremely decayed;
and their Sunshine, is like the Winters light, altogether without holy heat.
It was an high commendation of the Christian Romans, by Saint Paul, that they
were full of goodness, and filled with all knowledge, Romans 15.14. and it is
pity that this good couple should ever be divided. As practical Profession most
glorifieth God, so it wins most estimation amongst good Christians. The end
of this Treatise, is to edify Gods people in both; therefore if I should dare
to keep this piece secret, (which the Reverend Author intended for Public
use) I should not only frustrate the intentions of the dead, and deceive his
godly friends living, but also rob the Church of that which is her right.

Madam, I shall not any longer detain your Lady-ship from reading this Book,
which craveth your acceptance, and promises your soul benefit by a serious
perusal. That your Lady ship may long continue an encourager of godliness, and
a comfort to the Members of Christ, till the time of your everlasting
refreshing shall come, when triumph shall be your recompense, glory your
reward, Angels your company, and God your glory; shall be the humble prayer

(Madam) Of Your Honors humble Servant, CHARLES JACKSON.

To his dearly beloved friends, the godly people of Buxton and Belper, C. J.
heartily wishes all happiness, External, Internal, and Eternal.
Christian friends,
MAny of you, have had real impressions of love upon your hearts, toward my
worthy Uncle, the Reverend Author of this Exposition: you have fully known his
Doctrine, manner of life, purpose, faith, Long suffering, Charity, Patience,
Humility. That which you have heard with the Ear, is now (according to your
desire) represented to your Eye.

There is a great disparity betwixt a lively voice, and breathless lines; the
one moves more, but the other profits more; the one soon passes away with
the sound of words, but the other abides, gives the Reader leave to pause and
consider. Good men's works (being Printed) do not only reach them who are
alive, but those also who are unborn; and not to them alone who are near, but
such likewise who are afar off. It was the Authors desire, that having taught
you these things, you might after his decease, 2 Pet. 3.15.
have them always in remembrance; and therefore this Exposition according to
his order was transcribed for the Press when he dyed. Now he is taken out of
your sight; but if you yet desire communion with him, it must be, by walking in
that track which he has here chalked out before you, endeavoring to tread the
steps of his Religious, zealous conversation; who herein (though dead) still
speaks unto you. This birth was conceived and brought forth firstly for you,
therefore though others should despise it, yet you will (I hope) give it good
welcome; because it reviveth the memory of him, who (whilst he lived) ceased not
to pray for your happiness for ever.

Because of mine Education amongst you, and my near natural relations unto many
of you, I am affectionately disposed to desire your best good, and therefore
shall make bold to premise a few things for your direction, that this Book may
prove the more profitable. 1. Add Prayer unto your reading, that you may find
the power of those Truths warming your hearts. 2. Make practice your end in
seeking knowledge: for That servant that knows his Masters will and does it
not, Luke 12.47.
must be beaten with many stripes. This was the frequent advice of this Author;
and that when others had their Religion only at their tongues end, yours might
appear in your lives. 3. Attend constantly upon the Public Ministry of your
faithful Pastors and Teachers. Deuteronomy. 12.19.
Take heed to thy self, that thou forsake not the Levite so long as thou live
upon the earth. The first step toward Apostasy, is the slighting and declining
of the preaching of the Gospel. 4. Confer much with Orthodox Christians, who
are able to instruct you in the paths of pure truth and godliness. Matthew. 13.36.
As Christ's Disciples desired him to explain obsure Parables, Acts 8.30.32.
So the Eunuch improved the company of Philip, for the like advantage: These
examples doubtless are recorded for our imitation. Consider what I have said,
and the Lord give his blessing, that this Book may be abundantly beneficial
unto you. Now the Father of lights, and God of all grace, fill you with the
knowledge of his Will, and with the fruits of Faith, that you may with comfort
pray, and wait for the coming of Jesus Christ. I am

From Selston Aug. 9. 1653. Yours in the service of the Lord, CHAPTER JACKSON.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
THe hand of Providence does here tender unto thee a plain piece of good old
Divinity: The groundwork of the Book, is the foundation of Christian Religion,
gathered into six Principles (by that famous and worthy Minister of Christ, in
the University of Camb. Master Will. Perkins) which for above 50 years, have
been much approved, and improved in the Church of England and elsewhere, for the
instruction of many thousands in matters necessary to salvation. These needful
Principles are here familiarly, and faithfully, both confirmed and applied, for
thy spiritual advantage: and doubtless, there is more then ordinary need of
such helps, in these Apostatizing, erroneous times; wherein the chief Articles
of faith, are either impudently questioned, or irreligiously slighted. There is
no means more promising to reclaim wanderers, and to establish waverers in the
truth, then by recalling them unto the serious consideration of the first
grounds of Religion: for by this means, people would find sure footing for
their faith, and also grow able to defend fundamentals against gainsayers,
when others are like Vessels without Ballast, which float hither and thither,
according to the different motion of every wind and wave, which does assault
them. Many godly persons, who reaped soul-fruit from this seed when first sown,
by these Sermons when first preached, bave importuned the Printing of them
(according to the Authors own intention) for their own further benefit, and for
the edification of many others. The Sermons do breath the holiness and
plainness of the Preachers spirit, who was very laborious and prosperous in the
work of his Ministry. And although they be not so Notional and Rhetorical, as
many may desire; yet they are substantially profitable, and fitted to the
capacity of such, who most need them. The Candle yields not the more light,
because it is painted, neither does the Sword any better service, because
gilded, or put into a velvet Scabbard. As curious sights do not fill empty
bellies, so neither does gaudy language feed hungry souls. Reverend Master
Greenham was bold, to call the Ministry Glassy, Bright, and Brittle;
(foreseeing that vanity growing up in the Church in his days) wherein
ingenuity and affectation of words, was preferred before solidity of savory
matter. Although it is by all men acknowledged, that apt and pregnant
expresssions have their profit, and that the eloquence of Apollo's, is not to
be disregarded: yet Phrases are only the husks and shells, but Truths are the
Kernels, wherein the soul finds sweetness and strength. Not the fair leaves,
but the fruits upon Trees, are the food: and the Prophet Jeremiah tells us,
that Pastors according to Gods heart, shall feed with knowledge and
understanding, Jer. 3.15. And because the Lord has in his Family (the Church)
both babes and well grown Children; therefore in great wisdom, he is pleased to
provide both milk and stronger meats; Heb. 5.12, 13, 14. Some means of
spiritual nourishment (wholesomly, though not curiously cooked) God has here
vouchsafed unto them, whose hearts are disposed to be exercised in the
Principles of the Doctrine of Christ. Good Reader, In the conscientious use
hereof, I heartily commend thee to the guidance and blessing of the Almighty,
that thou may be better rooted, and further edified in the truths of the
holy Scriptures, through Jesus Christ; in whom I am

Aug. 29th 1653. Thy Friend and Servant, SIMEON ASH^.

The Foundation of Christian Religion gathered into Six Principles, EXPLAINED.
The first PRINCIPLE.
Quest. What do thou believe concerning God?

Answ. There is one God, Creator and Governor of all things, distinguished into
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

THat there is a God: There be three Books wherein we may read this great
Truth: 1. The Book of the Scriptures. 2. The Book of the Creatures. 3. The Book
of Nature. First, the Book of the Scriptures: as often as God is mentioned in
holy Writ so often (upon the matter) it is affirmed that there is a God: Now this
is a great demonstration, the Scriptures affirming a thing to be so. But come
we to the second Book, the Book of the Creatures; see what the Apostle says of
it, Romans 1.20. For the invisible things of him from the Creation of the world,
are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his
eternal power and Godhead; so that they are without excuse. The meaning of the
Apostle is, That there is a God, as is plain by the very Book of the Creatures;
and not a few Arguments in this kind may be deduced hence.

Argum. 1. As first, From the Original of the Creatures or world. They either
had a beginning or not a beginning: If we say, Not a beginning, then we make
the world God; all the Creatures from the least to the greatest, God. For to
have their being from themselves without beginning, is nothing else but to be
God (what has a being of it self without beginning, is God). But to affirm the
world to be God, or the several Creatures therein to be God, were not this
absurd and brutish?

If we say, They had a beginning, the world and Creatures, as is very evident;
who then was their beginner and Maker, but God? Why then, there is a God.

Arg. 2. The Creatures being many, are all referred to their several and
peculiar ends; and so they all work and are employed. Now hence it is plain and
evident, that there is one above them all, who did aim at these ends in them,
that did create them to these ends; and who is this but God? why then, there is
a God.

Arg. 3. The comely order and beauty which may be observed in the worlds great
variety, evidence, There is a God.

Arg. 4. Man himself, confidered from the rest of the Creatures, who may be
termed the Epitome of the world, or Microcosmos, the little world: Man's body
reviewed, is it not a wondrous and curious piece of work? as Psalm. 139.14, 15.
But his soul especially, (that immaterial, immortal, invisible substance) with
the faculties of it, and the great acts of those faculties; Do not all these
conclude a wise and infinite Creator, and so a God?

The third Book wherein this great truth may be read, is the Book of Nature: Of
this the Apostle speaks, Romans 1.19. Because that which may be known of God is
manifest in them; that is to say, Is writ in the hearts of the old Gentiles,
and so in the hearts of all men; not all that may be known of God, but so much
that there is a God, because God has showed it unto them, that is, has writ
it in their hearts by a general work of his Spirit; and so that place may be
understood, Joh. 1.9 That was the true light which lights every man that
comes into the world; to wit, with the light of nature, in a great measure, or
in a less; and this we call the Book of Nature. Among those common notions
imprinted in man's heart since Adams fall, this is a principal one, That there
is a God: Such sparks and notions as this, are usually called the Light, the
Law, or Book of Nature; not that man's nature is the Author of them, but God, as
before we have heard. Yet so called, First, Because they are imprinted in man's
nature. Secondly, Because they are as common as man's nature: and hence it is,
that all Nations do acknowledge a God. Suppose the most of them pitch upon a
false god, or seek the true God in a false way, why yet this general
acknowledgment from the light of nature, is a mighty Argument that there is a
God. And although happily some particular persons have been found to deny this
Principle; yet those persons committing heinous and horrible Crimes (but kept
secret from man) their consciences afterward have accused and terrified them:
now their heinous Crimes being not known to any man but themselves; why should
their consciences vex and terrify them, if there were not a God?

Object. 1. But may some men say, in whom the light of nature is almost
extinguished, I never saw God, how can I then believe there is a God?

Answ. Thou did never see thy soul, and do thou believe therefore thou have
no soul? Thou did never see the wind, yet surely thou believe there is such
a thing, such a creature.

Object, 2. But if this be a Truth generally acknowledged, How comes it to
pass, that the most men and women live as though there were no God?

Answ. First, by way of Concession or Grant; Secondly, By way of Solution.

1. By way of Concession or Grant. It is true, the most do live as though there
were no God; so walk as denying the Presence, Power, and Justice of God.

2. By way of Solution or Satisfaction. Although men and women generally by the
light of Nature do acknowledge a God, yet through the corruption of nature, they
frame and fain him to themselves, to be such a one as they please; to wit,
without Attributes, not present in all places, not infinitely powerful and just.

As this is a Truth, That by the light of nature, we know and believe there is
a God: so likewise this is a Truth, That since Adams fall, by the corruption of
nature (in regard of the true God) we are all Atheists: Thus the Psalmist,
describing the natural man, Psalm. 14.1. The fool has said in his heart, There
is no God: The natural man confesses there is a God, but it is a God of his
own framing; without Attributes, to wit, an Idol; which upon the matter, is as
much as to deny the true God.

Object. 3. Although this be a Truth granted, and plain; why yet the Regenerate
themselves have doubtings this way, they sometimes doubt Whether there be a God
or no.

Answ. And this comes to pass, First, by Satan's suggestion, who sometimes darts
this thought maliciously into them, even in their best Devotions. Secondly,
this thought may be in them through the corruption of nature remaining; they
having a seed and some degrees of Atheism remaining in them so long as they are
in this world. Thirdly, Want of through consideration may occasion doubting
this way. As when they observe themselves men and women of affliction, and the
wicked great in the world, and highly exalted; looking merely upon this and no
further, may occasion them to question this great Truth; but going on to the
end and issue, the doubt is presently removed, considering what the wicked's
exultation ends in; and so considering what is the issue of the godly man's
afflictions.

Use 1. To expostulate with the wicked and unregenerate: There is a God; this
thou say, thou beleevest; I say, thou do well, but the devils do as much,
nay more; ^hey believe and tremble. Jam. 2.19. Examine thy self, do not they
exceed thee in this? Thou believe there is a God, but do thou tremble at
his Justice, Power, and Omnipresence? Do thou persuade thy self of his
Omnipresence, that he sees thy ways, courses, and proceedings in all places,
and at all times? How comes it to pass then, that thou willingly and wilfully
committest that sin in secret (in his sight) which thou would be ashamed to
commit in the eye and veiw of the world? Observe now; Thou beleevest there is a
God, but it is a god of thy own framing; a god that sees not thy sinful
courses, and proceedings. And to this purpose, take notice how the spirit of
God brings in the wicked or natural man, speaking in his heart, Job 22.13, 14.
And thou say, how does God know? and is there knowledge in the most high?
Psalm. 73.11. Can he judge through the dark cloud? thick clouds are a covering to
him, that he sees not. And Psalm. 94.7. They say, the Lord shall not see,
neither shall the God of Jacob regard it. Thus what the wicked man's thoughts
are of God, his actions declare. And so in regard of Gods Justice, if thou
did believe him to be a God of justice, how durst thou go on obstinately in
thy sins, making a covenant with death, and being at agreement with hell; he
having openly proclaimed in his word, that he will be revenged on al such
malefactors? The truth of it is, although thou do acknowledge a God, why yet
again thou deniest him, by denying his justice; as if he were a God all of
mercy: but such as thou, shall one day find him to be a God of justice, of
infinite justice, Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20.

Again, in regard of Gods Power; Thou beleevest there is a God, but again
deniest him, in that thou do not believe him to be a God of infinite power:
If thou do believe him to be a God of infinite power, why do not thou
rather tremble at his threatening, then at the threatening of a mortal man? Let
an earthly Magistrate, or Prince threaten, and menace for the breach of his
statutes, and edicts, presently men and women begin to tremble, and to be
afraid, and know not which way to turn themselves; but let the Lord, the mighty
God of heaven and earth threaten to bring this and that plague, this and that
judgment upon them for their sins and transgressions; nay even to damn them to
the pit of hell, if they do not reform: for all this, they go on still in their
sins, and evil courses, as though the Lord had not power to maintain his
threatenings upon them. Well, thou that art a wicked and ungodly liver, see thy
condition to be a woeful condition: there is just so much light in thee, as to
make thee inexcusable: Thou beleevest there is a God, but in life deniest his
presence, power, and justice: Thou art not an absolute Athiest in judgment, but
an Athiest in practice. Well, it is as thou think, there is a God; but thou
shall find him otherwise then thou think, to wit, all-saving; for he is
infinitely just, and powerful.

Use 2. For Direction: Thou beleevest there is a God. First, more and more
examine this great truth, more and more ponder and perpend it, until thy heart
be established in it; and if God be God, serve him; if Baal be God, follow him.
The meaning is, if this principle be not true, follow the ways of thy own
heart, live and walk according to thy own lust without any restraint; but if it
be true, (as it is undoubtedly) then walk and live as thoroughly believing this
principle. Labor to please God, to glorify him, and to have communion with
him; and know there is nothing does so choke and suffocate this Principle, as a
wicked and profane life, as Romans 1.18. For the wrath of God is revealed from
heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth
in unrighteousness. This is the first rule of Direction.

2. Thou believing this Principle, endeavor to nourish and maintain it: To this
purpose thou may help thy self by the Book of the Creatures, as David says,
Psalm. 19.1. The Heavens declare the glory of God, and the Firmament shows his
handiwork. There is not the least Creature but thou may read God in it; but
especially be thou exercised in the book of the Scriptures in reading and
hearing them; they do the most plainly and evidently set forth God.

3. If thou have not a Justifying faith, be earnest with the Lord for it,
because without this supernatural faith, thou can not believe this Principle
savingly.

4. Converse much with those that are godly. They that converse with the
worldly-minded, shall observe them much to be ascribing the event of things to
natural and second causes; but the godly, the event of things to God. Then
further, The godly have an experimental knowledge of God, and so speaking of
God, they many times speak emphatically and movingly, much to the strengthening
of the faith of others. A Reverend Light in this age, one Junius, does
acknowledge, that the first thing that turned him from his Atheism, was his
talking with a Countreyman of his, and his manner of expressing himself.

Use 3. For Information.

1. Is there a God? why then, the Scriptures are true; because they declare
that he is, and what he is.

2. Is there a God? why then the soul is immortal; for as the immortal soul is
the image of God, and so does demonstrate a God: so they that do most firmly
believe there is a God, do likewise firmly believe the immortality of the soul.
And upon that ground cast for it accordingly, for the beautifying and well
being of it.

3. If there be a God? why then, there is a Heaven and a Hell: a place of Bliss
for the godly after this life, and a place of Torment for the wicked; otherwise
God should not be just, and then not God. We read of a Pope that when he was on
his deathbed, said, He should ere long be resolved of three things, which all
his life long he had doubted of: 1. Whether there be a God or no? 2. Whether
the soul be immortal, or no? 3. Whether there be a heaven and a hell, or no? He
being not satisfied of the first, might well doubt of the two last. And thus we
have absolved the first Member of the first Principle.

MEMBER II. That there is but one God.
THat there is but one God, the Scriptures are very evident this way, Deuter.
6.4. Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord. Deuteronomy. 32.39. See now, that
I, even I am he, and there is no God with me. Psalm. 16.31. Who is God save the
Lord, save Jehovah? And so Isai. 44.6. I am the first, and I am the last, and
besides me there is no God. And Isai. 45.5 I am the Lord, and there is none
else, there is no God besides me. Ephesians. 4.6. One God and Father of all. And
lastly, 1 Corin. 8.4, 5, 6. We know that an Idol is nothing in the world, (that
is, nothing in nature subsisting; or nothing in respect of the Divinity
ascribed to it) and that there is none other God but one; that is to say,
properly and by nature: For though there be that be called gods, to wit,
improperly, as there be Gods many, and Lords many, improperly so called: But to
us there is but one God; that is to say, the Church does know and acknowledge
but one God (properly and by nature. Magistrates are called gods, because they
are Gods Deputies or Vicegerents upon earth, as Psalm. 82.6. I have said, ye
are Gods. Idols are called gods, because some ignorant and fond people think
them to be so: Jer. 10.11. The Gods that have not made the heavens and the
earth, even they shall perish from the earth, and from under these heavens.
Nay, the Devil is called god, The God of this world, 2 Cor. 4.4. because of the
willing subjection that the wicked yield unto him; not that any of these are
gods by nature, or properly, but improperly.

Reas. 1. There is but one only chief good, and therefore but one God.

Reas. 2. There is but one first cause of all things, and therefore but one God.

Reas. 3. To be more Infinites then one is impossible: there is but one
Infinite, and therefore but one God.

R. 4. If there be more Gods then one; why not three as well as two? and why
not five as well as three? and why not ten as well as five? nay, why not thirty
thousand, as it is observed by some of the Fathers, the ancient Heathen had.

Use 1. For Reprehension: First, to reprove the Papists: Secondly, the carnal
Protestant.

1. The Papists set up diverse gods besides the true God: As first, The Pope:
They say, he is to judge all, but to be judged of none; that he has power to
forgive sins, and that properly; that he has power to make Laws to bind
consciences, as well as Gods Laws. 2. The Virgin Mary; they make her a
goddess, preferring her before Christ, trusting in her for salvation, and in
their Prayers entreating her to command her Son, by the might of a mother. Nay,
3. They make all the departed Saints gods, by praying unto them, as though they
knew the secrets of men's hearts, as though they were present every where; which
are things proper to God alone.

2. Reproof to the carnal Protestant. Such as principally affect the Creature,
or put their confidence in the Creature, those set up to themselves more gods
then one. Some make worldly Riches their god, and so the Covetous: some carnal
Pleasures, and so the Voluptuous: some earthly Honor, and so the Ambitious:
some make this and that man their god, and so trusting in him. The truth is,
the most make the Devil theirgod, by a willing subjection to his suggestions.
And thus the carnal Protestant, although he seem to confess one God with his
mouth, why yet in affection and practiee he sets up more. What a man loves
most, delights in most, trusts in most, that he makes his god, whatsoever he
professes with his tongue: but let those Idolaters know how the Apostle James
styles them, Jam. 4.4. Ye Adulterers and Adulteresses; that is to say,
Spiritual Adulterers and Adulteresses; and how the Lord threatens by the
generous and truly noble Prophet, Isaiah 42.8. That he will not give his glory
to another: and therefore they giving that to the Creature which is due unto
him, let them be assured that he will be revenged upon them, Psalm. 16.4.

Use 2. For Inquisition or Inquiry. Seeing there is a God, and but one God, it
shall be very necessary to enquire concerning him; to inform our selves, what
this one God is? What God is, strictly to enquire, (as a wise Logician says)
he being primum ens, is beyond Logic: and therefore that we may define God
perfectly, we have need of Gods own Logic. And the Reasons are, 1. Because he
is Incomprehensible. 2. Because he is in great part unknown unto us while we
are in the mortal body: Whilst we are in this world (as the Apostle tells us) 1
Cor. 15.12. we see through a glass darkly; but in the world to come we shall see
him face to face: this the Apostle John interprets, 1 John 3.2. We shall see
God as he is; that is, know him perfectly, as befits such Creatures, and as
such Creatures can comprehend. Yet we are to know, the Lord has so far
revealed himself in the Scriptures to the Elect, as may suffice to their
salvation, and has acquainted them, Deuteronomy. 29.29. that what is revealed belongs
to them; nay, has commanded them, John 5.39. To search the Scriptures; and as
for other ends, so especially for this, that they may know in some saving way
what God is.

Now because the Catechism in the Exposition of it, affords us a brief
Description of God; and because in the examination of it, we find it to be
borrowed and grounded upon the Scriptures; we think it not amiss to open that
Description unto you, that so you may the better conceive of God as his Word
reveals him. And this is the Description,

God is a Spirit, or spiritual Substance, most Wise, most Holy, Eternal,
Infinite.

The Catechism describes God afterward in a more large way, setting him forth
in his works of Creation and Preservation, and so in the several subsistances,
or manners of being in the one Divine Essence.

But first, for this Description, God is a Spirit, or Spiritual Substance.
First, God is a Substance or Essence; that is to say, such a Substance or
Essence, as first, has his being from none but from himself. 2. As is
preserved and sustained of none, but subsisteth by himself. 3. As is the cause
of all other Substances and Essences; and upon this ground he is called
Jehovah, which is the proper and essential name of God: As if one would say,
Being of himself, and causing all other things to be that have being.

2. A Spirit or a Spiritual Substance. That God is a Spirit, see Joh. 4 24. And
why said to be a Spirit or a spiritual substance? First, Negatively, because he
is not Corporeal. 2. By way of Similitude, because there are diverse perfections
in Spiritual Substances which shadow forth the Divine nature. Our souls and the
Angels are Spirits too, but observe the difference betwixt such Spirits and
God: our souls and the Angels are Spirits created and finite, but God is a
Spirit uncreated and incomprehensible.

3. Most Wise: Now well may the Catechism describe God to be most wise. First,
Because he is essentially wise, and Wisdom it self: in comparison of him the
wisest creature has no wisdom at all: and so we must understand that place and
the like; To the only wise God, Jude 25. 2. Because his Wisdom or Understanding
is an absolute, simple, and perfect understanding, without composition. By one
act of understanding he distinctly and perfectly knows all things. All things
are naked and open unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do, Hebr. 4.13. 3
Because his Wisdom it Immutable. He knows not one thing otherwise then
another; neither one thing more then another; neither that heretofore which he
knows not now; nor that now which he knew not heretofore: Known unto God are
all his works from the beginning of the world, Acts 15.18. 4 Because the Wisdom
of God is eternal: had no beginning, neither has: any ending. 5. Because the
Wisdom of God is infinite: He truly knows every thing, and the reason of every
thing. Zophar the Naamathite, one of the friends of Job, speaking of Gods
wisdom, says, It is as high as the height of heavex, deeper then hell, longer
then the earth, broader then the sea, Job 11.8, 9. And so the Apostle Romans
11.33. O the depth of the wisdom and knowledge of God!

4 Most Holy: See how the Angels cry on eto another, Isai. 6.3. Holy, holy,
holy is the Lord of Hosts: and the same Prophet styles God (by way of
excellency) The Holy One; in chap. 40. ver. 25. He is holy in all his ways; to
wit, of Mercy, Justice, Truth, etc. And not holy as the Creature; the Creature
it self is one thing, and the holiness of the Creature is another thing. But
God is holy by nature: Holiness is of the very nature of God himself.

5. Eternal. That is, neither had beginning, nor shall have ending: Psalm. 9.2.
Even from everlasting to everlasting thou art God: 1 Timothy 1.17. Now unto the
King eternal, etc. God is not eternal as the Angels and souls of men and women:
for although they shall have no ending, why yet they had a beginning; and
therefore they may more properly be termed everlasting, or sempiternal, then
eternal. Eternity looks both backward and forward: Everlastingness or
Sempiternity looks only forward unto that which is to come.

6. And lastly, Infinite. That is, such a one as whose Essence fills heaven and
earth, he being every where present totally and wholly: Isaiah 66.1. Thus says
the Lord, the heaven is my Throne, the earth is my foot stool: And Jer. 23.24.
Do not I fill heaven and earth, says the Lord. Nay, hear what Solomon says, 1
King. 8.27. Behold, the Heavens, and the heaven of heavens cannot contain thee.
He is in all places at once, and not only by his virtue and power, but by his
whole infinite Essence. Not that he is mixed with the Creatures, for that is
contrary to his most perfect single nature; nor that he is polluted with the
filth and contagion of any Creature, for that is contrary to his most perfect
holy nature: but in such a sort he is present, as is Heavenly, Spiritual, and
Incomprehensible. Thus he is in all places, yet circumscribed to none.

Object. But if the Lord be essentially and wholly in every place; why is he
said to remove from one place to another, as Genesis 11.7. Go too, let us go down,
and there confound their language?

Answ. These and such like phrases are spoken after the manner of men to our
capacities. Not that there is truly and properly any change of place in God.
And thus far touching this brief description of God. The Catechism goes on
further describing God by his works, and several subsistences.

MEMBER III. This one God is Creator of all things.
Doct. THis one God, or the one true God, is Creator of all things.

For the better understanding of this Doctrine, we are to resolve diverse
Questions: As first, more plainly, Who created? 2. What was created? 3.
Whereof? 4. How? 5. When? 6. To what end? Lastly, the Uses.

Quest. 1. The first Question: Who Created?

An. God. Genesis 1.1. In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth; to
wit, God the Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost; for so Solomon,
speaking of the Creator, does speak in the plural number, Eccles. 12.1.
Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth. The Father by the Son, and by
the Holy Ghost: the Son from the Father, and by the Holy Ghost; the Holy Ghost
from the Father and the Son: All the three Persons jointly Created, only they
are distinguished in their manner of Creating, as before. And that this is a
work common to all the three Persons, is plain by the holy Scriptures. That God
the Father did create, see Act. 4.24. The Apostles thus pray; Lord, thou art
God which have made heaven and earth, and the sea, and all that therein is; and
in ver. 27. For of a truth, against thy holy child Jesus, whom thou have
anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the people of
Israel were gathered together: Where we may observe, that the Apostle styles
God the Father Creator of all things. That God the Son did also create, see
Joh. 1.3. All things were made by him; to wit, by the Son: And so Colos. 1.16.
By him were all things created that are in heaven. and that are in earth; that
is to say, He from the Father did create, or the Father by him, and not by him
as an instrument, but as by another Person of the same Essence and Power with
himself. And that the Holy Ghost did create, see Genesis 1.2. And the Spirit of
God moved upon the face of the waters: and so Job 26.13. By his Spirit he has
garnished the Heavens; that is to say, the Holy Ghost, from the Father and the
Son. The work of Creation proclaims a God, but indeed does not discover the
mystery of the Trinity; and yet it cannot be denied (if we consult with the
Scriptures) but that this work of Creation was the work of the whole Trinity.

Quest. 2. The second Question: What was Created?

Answ. The Catechism answers, all things; that is to say, all things but God
himself: For we must not conceive that any of the three persons in the Deity
were created; They being all eternal and coeternall: Nay further, we must not
conceive that sin and misery were created, they coming in as the cause, and the
effect, by Satan's malice, and man's free will; and to the purpose aforesaid,
observe we that distinction, John 1.3. And without him (that is, the second
person in Trinity) was not any thing made, that was made. Now these exceptions
allowed, we answer with the Catechism, All things were created; as the third
heaven, with the Angels the inhabitants of it: That the third heaven was
created, see Heb. 11.10. For he looked, (that is to say, Abraham) for a city,
(to wit, the third heaven) whose builder and maker is God. That the Angels were
created (although Moses in his history of the creation, does not mention them,
for reasons best known to the Spirit of God, who did direct him in the penning
of the same) yet that they were created, see Psalm. 148.2. Praise ye him, (to
wit, God) all his angels: and the reason is given verse the 5. For he
commanded, and they were created. And so Colos. 1 16. By him were all things
created, visible and invisible; whether they be thrones, or dominions, or
principalities, or powers; and by these we understand the Angels. And so all
things downward from the third heaven, were created even to the bottom and
center of the lowest earth; as the sky, which is called the second heaven,
with the Sun, Moon, and Stars, which are therein: The air likewise, which is
called the lowest heaven, with the fouls of it: The earth with the creatures
thereon, as trees, plants, beasts, man: and so the seas, with the fishes
therein. That the particulars aforesaid were created, peruse the first Chapter
of Genesis.

Object 1. But were the great hills and mountains created, were they not
occasioned by the flood in Noah's time?

Answ. Some of them were created, Genesis 7.19, 20. And the waters prevailed
exceedingly upon the earth, and all the high hills that were under the whole
heaven, were covered; fifteen cubits upward did the waters prevail, and the
mountains were covered. Amos 4.13. Lo, he that forms the mountains, and
created the wind; speaking of God.

Object 2. But Toades, and Snakes, and such venomous things were not created.

Answ. Yes, they were created. Job 26.13. His hand (speaking of God) has
formed the crooked Serpent: Not created venomous, and hurtful, but became so
by man's sin. The Lord made every creature good, and so profitable to man; and
therefore what creatures are now become hurtful to man, it is man's sin that
has made them so.

Quest. 3. Whereof, or of what were all things made?

Answ. Not of the essence of God, nor of any former matter coeternall with God;
but of nothing. Heb. 11.3. The things which are seen, were not made of things
that do appear; that is, they were made of nothing.

Object. 3. But man was made of the dust of the earth, and woman of man.

Ans. The Lord made al things of nothing; but some things mediately, some
things immediately; or thus, Creation is twofold, 1. Simple. 2. In respect.
Simple creation, is a producing of things out of nothing, and so the first
matter was created.

2. Creation in respect, is a producing of things out of matter preexistent, or
out of the first matter.

Object. But of nothing nothing is made, says the Philosopher.

Answ. This is true of a natural generation, or working, but not true of a
divine Creation.

Quest. 4. How did God create all things?

Answ. Not by any labor or weariness, but by his word, and appointment, Genesis
1.3. And God said, Let there be light, and there was light. And so Psalm. 148.5.
He commanded, and they were created: He needed not tools, or other instruments;
neither used he the aid or help of any assistant, but at his very beck and
appointment all things were created.

Quest. 5. When was the world created?

Ans. It is betwixt five and six thousand years since the world was created: If
it be asked at what time of the year; the most judicious answer, in the spring
time: If in what space of time; in the space of six days, Genesis 1.31. compared
with Chap. 2. ver. 1. and Exodus 20.11.

Quest. 6. To what end did God create the world?

Ans. To the praise of his glory. Prove. 16.4. He made all things for himself,
to wit; for his own glory. And Romans 11.36. Of him, and through him, and to
him are all things; to whom be glory for ever. Now we come to the use of this
Doctrine.

Use 1. To confute the Atheistical person, such as are unwilling to acknowledge
the one true God, all the creatures proclaiming this great truth; nay, the
excellency of this work evidently demonstrating the infinite excellency of the
Creator, his infinite power, wisdom, goodness, and truth. And indeed, by this
work of Creation, is the true God plainly distinguished from all false gods and
idols whatsoever. If we be asked, how we know the true God from all false gods?
We answer, by the work of Creation, He alone being the maker of heaven and
earth, and all things therein, as himself says. Isa. 45.7. All the gods of the
nations are idols, but the Lord, (that is to say, the true God) made the
heavens.

Use 2. For the comfort and consolation of Gods people, who suffer much in this
world, and many times for the truths saks. 1 Pet. 4.19. Let them that suffer
according to the will of God, commit the keeping of their souls to him in well
doing, as unto a faithful Creator. And so Job argues, Job 10.3. Is it good
unto thee that thou should oppress? That thou shoul'dst despise the work of
thine hand? This argument indeed from such as obstinately go on in sin, will be
of little force, as we may see, Isa. 27.11. It is a people of no understanding,
therefore he that made them, will not have mercy in them: and he that formed
them will show them no favor. The potter, when he sees the clay will by no
means be brought to his mind, he takes it and dashes it against the walls: so
will the Lord deal with the wicked, who will by no means be brought to obey
their Creator. But for those that remember their Creator, and truly fear him,
he will be found a faithful Creator to them upon all occasions; in their
greatest wants, inward, and outward, supplying them as shall be the best; in
their greatest dangers defending them, as shall be for their greatest good. But
ye have not looked (says the Prophet Esaias) unto the maker thereof, neither had
respect unto him that fashioned it long ago, Isa. 22.11. As though if the
Jews had had [respect] or recourse unto their Creator in the way of true
humiliation and information, as well as used the civil means which they were
earnest in, they should have been strong enough, and too strong for the
Persians their enemies: see Psalm. 124.8.

Use 3. For Exhortation: and that diverse ways. 1. To imitate God, that we
would not hoard up and keep to our selves what might be profitable to others.
The Lord, although he made all things for his own glory, yet his glory was not
increased by any thing he made: For to speak properly, he being always
infinitely glorious, his glory can neither be increased, nor decreased: But in
the work of Creation, he commnicated himself to Elect Angels and men for their
good and happiness; so must we bring forth our talent inward and outward, for
the good and benefit of others.

Secondly, To exhort us, That we would seriously consider the work of Creation,
and in it to read God and his attributes. There is not the least fly, but in it
we may read God and his Attributes; the Lord could have made the world in a
moment of time, but takes six days to the business, and no question to move us
to be the more serious and laborious in the reveiw of this work: and will not
take it well at our hand to have such a work as this slighted. We must arise
from the creature to the Creator. The unreasonable creatures are matter of
praise, and we must therefore in our kind be instruments of praise.

Thirdly, To exhort us to serve and obey God, and that with cheerfulness;
Eccles. 12.1. Remember thy Creator, in the days of thy youth. Words of knowledge
in Scripture imply affection, and practice: that is to say, know, fear, love,
serve, and obey thy Creator in the days of thy youth, thou will then be the
fitter to serve and obey him in thy old age. And so the Psalmist, Psalm. 100.2,
3. Serve the Lord with gladness: it is he that made us and not we our selves.
We count him a Monster of men that is very undutiful unto his Parents; but how
much more may we account him a Monster that delights in rebellion against his
Creator, whose instruments only our Parents were to bring us into this world?
Deuteronomy. 32.6. Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish people and unwise? Is not he
thy father that has bought thee? has he not made thee and established thee?

Use 4. For Inquisition: Further to enquire into two Creatures the chief of the
Creation, to wit, Angels and Men.

Touching the Angels, if you ask when they were created? I answer, Whithin the
compass of the first six days, in likelihood upon the first day, when the
third heaven was created. That they were created within the compass of the six
days, see Genesis 1.31. and 2.1: The heavens and the earth were finished and all
the host of them. 2. If you enquire into their nature? Answ. They are invisible
and incorporeal Substances, Heb. 1.14 Are they not all ministering spirits? 3.
If you enquire into their number? Answ. They are very many Heb. 12.22. An
innumerable company of Angels; and so Dan. 7. 10. Thousand thousands ministered
unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him. 4. If we
enquire into their Properties? Answ. 1. They are Creatures of excellent
knowledge and understanding: 1 Cor. 13.1. Though I speak with the tongue of men
and of Angels: not that the Angels have tongues, or use of speech, but to note
what grace and excellency of speech must needs be thought to be in them, if it
might be supposed that they should speak; and hence it is they are said, Rev.
4.6. to be full of eyes. 2. They are Creatures wondrous holy; I mean, the
Angels that fell are extremely wicked, but were created holy. That the Angels
we speak of are holy Creatures, see Matthew. 25.31. and Luke 9.26. They having
this style given them, [Holy] in both places. 3. They are Creatures of great
strength and might, Psalm. 103.20. Bless the Lord, ye his Angels, that excel in
strength. And so 2 These. 1.7. Mighty Angels. 4. They are Creatures very
expeditious and nimble, and therefore described Ezekiel. 1.6. to have wings. 5.
They are Creatures Immortal: Luke 20.36. Neither can they dye any more, for
they are equal unto the Angels: yet but Creatures for all this, and finite.
Lastly, If you ask, Why they were created? Answ. For these two ends especially:
1. To celebrate the praises of God: Psalm. 103.20. Bless the Lord, ye his
Angels; and Isai. 6.3. One cried unto another, and said, Holy, holy, holy is
the Lord of Hosts, the whole earth is full of his glory. 2. To be instruments
of good and safety unto Elect men and women: Psalm. 34.7 The Angel of the Lord
encampeth round about them that fear him, and delivers them: Psalm. 91.11. He
shall give his Angels charge over thee to keep thee in thy ways; and Heb.
1.14. Are they not all ministering Spirits, sent forth for them who shall be
heirs of salvation? As this may greatly comfort and animate all true Believers,
why so it may restrain and pull in the wicked from offering the least wrong
unto such. Mat. 18.10. Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones;
for I say unto you, that in heaven their Angels do always behold the face of my
Father which is in heaven. They are Angels to take revenge upon you, if you do
them the least wrong; which is evident by the Angel his standing with a drawn
sword ready to destroy Balaam, because he would be allured by worldly gain to
go against Gods people, Number. 22.22 etc.

Now we come to the other principal Creature; to wit, Man.

If you ask when he was created? Answ. Upon the sixth day, and so the woman;
Genesis 1.27.31. 2. If you ask of what was man made? Ans. His body was of the dust
of the earth, the woman's body of one of the man's ribs, Genesis 2.7. and 2.22. both
their souls of nothing, inspired of God, Genesis 2.7. In man we have an Epitome or
compendium of all Creatures, he being partly visible, and partly invisible:
Visible in regard of his body; Invisible in regard of his soul. And touching
the excellency of man as he was created, this is employed in that the Trinity
hold a consultation about him: Genesis 1.26. And God said, Let us make man, etc.
Now man's excellency as he was created, did especially consist in three things:
1. In that he was made according to Gods image: Genesis 1.27. So God created man
in his own Image, in the Image of God created he him. Now by the Image of God
according unto which Adam was created, we are to understand; 1. His Immaterial,
Invisible, and Immortal soul; for so every man is the Image of God, in regard
of the substance of his soul. Genesis 9.6. Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall
his blood be shed; for in the Image of God made he man. By the Image of God in
this place, we only understand the substance of the soul. 2. Adam was created
according to Gods Image in regard of Holiness and Righteousness: he is said to
be created according to Gods Image, because he was created a holy and righteous
Creature. Ephesians. 4.24. And that ye put on that new man, which after God is
created in righteousness and true holiness.

The second thing wherein man's excellency did consist, as he was created, was
in this, That he had sweet communion and fellowship with God. This may be
gathered from Genesis 2.19. And out of the ground the Lord God formed every beast
of the field, and every foul of the air, and brought them unto Adam to see
what he would call them.

The third thing wherein man's excellency did consist as he was created, was, he
was made Lord of all visible Creatures, Genesis 1.26. And God said, Let us make
man in our own image, after our likeness, and let them have dominion over the
fish of the sea, and over the foul of the air, and over the cattle, and over
all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creeps upon the earth: And
so ver. 28. God said to Adam and Eve, Have dominion over the fish of the sea,
and over the foul of the air, and over every living thing that moves upon the
earth.

And thus far touching the work of Creation: We come in the next place to the
work of Preservation.

MEMBER IV. Preserver and Governor of all things.
Doct. THe one true God, the Lord is the Preserver and Governor of all things:
For so we must understand the Catechism, when it says, the Lord is Governor of
all things: the former to be implied, to wit, that he is the Preserver as well
as the Governor of all things. And so we come from the work of Creation unto
the work of Gods Providence; which consists of these two parts, Preservation
and Gubernation, or governing. And what is Preservation but Creation continued,
or the upholding of all creatures in their kinds, beings, motions and
operations? And what is Gubernation but the moving, ordering and directing of
all the Creatures and their actions to their decreed ends?

Now that the Lord is the Preserver and Governor of all things, the Scripture
is very copious this way; but we will only produce three or four places: Ephesians.
1.11. the Apostle describes the Lord to be such a one as works all things
according to the counsel of his own will: and the Psalmist, Ps. 36.6. O Lord,
thou preservest man and beast. Act. 17.28. In him we live, move, and have our
being: And do but see Nehem. 9.6. Thou preservest them all (to wit, all the
Creatures) and the Host of Heaven worshipeth thee: that is to say, is governed
by thee, is at thy command and appointment. And further to argue the point in
hand. That the Lord does preserve and uphold all the Creatures in their kinds,
beings, motions, and operations, is evident and plain.

Arg. 1 Otherwise they would not continue, but would return to their first
nothing, to that nothing of which they were at first made. The Lord is called
Jehovah, not only because he gave being to every thing, but likewise because he
maintained it in every thing. And that the Lord is Governor of all things, to
wit, moves, directs, and disposes of all the Creatures and their actions to
their decreed ends, this we demonstrate two ways; 1. By instancing particular
Creatures. 2. Particular Actions.

Arg. 2 As first, The good Angels: 1 Chr. 21.15. And God sent an Angel unto
Jerusalem to destroy it, and as he was destroying, he said to the Angel that
destroyed, It is enough, stay now thy hand. And so Luke 1.26. And in the sixth
month the Angel Gabriel was sent from God unto a City of Galilee named
Nazareth. 2. The evil angels: The Devils are governed by God and act his
command. 1 King. 22.22. The Lord says unto the lying spirit, go forth; and in
ver. 23. Michajah says to Ahab, Behold, the Lord has put a lying spirit in
the mouth of all these thy Prophets: And so in Mark 9.26. And the spirit cried,
and rent him sore, and came out of him; but in the verse next foregoing,
God-man lays a command upon this wicked spirit, Thou dumb and deaf spirit, I
charge thee come out of him, and enter no more into him. 3. Men and Women, the
Lord governs and disposes of them as he pleases. Prove. 21.1. The Kings
heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the rivers of water, he turns it
whithersoever he will. And so Prove. 29.26. Many seek the Rulers favor, but
every man's judgment comes from the Lord. And if those superior creatures ( Job
12.17. to 22.) be at Gods command and governed by him; why then sure all the
inferior creatures also.

Obj. But may some men say, If the Lord so command and govern the reasonable
Creatures, is not the freedom of their wills by this altogether taken away?

An. No; because the Lord does not compel the reasonable Creatures to do this
or that, but only bends and inclines them. The necessity of Gods will, does not
overthrow the freedom of their wills: This or that action, if it be referred to
Gods will, may be said to be necessary; if to their wills, it may be said to be
voluntary.

Arg. 3. The second way whereby we demonstrate that the Lord is the governor of
all things, is by instancing particular actions. If the providence of God does
extend, 1. Even to the least actions, to actions of the smallest nature. 2. To
actions that are the most casual. 3. To actions that are the most sinful; why
then the Lord is governor of all things. But that the providence of God does
extend to actions of all these kinds, the Scriptures do plainly demonstrate. 1.
That the providence of God extends to the least actions, Matthew. 10.29, 30. Are
not two sparrows sold for a farthing? and one of them shall not fall on the
ground without your father; the very hairs of your head are all numbered: can
there be any thing of less account then a Sparrow lighting on the ground, or an
hair falling from our head? Secondly, that the providence of God does extend
even to actions that are the most casual: Pro. 16.33. The lot is cast into the
lap, but the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord: what more casual then the
event of lots cast into the lap? Thirdly, that the providence of God does
extend to actions that are most sinful. Ezekiel. 16.9. If the Prophet be deceived
when he has spoken a thing, I the Lord have deceived that Prophet: was there
ever a more wicked action undertaken then crucifying of Christ? and yet see
what the Apostle affirms of them who did commit this fact, Act. 4.27, 28. They
were gathered together for to do whatsoever thy hand (speaking of God) and thy
counsel determined before to be done. Not that the Lord is the Author of sin,
as it is sin; but the Author of the action as it is an action; he permits the
sin, and not only as an idle spectator, but further works in the sinful
action; as 1. By taking away or denying his grace, 2. By delivering over the
party unto Satan and his own lusts. 3. By presenting unto the party such
objects, as through corruption may occasion sin. 4. By so governing the sinful
action, as to dispose it to his own glory. And thus we see it evidently argued,
that the Lord is the preserver and governor of all things: Now we come 1. To
lay forth the kinds of Gods providence. 2. To answer some objections. 3. To the
Use.

Kinds of Gods providence.
1. The Providence of God is either mediate or immediate; the immediate
Providence of God is, 1. When he works without means. 2. When he makes void the
means. Or 3. When he works contrary to the means.
1. Without means, as when he sustained Moses in the mount 40 days and 40
nights without either bread or water, Exodus 34.28. 2. Making void the means;
for thus he does sometimes. Eccles. 9.11. I returned and saw under the Sun,
that the race is not to the swift, nor the bat tell to the strong, etc. 3.
Contrary to the means, as when the Lord brought water out of the rock, Exodus
17.6. Thus for the immediate Providence of God: The mediate providence of God
is, when he works by means; and this is his most usual working: Now the Lord
does not use means because of any defect or inability in himself; but 1. That
he might communicate some honor to the creature, he is pleased to make use
thereof. 2. That the creature might so better perceive his working, his
providence, the working of his providence. 3. That he might so show himself to
be Lord of al things, making use of them as he pleases. And 4. lest under
pretense of his providence, we should be slothful. But that you may better
understand the thing in hand, to wit, Gods providence, we come to lay it forth
in another division: as, the Providence of God is Universal, Particular, or
Peculiar. The universal providence of God, is that whereby he preserves, and
governs all the creatures according to that natural instinct he put into every
several kind in the first creation, as Genesis 1.11. And God said, Let the earth
bring forth grass, the herb yiedling seed, and the fruit tree yiedling fruit
after his kind: This is the law of nature, or order which the Lord appointed
and set in the beginning, and accordingly (in the ordinary course) the
creatures work: This we call Gods universal providence.

The particular Providence of God extends to every creature, from the greatest,
unto the least; unto every action, from the greatest, unto the least; unto
every Accident, from the greatest unto the least; unto every circumstance in
every business: there is not the least Cloud does arise, nor the least chive of
Grass spring up, but by his Providence, Psalm. 147.8. He covers the Heavens
with Clouds, he makes the grass to grow upon the mountains. Jonah 4.6. And the
Lord God prepared a Gourd, and made it to come up over Jonah. This is Gods
particular Providence.

The peculiar Providence of God, is that which he exercises toward his Church
and chosen, gathering them, guiding them, defending them; he working in them,
by them, and for them peculiarly; Psalm. 33.18. Behold, the eye of the Lord is
upon them that fear him. And 1 Timothy 4.10. the Apostle speaking of the bodies of
men, he styles the Lord, the Savior of all men, chiefly (for so it is in the
Original) of those that believe. This is Gods peculiar Providence: And thus
much for this illustration of the kinds of Gods Providence.

Now we come to answer some Objections.

Object. 1. In 1 Cor. 9.9. it is said, Does God take care for Oxen? as though
his Providence did not extend to that kind of creature.

Answ. This cannot be the meaning, because, Psalm. 36.6. O Lord, thou preservest
man and beast: and Psalm. 147.9. He gives to the beast his food: but the
Apostle by this passage would intimate unto us, that that Law in Deuteronomy,
Thou shall not muzle the mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn, had a
further extent then Oxen. If the laboring Ox must have right done him, much
more the laborious and painful Minister; he must not be cut short of outward
maintenance.

Object. 2. But if Gods Providence govern all things, how comes it to pass that
the wicked do so flourish in this world, and the godly are so attended with
afflictions and crosses?

Answ. Although the godly be attended with many crosses and afflictions, why
yet these crosses and afflictions, by the wise and gracious Providence of God,
turn to their great good; as the prosperity of the wicked to their great woe.

Now we come to the Uses.

Use 1. Of Reprehension; and it consists of diverse Members, as

First, Is the Lord the Preserver and Governor of all things? why then, to
reprove all such as lead a wicked and ungodly life; willingly, and wilfully
violate Gods Commandments: If one was to carry us over a River, and if we let
our hold go the least, we were sure to drown, how unwilling would we be to
provoke that Party who had us at such advantage? In the Lord we live, move, and
have our being, in his hands is our breath, how dare we then provoke him? O the
great folly and madness of presumptuous sinners, but especially the folly,
madness, and ingratitude of such, unto whom the hand of Gods Providence has
reached plentiously of temporal blessings, and they are the more licentious,
sensual, and rebellious! Do these men and women walk safely for themselves? Do
they well requite the Lord, the giver of their breath, and of all those
temporal enjoyments they have?

2. To reprove all such as live idly, do not walk diligently in their
callings, Joh. 5.17. My Father works hitherto, and I work. The Lord never
cease from his work of Providence.

3. Reproof to all such, as are discontented with their outward condition and
estates; and so calling Gods wise Providence in question, contrary to the
Apostle, Phil. 4.11. I have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be
content: And David, Psalm. 39.9. I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou
did it.

4. To reprove all such as neglect the lawful means, Civil, or Holy (the Lord
in his ordinary course working by means;) or if the means fail, they distrust
the Lord; as though he that tied us to means, were himself tied to means, and
could not work by little means, against means, above means.

5. To reprove all such, as lay their sins on God, because nothing comes to
pass but by his Providence; but hearken to the Apostle, James 1.13. Let no man
say, when he is tempted, I am tempted of God; for God cannot be tempted of
evil, neither tempts he any man. There is no sin in God, neither does he put
sin into any man's heart. It is true indeed, the Lord could prevent sin, and
would, if he could not gain himself glory out of it: thou can not do this or
that wicked action, without Gods Providence; but thy sin, as it is sin, is of
thy self and Satan; thou sinning willingly, and cheerfully, not endeavoring to
serve Gods Providence, but thy own vile affections.

6. To reprove the evil speech of some, as, they that say, this, or that came
to pass by mere chance; as though any thing came to pass without a cause, or
without Gods Providence; and so such as say, this, or that we will do, not
putting in Saint James's condition, Jam. 4.15. If the Lord will: not remembering
that they, and their actions, are in Gods disposing, and not in their own.

Use 2. For the great comfort and consolation of all the godly. It is true,
they have many enemies, but the Lord has them all in a string; as he says to
Sennacherib King of Assyria, 2 Kin. 19.27, 28. I know thy abode, and thy going
out, and thy coming in, and thy rage against me; because thy rage against me,
and thy tumult is come up into my ears, therefore I will put my hook into thy
nose, and my bridle in thy lips, and I will turn thee back by the way by which
thou came. Nay, the Devils themselves, the Lord has them in Chains, they
cannot go a link beyond his permission; as is evident in the History of Job,
even as he says unto the Sea, Job 38.11. Hitherto shall thou come, but no
further; and here shall thy proud waves be stayed. And so in regard of any
affliction; no affliction can befall the godly, but by the Providence of God;
and no affliction shall befall them, but the Providence of God will turn it to
their good; insomuch as every true Believer may say with David, Psalm. 16.8. The
Lord is at my right hand, I shall not be moved; not moved to my hurt: and as he
says, Psalm. 23.1. The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want: and verse 4.
Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil;
for thou art with me. And wondrous comfortable is that sentence, 2 Chronicles. 16.9.
The eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the whole earth, to show himself
strong in the behalf of them, whose heart is perfect toward him. And not a
little may the godly man succor his faith, by his former experience of Gods
Providence, Psalm. 56.13. Thou have delivered my soul from death, wilt not thou
deliver my feet from falling, that I may walk before God in the light of the
living? And 1 Samuel 17.37. David said, The Lord that delivered me out of the paw
of the Lion, and out of the paw of the Bear, he will deliver me out of the hand
of this Philistine. And so Psalm. 46.1.2. God is our refuge and strength, a very
present help in trouble: Therefore will we not fear, though the Earth be
removed, and though the Mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea.

Use 3. To exhort every one to serve Gods Providence in the use of all good
means, Civil, and Holy, because so the Lord works ordinarily. To neglect
ordinary means, is to tempt God, and great presumption; as our Savior replies
to Satan, when he would have had him cast himself down from the Pinnacle of the
Temple, Matthew. 4.7. It is written, thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. And
yet we must take heed of trusting in the means, for that is Idolatry; the truth
of it is, it is Gods blessing that does mainly effect a thing, as Psalm. 127.1.
Except the Lord build the house; they labor in vain that build it: Except the
Lord keep the City, the Watchman waketh but in vain. And therefore when the
means fail us at any time, our faith must not: It was an evil saying of the
Israelites, Psalm. 78.19. Can God furnish a table in the Wilderness? and
therefore the Spirit of God says of them, putting forth such a question, that
they spoke against God. But it was a good saying of Abraham, Genesis 22.8. God
will provide: and if you peruse verse 14. you shall perceive, that this speech
of his grew to a Proverb; intimating thus much, that in due time and place, the
Lord will supply the wants and necessities of all his people.

And thus far touching the description of God by his works of Creation and
Preservation.

MEMBER V. One true God, Creator and Governor of all things, is distinguished
into the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.
THat there is a distinction of Persons, and this distinction in the Divine
Essence, is evident, if so be we look into the holy Scriptures, Genesis 1.26. And
God said, Let us make man in our image; where God the Father consults with his
Son, and holy Spirit. The like phrase we have in Genesis 11.7. Let us go down, and
there confound their Language. And Isa. 63.9, 10. The Angel of his presence
saved them. Of whose presence? Of God the Fathers; and who was this Angel, but
the Son, the second Person in Trinity? But they rebelled and vexed his holy
Spirit; to wit, the Holy Ghost. Haggai 2.5, 7. According to the word that I
convenanted with you, when ye came out of Egypt: Who was it that did covenant
with the Israelites? to wit, God the Father. So, My Spirit remains among you,
to wit, the Holy Ghost. And The desire of all Nations shall come; to wit, the
Son: But this Mystery is more clearly revealed in the New Testament, as when
Christ was baptized, Matthew 3.16, 17. And he saw, (to wit, John the Baptist)
the Spirit of God descending like a Dove, and lighting upon him; to wit, upon
Christ) And lo a voice from Heaven, (that is to say, from God the Father)
saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. But more expressly
in that form of Baptism which our Savior enjoynes, Matthew. 28.19. Go ye, and
teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost. And so 1 John 5.7. There are three that hear Record in
Heaven, the Father, the Word (that is to say the Son) and the Holy Ghost. And 2
Cor. 13.14. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, (to wit
God the Father) and the communion of the Holy Ghost be with you all.

Now that you may the better conceive of so great a Mystery, these questions
following are to be answered. 1. How the Divine Essence, and the Persons in the
Divine Essence do differ? 2. What the Person of the Father is? what the Person
of the Son is? and what the Person of the Holy Ghost is? 3. How these three
Persons are united? 4. How they are distinguished? 5. Why it is necessary the
Church should be acquainted with this Doctrine? And Lastly the Uses.

Quest. 1. How the Divine Essence, and the Persons in the Divine Essence do
differ?

Answ. The difference is not real, but formal; we must not conceive the Divine
Essence to be one thing, and the Persons to be another thing; for that were not
to make a Trinity, but a Quaternity; not to make three, but four. There is
another, and another in the Godhead; but not another thing, and another thing.
That there is another, and another in the Godhead, John 5.32. There is another
that bears witness of me, says our Savior; to wit, the Father: And John
14.16, 17. And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter,
even the Spirit of truth; but not another thing, and another thing; for this
were to divide the Godhead, and to make three Gods; the Godhead being
undivided, and there being but one God, as 1 Cor. 8.4. There is none other God
but one: the Divine Essence is one, and common to all the three Persons; the
Persons are three several Subsistences, or manners of being in that one
Essence: It is true, the Father is God, the Son is God, and the Holy Ghost is
God; and all Eternal, Omnipotent, etc: But yet there are not three Gods, three
Eternals, three Omnipotents; because the Essence, the whole Essence, the
Godhead, the whole Godhead, is in every one of the three Persons, Colos. 2.9.
In him (to wit in the Son) dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, that
is, Personally, in the Person of the Son, which is true of the other two
Persons. And this is the Mystery of Mysteries, that the Essence or Godhead
should be in every Person, and yet not divided; that the whole Essence or
Godhead should be in every Person, and yet not three Gods, but one God. Now we
come to the second question.

Quest. 2. What the Person of the Father is? what the Person of the Son is? and
what the Person of the Holy Ghost is?

Answ. The Father is the first person, the Son is the second, and the Holy
Ghost is the third. The Father is not the first person in regard of time or
Dignity, but in regard of Order, all the persons being as Co-Essential, so
Coeternal, and Coequal. The Order of the persons observed, there is no
Priority, or Posteriority, no Superiority, or Inferiority among them: the
Father is the person not begotten, nor proceeding, but from everlasting
begetting the Son, and sending forth the Holy Ghost: The Son is the person not
Created, but begotten from everlasting of the Father, and with the Father
sending forth the Holy Ghost. The Holy Ghost is the person not made, nor
created, nor begotten, but proceeding from the Father and the Son, by an
Eternal spiration. Now here we must observe, that the Essence does not beget
another Essence; for every one of the persons has the Essence from himself,
but one person does beget another, the person of the Father, the person of the
Son. 2. That there is this difference betwixt the Son and the Holy Ghost,
The Son is begotten of the Father only, the Holy Ghost proceeds both from
the Father and the Son. 3. These phrases begetting, begotten, proceeding,
must in no case be understood in any carnal way, but altogether in a Spiritual
manner.

Quest. 3. How these three persons are united?

Answ. The union of the persons is that, by which each one is in the rest, and
with the rest, by reason of the unity of the Essence or Godhead, as John 14.10.
Believe thou not that I am in the Father, and the Father in me, says our
Savior to Philip? They are all one in nature, that is, Co-Essential, and
Con-Substantial; as 1 John 5.7. There are three that bear record in Heaven, the
Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one; to wit, in
Nature and Essence. That which we said before, is true; the Father is God, the
Son is God, and the Holy Ghost is God; yet there are not three Gods, but one
God only; because there is but one Divine Essence, but one God, and no more in
Nature.

Quest. 4. How the three persons are distinguished?

Answ. Not Essentially, for every one of them has the whole Essence or
Godhead; and yet really. And here observe, The difference betwixt the Essence
and the persons is but formal, the difference betwixt the persons themselves is
real; as the Father is the Father, and not the Son, or the Holy Ghost; The Son
is the Son, and not the Father, nor the Holy Ghost; The Holy Ghost is the Holy
Ghost, and not the Father, nor the Son.

Now the persons of the Godhead are distinguished two ways: 1. By their
External actions, 2. By their Internal.

Their External actions are such, as they work in and toward the creatures, as
in the work of Creation, and Preservation, etc: As touching any of these works
or actions, the Father works of himself, by the Son, and the Holy Ghost;
the Son from the Father, by the Holy Ghost; the Holy Ghost from the Father
and the Son. The Father is the Original or Fountain of actions, effecting by
the Son and the Holy Ghost: the proper working of the Son, is to execute
actions from the Father, by the Holy Ghost: the proper working of the Holy
Ghost, is from the Father and the Son, to finish actions. And here observe the
reason why in Scripture so many things are attributed and refered to the
Father; Because he is, as the Original and Fountain of the other persons, so
likewise of their operations.

2. The persons of the Godhead are distinguished by their Internal actions; and
these are such, as they exercise one toward another: As the incommunicable
property of the Father is to beget; the incommunicable property of the Son is
to be begotten; and the incommunicable property of the Holy Ghost is to
proceed. And thus in some measure we see into this great Mystery, the Unity in
Trinity, and Trinity in Unity.

Quest. 5 Why it is necessary the Church should be acquainted with this
Doctrine?

Answ. 1. In respect of Gods glory, that so he may be discerned, and
distinguished from all false gods, and Idols. 2. In regard of our selves, and
that two ways. 1. Without this knowledge, there is no salvation, John 17.3.
This is life Eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus
Christ whom thou have sent. That we may be saved, we must know, and believe God
the Father to be our Father; God the Son to be our Redeemer; and God the Holy
Ghost to be our Sanctifier and Comforter.

Answ. 2 In regard of our selves. This Doctrine directs us in worshipping the
true God aright: for Unity in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity is to be worshipped.
If we worship the Father without the Son, and the Holy Ghost: or if we worship
the Son, without the Father and the Holy Ghost: or the Holy Ghost, without the
Father and the Son, we worship nothing but an Idol. Again, If we worship the
three persons not as one God, but as three Gods, then we make three Idols. Now
we come to the Uses of the point.

Use 1. To reprove two sorts of people. 1. Such as labor to fathom this
Mystery by Humane Reason, it being a Mystery propounded to our faith to
believe, not to our reason to dispute; and thus many have erred, and do err,
in this Doctrine of so great consequence. 2. To reprove such as do not labor
with all diligence to understand this Mystery, as the Scripture reveals it.

Such as are altogether ignorant of this Mystery, what can their faith be?
what can their worship be? what can their comfort be? what can their lives be?
how can they upon good grounds expect salvation? Although in this search and
scrutiny, we must be wise to sobriety; yet to be altogether ignorant of this
way, is dangerous, and damnable. How can we be truly Pious, if we do not think
aright of God, If in some measure we do not know the true God, one in Essence,
three in Persons?

Use 2. To inform us in regard of Divine worship: We must worship the Unity in
Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, without confounding the persons, or dividing the
Essence. When I think of one, (says a Father) a threefold light does dazzle
me; and when I discern three, I am presently brought back to one. It is true,
we may invocate to any of the three persons, as Steven, Acts 7.50. Lord Jesus
receive my Spirit; but in the ordinary Course, pray we to the Father, in the
Name of the Son, by the assistance of the Holy Ghost: John 16.22. Whatsoever ye
shall ask the Father in my Name, he will give it you; says our Savior. And
the Apostle Paul tells us, Romans 8.26. That the Spirit, the Holy Ghost helps our
infirmities in Prayer.

Use 3. To exhort every one of us, if we would more and more conceive of this
Mystery, 1. To be much exercised in the Scriptures, they being the only
Instrument to reveal it. John 1.18. No man has seen God at any time; the only
begotten Son, which is in tho bosom of the Father, he has declared him: to
wit, in the Scriptures. 2. Often to renew our Repentance; the Lord reveals
himself especially to such, Psalm. 25.9. The meek will he guide in judgment,
and the meek will he teach his way. And so v. 14. The secret of the Lord is
with them that fear him, and he will show them his Covenant. 3. To be earnest
with the Lord this way in Prayer and Supplication; thus Moses, Exodus 33.13. I
pray thee, if I have found grace in thy sight, show me now thy way, that I may
know thee. And verse 18. I beseech thee show me thy glory. If we would have
knowledge of this way, our Savior intimates from whom we must have it; when
Peter made that excellent confession of him, Matthew. 16.16 Thou art Christ the
Son of the living God, verse 17. replies our Savior, Flesh and blood has
not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in Heaven. And so Saint
James, Chapter ^. verse 5. If any of you lack Wisdom, let him ask of God, that
gives to all liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him. And
thus far touching the first Principle, and the several Members of it.

PRINC. II.
Quest. What Do thou believe concerning man, and concerning thine own self?

Answ. All men are wholly corrupted with sin through Adams fall, and so are
become slaves of Satan, and guilty of eternal damnation.

MEMB I.
ALL men are corrupted with sin: All men and women are sinners by nature; for
so we are to understand the Catechism, which after the description of God, we
endeavor, and assay to delineate, and lay forth the natural man. Now that all
men and women are corrupted with sin, are sinners by nature, Romans 3.10. There
is none righteous, no not one: to wit, by nature, mere man, and mere woman. And
so in v. 23. All have sinned. And Gal. 3 22. The Scripture has concluded all
under sin; as well Jews, as Gentiles, to be sinners by nature. The Reasons of
the Point.

Reas. 1. The great disagreement and variance that is betwixt the natural man,
and the holy Law of God. As the Law of God is ever discovering the natural man's
misery, beating him, buffeting him, and condemning him; so the natural man
cannot away with the Law of God opened and applied, nor with the Minister that
does the same, but exclaims upon him, as a severe, censorious, and uncharitable
man. Now this disagreement and variance betwixt the natural man and the Law of
God, does plainly declare every natural man to be a sinner.

Reas. 2. Observe the Natural man, and of all Doctrines he cannot away with the
Doctrine of the last judgment; and this plainly manifests his guiltiness. If
Felix was not a sinner, why did he tremble at this Doctrine? Acts 24.25.

Reas. 3. The continual combat that is ever in the regenerate, 'twixt the
flesh and Spirit Before we come to the Applic. of the point, we will 1. Let you
see briefly what sin is? 2. How many ways the natural man is a sinner?

1. What sin is? Ans. The Apostle Joh. tells us, 1 John 3.4. Sin is the
transgression of the Law: It is any inconformity or repugnancy in the
reasonable creature unto Gods revealed Will.

The 2d question is, How many ways a natural man is a sinner? Answ. Four
ways. 1. By Participation. We were all in Adam's loins when he sinned, as
Levi was in Abraham's loins, when Abraham paid Tithes to Melchizedek; and so
Levi, that afterward took Tithes, paid Tith in Abraham; as it is, Heb. 7.9. 2.
By Imputation, The guilt of Adam's fall is imputed unto all his Posterity; as
the convicted Traitor, by man's law, is not only guilty of Treason himself, but
his whole Posterity; and so the Apostle, Romans 5.18. By the offense of one, (to
wit Adam) judgment, or guilt, came upon all men to condemnation. 3. By Natural
corruption, There being in every natural man, not only an absolute want of
true holiness and righteousness, but a corrupt inclination in every faculty of
soul and member of body: Genesis 8.21. The imagination of man's heart is evil from
his youth, even from the very time he begins to conceive 4. By Actual
transgression. And thus we see how many ways the natural man is a sinner. We
now come to the Application.

Use 1. For Confutation. To confute the Papists, who affirm, that the Virgin
M. was without sin, free from original sin, and from sin all her life long; but
this were to make her equal to Christ as he was man; and this is to cross the
Apostles allegation, There is none righteous, no not one; to wit, by nature,
mere man or mere woman, since Adams fall; and that the V. M. was not exempted
in this kind, is evident by our Saviors reproving of her, John 2.4. When she
told him of a want of Wine at the Marriage Feast in Cana, Woman, what have I to
do with thee? my hour is not yet come. Had she not been in fault, he would not
so have checked her. And further observe what she her self says, Luke 1.47. My
spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior. If she were free from sin, what needed
she a Savior?

Use 2. To reprove diverse men and women. The most will confess they are
sinners, and great sinners, but with so little knowledge, as when they became
sinners, or how, or wherein, or what sin is, they cannot tell: As if a Debtor
should acknowledge himself to be indebted to such a man, and yet he cannot tell
when, wherein, or how he became indebted to him: were not this an ignorant
acknowledgement? And likewise with so little humility'; the most men and women
will confess they are sinners, but with so little sense and feeling, with so
little grief and shame; not considering how great an evil sin is; how odious
it makes a man or a woman to God, how it lays them open to Gods wrath, here,
and hereafter. The Leper (we know) in the time of the old Testament, must be
shut up, must not converse with men; but no Leper so odious to man's eye, as
sin makes a man odious to God: And no man indebted (be it never so much) is
so in danger of an Arrest by man, as the unhumbled sinner is in danger of Gods
wrath to Arrest him every hour, and to press him down to the pit of Hell;
where his worm shall never dye, and his fire never goes out. Mark 9.44.

Use 3. To awaken the Natural man, he being a sinner, and a sinner so many
ways, as we have heard: Ephesians 5.14. Awake thou that sleep, and stand up
from the Dead, and Christ shall give thee light. Would any man (unless he were
dead drunk) lay himself down to sleep on the top of the Mast, the Ship being
under-saile in the midst of the Sea? Or will any man (but a mad man) wittingly,
and willingly, lie sleeping in a house that is on fire over his head? O that
the Natural man would take notice of his wretched condition, that so he might
be dejected, and cast down; crying out of himself as the Leper in the Law,
Leviticus 13.45. Unclean, Unclean. Crying to God with the Publican, Luke 18.13.
Lord be merciful to me a sinner. And with more words then so, for we must know,
we have there but the abridgement of the Publicanes Prayer; and crying to the
Minister of God with them in the Acts, Chapter 2d. Verse 37. Men, and Brethren,
what shall we do? Now that men and women would labor for a fight and sense of
their Natural misery: consider 1. Some Motives, 2. Some Means.

Motive 1. Otherwise they can never confess their sins heartily: What is the
reason men and women confess their sins so general, and carelessly? but
because they have not a sight, and sense of their natural misery. Hosea 14.2
Take with you words, and turn to the Lord, to wit, in the way of confession,
says the Prophet to the Israelites: But in the first Verse, they must before
consider how they had fallen by their iniquity, how sinful they were.

Motive 2. Without sight, and sense of misery, men, and women are not capable
of true Comfort and Consolation. Before true Consolation, goes hearty
humiliation, Luke 5.31. They that are whole, need not a Physician, but they
that are sick 2 Corinthians, Chapter 7. Verse 6. the Apostle Paul styles the
Lord, the Comforter of the abject.

Motive 3. Observe the Promise made to the truly dejected, Matthew 5.4. Blessed
are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. Isaiah 37.15. Thus says the
high and lofty One, that inhabiteth Eternity, whose Name is Holy, I dwell in
the High and Holy place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit,
to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite
ones.

We come to the Means to bring men and women to a sight, and sense of their
misery.

Means 1. To look themselves thoroughly in the glass of the Law. Romans 3.20. By
the Law comes the knowledge of sin.

2 By applying to themselves the curses, which are without partiality threatened
to every transgressor of the Law, for every transgression, as Gal. 3.10. Cursed
is every one that continues not in all things which are written in the book of
the Law to do them.

3. Consider of how pure eyes the Lord is, how he hates iniquity, and suffers
no transgression to pass unpunished, but does either punish it in the party
offending, or has already punished it in the Mediator.

Use 4 To justify the Lord in regard of the judgments he sends upon the world.
All men and women being corrupted with sin, and so many ways, as we have
heard; no marvel then that the world is so plagued. In the seventh of Genesis
we read, how the Lord destroyed the world by water; but see the sixth Chapter,
from the first verse unto the fourteenth, The world was exceedingly corrupted
with sin. We know what the Psalmist says, Psalm. 107.17. Fools by reason of
their sins, and because of their iniquities, are afflicted: And the Church,
Lament. 5.16, 17. Woe unto us that we have sinned; for this our heart is faint,
and for these things our eyes wax dim. Nay, the very young Infant that is taken
away by death, the Lord is not unjust in that proceeding; even the young Infant
being a sinner three ways at the least: by Participation, by Imputation, and
by natural Corruption. When judgments are upon us, we must not murmur and
repine, but consider, as Solomon does advise, Eccles. 7.14. In the day of
adversity consider; that is, consider for what, and then we shall justify him
from whom the affliction comes.

Use 5. For comfort and consolation to all true Converts. It is true, they are
sinners, but the Lord sees no sin in them, which he will impute unto them. It
is true, they are sinners, but not such as he that was blind speaks of, John
9.31. We know that God hears not sinners; for Prove. 15.8. The prayer of the
upright is his delight. It is true, they have sin in them, but sin has not
dominion over them. It is true, they are sinners, but they are also Saints,
even in this world, Psalm. 16.2, 3. My goodness extends not to thee, but to the
Saints which are on the earth. It is true, any temporal judgment may befall them
in this world; but this is as true, that nothing shall befall them but what
shall work for their good; therefore in a humble and thankful wonderment, let
them acknowledge the great things the Lord has done for them, as the Church
coming out of captivity, Psalm. 126.3. The Lord has done great things for us,
whereof we are glad; and the Psalmist, Psalm. 126.12 What shall I render unto
the Lord for all his benefits toward me?

MEMBER II. Wholly corrupted with sin.
Doct. ALl men and women considered in the state of nature, are wholly
corrupted with sin. For so we are to understand the Catechism, to wit,
according unto this exposition. Now the assertion is true in two respects: 1.
In regard of their natures. 2. In regard of their lives. Their natures are
wholly corrupted with Original sin; their lives with actual transgression.

1 That the natures of the unregenerate are wholly corrupted with Original: sin
we will let you see what Original sin is, and then prove the thing affirmed.

What Original sin is.

Original sin is so called, first, because it was from the beginning; I mean,
as soon as ever the fall of Adam was.

Secondly, Because it is one of the first things which is with the child in the
Conception.

Thirdly, Because it is the beginning of all actual sin. Now Original sin is
sometimes taken Largely, sometimes Strictly. When it is taken Largely, it
signifies the fall of Adam, the guilt following, and withal the corruption of
nature. When it is taken Strictly, it signifies that corruption which taints
and defiles the whole man, every faculty of soul and member of body. More
plainly, Original sin taken strictly, contains, 1 A want of all holy
disposition in every faculty of soul and member of body. 2. In stead and room
thereof, a corrupt disposition in every faculty of soul and member of body. And
thus now seeing what Original sin is, we come to prove that the natures of the
unregenerate are wholly corrupted with it. To this purpose

1. Take notice of some general phrases which the Spirit of God uses touching
Original sin, as the natural man is tainted with it and defiled. As sometimes
it is called the Old man, as Romans 6.6. Colos. 3.9. Sometimes it is called the
Flesh, Romans 7.5, 18. and so ver. 25. Sometimes it is called the members, as
Colos. 3.5: Sometimes it is called the Law of the members, Romans 7.23. Sometimes
the Body of sin, Romans 6.6. and 7.24. And what do all these general phrases
imply, and import, but that the natures of the unregenerate are wholly
corrupted with original sin? But in the second place, that you may be the more
thoroughly convinced in the point, we will anatomize and take man in pieces, and
let you see what the spirit of God says of every several part and piece; to
wit, how that in every faculty of soul, and member of body, there is not only
want of all holy disposition, but likewise a corrupt and depraved disposition.

Now as concerning the soul, we consider these faculties, 1. The Mind, 2. The
Memory, 3. The Conscience. 4. The Will. 5. The Affections.

1. For the Mind, that it is not only empty of all holy knowledge, but depraved
with a corrupt disposition. Genesis 8.21. The imagination of man's heart (that is
to say, of the natural man's mind) is evil from his youth; from that very time
he begins first to conceive. And the Apostle Paul does not only affirm 1 Cor. 2
14. That the natural man cannot know the things of the Spirit of God; But Titus
1.15. he says, the unbeleeving, the natural mind is de filed; nay Romans 8.7.
That the carnal, the natural mind is enmity against God: and exhorting the
Ephesians, Ephesians. 4.23. Be renewed in the spirit of your mind, intimates that
that which is most inward in the natural mind, which is as it were the mind of
the mind, is corrupted.

2. For the memory, that it is not only deprived of all holy abilities, but
depraved with a corrupt disposition, Gen 40.23. yet did not the chief Butler
remember Joseph, but forgate him. Deuteronomy. 8.11. Beware that thou forget not the
Lord thy God, which naturally (as though Moses should say) thou art prone unto.
The chief Priests and Pharisees said to Pilate, Matthew. 27.63. Sir, we remember
that that deceiver (meaning Christ) said whilst he was yet alive, after three
days I will rise again: They could remember what our Savior had said whilst
he was yet alive in that kind, to their own corrupt ends; the natural memory
is a corrupt memory.

3. The natural conscience is not only destitute of holy testimonies, but is
likewise corrupted, and defiled. Titus 1 15. But even their mind and conscience
is defiled; the Apostle speaking of unbeleevers, and those in the estate of
nature.

4. The natural will is not only deprived of all freedom to good, but
likewise depraved with a corrupt disposition, 1 Cor. 2.14. The natural man
receives not the things that are of the Spirit of God, Phil. 2.13. It is God
that works in you, to wit, by his Sanctifying grace; both to will, and to do
of his good pleasure: nay, Jer. 18.12. say the Jews, we will walk after our own
devices, and we will every one do the imagination of his evil heart. The
natural will is a corrupt will.

5. The affections are not only deprived of all holy motion, but exceeding
corrupt, and disordered. Gal. 5.24. They that are Christ's, have crucified the
flesh, with the affections and lusts; as though the affections naturally were
corrupt and disordered; and so the same Apostle terms them, Romans 7.5. The
affections of sin, or sinful affections: and this the Apostle makes very
evident; in describing natural men and women, he styles them haters of God,
Romans 1.30. And thus we see by holy writ, that every faculty of the
unregenerate persons soul is corrupted, and depraved with original sin. Now
come we briefly to the members of his body, and we shall observe them to be
corrupted with original sin.

First, The eye, 2 Pet. 2.14. Having eyes full of adultery: the natural eye is
a filthy and an unclean eye. Secondly The ear, 2 Timothy 4.3. Having itching ears;
the natural ear is an itching ear. Thirdly The tongue, Jam. 3.6. The tongue
is a sire, a world of iniquity, The natural tongue is a corrupt tongue. 4. The
hand Isai. 1.15. Your hands are full of blood: The natural hand is a cruel
hand. 5. The feet: The Apostle describing men and women in the estate of
nature, Romans 3.15 Their feet are swift to shed blood, says he: The natural
feet are swift to mischief. Those outward senses and members are not only
deprived of all holy inclination, but prone to let in sin, and to execute sin.
And thus now by Anatomizing, and taking man in pieces, we have it made evident,
that the natures of all the unregenerate are wholly corrupted with Original
sin, which indeed is the seed and spawn of all sin, even of the sin against the
Holy Ghost. But here we must remember, that the nature it self is good, but the
corruption of nature is evil. These two in the natural man may be
distinguished, but cannot be separated: the one is not the other, but the one
is not without the other. Hence it is that Original sin is called the sin that
does so encompasse us, or that hangs so fast on, Heb. 12.1.

Now we come to the second Member of the Assertion, to manifest that the
natural man's life is wholly corrupted with actual transgression. And must it
not needs be so when his nature is corrupted, as aforesaid? What can such a
tree bring forth, but even fruit suitable? and that it is so, do but see what
the Apostle says of himself and the Romans, when he and they were in the
state of nature, Romans 7.5. For when we were in the flesh, (to wit, in the state
of nature) the motions of sin, (or the affections of sin or sinful affections)
which were by the Law, (to wit, stirred up by the Law) did work in our members
to bring forth fruit unto death; to wit, actual transgressions. And the same
Apostle, Romans 3.12 describing of men and women in the estate of nature: There
is none that does good, no not one. If there be no natural man that does any
good, why then surely every natural man does nothing but what is evil; but the
former is true in regard of good formally, any thing which is acceptable to
God: and if the natural man does any thing which is good materially, it is not
as he is a natural man, but as he is helped and assisted by common Grace.

We should now come to lay forth the parts of actual transgression, as sin of
Omission, and sin of Commission, and the several Distinctions and degrees; but
so we should be more prolix then we purposed in this Exposition; and therefore
we proceed to the Uses.

Use 1. To confute the Papists, who speak of a freedom in the natural will to
good, if it be but a little helped and assisted. As though there were some
power remaining in the natural will this way. But this is just to oppose the
judgment of Gods Spirit; Phil. 2.13. It is God which works in you both to
will and to do of his good pleasure. And Ephesians. 2.1. And you has he quickened
who were dead in sins and trespasses. No more power in a natural will unto any
thing that is acceptable unto God, then in a dead man to stir and walk about.
And further, can there be any more in the will then in the mind? There is no
holy knowledge in the natural mind, but even the wisdom of the flesh is enmity
to God; and the spirit of the mind, even the mind of the mind, depraved and
corrupted: And can there then be any holy disposition in the natural will? And
thus the Apostle argues 1 Cor. 2.14. The natural man receives not the things
of the Spirit of God, neither can he know them. The natural man is so far from
having any holy disposition in his will, as he has none in his mind; and if no
holy disposition in his mind, why then sure none in his will.

Use 2. To reprove diverse persons.

1. Such as are forward to boast of their Birth, Parentage, and Pedigree. A
poor thing to boast of, when their lives are wholly corrupted with actual
transgression, and their natures with Original corruption. David considering of
his Birth and Conception, was humbled, Psalm. 51.5. Behold I was shapen in
iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me. Lumps of sin to be lifted up
because of a little civil difference, not considering their natural pravity and
vileness!

2. To reprove such as stand upon their natural wit and wisdom, neglecting and
despising the means of holy wisdom: but let such see the little extent of their
natural wisdom, 1 Cor. 2.14. The natural man receives not the things of the
Spirit of God, neither can he know them, for they are foolishness unto him.

3. To reprove such as are so far from being humbled for their natural
corruption, as they lessen and excuse their actual transgressions by it. Tell
them of their Uncleanness, of their Drunkenness. of their Covetousness, of
their Impatience, etc. They presently answer, and that carelessly, It is their
nature, and they cannot help it: or thus, They are but flesh and blood, and
what would we have them to do? And thus they bolster up Actual Transgression by
Original Corruption, and are humbled for neither, where they should be much
dejected for both.

Use 3. Further to awaken the natural man. He never did good in all his life (I
mean any thing acceptable to God); suppose he be thirty, forty, threescore
years old: then what has he done but sin? All his actions Natural, Civil,
Religious, are sin: as in regard of the evil ends propounded; why so, likewise
in regard of the evil fountain they issued from. And in this estate he cannot
be saved. John 3.3. Verily, verily, I say unto you (says our Savior) except a
man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. And suppose as yet some
natural people have not broken forth into such gross sins as some others have;
why yet the seeds of every sin remain in them unmortified, and may manifest
themselves in their lives to night before to morrow, for any thing they know,
or any power they have over them.

Use 4. To direct every one of us that in the practice of repentance, we would
not only labor to mourn for Actual Transgressions, but likewise for Original
corruption, even for our bad natures. Although Repentance does commonly begin
at some great Actual sin; why yet, let every Actual sin lead us to mourn for
Original sin: it being not only the punishment of sin, but sin it self, and the
cause of all actual sin. This is a main difference betwixt the sincere and
hypocritical. The sincere person does not only mourn for actual Transgressions,
but likewise for Original Corruptions, as David, Psalm. 51.5. Behold, I was
shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me. And so further, he
does not only labor to prevent actual Transgression, but likewise to suppress
Original Corruption. Even as Sarah will not have Ishmael be packing, but his
mother the Bondwoman likewise: Or as Elisha healed the bitter waters by
seasoning them at the Spring, 2 King. 2.21. The sincere man or woman does not
only strive to reform the action, but likewise the affection of sinning.

MEMBER III. Through Adams fall, etc.
D. IT is through Adams fall that all natural men and women are wholly
corrupted with sin. Do but see Romans 5.12. By one man sin entered into the
world; that is to say, by Adam his eating of the forbidding fruit, all men and
women became sinners; and not only by imputation but by propagation, their
natures wholly corrupted and depraved; and ver. 19 By the disobedience of one
(to wit, Adam) many (that is to say, all men and women descending of him) were
made sinners: And 1 Cor. 15.22. In Adam all died, but first finned, because
sinners by his fall.

Now for the opening of this Point, we propound these questions. 1. What Adams
condition was before this Fall? 2. The cause of his Fall. 3. The fall it self.
4. How his whole Posterity became wholly corrupted with sin by his fall.

Qu. 1. What Adams condition was before his fall?

Ans. We are to know, that Adam was created, 1 Holy: 2. Happy.

1. Holy. He did not only know God, and his will, perfectly, as far as such a
creature was capable; but likewise there was in every faculty of his soul, and
member of his body, a holy disposition, a holy conformity unto God and his
will: And so we are to understand these places, Genesis 1.26, 27. And God said,
Let us make man in our image, after our likeness: So God created man in his own
[likeness] or image, in the image of God created he him. And Colos. 3.10. And
have put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge, after the image of him
that created him. And so Ephesians. 4.24. And that you put on the new man, which
after God is created in righteousness and true holiness.

2. Happy. The Lord did create him happy: as first, Being placed in the Garden
of Eden, Genesis 2.8. A place of singular delight and pleasure, and therefore
called, Paradise; Our Savior alluding to heaven by it, Luke 23.43 says he to
the Thief upon the Cross, To day shall thou be with me in Paradise. 2. In state
of Innocence: he had a blessed communion and fellowship with God, Genesis 2.19.
And out of the ground the Lord God formed every beast of the field, and every
foul of the air, and brought them unto Adam to see what he would call them:
This intimates that Adam before his fall had sweet converse and communion with
God. 3. A kind of happiness was put upon Adams body, it being created beautiful
and glorious; Genesis 2.25. And they were both naked, the man and his wife (that
is to say, Adam and Eve) and were not ashamed: Not that any uncomly thing is
spoken of them, but in this passage the Spirit of God would set forth the
beauty and comeliness of their bodies, every part and member being so beautiful,
as they had no cause to be ashamed. It was sin that brought in deformity and
shame. 4. Although Adam had a peculiar Calling to walk in, the Garden to dress
and keep, Genesis 2.15. yet he was able to execute it without any pain or
weariness, as is evident Genesis 3.19. In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat
bread, till thou return to the ground; that is, with pain and weariness: but
intimating, that before his fall, it was not so. Lastly, He was made Lord and
King over all the visible Creatures. Genesis 1.28. says the Lord to Adam, Have
dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the foul of the air, and over every
living thing that moves on the earth. Thus we see what Adams condition was
before his fall: we come to the second Question.

Quest. 2. What were the causes of Adams fall?

Answ. 1. Adam himself was the principal cause of his own fall, and that by the
abuse of his own free will; he was made mutably, changeably good, as we may
perceive by the tenor of Gods Commandment, in which he forbids him to eat of
the tree of knowledge of good and evil, Genesis 2.17. Of the tree of knowledge of
good and evil, thou shall not eat of it; for in the day thou eatest thereof
thou shall surely dye: intimating his free will to eat or not eat of it; he
might have stood if he would, or he might fall if he would. It is true, the
Lord did not give him the gift of perseverance, did not corroborate and confirm
him with new grace, neither was the Lord bound unto it. Thus we see that Adams
abuse of his own free will, was the principal cause of his fall.

2. The Devil and Eve, were furthering causes of Adams fall: First, I say, the
Devil was a furthering cause of Adams fall, and that by counselling and
persuading. He did not compel or enforce the will of Eve or of Adam, for that
he could not do: but not long before having fallen himself, in hatred to God,
and envy to mankind, he wondrous cunningly and craftily sets upon this
mischief, as is evident in the story Genesis 3.1. etc. As first, take we notice of
the Instrument he makes choice of, whereby to bring about this wicked Design,
he speaking in, and by a Serpent; and see we how the Spirit of God describes
this Creature, Genesis 3.1. Now the Serpent was more subtle then any beast of the
field which the Lord God had made. 2. That he begins with the woman the weaker
Vessel: And he said unto the woman (that is to say, the Devil by the Serpent)
Ye shall not surely dye. 3. Observe how he begins by way of question, as though
he had been somewhat ignorant of the proceedings betwixt the Lord and our first
Parents: Yea, has God said, Ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden? and
mark the ambiguity and subtilty of the question, Yea, has God said, Ye shall
not eat of every tree of the garden? Eve might understand this Question two
ways; 1. As though the Serpent had asked her, whether she and Adam might eat
of none of the trees, of the Garden: or secondly, Whether they might not eat of
every one; implying thus much, that if they might not eat of every one, the
Lord dealt hardly and strictly with them, and not liberally: But Eve
understands the latter way, as appears in her answer, ver. 2, 3. And the woman
said unto the Serpent, we may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden; but
of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the garden, God has said, Ye
shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye dye. But in this, her
answer gives the Devil great advantage, for the threatening being certain and
absolute, she makes a peradventure of it, Lest ye dye. Now observe how the
Devil snatcheth at this, ver. 4. And the Serpent said unto the Woman, Ye shall
not surely dye. As if he should say, then it is not certain you shall dye; if
you do eat of it, it may be ye shall die, it may be you shall not. And now not
giving her the least breathingtime or respite, he comes upon her very
impudently. ver. 5 For God does know, that in the day ye do eat thereof, then
your eyes shall be opened; that is, ye shall see that ye never saw. And thus he
accuses God of envying, and hindering their good estate; nay further, and ye
shall be as gods knowing good and evil; promising a kind of divinity unto them
if they would eat of the tree forbidden: Upon this, the woman held forth no
longer, but consents, yields, and seduceth her husband, and so he falls. ver.
6. And when the womnasaw that the tree was good for food, and that it was
pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise, she took of
the fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave also unto her husband with her, and he
did eat. And thus we see that the Devil and Eve were furthering causes of Adams
fall.

Object. But may some men say, had not the Lord a hand, a stroke in Adams fall?

Answ. He did oversee and order it, because nothing comes to pass but by his
providence, but yet he was no way the cause of it. James 1.13. God tempts no
man to sin; he did decree to permit it, but not as it was a sin against his
commandment, but as it might tend and serve for the manifestation of his
justice, and mercy. Thus we see into the causes of Adams fall. Now we come to
the third question.

Quest. 3 What was the fall it self?

Answ, It was the eating of the forbidden fruit: But before the outward act,
observe their falling into this sin by degrees; Genesis 3.6. As first, they beheld
it. 2. desired it, 3. took it, Lastly did eat of it: And we must not think this
sin of our first parents Adam and Eve little, but great and grievous; It being
not only the offense of a great and infinite God, but of a good and bountiful
God; they having liberty to eat of all the trees in the Garden, save one. Genesis
2.16.17. Of every tree in the garden thou may freely eat; but of the tree of
knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not eat of it. And then it being but
such an easy commandment to keep, but the fruit of one tree to forbear. And
further, do but see what a company of sins it contains, and therefore it is
called the fall, it being not one sin, but many: As 1. Infidelity, our first
parents doubting of the truth of divine threatening. 2. Idolatry, They believing
the Devil more then God. 3. Horrible unthankfulness. They conceiting God to
envy their good estate. 4. Curiosity, They affecting more knowledge then God had
allotted them, 5. Intolerable pride and ambition: they desiring to be equal
with God. 6. Murder, both of themselves, and whole posterity. Thus we see into
the fall it self, and so come to the fourth question.

Quest. 4. How all natural men and women become wholly corrupted with sin
through Adams fall?

Ans. By generation; A Serpent engenders a Serpent; and a sinful Parent begets
sinful children. Genesis 5.3. And Adam lived an hundred and thirty years, and
begat a son in his own likeness, after his image: not according to the image in
which he was first created, but in the image Adam was then in; to wit, corrupt.
Adam was created a public person, and to stand or fall for his whole
posterity; but he falling, his whole posterity fell in him, and so are sinners
by imputation; and not only so, but by his fall he corrupted our nature, and
nature being corrupted, corrupts the persons of all men and women absolutely
descending of Adam. To this purpose. Job 14.4. Who can bring a clean thing out
of an unclean? Not one. And Psalm. 51.5. I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin
did my mother conceive me: David here speaks of the original sin, wherein he
was bred and born. For we are to know, that as original corruption in us, is
the cause of all our actual transgressions; so this original corruption is the
punishment and fruit of Adams first actual sin

Object But may some men say, me thinks regenerate Men, should beget regenerate
Children?

Answ. Men do not beget children as they are regenerate, but as they are men. A
circumcised Jew did beget children uncircumcised; and clean seed being sown,
comes up with straw, chafe. etc. Now we come to the Uses.

Use 1. To reprove diverse persons. 1. Such as trust to their own strength, are
confident in it. Did Adam fall created holy and righteous? and do we presume
upon our own strength? It is a wonder to observe how many men and women offer
themselves to the occasions of sin; and tell them of the great danger therein,
they will reply, no provocation to sin can stir them, no bad company can infect
them.

2. To reprove such as trust Satan, he told our first Parents of great matters
following his counsel; but in their woeful experience, they found him a
horrible liar. So his temptations being yielded unto, he promises us much
pleasure; and gain, but alas, yielding, we find the clean contrary at one time
or other, if not for the present, yet afterward.

3. To reprove such as do not trust the word of God. This was the fault of our
first Parents, and so they let a world of sin into the world: where the
threatening was absolute, they question and make a peradventure of it. Even so
do the most at this day with the threatenings of God, they question them, do not
believe them. And hence it is they do no more refrain sin, give themselves
liberty in all abominable courses.

Use 2. To exhort; and that two ways:

1. That we would more and more acquaint our selves with the Original of our
mifery; to wit, Adams fall. This Truth so necessary to be known, is only
revealed in the Word; was not known to the body of the Gentiles before the
coming of Christ. And how many of our common people at this day, are upon the
matter ignorant of it. But let us labor for knowledge and sense the way, that
so we may be the more induced to seek after the second Adam and his benefits.

2. To exhort Parents, seeing by Adams fall they are instruments to convey
original sin to their children, and so consequently all manner of hurt, that
they would labor the more earnestly to be instruments of their good, by
praying for them and with them; by admonishingthem, bringing them to the
Public Means, and by walking before them in all holy example. Oh how can
Parents be too careful this way, when they have been Instruments to bring them
into such a woeful estate! Parents which beget and bring forth children, and do
not earnestly labor their Regeneration, beget and bring forth children (as
much as in them lies) for the Devil, and not for God; for the enlarging of
hell, and not for the enlarging of heaven. And thus far touching the third
member of the second Principle.

MEMBER IV. And so are become slaves of Satan.
Doct. EVery one in the estate of corrupt nature is the Devils slave, is the
slave of the Devil. This assertion the Scripture makes very plain and evident,
as Act. 26.18. The Apostle Paul being sent to the unconverted Gentiles, the
Lord acquaints him, that his business unto them was, to open their eyes, to
turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God:
intimating, that being in the estate of nature, they were the slaves of the
Devil, under his dominion: and so Col. 1.13. Who has delivered us from the
power of darkness; that is to say, from the power of Satan, as though he and
the Collossians had been under Satan's dominion, so long as they were in the
estate of nature. And 2 Timothy 2.26. And that they may recover themselves
(speaking of the unregenerate) out of the snare of the Devil, who are taken
captive by him at his will. And do but see one place more, Ephesians. 2.1, 2. And
you has he quickened who were dead in trespasses and sins; wherein in times
past ye walked according to the course of this world, according to the Prince
of the power of the air, the spirit that now works in the children of
disobedience; that is to say, as the Master of the Shop in his Shop commanding
and ruling therein.

The Truth of this Point may be maintained by diverse Arguments.

Reas. 1. Every man, and so every woman is either Gods servant, or the Devils
slave; but the unregenerate are not Gods servants. It is true they owe God
service and obedience, but they have no mind, no will unto it; as our Savior
tells the Jews, Matthew. 23.37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the
Prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee: How often would I have
gathered thy children together even as a hen gathers her chicken under wings,
and ye would not? And so the Apostle, Romans 6.20. When ye were the servants of
sin, ye were free from righteousness; that is, when ye were in the estate of
nature, there was not the least desire or motion in you to holy obedience. And
do but try those that are in the estate of nature, even with the outward
Service of God, as Prayer, reading of the Word, hearing of Sermons, conversing
with the Godly, sanctifying of the Sabbath; O how irksome and burdensome are
these things unto them? you seem to kill them when you put these things upon
them. They cannot, they will not hold to these Religious courses constantly;
they will find some way or other to shift themselves from those (as they hold
them) intolerable burdens. And thus we see the unregenerate are not Gods
servants, and therefore it follows that they are the Devils slaves.

Reas. 2. Every one in the estate of corrupt nature is the servant of sin, and
so must needs be the slave of the Devil. These two are subordinate the one to
the other; sin being the Devils baud or Broker, preferring men and women to his
service. Now that every unregenerate person is the servant of sin; do but see
what our Savior says. Joh. 8.34. Verily, verily I say unto you, whosoever
commits sin, is the servant of sin; that is to say, commits sin as the
unregenerate, goes on in the practice of sin impenitently; and so the Apostle
Romans 6.17. But God be thanked, ye were the servants of sin; meaning when they
were in the estate of nature; but when he writ this Epistle, taking notice of a
change wrought in them, he thanketh God. And so ver. 20. When ye were the
servants of sin; which (as though the Apostle should say) you were when you
were in the estate of nature. Thus we see the unregenerate are the servants of
sin, and so consequently the slaves of the Devil.

Reas. 5. The unregenerate, although they owe no service to the Devil, why yet
they willingly and readily subject themselves unto him, and obey him, John
8.44. Ye are of your father the Devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do,
says our Savior to the Jews. And hence it is that he calls Satan the Prince
of this world, John 12.31. and 16.11. And so the Apostle Paul, Ephesians. 6.12. The
ruler of the darkness of this world; to wit, of the unregenerate. And 2 Cor.
4.4. The god of this world. And it is a wonder to behold and observe how
cheerfully the unregenerate serve the Devil, yea many times when great
difficulty, nay visible danger is in the way. If he command the Drunkard, he
rises early in the morning to follow after drunkenness If he command the
Adulterer, he watches his opportunities, although never so inconvenient unto
the health of his body. If he command the Covetous person, he will accomplish
his worldly project, or else it shall cost him his life. Who rises so early as
the Drunkard, and sits up so late? Who walks so many dark nights as the
Adulterer? Who endures so many Tempests as the Pirat? Who adventures on so many
dangers as Thieves and Robbers? Thus we see the unregenerate are the Devils
slaves, because of their willing obedience and subjection to him.

Reas. 4. That the unregenerate are the slaves of the Devil, is evident by
their reward in this life and the life to come. In this life besides many
outward judgments upon them diverse times) terrors of conscience, and fear of
hell fire, as the unregenerate are described Heb. 2.15. to be such as through
the fear of death (that is to say, death eternal) are all their life time
subject to bondage: And in the life to come, to condemnation, Romans 6.23. The
wages of sin is death; to wit, eternal. And so of Satan. He will promise great
matters to men and women, but he is a Deluder and a Liar. He told our first
Parents, obeying him, they should become as gods; but in their woeful
experience, they found the clean contrary. And so he suggested to our Savior
Matthew. 4.8, 9. that if he would fall down and worship him, what he would do for
him: but had our Savior trusted him, he had been deceived. The truth of it is,
he deceives all that trust him: Witness his principal slaves Witches, and
Wizards, unto whom he promises much Wealth and Riches; but where is the Wealth
of such when they dye? Thus we see, by the woeful reward of the unregenerate in
this life, and the life to come, that they are the slaves of the Devil.

Reas. 5. That the unregenerate are the slaves of the Devil is plain, because
the Lord as the punishment of sin, has given them over unto his dominion and
government, even as he gave the rebellious Israelites often into the hands of
cruel Tyrants. We all in Adams loins making choice of this Master; rather
choosing to obey Satan then God: was it not just with the Lord to give us up
unto his Regiment? And so the Unregenerate continually delighting more in the
service of Satan then in the service of God: is it not just with God to leave
them in his hands, to be slaves to him whose service they so delight in? It is
true, Satan has no power but what Gods permits. But how just is it with God to
give up such unto his dominion as are Rebels to his Majesty?

Now for the further illustration of this point we come to answer some
objections. 2 To show the greatness, and grievousnesse of this slavery; and
Lastly to the Uses.

Object 1. But may some men say, the debaucht, and profane person, the common
swearer, drunkard, gamester, those by their very way and course, do seem to be
the slaves of the devil; but your civil honest men and women, such as live
neighbourly, are outwardly well governed, but yet are not religious, care not
much for hearing of Sermons, do not labor after holy knowledge, have not a good
word for those that are forward in profession; do you hold those likewise to be
the slaves of the Devil?

An. Yes, It is true, they are not in that measure the slaves of the devil as
the former, but being in the estate of nature, sin is altogether unmortified in
them, and where sin is altogether unmortified, there Satan reigns. This is a
truth, the more liberty any man takes to sin, the more he is the slave of the
devil. But yet this is a truth likewise, that Satan has the mere Civillist
sure enough; because although sin may sleep in him, why yet it is not mortified
in him. The Scribes and pharisees who were civil men, our Savior, Mat. 23.15.
styles them no better then the children of hell; he might have as well called
them the slaves of the Devil: And so Simon Magnus, the sin of covetousness
being unmortified in him, the Apostle Peter tells him, Acts 8.23. That he was in
the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity; and why in the bond of
iniquity? because he was bound to the sin of cove^ousnesse as by a chain, and
so to the Devil; this sin being unmortified in him, he was the slave of the
Devil.

Object 2. But may some man say, diverse that in likelihood are in the estate of
nature, are many times frolic, and merry; and who so jovial as they?

Answ. It is true, and yet sometimes these persons have horrible pangs, and
gripes of conscience; and the reason they are so merry and joviall is, because
they are not sensible of this bondage, neither how deeply they are drowned in
this slavery. A man on dry ground (being alive) feels a small weight that is
laid on him; but being dead in the bottom of the water, is not sensible,
although never so great weight be laid upon him: So it is with a mere natural
man spiritually dead.

Object 3. But the regenerate themselves whilst they are in this world have
sin in them, and where sin is, Satan is: are not they likewise the slaves of
the Devil?

Answ. Not; although the regenerate have sin remaining in them, why yet it does
not reign in them; and where sin raigns not, Satan raigns not: There is a great
difference between one being in a house, and ruling in a house; between one
usurping as a tyrant and ruling as a king, willingly submitted unto. The
Apostle Peter speaking of the regenerate, 1 Pet. 2.9. But ye are a chosen
generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people. They are no
longer the slaves of Satan, but the servants of God; nay, the children of God
by adoption. These Objections being answered, we come (in some measure) to
point at the greatness, and grievousness of this slavery, the miserableness
of it. You have heard of the bondage of Christians under the Turks, and
Infidels, of the slavery of the Gibeointes, who were censured by Joshuah to be
hewers of wood, and drawers of water; Josh. 9.23. But especially of the great
slavery of the Israelites under Pharaoh in Egypt; but this bondage of the
unregenerate under Satan, is a great deal worse. For first, that bondage was of
the body only, but this is the bondage of the whole man, body and soul.
Secondly, In that bondage, men were served; but in this, the Devil who is the
basest Lord, and who commands the basest things. Thirdly, In that bondage the
greatest harm was temporal, but in this eternal, even damnation in hell for
ever. Fourthly, In that bondage, they had a sense of their thraldom, and
desired liberty; but in this, men do not perceive themselves to be bound, but
think themselves to be free, and despise liberty. Lastly in all outward
bondage, there may be probability of help; as by running away, or by entreaty,
or by ransom, or by the death of those that hold us in bondage: but in this
bondage men and women lie still, as it were bound hand and foot, not able, not
willing to help themselves, except the Lord from heaven come and vindicate them
out of the paws of the Lion, by his Word and Spirit unbind them and set them
free. Now we come to the Uses.

Use 1. To inform us, touching a great error which is in many. They seem to
admire at the condition of such as live out of the danger of man's Law; have
enough to pay every man his own, so as they fear not to be cast in prison, are
able to make their part good in any suit or quarrel, may go whither they list,
as their humor serves, from Alehouse, to Alehouse; from Bawdy House, to
Bawdy House; have money enough in their purses to defray. so as they need not go
upon the score. O they take such to be the only free persons in the world, and
only to live at their own command: and thus they judge, looking upon the outward
appearance; in the mean time, not considering that those persons aforesaid,
being in the estate of nature, they are all this while the slaves of the Devil.
Certain it is, there be many that feed daintily, are clothed richly, live idly,
take their fill of all worldly pleasures, in all licenciousnesse; and yet are
arrant slaves as any that serves in a Gally. It is a good saying of one of the
Ancients; a good man though he serves, yet is he free; a wicked man; though he
reigns, yet he is a servant: Those that are not the servants of God, how many
lords have they? the world, the flesh, and the Devil; the world their servant,
their flesh their fellow, the Devil their enemy. There is no vassallage like
unto this, besides the woeful reward in this life, and the life to come. And if
you would have these slaves of the Devil painted out unto you by some signs.
First an arguing for sin, and a defending of their evil ways. Secondly, An
hating and disliking of those that reprove them for their sins. Thirdly; A
loving of those that sooth them; and flatter them in their evil ways,
Fourthly, A maintaining and upholding of sin in others.

Use 2. For the great comfort and consolation of all the Regenerate: They are
not the slaves of the Devil: they were indeed, but now they are not, but the
servants of God: And this they may know, by resisting of Satan's suggestions, by
denying of obedience unto his temptations; by mortifying that which is his
Broker and Baud, to wit, sin and corruption; by the daily renewing of our
repentance; and so by their great rejoicing in taking notice of any to come
from under his slavery. O what an easy service is this in comparison of the
other! What an honorable service this is in comparison of the other! and the
great difference in the issue and end! Romans 6.23. The wages of sin (and so of
Satan) is death, eternal death; but the gift of God (to wit, to his servants)
is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Use 3. For Exhortation: 1. To exhort Ministers, that they would ply their
business, seeing all the Unregenerate are the slaves of the Devil. O what
Minister is there but has most of his people unregenerate?

2. To exhort Masters of Families to bring their children of understanding, and
likewise Servants to the Public Means, that so they may be vindicated from
Satan.

3. To exhort all the Unregenerate, in the use of all good means, to labor the
new birth. O the great Liberty the Regenerate have in this world, besides the
heavenly Reward in the world to come! But the woeful bondage of the
Unregenerate, and the woeful payment that attends them in this world, and in the
world to come, besides their living in the continual breach of that Vow which
they made in Baptism, they then vowing to serve the Lord, and not the Devil.

MEMBER V. And guilty of eternal Damnation.
Doct. EVery one in the estate of corrupt nature is not only the slave of
Satan, but likewise subject to eternal Damnation.

Now in the handling of this Doctrine, I observe the method following. 1. To
acquaint you in some measure what Damnation is. 2. To prove the point, by
Scripture, and Reasons. 3. To answer some Objections. 4. To make Appplication.

1. To acquaint you in some measure what Damnation is? I say, in some measure,
because it cannot be expressed to the full, nor conceived in its largest
extent, the wrath of God does so appear in the same.

Damnation contains in it these Particulars.

1. It is a separation from Gods comfortable presence: Matthew. 7.23. Depart from
me ye that work iniquity: Thus our Savior tells us he will say unto all the
Reprobates at the day of Judgment, Depart from me. And the Apostle Paul,
speaking of the Reprobate at the day of Judgment, 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. Who shall be
punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord. Now as
touching the wofulness of this separation, do but ask the godly man or woman,
the Lord being at any time absent from them in their apprehensions. It is to be
observed of Eli, and his daughter in Law, the perplexity they were in, and
amazement they were put unto, when news was brought that the Ark was taken,
which was was but a sign of Gods presence, 1 Samuel 4.17. and so to the end of
the Chapter. And what a cross was it to Absalom when he might not see David's
face? 2 Samuel 14.32. and David but a man: The misery of this separation is not
to be conceived. And one thing that shall aggravate this part of the Reprobates
misery, they shall see others enjoy what they have lost. Luke 13.28. There
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth (says our Savior to the Jews) when ye
shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of God, and you your
selves thrust out. This is the first Particular of Damnation, to wit, a
separation from Gods comfortable presence.

The second Particular Damnation compriseth, is, Society with the Devil and his
Angels. This is the Sentence which our Savior will pronounce upon the
Reprobate at the day of Judgment, Matthew. 25.41. Go ye cursed into everlasting
fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels. In this world the wicked love not
to converse with God in his Ordinances, to associate themselves with the Saints
and people of God; and therefore in the world to come, they shall have
lamentable companions, to wit, the Devil and his Angels. David complains of
wicked and contentious neighbors, Psalm. 120.5. etc. Woe is me that I sojourn in
Mesech, that I dwell in the Tents of Kedar; my soul has long dwelt with him
that hates peace. But what cause will the wicked have this way in hell? O how
will our hair start up if we think we see a Devil! nay, do but speak of a Devil
and men and women bless themselves. We read of some of the Heathen, being
Exiles, they could not look back on their own Countries without grief and tears:
but what will the wicked do in Hell, being banished from God and Heaven, and
restrained to such company as the Devil and his Angels? This is the second
Particular of Damnation; to wit, society and fellowship with the Devil and his
Angels.

The third Particular which Damnation compriseth or contains, is; intolerable
and unconceivable torment both of soul and body; O how shall the soul be
tormented? This our Savior sets forth by a worm, Mark 9.44. speaking of the
Damned in hell, Where their worm dies not. A worm lying gnawing at the heart
we know is great pain; and shall the body be free from punishment in hell? Nay,
the punishment that shall be inflicted upon it, our Savior sets forth by fire,
Mark 9.44. And the fire is not quenched; and fire which is the most scalding
and vehement; Fire and brimstone, as it is Rev. 21.8. Now who can abide to
touch the fire so much as with his finger?

The fourth Particular Damnation compriseth, is the universality of the
torment. It shall extend to every faculty of soul, and member of body. The
Understanding shall discern Gods infinite wrath: The Memory shall be fresh to
call the sin that is past, and the aggravations of it: a hell shall be in the
Conscience; And all these employed in the Worm forementioned. And so likewise
in hell every member of the body shall be tormented, as may be observed of the
Rich man in hell. mentioned, Luke 16.24. And he cried and said, Father Abraham
have mercy on me, and send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger in
water to cool my tongue, for I am tormented in this flame; as though he should
say, every member of my body being tormented, but especially my tongue.

The fifth Particular, or aggravation of Damnation, is Eternity. This
separation from Gods comfortable presence must be perpetual: This Society with
the Devil and his Angels must be for ever: This intolerable and unconceivable
torment of soul and body must be eternal. Every faculty of soul, and member of
body must be tormented, and that for evermore. It is as if a man were pressing
to death, and could wish that more weight might be laid upon him; but cannot
have his desire. If those that go to hell were but to continue there as many
thousand years as there are sands on the sea shore, or Stars in the Firmament,
there were some hope and comfort: but alas, when never so many years are
expired, the torments of the Damned are as fresh to begin again as though they
had never been. Their worm never dies, and their fire never goes out, Mark
9.44. And Matthew. 25.46. These (says our Savior speaking of the Reprobate)
shall go into everlasting punishment. Thus we see in some measure, according to
the Scriptures, what eternal Damnation is.

Now we come to prove the Point, to wit, that every one in the estate of
corrupt nature is guilty of, is subject to eternal Damnation; John 5.24.
Verily, verily, I say unto you (says our Savior) he that hears my word, and
believes on him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into
condemnation: holding forth thus much, that all but the true believer must come
into condemnation. And so Romans 8.1. There is no condemnation to them that are
in Christ Jesus; hinting plainly thus much, all living and dying out of Christ
unregenerate, must be damned. And likewise 1 Cor. 6.9. Know ye not that the
unrighteous (those that are in the estate of nature) shall not inherit the
kingdom of God? And if such must not inherit heaven, what must they do that go
to hell? And to the same purpose our Savior, John 3.36. He that believes on
the Son has everlasting life, and he that believes not the Son shall not see
life, but the wrath of God abides on him. It is as much as if our Savior
should have said, All living and dying in the estate of nature, the wrath of
God shall press them down to the pit of hell, they shall be damned. And Matthew.
13.41, 42. The Son of man shall send forth his Angels (to wit, at the last
Judgment) and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and
them that do iniquity (to wit, all the unregenerate) and shall cast them into a
furnace with fire; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. And Rev. 21.8.
But the fearful, and unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers, and
whoremongers; and Socerers, and Idolaters, and all liars, shall have their part
in the Lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death;
that is to say, whosoever they be that have sin unmortified in them (as every
one in the estate of nature has) shall be damned; that is to say, so living
and so dying, shall be damned. Now we come to the Reasons of the Point.

Reas. 1. The unregenerate person is a sinner and that diverse ways: Romans 6.23.
Now the wages of sin is death, to wit, eternal.

Reason 2. The unregenerate person stands upon his own bottom, is under the
curse, and so is to satisfy Gods Justice in his own person, living and dying
in that estate, has no benefit by Christ's Satisfaction and Intercession.
Galatians 3.10. Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which are
written in the book of the Law to do them; that is, Cursed is every one that
keeps not the whole Law, either by himself, or by another, to wit, Christ: It
is true, the Regenerate, and such as are in Christ, fulfill the Law in Christ
(Christ's obedience passive and active being theirs by imputation) and so freed
from the Curse, Romans 8.1. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus: but the unregenerate are under the Curse, the principal part whereof is
eternal death and damnation. The Curse does not only contain all the miseries
of this life, inward and outward, besides the separation both of soul and body
by corporal death in the end; but likewise eternal death and damnation in the
world to come. The soul when by corporal death it goes out of the body being
pressed down to hell by the wrath of God, and at the day of Judgment when both
are conjoined, both to be punished according to the particulars aforesaid.

Reas. 3. The consciences of the unregenerate, sometimes even in this world,
tell them no less then the Point comes unto; witness Cain, Abitophel, and
Judas. When the Lord at any time, even in this life, is pleased to awaken and
wound the consciences of the unregenerate, the very flashes of hell fire does
appear in them. Now we come to answer two Objections, and so to the Uses.

Obj. 1. But may some men say, If the bodies of the unregenerate shall be raised
up at the last day, and their souls and bodies again conjoined, and both to
continue for ever, why is not their condition future, rather called eternal
life, then eternal death?

Ans. Because that life which is called theirs, then is most miserable death,
and does not deserve to be called life.

Ob. 2. But how can it stand with Gods justice to punish temporal offense with
eternal punishment?

Answ. 1. Because sin is an offense against an Infinite God, and so does
deserve eternal punishment. 2. Did the unregenerate person live eternally in
this world, he would sin eternally. 3. The unregenerate damned in hell do not
cease to sin; I do not say they commit Murder, Adultery, and such like sins,
but continue in unbelief, impenitency, blasphemy, etc. Now to the Uses.

Use 1. To reprove diverse persons: 1. Such as in their Conference and Discourse
do use this imprecation; That if this and that be not true which they affirm,
they wish they might be damned: But do those persons consider what damnation is
of which they speak so lightly?

2. To reprove such as are offended at Gods Ministers for preaching of
damnation. Do not many of their people remain and continue unregenerate in the
state of nature? and does not eternal damnation belong to such? Why then should
they not preach in this manner unto them, for the awaking and rowzing of them
up? Must not a Minister deal faithfully with his people? See what Balaam a
false Prophet says to a King, Number. 24.13. If Balak would give me his house
full of Silver and Gold I cannot go beyond the commandment of the Lord to do
either good or bad of my own mind, but what the Lord says, that will I speak.
If the Lord say in his Word that those that live and dye in the estate of
nature must be damned, how can the Minister (if he would be found faithful
either to his Master or people) conceal it? Joseph did not only tell the Butler
the meaning of his dream, but likewise the Baker the meaning of his, Genesis
40.19. Yet within three days shall Pharaoh lift up thy head from off thee, and
shall hang thee on a tree, and the birds shall eat thy flesh from off thee. And
the Butler afterward relating this to Pharaoh upon occasion, Genesis 41.13. And
it came to pass (says he) as he interpreted to us so it was; me he restored to
my Office, and him (that is to say, the chief Baker) he hanged. And is not this
that which the Apostle Paul calls upon Timothy for, 2 Timothy 2.15. Study to show
thy self approved unto God, a work man that needs not be ashamed, rightly
dividing the word of truth. Do not we rightly divide the word of truth when we
preach salvation to the Regenerate, and damnation to the Ungenerate?

3. To reprove all such as neglect the means whereby they might be brought out
of the estate of nature, to which eternal damnation belongs. No better means to
prepare for this business, then a thundering and powerful Ministry.

Use 2. A call to repentance, unto all such as are in the estate of nature, as
ignorant persons Swearers, Cursers, Profaners of the Sabbath, Whoremasters,
Drunkards, Oppressors, Usurers, Greedy Earthworms, Contemners of the Gospel,
Despisers of Gods Ministers, who all proclaim themselves to be in the estate of
nature. O that such would consider the woeful case they are in. To be under the
Curse (as the unregenerate person is) is no little misery To be subject to all
outward calamities in this life; nay, to have many Spiritual plagues upon them,
as blindness of mind, hardness of heart, and many times terrors of conscience,
even the flashes of hell fire in their consciences; and when by temporal death
the soul goes out of the body, the wrath of God to press it down to the pit of
hell, and there to be in unspeakable, nay, unconceivable torment until the day
of Judgment; and then, when the soul and body shall be again conjoined to
appear and stand before, 1. Such a Judge as cannot be deceived through
ignorance: 2. Such a Judge as cannot be forestalled by favor. 3. Such a Judge
as cannot be overswayed with power. 4. Such a Judge as cannot be moved with
pity, for then the time of pity is past to such. 5. Such a Judge as cannot be
corrupted with gifts. Lastly, Such a Judge as cannot be overcome with Arguments:
and so the Sentence to be passed upon them, Mat. 25.41. Go ye Cursed into
everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. And then to be for
ever separated from Gods comfortable presence, to be for ever restrained and
enforced to the society of the Devil and his Angels; both soul and body to be
in unspeakable and unconceivable torment, and that for ever; every faculty of
soul and member of body to be in this torment, and that for evermore. O
consider this ye that forget God, lest he tear you in pieces, and there be none
to deliver. Psalm. 50.22. 2 Cor. 5.11. Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord,
we persuade men, says the Apostle. So we persuade you to see and to be
sensible of your condition, that in the use of all good means you would labor
to get out of your present estate, as it is Ephesians. 5.14. Awake thou that
sleep, and stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light. Take
heed of fore-slowing the time; If death seize upon thee before thy Repentance
and Regeneration, ah, woe be unto thee that ever thou wast born! And know, thou
have no lease of thy life: remember that secure fool, Luke 12.20. Thou fool,
this night shall thy soul be required of thee: This day hear Gods voice, and do
not harden thy heart for to morrow thou art uncertain of it. Thus far touching
man's misery by nature. We proceed to the third Principle.

PRINC. III.
Quest. What means is there for thee to escape this damnable estate?

Answ. Jesus Christ the eternal Son of God being made man by his death upon the
Cross, and by his Righteousness, has perfectly alone by himself
accomplished all things that are needful for the salvation of mankind.

MEMB 1. Jesus Christ the eternal Son of God.
HErein we have the Redeemer of mankind described by three of his Titles: 1.
Jesus; 2. Christ; 3. The Son of God: this last illustrated by this Epithete,
eternal; The eternal Son of God. Of these three Titles in order, and first of
the Title Jesus.

This Title is a Title of benefits, it signifying an Author of safety, our
Savior as we may observe the Angel to interpret, speaking to Joseph, Matthew.
1.21. Thou shall call his name Jesus, for he shall save his people from their
sins.

Obj. But may some men say, There was others called by this name, besides the
Redeemer of mankind.

Ans. It is true, but take notice of the difference betwixt him and them. 1.
They had his name imposed on them by the will of men but he had his name given
him by an Angel from God. 2. They were but typical Saviors, he the Savior
indeed. 3. They were but temporal and outward Saviors, he a Spiritual Savior.
4. They were but Instrumental Saviors, he the Author of all good things,
Temporal, Spiritual and Eternal.

Obj. But the Father and the Holy Ghost are Saviors also.

Ans. It is true, but the difference is in their manner of saving. The Father
saves by the Son; the Son saves by paying the Ransom and price of salvation;
the Holy Ghost saves by a particular applying of this Ransom. Two Questions
following to be answered, and then we come to Application, 1. Whom this Jesus
saves? 2. From what?

Quest. 1. Whom?

Ans. The Angel tells us whom in the place forecited, Matthew. 1.21. Thou shall
call his name Jesus, for he shall save his people. And the Apostle Paul, Ephesians.
5.23. calls him The Savior of his body; to wit, of all the Elect.

Quest. 2. From what?

Ans. The Angel tells us that too in the former place, He shall save his people
from their sins; to wit, all their sins, the guilt and dominion of them.

Use. The Application may be to inform us two ways: 1. Touching our miserable
lost estate by nature, for so much a Savior implies: And the truth of it is,
we can never rightly and comfortably acknowledge this Savior, until we be
sensible this way. Many speak of this Savior as their Savior, but when were
they dejected and cast down with a sight and sense of their own misery by
nature? The Son of man is come (says our Savior himself, Matthew. 18.11.) to
save that which was lost; that is to say, those that were sensible of their
lost estate and condition: but diverse very ignorant and insensible this way,
will yet call him their Savior.

2. To inform us touching the great mercy of God to mankind. Satan and his
Angels fell but have no Savior; man falls, and the Lord devises and affords
a Savior. Now to this Savior, (seeing and feeling our misery) let us fly,
saying and praying with the Disciples, Matthew. 8.25. Lord save us, we perish:
and with David, Psalm. 35.3. Say unto our souls, Thou art our salvation:
Considering that comfortable Text he himself preached upon, the truth of which,
he came into the world to make good, Luke 4.18. The Spirit of the Lord is upon
me, because he has anointed me to preach the Gospel to the poor; he has sent
me to heal the broken hearted, to preach deliverance to the Captives, and
recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised. And
in ver. 21. He began to say unto them, This day is this Scripture fulfilled in
your ears.

Now we come to the second Title, Christ; which is a Title of Office, and
signifies Anointed. There were three sorts of persons anointed in the time of
the Old Testament; Prophets, Priests, and Kings, who were all types of this
Anointed, of this Prophet, Priest and King. That we may the better understand
this Title, we intend to answer the Questions following: 1. Why this Jesus is
said to be anointed? 2. With what? 3. His Office of Mediatorship, what it is
in the three parts of it: 4. The benefits the Elect have by it. Lastly, The
Duties intimated.

The first Question is, Why this Jesus is said to be anointed?

Answ. In ancient time, two things were intimated by this Anointing. 1. That
God did appoint such a person to such an Office. 2. That he would fit and
qualify him for the same. In both these respects Jesus is said to be anointed.
1. He was set apart of God the Father to the Office of Mediatorship, for
(although this be a common action of the whole Trinity), yet because the Father
is the first Person in order, and has the beginning of the action, it is
especially ascribed unto him, according to that Joh. 6.27. Him has God the
Father sealed. 2. He was fitted and qualified with gifts accordingly, John
3.34. God gives not the Spirit by measure unto him: that is to say, God gives
the Spirit unto him; that is, unto this Jesus, in an abundant measure: For this
we must know, that although both natures were set apart to the Office of
Mediatorship, why yet the Humane nature only was qualified with gifts, because
nothing could be added to the Divine; I say, this qualification must be
understood of the humane nature, and not of the Divine, for the reason
aforesaid; and although the humane nature was iqualified with pifts in an
abundant measure, why yet not in an infinite measure, for that were to confound
the two Natures.

Quest. 2 With what was this Jesus anointed?

Ans. Not with Ceremonious oil typically, as the Prophets, Priests, and Kings
in the old Testament; but with the gifts of the holy Ghost, as Acts 10.38. God
anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the holy Ghost, and with power.

Quest. 3 His office of mediatorship, what it is in the three parts of it?
Prophetical, Priestly, and Kingly.

Answ. First, of the first, his Prophetical office, is that whereby he
instructs and teaches his Church, as in his own person, when in our nature
he lived in the world; why so by his instruments before his assuming our
nature, and since his ascension, unto the end of the world. That he is the
Prophet of the Church, do but see, Act. 3.22, 23. where the Apostle Peter
speaking of Christ, says, For Moses truly said unto the fathers, A Prophet
shall the Lord your God raise up unto you, of your brethren like unto me; him
shall you hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you. And it shall
come to pass, that every soul that will not hear that prophet, shall be
destroyed from among the people. And hence is he called the wisdom of God, 1
Cor. 1.24 Nay, says the Apostle Paul, Colos. 2.5. In him are hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge.

2. His P^iestly office. That he is a Priest, the Psalmist declares speaking
of him, Psalm. 110.4. Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchized^k.
His Priesthood contains two things, First, His satisfaction made to his Father
for the elect, by his obedience, even to the death of the Cross. Secondly, his
intercession at his Fathers right hand; he ever living to present the meant of
his obedience to his Father, and to will an application of it to his elect.
Touching the former part of his Priestly office, to wit, his satisfaction; do
but see Heb. 9.26. Now once in the end of the world, has he appeared to put
away sin by the sacrificing of himself; and verse twenty eight, Christ was once
offered to bear the sins of many, to wit, of the Elect; all the Elect. Touching
the other part of his Priestly office, his intercession; see Heb. 7.25. He is
able to save them to the uttermost, that come unto God by him, seeing he ever
lives to make intercession for them. Romans 8.34. Heb. 9.24.

3. We come to the Kingly office of Christ: That he is a King, see Psalm. 2.6.
David there speaking of him, says, yet have I set my King upon my holy hill of
Zion: His Kingly office, is either Universal or special; Universal, and so
all creatures are under his dominion, Ephesians. 1.21, 22. Special, and so he
effectually calls the Elect, confirms the graces in them, protects them from
their enemies in this world, as he sees the best for them, glorifies them at
the length, and in the end, confounds and destroys all his and their enemies.

Quest. 4 What are the benefits the Elect have by this anointing?

Answ. Hence it is the Elect become Christians, and Christians indeed; that
they are spiritual Prophets, Priests, and Kings. Men and women no sooner
truly believe, are no sooner effectually called, but they receive of this
anointing, and so become Christians, Spiritual Prophets, Priests, and Kings:
to this purpose, see 1 John 2.27. The anointing which ye received of him,
abides in you, and teaches you all things: So then the regenerate are
spiritual Prophets; and they are likewise spiritual Priests; and Kings, see
Rev. 1.6. who has made us kings, and priests unto God and his Father

The last question. What are the duties intimated? An. 1 Seeing this Jesus is
the Christ, is the anointed, he should be sweet and savory unto us. Cant. 13.
Because of the savor of thy good ointments, thy name is as ointment poured
forth; therefore do the virgins love thee. Nothing should be so desired of us,
so affected by us, as Christ. 2. We should labor more, and more for holy
knowledge, and so demonstrate our selves to partake of Christ prophetical
office. Many exhortations this way. Provt 19.2. without knowledge, the mind is
nogood. John 5.39. Search the Scriptures. Colos. 3.16. Let the word of Christ
dwell in you richly in all wisdom: And how the Apostle reproves the Hebrews
for their bad proficiency this way, Heb. 5.12. etc. 3. We should demonstrate
our selves to be spiritual Priests, (and so to partake of Christ's Priestly
office) by spiritual Sacrifices; as first, by being frequent in prayer and
praise, as the Apostle exhorts, Heb. 13.15. By him therefore let us offer the
Sacrifice of praise to God continually. 2. By resigning up our selves wholly
unto God in the way of new obedience as the same Apostle exhorts. Romans 12.1. I
beseech you brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a
living sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God. 4. We should demonstrate our
selves to be spiritual Kings, (and so to partake of Christ's Kingly office) and
this by continual warring with our spiritual enemies, especially laboring to
subdue our own sinful passions, and affections, see what Solomon says this
way, Prove. 25.28. He that has no rule over his own spirit, is like a City that
is broken down, and without walls. And Prove. 16.32. He that is slow to anger, is
better then the mighty; and he that rules his spirit, then he that takes a
City. Thus much touching the second title, Christ, we come to the third.

The Son of God, illustrate by this epethite, eternal, Jesus Christ the
eternal Son of God. The Son of God, not by Creation as Adam and the Angels,
Luke 3.38. Job 1.6. Not by Adoption, as all true believers, Romans 8.14. Not by
grace of personal union, as the man Christ Luke 1.35. But by Generation, 1
John. 4.9. In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because God sent
his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him. For the
opening of this mystery, we propound the questions following; 1. The thing
generated, 2. How? or the manner of this generation? 3. When?

1. The thing it self generated, to wit, Christ; who is to be considered two
ways: 1. According to his essence. 2. According to his personal existence;
that is, as he is God, and as he is a Son; as he is a Son and person, he is not
of himself, but the Son of the Father by generation, as he is a God, and in
respect of his absolute essence, he is of himself neither begotten, nor
proceeding: One essence does not beget another, but one person another; the
person of the Father, the person of the Son, and so the Son is God of God, and
no otherwise; has from his Father the beginning of his person, but not the
beginning of his essence.

The second question, The manner of this generation. Answ. we must know it is
ineffable. Some Divines say, it is begotten of the Father, as the light of the
Sun in the firmament, by a simple emanation, passing, or flowing out; light of
light, says one of the Creed: But take we notice of the holy Ghosts metaphor,
John 1.1. In the beginning was the Word; so the second person in Trinity is
called. As the speech is in the mind, and the mind in the speech; so is God the
Son, of God the Father.

Qu. 3 The time of this generation? Ans Before all worlds, The second person in
Trinity is the Son of God the Father, eternal by generation, according to the
Chatechism: and to this purpose, see Prove. 8.22, and 23. The Lord possessed me
in the beginning of his way, before his works of old; I was set up from
everlasting. Which place we are to understand of the second person in Trinity.
In this generation there is priority of order, but not of time, the Father and
the Son being coeternall. Now we come to the Uses.

Use 1. To terrify such profane persons, as despise Christ's word, and
ordinances; and such likewise as by their blasphemous oaths, tear, and rent
him in pieces as much as lies in them. Well, let all such know, that Jesus
Christ is not only the Son of man, but likewise the Son of God; and so able to
crush them, to be revenged upon them; therefore let such remember the Prophets
counsel, Psalm. 2.12. Kiss the Son, (that is, every way submit unto him) lest
he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little.

Use 2. For the great comfort of all true believers. Hence it is, that they,
poor miserable creatures, are become the Sons and Daughters of God by Adoption,
according unto that, John 1.12. As many as received him, to them gave he power
to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name. This is no
little privilege. The world little esteems of such persons; but Saint John
gives the reason. 1 John 3.1. Because the world knows them not. But
notwithstanding, let the true believer rejoice in this, that he being sometimes
the vassal and slave of Satan, is now become the Son of God by Adoption in and
through this his natural Son. Thus far touching the first Member of the
third Principle.

Now we come to the second member of the third Principle.

MEMBER II. Being made Man.
Which Member we commend unto you in this Doctrine.

Doct. There was a time, when the eternal Son of God was made man. John 1.14.
The Word, (that is to say, the Son of God, the second person in Trinity) was
made flesh, and dwelt among us. And Romans 1.3. concerning his Son Jesus Christ
our Lord, which was made of the seed of David according to the flesh. And Gal.
4.4. When the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a
woman. And so 1 Timothy 3.16. Without controversy, great is the mystery of
godliness, God was manifest in the flesh. And lastly, Heb. 2.16. Verily, he
took not on him the nature of Angels, but he took on him the seed of Abraham.
But that we may the better see into so deep a mystery, we intend to answer the
questions following.

1. How the Son of God, the second Person in Trinity could take upon him our
nature, and not the Father and the Holy Ghost, they all being one Essence? 2.
How far forth the Son of God was made man? 3. How the two natures, Divine, and
Humane were united? 4. How they remain distinguished? 5. Why it was necessary
the Redeemer of mankind should be man? why it was necessary he should be God?
and why it was necessary he should be both God and man?

Quest. 1. How the Son of God the second person in Trinity, could take upon him
man's nature, and not the Father and the Holy Ghost, they all being one Essence?

Ans. The Godhead is to be considered of in a twofold respect: 1. In regard of
Essence: 2. In regard of Person. The Essence is but one, the Persons three. A
Person is a distinct subsistence of the whole Godhead; now although the
Essence, the whole Essence be in every Person; why yet the Persons do
distinctly and real differ each from other in their peculiar manner of
subsisting; and so might the Son; and the Son only takes upon him man's nature
and not the Father nor the Holy Ghost.

Quest. 2. How far forth the Son of God took upon him man's nature?

Ans. 1. He took upon him the Essence of man, a reasonable soul and an humane
body. 2. He took unto him the Properties of man's nature; in his body, length,
breadth, thickness, etc. In his soul, the faculties of Understanding, Will,
Affection. 3. He took unto him the Infirmities of man's nature; not sinful or
personal, but mere infirmities, as to be hungry, thirsty, weary, sad, angry.

Obj. But how could the Son of God take upon him our nature, and be free from
sin, our nature being so sinful?

An. 1. Because he was not begotten by the mixture of man and woman. 2. Because
he was conceived by the Holy Ghost. Now we come to the third Question.

Quest. 3. How the two Natures, Divine, and Humane were united?

Ans. We must not think that the Godhead is changed into the manhood, or the
manhood into the Godhead; but the second Person of the Godhead did assume or
take into the Unity of his Person the Manhood; that is to say, the whole nature
of man soul and body; The manhood of Christ not subsisting of it self as
another man, it being a Nature only, and not a Person. There is one thing and
another thing in Christ, but not one Person and another Person: two Natures,
and but one Person: the second Person in Trinity assuming an humane Nature, and
both Natures making one Christ and Mediator.

Quest. 4. How the two Natures in Christ remain distinguished?

Answ. We must know, that although the two natures in Christ be so really
united, as that they can never be separated asunder, yet are they not
confounded, but remain distinguished. 1. In themselves: 2. In their
Properties: 3, In their Actions. 1. In Themselves: As the Godhead of Christ
remains the Godhead, and is not the manhood, although the Son of God be also
very man, and so the manhood of Christ remains the manhood, and is not the
Godhead, although the man Christ be also God. 2. They remain distinguished in
their Properties, as the Godhead of Christ remains Incomprehensible and
Infinite, as it has always been, and the manhood remains, comprehensible and
finite, notwithstanding the uniting of it to the second Person in Trinity: The
Godhead becomes not finite by this Union, nor the manhood Infinite. 3. They
remain distinguished in their Actions, as John, chap. 10. ver. 18. I have
power to lay down my life (says our Savior) and power to take it again. The
laying down of his life, was an action of his Manhood the taking it again, an
action of his Godhead. Thus we see the two natures in Christ, with their
properties and actions distinguished, and yet in regard of the union of the two
natures, we must take notice of the things following: 1. That in Scriputre,
that is sometimes ascribed to whole Christ, which is but proper to one of his
natures; 1 Cor. 15.3. Sometimes that ascribed to one of his natures, which
agrees to whole Christ; 1 Timothy 2.5. Sometimes that ascribed to one nature,
which is proper to the other; Acts 20.28. and this Divines call, the
communication of properties. 2. That notwithstanding the two natures in Christ
remain distinguished, as aforesaid, yet they both concur in the work of
Redemption. 3. That by this union, the humane nature is unspeakably, and
extraordinarily exalted; to wit, above all creatures, even the Angels
themselves, and together with the Godhead of Christ to be adored and worshipped.

Now we come to the fifth Question.

Quest. 5. Why was it necessary the Redeemer of Mankind should be man? Why was
it necessary he should be God? Why was it necessary he should be both God and
man?

Answ. It was necessary he should be man, 1. That he might have something to
offer for sin, Heb. 8.3.2. That he might work perfect righteousness in our
nature. Matthew. 3.15.3. That in our nature he might always appear in Gods sight
for us, Heb. 9.24.4. That in our nature he might feel our infirmities, and so
by experience learn commiseration, Heb. 2.17, 18.

2. Why was it necessary the Redeemer of Mankind should be God? Answ, 1. That
he might be able to sustain, and undergo the infinite wrath of God due to our
sins. 2. That he might give merit to the doing and suffering of his Manhood;
for no mere creature can merit of God. 3. That he might give his Spirit to the
Elect to sanctify them; the Spirit being God, none but God could give him. 4.
That he might raise up himself from the dead, and likewise all his Members at
the last and great day.

3. Why was it necessary that the Redeemer of Mankind should be both God and
man? Answ. That he might be a fit and competent Mediator between God and man.

Use 1. For the great comfort and consolation of all penitent, and dejected
sinners; What, the Son of God become our kinsman? Emmanuel, God with us, a
Redeemer of our own flesh? What we that were estranged from God, that had gone
a Whoring from him by our sins, he now to seek unto us by his Son, to send his
own Son to entreat us to be reconciled unto him; surely, this is an evident
demonstration that the Lord intends good to the sons and daughters of men;
that he would not the death of the poor penitent sinner. Never were the
Attributes of God so illustrated, as when the Son of God did assume our nature;
and as his other Attributes, so especially his Mercy. Do but see what the Angel
says unto the Shepherds, Luke 2.13.11. Fear not, for b^hold I bring you good
tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people. For unto you is born this
day, i^ the City of David, a Savior, which is Christ the Lord. Nay, a
multitude of Angels, 13 and 14 verses. And suddenly there was with the Angel a
multitude of the heavenly Host, praising God, and saying, Glory to God in the
highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men, O therefore let the poor
penitent sinner break forth with joy, saying or singing with old Zachary, Luke
1.68, 69. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed
his people; and has raised up an horn of salvation for us, in the house of his
servant David. O how narrow was the Church of God, before the incarnation of
the Son of God, pined up within the Nation of the Jews! But now, how has she
enlarged her borders? Is he the Savior of the Jews only, and not of the
Gentiles also? How obscure the service of God before, how clear now? The
Substance is come, the types and shadows are gone. How costly and painful the
service of God before, but now, how easy and light?

Use 2. To exhort us, and that diverse ways: 1. To believe Gods promises, that
the Son of God should come into the world, assume our nature, was a blessing
long promised, as Genesis 3.15. He shall bruise thy head; to wit, God-man, the Son
of God assuming man's nature, should bruise the Serpents head, overcome Satan in
the behalf of all the Elect. Now although there were diverse thousand years
betwixt the Promise, and the performance, why yet at length it was fulfilled;
as Gal. 4.4. When the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son made of
a woman. The Scriptures contain many precious Promises running upon the people
of God, the Lord will perform them all, so his people will but rest on him by
faith, and by a lively hope wait their accomplishment. 2. To exhort us, seeing
the Son of God did so abase himself, as to take upon him our nature, that we
should learn humility of him; we must not be highly conceited of our selves, as
to think we have had faith, and good hearts to God, ever since we were born, as
diverse imagine; but we must labor to see and feel our great misery in the
first Adam, being thoroughly convinced, that there is not a good thought, nor
the least dram of saving faith in any man, until he be Regenerate.

3. To exhort us, that we would meet the Son of God: Is he come in our nature,
and will we not give him the meeting? Is he become bone of our bone, and flesh
of our flesh, and will not we labor to become bone of his bone, and flesh of
his flesh? As he is one with our nature by Personal Union, so to be one with
him by Mystical Union? To this purpose let us endeavor to acquaint our selves
with his Birth, his Life, and Death; with his Natures, his Offices, his
Benefits; what he was, what he did, what he suffered for Mankind; so
manifesting that we are acquainted with him, united unto him by a holy life and
conconversation: one special end why he assumed our nature, and came into the
world, as we may see Luke 1.75. and Titus 2.11. and so to the fifteenth verse.
Thus far touching the second Member of the third Principle.

Now we come to the third Member of the third Principle.

MEMBER III. By his death upon the Cross.
JEsus Christ, the Eternal Son of God, being made man, by his death upon the
Cross. Take it in the form of a Doctrine after this manner.

Doct. Jesus Christ, the Eternal Son of God, being made man, was Crucified to
death.

The Scripture is abundant in proof this way, as Mat. 27.35, 44, 50. Mark
15.24, 25, 27, 37. Luke 23.33, 46. John 19.15, 16, 17, 18, and 30 verses. This
is that which the Apostle Peter does charge upon the consciences of the Jews,
Acts 2.22, 23, and 36 verses. Chap. 3.13, 14, 15 verses. And so Chap. 4.10.
Chap. 5.30. And so Stephen, Acts 7.51, 52. That we may the better conceive of
this weighty point, to wit, Christ's Passive obedience, it shall be necessary to
answer the questions following, 1. Whether Christ suffered in both his Natures
yea or no? 2. What he suffered, or the Passion it self? 3. When his sufferings
began, and when they ended? 4. The Causes of his passion? 5. To what end he
suffered?

Quest. 1. Whether Christ suffered in both his Natures or no?

Answ. There is no question but he suffered in the Humane nature, both soul,
and body; but the Divine nature is impassible, cannot suffer; and yet in a
manner may be said to suffer, not only because the Person that was both God
and man did suffer, but also because the whole time of Christ's humiliation, the
Majesty and glory of his Divine nature was somewhat laid down and hidden; and
so we understand the Apostle, Phil. 2.7. Who made himself of no reputation,
speaking of Christ; or as it is in the Original, Who emptyed himself; it being
spoken in regard of his Divine nature, the Majesty, and glory of it being much
hidden and obscured, all the time he had upon him the form of a servant.

Quest. 2. What Christ suffered? or the Passion it self?

Answ. The sufferings of Christ, can never be expressed to the full; so deeply
did he drink off his Fathers wrath for our sins. This the Evangelical Prophet
denotes before hand, Isaiah 52.14. and 53.3. Now his sufferings may be divided
into the sufferings of his life, and the sufferings of his death, or near his
death. 1. Touching the sufferings of his life, which were manifold:

As 1. He no sooner being conceived as man, but suspected to be illegitimate,
or unlawfully begotten, Mat. 1.19, and 20 verses. 2. Being born in a Stable,
and laid in a Manger, Luke 2.7. 3. The pain of his Circumcision, Luke 2.21. 4.
His flight into Egypt, Mat. 2.13. 5. His being tempted of the Devil forty
days and forty nights together in the Wilderness, a place of great terror, and
in that time, the Devil carrying up and down his body at his pleasure;
sometimes to a Pinnacle of the Temple, and sometimes to the top of an high
Mountain, Mat. 4.1. 6. His Poverty, he having not where to lay his head, Luke
9.58. 7. His going about from place to place, with hunger, thirst, and
weariness, to Preach, and work Miracles. 8. The manifold contumelies and
reproaches that were cast upon him by those that did oppose his Doctrine and
Miracles; as that he was a Deceiver, was Mad, had a Devil, etc. Thus we have
given you a taste of the first sort of Christ's sufferings, to wit, the
sufferings of his life.

Now 2. We come to lay forth briefly the sufferings of his death, or near his
death; and how grievous, and dolorous his sufferings were in, and about his
death, may appear: 1. By his testifying and complaining how heavy he was, even
unto death, Mat. 26.38. 2. By the great drops, or clods of water and blood,
which fell from his face, Luke 22.44. 3. By his sundry cries to his Father,
that if it were possible, the cup of death might pass from him. 4. By those
unworthy things he suffered at the hands of sinners, as being betrayed by one
of his own Disciples; then taken as a Thief with swords and staves, bound and
carried away, and brought as a Malefactor before the Magistrate; before whom,
although he was cleared, yet must he be scourged, stripped of his own apparel,
clothed with scornful Kingly Robes, a Crown of thorns put upon his head, and a
Reed put into his hand instead of a Scepter, and so was he led away as a sheep
to the slaughter, and between two Thieves (as the chief of all sinners)
crucified; his joints stretched and racked, his hands and feet dug with
nails,; his side pierced with a Spear, and instead of drink, he had Vinegar
tempered with Gall reached unto him; the High Priests scoffed, the Passengers
wagged their heads, the Soldiers mocked him; nay, one of the Thieves upon the
Cross, could with his last breath blaspheme him: so many reproaches and
contempts were done unto him, as no Chronicle can remember the like ever done
to any Malefactor. 5. He was as one oppressed, and forsaken of God, which made
him cry out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? he not only suffering
the first death, but the pangs of the second death. Thus we see a little, what
Christ suffered in his life, and in his death.

Quest. 3. Is, When the sufferings of Christ began? and when they ended?

Answ. They began at his Birth, or before, as we have heard, (he no sooner
being conceived, but suspected to be illegitimate) and continued until the
giving up of the ghost; then, and not until then, were his dolours and torments
ended; as himself witnesses, John 19.30. When Jesus had received the Vinegar
he said, it is finished; and he bowed his head, and gave up the ghost: which
must he understood of his dolours and torments, but not of his Humiliation,
which continued so long as he was captivated of death, even unto his
Resurrection.

Quest. 4. What were the causes of his Passion?

Answ. The principal causes of his Passion, were, 1. Gods Decree, for the
manifestation of his Justice and Mercy, Acts 2.23. Him, being delivered by the
determinate Counsel and foreknowledge of God, (speaking unto the Jews of
Christ) ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and slain. 2. The
great love of God the Father unto his Elect, John 3.^6. God so loved the world,
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should
not perish, but have everlasting life. And Romans 5.8. God commends his love
toward us in that while we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us. And so 1 John
4.9, 10. In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that God
sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him.
Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son
to be a Propitiation for our sins. 3. The great love that was in Christ himself
unto the Elect, Gal. 2.20. I live by the faith of the Son of God, (says the
Apostle Paul) who loved me, and gave himself for me. And Ephesians. 5.2. Walk in
love, as Christ also has loved us, and given himself for us. And so verse 25.
Husbands love your wives, even as Christ also loved the Church, and gave
himself for it. The instrumental Causes, were Satan, Judas, the High Priests,
the Jews in general, Pilate, and the Roman Soldiers: But these Instruments,
neither to be commended, nor excused in this business, they having their own
wicked and malicious ends.

Quest. 5 Now we come to the fifth question, To what end Christ suffered?

Answ. The principal, and next to Gods glory, was to merit for the Elect
remission of sins, and freedom from punishment, Coll. 1.14. In whom we have
redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins. And Gal. 3.13.
Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law. We must not conceive of
Christ's sufferings as the sufferings of a private man, but as the sufferings of
a public person; he being our Pledge and Surety, as he is called, Heb. 7.22.
And whatsoever he suffered, he suffered for us; as Romans 4.25. Who was delivered
for our offenses: that is to say, to death. And 1 Cor. 15.3. Christ dyed for
our sins. And 1 Pet. 2.24. very comfortably; Who his own self bare our sins
in his own body on the tree. And hence it is, that he is said to be made sin
for us, 2 Cor. 5.21. and a Curse for us, Galatians 3.13. Here take we notice of
the difference between the sufferings of Christ, and the sufferings of Martyrs.

1. Christ's sufferings were an acursed punishment. The sufferings of Martyrs
are only Chastisements or Trials. 2. Christ's sufferings were Meritorious, so
are not the sufferings of Martyrs; but a duty, and debt. There be other ends of
Christ's Passive obedience, as the mortifying of sin in the Elect, Romans 6.6.
Knowing this, that our old man is Crucified with him, that the body of sin
might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin. And the giving
of them an example of suffering patiently, 1 Peter 2.21. Christ suffered for
us, leaving us an example, that we should follow his steps. Thus we have the
five Questions answered. Now we come to the Uses.

Use 1. To inform us, and that diverse ways. 1. To let us see into the
fierceness of Gods Wrath, and wonderful Justice against sin; when nothing
could expiate it but the death of his Son, when nothing could satisfy for
it, but the blood of the Lord Jesus; what think we then of those that make
nothing of sin, do not account it to be of an horrible and accursed nature?

2. See we here the great love of God the Father, that rather then we should
perish everlastingly, his Son must undertake for us; he must satisfy for us,
become sin, become a Curse for us, dye the accursed death of the Cross for
our sakes, John 3.16. God so loved the world, (it cannot be expressed how much)
that he gave his only begotten Son to dye for us. In this God commends his
love unto us, as the Apostle Paul, Romans 8. And in this he manifested his love
unto us, as the Apostle John says, 1 John 4.9, 10. Herein is love; indeed a
miracle of love, that God the Father should so love his enemies, as to give his
only Son to dye for them. Very moving is that phrase of the Apostle Paul,
Romans 8.32. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all;
as though he had loved us better then his own Son. As the Lord says of
Abraham, Genesis 22.12. (when at his command he was ready to offer up his only son
Isaac: Now I know that thou fear God, seeing thou have not withheld thy
son, thy only son from me. So may we say of God, that we know that he
loved us, because he has not withheld his Son, his only Son from us, but has
given him to that accursed death for our sakes. 3. See we here the great love
of Christ himself, unto his Church; that rather then she should perish, he
would give himself to death, even the accursed death of the Cross; as Gal. 1.4.
Who gave himself for our sins: which phrase intimates unto us, how willingly
he laid down his life for our sake. Now indeed, had not his death been
voluntary, it could not have been satisfactory. But that he laid down his life
willingly for us, is evident by many circumstances about his death; as when
Peter counseled him to spare himself, see what he got for his labor, Matthew
16.23. Get thee behind me Satan, says Christ unto him. And when Judas was
ready to betray him, see what our Savior says unto him, John 13.27. That thou
do, do quickly. And when Judas was gone out, to get company to apprehend him,
he went to the place he had wont to be in, so as Judas might readily find him;
nay, he met them in the midway, that came to take him, and tells them he was
the Party they sought for; and when they fell to the ground upon his saying, I
am he; he would not escape from them. All these particulars you may observe in
the eighteenth Chapter of John, Verse first, etc. He could have been rescued by
the Angels, ( Matthew. 26.53.) but would not; and when by his Adversaries he was
provoked to have come down from the Cross, ( Matthew 27.42.) and could have
done so, he would not. All these circumstances let us see, how willingly he
laid down his life for our sakes, according to that he says, Joh. 10.18. No
man takes my life from me, but I lay it down of my self: I have power to lay
it down, and I have power to take it again. And does not this much commend the
love of Christ to us, he so willingly laying down his life for us? No marvel
the Apostle Paul, Ephesians. 3.19. calls this love of his a love passing knowledge.

Use 2. For the great comfort and consolation of all true believers, and that
on several cases. 1. Does their present infirmities, or their ancient grievous
sins stare them in the face? Does at any time the weight and butden of sin,
with the wrath of God due for the same, oppress them? let them weigh and
perpend the price of their redemption, the great ransom was given for them; to
wit, the precious blood of the Son of God: as 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. Ye were not
redeemed with corruptible things, as Silver, and Gold; but with the precious
blood of Christ: A ransom invaluable, and of infinite merit. It being more
(the passion of Christ for a short time) then if all men and Angels had
suffered for ever.

Secondly, Has God the Father out of his infinite love, given his Son to die
for thee? then do not thou doubt the supply of all necessaries inward, and
outward; he that has given the greater, will also give the lesser; Christ is
more worth then ten thousand worlds, and Christ is the sweet and pleasant
fountain of all other good things. It is for him, and through him, that we have
any thing, that is good; see what the Apostle says, Romans 8 32. He that spared
not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all; how shall he not with him
also freely give us all things? The Lord that has given thee Christ, and him
to die for thee, will give thee an increase of grace, will give thee to
persevere in grace; nay, in the end, will give thee eternal life. Romans 5.10.
And in regard of outward things, it is comfortable to hear what the Lord says,
Psalm. 34.10. The young Lions do lack and suffer hunger; but they that seek the
Lord, shall not want any good thing. And Heb. 13.5. I will never leave thee,
nor forsake thee; For let God be true and every man a liar. But this is an
argument of arguments, which the Apostle uses to persuade true believers,
touching their outward supply; I mean, Romans 8.32. He that spared not his own
Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely
give us all things?

Use 3 To exhort, and that diverse ways. First, Is it so, that the Son of God
did humble himself so far as to take upon him, the form of a Servant; nay,
even to die the accursed death of the Cross, and For our sins, and iniquities?
O then, let us be exhorted to grieve and mourn for sin, the proper, and
procuring cause of his sufferings. How can we but lament that which procured
Christ's death? Be troubled and vexed for that which caused the Son of God so
much trouble and vexation? There is nothing does so demonstrate the horrible
nature of sin, (...) the death of Christ for sin; and there is nothing should
move us more to grieve for sin, then considering that our sins have pierced the
Son of God, and killed the Lord of life. If this consideration will not move
us, nothing will. See Zachar. 12.10. I will pour upon the house of David, and
upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem the Spirit of grace, and supplications; and
they shall look upon me whom they have peirced, and they shall mourn for him,
as one mourns for his only Son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one
that is in bitterness for his first born.

2. To exhort every one of us to hate, and shun sin for the time to come. Oh,
How can we love that, how can we favor that, which nailed the Son of God to
the cross? Will not we labor to die to that, for which the Son of God dyed? O
let us down with this body of sin; as the Apostle has it in 1 Cor. 9.27. I
keep under my body, and bring it under subjection. He beat down his corruption
as it were with clubs; for so the word he here uses in the Original
signifies, as the Apostle Peter exhorts, 1 Pet. 4. ver. 1, 2. Forasmuch as
Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, arm your selves likewise with the
same mind; for he that has suffered in the flesh, has ceased from sin, that
he no longer should live the rest of his time in the flesh, to the lusts of
men, but to the will of God. And is not this one special end why the Son of
God gave himself to death for us; to wit, that we might become a holy people?
Gal. 1.4. Surely, to go on in sin, is horrible ingratitude to God, and Christ;
nay, the truth of it is, we should be so affected to God who gave Christ, and
to Christ who gave himself to that accursed death of the Cross for our sins,
as we should rather our selves admit of death, even the most bitter and
torturing death, then admit of the least sin wittingly, and willingly.

Thirdly, Did God the Father so love us, as to give us his Son; nay the Son so
love us, as to give himself to death for our sakes? why then upon a just
occasion and call let us not think much to let our dearest blood go for Gods
sake, for Christ sake. Shall Christ the Son of God willingly dye for us, and
shall we not willingly lay down our lives for him and for his Truth upon a
call, that so we may glorify him? Joh. 21.19. And for his people upon a call,
that so we may manifest that his example swayes us? as 1 John 3.16. Herby
perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his life for us, and we ought
to lay down our lives for the brebren.

Thus far touching Christ's Passive obedience; and the third Member of the third
Principle.

MEMBER IV. And by his righteousness.
WHerein we have employed Christ's Active obedience, as in the former Member his
Passive: and this we deliver in the form of a Doctrine; thus,

Doct. Jesus Christ the eternal Son of God, although he was crucified to death
as he was man, yet was he a just and righteous man. In the prosecution of this
Point, we are only to make good the latter part of the Doctrine, to wit, that
Christ even as he was man, was Just and Righteous: To this purpose see 2 Cor.
5.21. He has made him to be sin for us (that is to say, a sinner by
imputation) who knew no sin; that is to say, who was without sin. And Heb.
4.15. We have not an high Priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of
our infirmities, but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin.
And hence it is that the Apostle Peter calls him, A Lamb without blemish and
without spot, 1 Pet. 1.19. And that the Apostle Paul says of him, Romans 10.4.
He is the end of the Law; that is to say, the perfection of the Law; whatsoever
the Law could exact, he not only suffered but likewise was, and did.

Now we are to know that Christ as he was man, was righteous two ways: 1. In
his Birth and Conception. 2. In his life and conversation.

1. In his Birth and Conception: Luke 1.35 And the Angel answered and said unto
her, (to wit, to Mary the mother of Christ) The Holy Ghost shall come upon
thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee; therefore also that
holy thing which shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God. So
Matthew. 1.20. Joseph thou son of David, fear not to take unto thee Mary thy
wife; for that which is conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost. And although
Mary was a sinner, yet the Holy Ghost knew well enough how to cleanse and purge
from sin that part of her substance of which Christ's humane nature was made;
and for the guilt of Adams fall, it did not belong unto him, he not coming from
Adam by natural generation but by a miraculous Conception. Nay further, in his
Conception and Birth, his humane nature was not only free from sin, but withal
enriched and filled with Grace and holiness, and that in greater measure then
all men and Angels; as John 1.14. The Evangelist speaking of him, and according
to his humane nature, says, he was full of Grace: and in chap. 3. ver. 34. God
gives not the Spirit by measure unto him; that is to say, he gave it unto him
in an abundant measure: and yet the Holiness of Christ as man, is not infinite,
but finite; there being this difference betwixt his Righteousness as he is God,
and his righteousness as he is man. His righteousness as he is God being
infinite and uncreated: his Righteousness as he is man being finite and
created. Thus we see, even as Christ was man he was righteous in his Birth and
Conception.

2. As he was man, he was righteous likewise in his Life and Conversation: his
whole course of life being conformable to the absolute Righteousness of the
Law: as 1 Pet. 2.22. Who did no sin, (speaking of Christ) neither was guile
found in his mouth. And John 8.29. He that has sent me is with me; the Father
has not left me alone, for I do always those things which please him.

The Point being thus maintained, we come to answer two Questions. 1. To what
end was Christ's Active obedience, the Righteousness of his Humane Nature, and
the Righteousness of his Life? 2. If perfect Righteousness and eternal life be
merited by Christ's Active obedience, how comes it to pass that the Scriptures
speak so little of this kind of obedience, and so much of his Passive?

Quest. 1. To what end was Christ's Active obedience, the Righteousness of his
humane nature, and the Righteousness of his life?

Ans. The principal end (next to Gods glory) was to merit for the Elect perfect
Righteousness, and eternal Salvation: As we must not conceive of Christ's
sufferings as the sufferings of a private man, but as the sufferings of a
public person, he being our Surety and pledge: so we must conceive of the
Righteousness of his humane nature and life, his Active obedience; it was not
for himself, but for us; as Isai. 9.6. Unto us a child is born; and Romans 8.2,
3, 4. which place is to be understood of the perfect righteousness of Christ's
humane nature, imputed to all true Believers, he so meriting a cover for their
corrupt nature; and touching the righteousness of his life, that he thereby
further merited for the true Believer righteousness and eternal life: do but
see, Romans 5.6. As by one man's disobedience (to wit Adams) many were made
sinners; so by the obedience of one (to wit, Christ) shall many be made
righteous: and so in ver. 17. of the same Chapter, If. by one man's offense,
death reigned by one (to wit, Adam) much more they which receive abundance of
grace, and of the gift of righteousness, (that is to say, they who out of Gods
abundant favor, are justified by the righteousness aforesaid) shall reign in
life; that is, shall be saved: And Romans 10.4. Christ is the end of the Law for
righteousness to every one that believes: and eternal life is a consequent of
this perfect righteousness the Apostle here speaks of. We all owe the Lord a
double debt; 1. The debt of punishment for the breach of his Law. 2. The death
of obedience; to wit, the perfect fulfilling of the Law. Now Christ's Passive
obedience does discharge the former debt, his Active obedience the latter: by
his Passive obedience he has merited for us remission of sins, and freedom
from punishment; and by his Active obedience he has merited for us perfect
Righteousness, and eternal life.

There be other ends of Christ's active obedience; as the meriting for the Elect
sanctifying Grace. As Joh. 17.19. For their sake (says Christ) I sanctify my
self, that they also might be sanctified. And then that he might be an example
of Holiness, as Matthew. 11.29. Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart.

Quest. 2. The second Question is, If perfect righteousness and eternal life be
merited for the Elect by Christ's Active obedience, how comes it to pass that
the Scriptures speaks so little of this kind of obedience, and so much of his
Passive?

Ans. 1 Because his Passive obedience was most sensible, and exposed to the
eyes of all. 2. Because the Ceremonial Types had especially their
accomplishment in it. 3. Because this was the chief and principal part of his
obedience. 4. The Passive implies the Active. Now we come to the Uses of the
Point.

Use 1. To abase, and greatly to humble us, our natures and lives being ^o
stained and defiled, as nothing could be a cover unto them but the
righteousness of the Son of God; the righteousness of all men and Angels, being
insufficient this way, to wit, to hide the filthiness of our natures and lives
from the eyes of Gods Justice. Oh the cause we have to lament the impurity of
our natures and lives, when nothing could be a Remedy for us, but the Son of
God must assume our nature, and here in the world work righteousness for us!
This consideration should not a little humble us, but likewise work in us a
great dislike and loathing of sin, and of our selves for sin.

Use 2 To inform us touching the goodness of God unto us. We in Adams loins
having undone our selves and lost all righteousness, that the Lord should
provide us a Savior, not only to merit for us remission of sins and freedom
from punishment by his Passive obedience, but likewise perfect righteousness
and eternal salvation by his Active; so as let the Justice of God be objected
any way to the true Believer, he has sufficient answer in his Pledge and
Surety the Lord Jesus; and hence it is that the Apostle says, Romans 10.4.
Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to every one tht believes: If
the Law and Justice of God require punishment for sin and disobedience, the
Believer has the death and passion of Christ to interpose; if the Law and
Justice of God require perfect righteousness, to be justified in Gods fight,
and to enter heaven, the true Believer may have present recourse to the holy
nature and life of Christ, as his cover and righteousness; so as whatsoever the
true Believer should be, should do, should suffer, Christ was, did, and
suffered. And may not this greatly comfort the true Believer, that the Lord
has provided such a Savior? and further, that his righteousness, whereby he
is justified in Gods sight, and must enter heaven, is not in his own keeping,
as his first righteousness in Adam was, which was quickly lost; but in the
keeping of the Lord Jesus, and so cannot be lost? The Believer may lose this
and that outward thing, which for the present he enjoyed, or may lose his
inward peace and comfort for a time, but this righteousness of his is in a sure
hand, and cannot be lost. And thus the true Believer is in better case then
Adam in his innocence: he might, and did lose his Righteousness, but the
Believer cannot lose his, it being not in his own keeping but in the keeping of
the Lord Jesus.

Use 3. To exhort, and that diverse ways

1. That in the case of Justification we would altogether deny our selves, go
out of our selves. Alas, look we upon our natures, and upon our lives, and how
impure are both? and therefore David ( Psalm 143.2.) humbly prays, Enter not
into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no man living be
justified. If we be justified at all, it must be by the righteousness of
another, by a righteousness without us, the righteousness of Christ imputed
unto us, as the Apostle tells us, 2 Corinthians. 5.21. He has made him to be sin
for us who knew no sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him.

Secondly, To exhort every man and woman that they would labor for a distinct
knowledge of CHRIST, seeing the Righteousness whereby we must be justified is
only in him; as to know what he suffered for us, so likewise to know what he
was and did for us.

Thirdly, To exhort every one of us, that upon a sight and sense of our own
defilement and impurity, we would hunger and thirst after the Sanctify of
Christ's humane nature and life, I mean the merit of his Active obedience, as
our cover and righteousness in the sight of God. These are they our Savior
pronounces blessed, Mat. 5.6. Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst
after righteousness. And take notice of the Apostle his earnest desire Phil.
39. And found in him (speaking of Christ) not having mine own righteousness
which is of the Law, but that which is through the faith of Christ; the
righteousness which is of God by faith: Let our faith be frequently employed,
as in putting our sins upon him, so likewise in putting his righteousness upon
our selves.

4. To exhort every man and woman that profess themselves to be justified by
the righteousness of Christ, that they would manifest as much by a holy life,
Justification and Sanctification being always inseparable. 1 Cor. 6.11. Romans
8.1.9. Gal. 5.24.

MEMBER V. Has perfectly.
ANd this also take in the form of a Doctrine.

Doct. The Lord Jesus is a perfect Savior. See Heb. 7.25. He is able,
(speaking of Christ) to save them to the utermost that come unto God by him.
But this Member and Doctrine we shall not much insist upon; and yet to
demonstrate it in a word or two. First, He saves not only some of the Elect,
but all the Elect: Secondly, He saves not only their bodies, but likewise their
souls: Thirdly, He not only saves them from some of their sins, but from all
their sins, be they never so many, or so heinous. Fourthly, He saves them, not
only from some of the evil consequents of sin, but from all the evil
consequents of sin; as the wrath of God, the curse of the Law, the venom of
all outward crosses, the tyranny of Satan, the sting of death, the power of the
grave, and the torments of hell. Fifthly, He not only saves the Elect
privatively, but positively; he has not only merited for them remission of
sins, and freedom from punishment, but likewise perfect righteousness and
eternal life, as lately we have heard.

The Ground or reason is this.

Reas. Not only his holiness and purity, as he was man; but likewise the
excellency of his person, he being God as well as man. We come to the Uses.

Use 1. To confute the Doctrine of the Papists, which to Christ's perfect
satisfaction add humane satisfactions: as, we must satisfy Gods justice by our
temporal punishment; and we must partly merit salvation our selves, or the
merits of other men must be made over unto us that we may be saved; but we are
to know, a fifth wheel helps nothing, nay troubles not a little; and so it
fares with all additions of righteousness joined with Christ's in matter of
Justification. That which is absolutely perfect is marred by adding any thing
unto it.

Use 2 For comfort and consolation to every wounded and penitent soul: Suppose
thy sins have been many and grievous; the Lord Jesus is a perfect Savior, his
blood is a sufficient medicine for the curing of thy wounded conscience; his
righteousness is a perfect cover to hide thee from Gods wrath, and therefore
although thou see nothing in thy self but to damn thee, why yet see
sufficient in the Lord Jesus to save thee: rest thy soul upon this perfect
Savior, and his merits; nay labor with the Virgin Mary to rejoice in him.
Luke 1.47. My spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior.

And thus much touching the fifth Member of the third Principle.

MEMBER VI. Alone by himself.
WHich we commend unto you in the Doctrine following.

Doct. The Lord Jesus is the alone Savior. So the Prophet Isaiah foretells in
his person, Isay. 63.3. I have trodden the wine press alone; and Heb. 1.3. Who
being the brightness of his glory, and the express Image of his person, and
upholding all things by the word of his power, when he had by himself purged
our sins, sat down on the right hand of the majesty on high: Most express is
that in Acts 4.12. Neither is there salvation in any other, for there is no
other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved: And hence it
is, that old Simeon calls Christ Salvation it self. Luke 2.30. Mine eyes have
seen thy Salvation.

Reas. 1. There is none so able, he being not only Man, but God.

Reas. 2. There is none so fit, he being not only God, but Man. Yet when we
affirm the Lord Jesus Christ to be the alone Savior, we do not exclude the
Father, and the Holy Ghost, but the creature, any other creature.

Use 1 To inform us touching the folly and madness of the Papists, who trust
to other Saviors. All the Angels in heaven, and all whom at any time their
Popes have canonized for Saints, (which are many thousands) are made Saviors
by them, but especially the Virgin Mary, whom they call the Queen of heaven,
and the mother of mercy; these by their intercession must merit for them? Thus
they join other saviors to this alone Savior, and so make him but half a
Savior. Jer. 2.12, 13.

Use 2 Is the Lord Jesus the alone Savior? this calls upon us that we would
labor more and more to be accquainted with him, his natures, his offices, his
merits, his benefits; and upon a sight and sense of our own great misery to
trust unto him, and rely on him only for Justification and Salvation: Thus in
rejecting all but Christ this way, we shall honor Christ: and further, this is
the only way of our own happiness. And so much touching the sixth Member of
the third Principle. Now we come to the seventh and last Member thereof.

MEMBER VII. Accomplished all things needful for the salvation of Mankind.
ANd this take likewise in the form of a Doctrine, and let the whole Principle
be it.

Doct. Jesus Christ, the eternal Son of God, being made man, by his death upon
the Cross, and by his righteousness (that is to say, by his obedience passive
and active) has perfectly alone by himself accomplished all things needful for
the salvation of mankind.

This Principle (as you know) consists of seven Members, six of which we have
already handled particularly, and so the last only remains to be spoken of.

Now for the opening of it, take only two questions.

1. Whether mankind has no benefit by Christ's Exaltation; because the
Catechism ascribes all to his Humiliation, his obedience passive and active?
2. How we must in this passage understand mankind?

Quest. 1. The first question is, Whether man kind has no benefit by Christ's
Exaltation, because the Catechism ascribes all to his humiliation, his
obedience, passive and active?

An. Although Christ's exaltation be no part of his satisfaction, he by his
obedience passive and active, having fully satisfied his Fathers justice in the
behalf of mankind; why yet mankind has great benefit by his exaltation, and
the several degrees of it; as his resurrection, ascension, and his sitting at
his fathers right hand; his exaltation being an essential part of his
mediation.

Quest. 2. How we must in this passage understand mankind?

Answ. Although Christ's satisfaction be only effectual to the Elect,
according to these places of Scripture, Matthew. 1.21. Thou shall call his name
Jesus, for he shall save his poople from their sins; and John 10.15. I lay down
my life for the sheep. And so Ephesians. 5.23 He being called the Savior of the
body, his body, to wit, the Elect; why yet it cannot be denied but that his
satisfaction was sufficient for all mankind; for the Whole posterity of Adam;
according to these places following, John 1.29. Behold the Lamb of God, which
takes away the sin of the world; and John 6.51. I am the living bread which
came down from heaven, if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever:
And the bread that I will give, is my flesh, which I will give for the life of
the world: And so 1 John 4.14. We have seen and do testify, that the Eather
sent the Son to be the Savior of the world; and 1 Timothy 2.6. Who gave himself
a ransom for all: Hence it is, that Christ is to be offered to all unto whom
the Gospel comes, As Mark 16.15. And he said unto them, (to wit, Christ unto
his Apostles) go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every
creature; that is, make a tender of Christ to every creature, every reasonable
creature, not only Jews, but Gentiles; and hence it is, that the Gospel
commands every man and woman to repent and believe in Christ; as Mark 1.15.
Repent ye, and believe the Gospel; that is, (as though our Savior should say)
believe that you shall be saved by my merits: and hence is also the universal
promise of salvation made to every one that shall believe in Christ, as John
3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. And
the truth of it is, there is no defect in the remedy, but in regard of the
merit of Christ every man and woman becomes saveable; and yet we must not think
that every particular man and woman shall be saved; for this is directly
contrary to many places of Scripture: As do but see Matthew. 25.46. our Savior
having laid forth what should be the manner of his proceeding at the last day,
These (says he) shall go away into everlasting punishment; but Matthew. 7.13,
14. Enter ye in at the strait gate, (says Christ) for wide is the gate, and
broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many there be which go in
thereat; because strait is the gate and narrow is the way which leads unto
life, and few there be that find it. Nay, not every one that lives in the
visible Church shall be saved, Matthew. 20.16. Many be called, (to wit, outwardly
by the word) but few chosen, that is to say, called effectually, and so their
elections manifested; but Matthew. 7.22, 23. Many will say to me in that day, (to
wit, the day of judgment) Lord, Lord, have not we prophesied in thy name, and
in thy name have cast out devils, and in thy name have done many wonderful
works? And then I will profess unto them, I never knew you; depart from me ye
that work iniquity. And the truth of it is, there is a world of people unto
whom Christ never intended to apply his merits effectually, as we may observe
by that passage in his prayer, John 17.9. I pray for them, I pray not for the
world, (to wit, the world of the reprobate) and Luke 2.34. And Simeon blessed
them, and said unto Mary his Mother, Behold, this child is set for the fall and
rising again of many in Israel; observe the phrase; Is set; that is to say,
appointed of God by an unchangeable decree, as to be the rising of some, so to
be the fall of others; and so 1 Pet. 2.8. And a stone of stumbling (speaking of
Christ) and a rock of offense, though not a cause, yet an occasion of their
utter ruin, and perdition. And as we must not think that every particular man
and woman shall be saved; so likewise we must not think that every particular
man and woman may be saved if they will: And amongst other reasons this is one;
justifying faith is not in man's power (it being a supernatural gift) and
without it, no man can have any saving benefit by Christ; now that justifying
faith is not in man's power, see John 6.44. No man can come to me; (says our
Savior) except the Father which has sent me draw him. No man can come to me,
that is, no man can believe in me, except it be given him of my Father. And
further, because we say that Christ's satisfaction was sufficient for all
mankind, yet only effectual to the Elect, we must not think any part of it to
be superfluous, because the merit of Christ's satisfaction, is not to be applied
by parts; but the whole merit is to be applied to each particular person that
shall be saved. We proceed to the Uses.

Use. 1 For Trial and Examination, whether we be of that number that can assure
our selves upon good grounds, that Christ is our Savior, seeing his merits are
only effectual unto some, to wit, the Elect. Signs this way.

First, Have we been schooled by the Law? Gal. 3.24. Has the Law brought us to
a sight and sense of our natural misery? Til then we cannot hunger and thirst
after Christ, til then we are like to the Laodiceans, who thought themselves
rich and wanted nothing, when indeed they were poor, and miserable, and
wretched, and blind, and naked. Revel. 3.17.

The second sign is a dear love to God, John 4.9. We love him, because he
first loved us; that is, because in Christ we first apprehend his love unto us:
when a man apprehends Gods love unto him in the Lord Jesus, how he gave the
Lord Jesus unto him to free him from misery, and to make him eternally happy,
then he cannot but love the Lord again. A man may receive all outward gifts
from God, and never love him; but a man cannot receive this gift from God, to
wit, be assured that God has given him Christ, and pardon of sins, and
eternal life in and through him, but he must needs dearly love the Lord, and
study how to honor him, and show himself thankful unto him.

The third sign the apostle Paul lays us down Gal. 5.24. They that are
Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. Sin does not
reign as king in those that are united to Christ, that they should obey it in
the lusts thereof; no, their very sinful passions, affections, and desires, are
a great trouble, and grief unto them, as we may observe in the Apostle Paul's
complaint; Romans 7.24. Oh wretched man that I am; who shall deliver me from
the body of this death?

The fourth Sign: 2 Corinthians. 5.17. If any man be in Christ, he is a new
creature: Such as are united to Christ, have a change wrought in them by the
Spirit of God, a change in their minds, affections, and conversations; and
hence are described Heb. 5.9. to be such as obey God.

The fifth Sign; A special love to Christ's members: as they are his members 1
John 5.1. Every one that loves him that begat, loves him also that is
begotten of him; and the 3d chapter, the 14th verse: We know that we have
pussed from death to life, because we love the brethren.

6 The last sign we now commend unto you; A hearty rejoicing to see the word of
God prosper and prevail. Acts 11.18. When they heard these things (to wit, the
believing Jews) they held their peace, and glorified God, saying, Then has
God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life. And Acts 15.3. And being
brought on their way, (to wit, Paul and Barnabas) they passed through Phenice
and Samaria, declaring the canversion of the Gentiles, and they caused great
joy unto all the brethren. As the people of God are to pray that the word of
God may have free course and be glorified, 2 Thessalonians. 3.1. that is, may prevail
and prosper in that that God sent it for; so they cannot but rejoice when they
see the fruit of their prayers this way.

Use 2. To awaken the presumptuous sinner, dreaming of an absolute universal
Redemption. Ask such, how they can go on in their sins and have any peace? They
answer, They hope well, because Christ died for all. But did Christ intend that
his death should be effectual to all? There is no question but Christ's
obedience Passive and Active, was of infinite merit; but can any? apply this
merit but the penitent? And do not those that truly apply it, labor more and
more to forsake their sins, even those which they have formerly taken great
delight in? Do we think that Christ came into the world to be a Baud to our
sins? nay certainly, he came into the world as to satisfy for sin, so to slay
sin. As there is a world of the Elect, so there is a world of the Reprobate,
and of whether company are they that go on in their sins? and the truth of it
is, the peace such have is a false peace, as Isai. 48.22. There is no peace
says the Lord, unto the wicked; no true peace: and notwithstanding the peace
they have now, the time will come when their consciences shall roar and fly in
their faces, and when they shall find that their fruitless faith was but
presumption, and that true of the world which the Apostle says of Israel,
Romans 9.27. Though the number of the children of Israel be as the sand of the sea, a remnant shall be saved, and but a remnant.

Use 3. For the support and comfort of all truly penitent; such as see the
great number and heinousness of their sins, and the infinite wrath of God
ready to seize upon them for the same: let such contemplate the sufficiency of
the satisfaction and remedy, how the Lord Jesus has accomplished all things
needful for their salvation. Do but see John 3.16. God so loved the world, that
he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not
perish, but have everlasting life: See, thou art not excepted, excluded, if
thou do believe, suppose thy sins be never so many, so grievous, ( Isai.
45.23. Romans 3.22, 23) Nay, see Christ's loving invitation to such as thou art,
Matt. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will
give you rest. And Luke 4.18. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he
has anointed me to preach the Gospel to the poor: he has sent me to heal the
broken hearted, to preach deliverance to the Captives, and recovering of sight
to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised. Nay, is it not the Lords
command in plain terms, that thou believe in his Son? John 3.23. This is his
Commandment, that we should believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ. Take
heed thou do not, to all thy former sins, add disobedience to this command;
for surely rebellion in this kind will exceed all thy other sins, as 1 John
5.10, 11. He that believes not God, has made him a liar, because he believes
not the record that God gave of his Son; and this is the record, that God has
given to us eternal life, and this life is in his Son. And Joh. 16.7, 8, 9. If
I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will
send him unto you, and when he is come, he will reprove the world of sin: Of
sin, because they believe not on me. And further, John 3.36. He that believes
on the Son has everlasting life, and he that believes not the Son shall not
see life; but the wrath of God abides on him. See Romans 5.7, 8. Scarcely for a
righteous man will one die, yet peradventure for a good man some would even
dare to die: But God commends his love toward us, in that while we were yet
sinners, Christ died for us. And Romans 8.32. He spared not his own Son, but
delivered him up for us all; or gave him for us all: And will not we accept of
this gift? no more required of thee then to accept of this gift, and will thou
not? Behold, now is the accepted time, now is the day of salvation, 2 Cor. 6.2.

And so far now by occasion, of the third Principle.

PRINC. IV.
Quest. But how may thou be made partaker of Christ and his benefits?

Answ. A man of a contrite and humble spirit, by faith alone, apprehending and
applying Christ with all his merits unto himself, is justified before God, and
sanctified.

MEMB. I. A man of a contrite and humble spirit.
NOW we come to the fourth Principle, which requires of us, how a man or a
woman may be made partakers of Christ and his Benefits? In the first place
(says the Catechism) they must have contrite and humble spirits; A man of a
contrite and humble spirit. We commend the Point unto you in the form of a
Doctrine, thus,

Doct. That a man may be partaker of Christ and his Benefits, he must have a
contrite and humble spirit. See Isai. 55.1. Ho, every one that thirsts, come
ye to the waters (to wit, to Christ) and he that has no money: that is, sees
nothing in himself to trust unto, and so consequently is of a humble and
contrite spirit: And Jerem. 50.4. In those days, and in that time, says the
Lord, the children of Israel shall come, they and the children of Judah
together, going, and weeping they shall go, and seek the Lord their God:
observe I pray you, going and weeping shall seek the Lord their God; as though
that were the way and the only way to find God in Christ, to partake of Christ
and his benefits: And does not our Savior tell us this, Matthew 9.13. I am not
come to call the righteous (that is, such as think themselves righteous) but
sinners to repentance? to wit, contrite and humble sinners, to call them to a
new life to partake of me and my benefits. And Mat. 11.28 Come unto me (says
he) all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. And hence
it is that the Lord is described, 2 Corinthians. 7.6. to be the Comforter of such
as are cast down. And this Doctrine the Apostle James informs us of, Jam. 4.6.
God resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble; that is, assures such
of his favor; and therefore ver. 10. of the same Chapter, Humble your selves
(says he) in the sight of the Lord, and he shall lift you up: And do but see
that place for all, Luke 4.18. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he
has anointed me to preach the Gospel to the poor; he has sent me to heal the
broken hearted, and to set at liberty them that are bruised. Now we come to the
Reasons,

Reas. 1. Such and only such have an appetite to Christ, hunger and thirst
after him and his benefits. Till we be sick of sin we can find no need of this
Physician, neither care much for him, according to that Mat. 9.12. They that be
whole need not a Physician, but they that are sick When the fiery Serpent
(Numb. 21.9.) had bitten and stung an Israelite, then he would run and make use
of the Brazen Serpent, but never till then.

Reas. 2. Such and only such do prize Christ at his full value, are willing to
part with any thing to purchase him: See what the Apostle Paul says, Philip.
3.8, 9. He esteemed all things but dung in comparison of Christ and his
Benefits: but to make way for this, observe the deep sense and feeling he had
of his own unworthiness, 1 Timoth. 1.15. This is a faithful saying, and
worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save
sinners, of whom (says he) I am chief.

Reas. 3. Such, and only such are made fit to receive Christ by faith, and to
make him their own: Mark 1.15. Repent and believe the Gospel: the unhumbled and
unbroken-hearted sinner is altogether unfit to receive Christ and his benefits.

Reas. 4. Such, and only such truly rejoice and take comfort in Christ, account
him their chief Treasure and happiness. Gal. 6.14. God forbid, that I should
glory in any thing, save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ; that is, save
in the Passion and Sufferings of our Lord Jesus Christ. But who was this that
did thus rejoice in Christ and his Sufferings? Surely it was one that had such
a low opinion of himself, as that Ephesians. 3.8. he styles himself less then the
least of all Saints.

But that you may further see into this weighty Doctrine, we intend to answer
the Questions following, 1. What that contrition and humiliation is, which
truly and sufficiently prepares a man or a woman to be made partakers of Christ
and his benefits? 2. Whether every man and woman, that has this contrite and
humble spirit, shall certainly be made partakers of Christ and his benefits.

3. Whether this contrition and humiliation be wrought in the like measure, in
all that are made partakers of Christ and his benefits.

Quest. 1 What that contrition and humiliation is, which truly, and
sufficiently prepares a man or a woman to be made partakers of Christ, and his
benefits?

Answ. This contrition and humiliation, contains the particulars following.

1. A true and distinct sight of sin, and not only as punishment does attend
it, but as it is vile and loathsome in its own nature; as Ezekiel. 36.31. Then
shall ye remember your own evil ways, and your doings that were not good, and
shall loath your selves in your own sight, for your iniquities, and for your
abominations.

2. Unfeigned and sound sorrow: and as for the consequent, so for the cause; as
for punishment, so for sin; Acts 2.37. Now when they heard this, they were
pricked in the is hearts; to wit, that they were guilty of the death of the
Lord of Life.

3. A being weary of sin, finding it a load, and burden upon the conscience,
Matthew. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will
give you rest. Our Savior means here, all that have contrite and humble
spirits.

4. Humble and hearty confession of sin, as Luke 15.21. Father (says the
Prodigal) I have sinned against heaven, and in thy sight, and am no more worthy
to be called thy son. Lu. 23.40, 41.

5. Earnest suit to the God of heaven for mercy, as the Publicane, Luke 18.13.
God be merciful to me a sinner. And Saul, (afterward called Paul) Acts 9.11.
Behold he prays: surely the three days he was without sight, he sent up many
a loud cry to heaven for mercy.

6. The sixth particular. This Contrition and Humiliation contains a distaste,
and dislike of sin; as Isaiah 30.22. Ye shall defile also the covering of the
graven Images of silver, and the ornament of thy molten Images of gold, thou
shall cast them away as a mensturous cloth, (to wit, in the day of thy
repentance) thou shall say unto it, get thee hence. And Luke 19.8. Zacheus
stood and said unto the Lord, Behold Lord, the half of my goods I give to the
poor, and if I have taken any thing from any man by false accusation, I restore
him four fold. Thus we see now what Contrition and Humiliation is, which truly
and sufficiently prepares a man, or a woman to be made partakers of Christ, and
his benefits.

But yet we must not think this preparatory work in the particulars aforesaid,
to be the same that is in the soul after Christ is received, and partaked of;
for that flows from the Principle of grace, and so works more freely, and
absolutely: But in this the soul is only a Patient;, this is a saving work,
but not a sanctifying work; but yet always sanctification follows upon the
same.

Now we come to the second question.

Quest. 2. Whether every man and woman that has this Contrite and Humble
spirit, shall certainly be made partakers of Christ and his benefits?

Answ. Yes, because this is the lost soul which Christ came to seek, and to
save; for of this soul, we must understand our Savior, when he says, Luke
19.20. The Son of man is come to seek, and to save that which was lost. And
this is the bruised reed, which in no case he will break; Matthew. 12.20. And do
but see Psalm. 51.17. A broken and a contrite heart, O God thou will not
despise: not the broken and contrite heart aforesaid. And Isaiah 57.15. Thus
says the high and lofty One, that inhabiteth eternity, whose Name is HOLY: I
dwell in the high and holy place; with him also that is of a contrite and
humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of
the contrite ones. And so Matthew. 5.3.4. Our Savior says, Blessed are the poor
in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven. And Blessed are they that
mourn, for they shall be comforted: It is the contrite and humble ones, which
our Savior here intends. Thus we see distinctly and plainly, that every man
and woman, that has the contrite and humble spirit aforesaid, shall certainly
be made partakers of Christ, and his benefits.

Quest. 3. Whether this contrition and humiliation be wrought in the like
measure, in all that are made partakers of Christ and his benefits?

Answ. No; and for the Causes and Reasons following:

1. Some have committed more gross and heinous sins then others, and therefore
have cause, and need to be more terrified and humbled then others.

2. The Lord intends to bestow a greater measure of grace upon some then upon
others; to do greater works by them, then by others; and therefore prepares
them accordingly by contrition and humiliation.

3. Some have been Religiously educated from their Childhood, whereby as they
were kept from gross sins, so corruption was subdued in them gently, and
secretly, by little and little, without any great measure of contrition and
humiliation; grace and comfort being instilled into them almost insensibly.

4. Some by natural constitution, and temper of body, are more fearful and
sensible of anguish then others.

5. Some after the Wound, have the Medicine sooner revealed and applied to them
then others.

Now we proceed to the Uses.

Use 1. To acquaint us, that there is but a few, comparatively, that partake of
Christ, and his benefits; and this will be evident, if so be we weigh the
particulars, which the contrition and humiliation aforesaid contains.

As first, a true and distinct sight of sin: many see their sins in a general,
slight, and confused way; but where is the man that sees sin to be the greatest
evil, even separating from the greatest good; to wit, God himself? Isaiah 59.2.
nay, that so far as he gives way unto it, so far he joins with the Devil, and
fights against God; that sees into the vile and loathsome nature of sin? And
where is the man that sees himself to be guilty of Adams fall, himself to be
stained, and polluted universally with natural corruption, himself to be guilty
of such, and such actual sins, sins of Omission, and sins of Commission, that
turns his sins upside down, considers them in the circumstances of them, Psalm.
119.59.

2. The second particular the contrition and humiliation aforesaid contains,
is, unfeigned and sound sorrow for sin, Psalm. 94.16, 17. Alas, the most, sin is
their meat, and their drink, their very delight; they storm, and grieve,
because they cannot sin as they would; are sorry, and angry they have such a
Minister as will reprove them for their sins, that they may not go on in sin
without any control; or if they have any sorrow in them at any time, it is
only because of the punishment that attends sin. Many that mourn for this and
that outward cross and calamity present, and imminent; but do not at al mourn
for sin, the cause of it; but a few whose hearts are rightly pricked for their
sins. Acts 2.37.

And so for the other particulars: Where is the man that finds sin a load and
burden upon his conscience? that does humbly, and heartily confess his sins?
that importunately cries to heaven for mercy? and that truly dislikes sin, even
to a sinful thought? The particulars aforesaid being perpended, it will appear,
that there is but a few that have contrite and humble spirits, and so
consequently but a few that partake of Christ, and his benefits.

Use 2. For the comfort and consolation of all such as have contrite and humble
spirits: they, all they shall partake of Christ, and his benefits: such, all
such are they whom Christ came to seek, and to save, Psalm. 51.17. The
sacrifices of God are a broken spirit, a broken and a contrite heart, O God
thou will not despise. Isa. 57.15. And Matthew. 11.28. Come unto me (says
Christ) all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. The
Lord does not deal with the burdened conscience, as Satan and his Instruments:
Satan, ( Revel. 12.4.) when the woman was ready to be delivered of her Child,
was ready to devour her Child; and so are his Instruments: Now we hope (say
they) you have followed Preachers, gone to Sermons long enough; no, no, Psalm.
147.3. He heals the broken in heart, and binds up their wounds: to wit, the
Lord, Isaiah 61.1. And to this purpose, it is a wondrous thing to observe, how
the Lord sustains and bears up the wounded soul, by a secret hope of mercy; as
we may see in the King of Niniveh, Jonah 3.9. 9. Who can tell if God will turn,
and repent, and turn away from his fierce anger, that we perish not? But for
this hope, the bruised heart would break; and but for this hope, the means of
recovery and raising up, would not be endeavored. This hope keeps from despair,
and provokes to the use of holy means. It is true, says the wounded soul, I am
in a miserable case; but if there be any hope, I will cry to heaven for mercy;
I will depend upon the Ministry of the word constantly; I will creep into the
company of those that make profession of Religion, in a special manner; who can
tell but that the Lord may show mercy to my poor soul?

May some man say, this is very comfortable, that every contrite and humble
spirit shall certainly partake of Christ, and his benefits. But how may I know
that my heart is truly contrite and humble?

Signs 1. If thou judge sin to be the greatest evil, and the favor of God
to be the greatest good.

2. If thou had rather hear of mercy to thy poor soul then of an earthly
Kingdom to be bestowed upon thee.

3. If thou think those that have true Peace of conscience, and Joy in the
Holy Ghost to be the happiest people under the sun.

4. If thou tremble at the Word, and honor the very feet of those Instruments
that bring glad tidings of peace to such as thy self; to wit, to wounded
consciences.

5. If thou send up strong and uncessant cries to God for the assurance of his
favor in and through Christ.

6. If thou do pity and compassionate all such, as have broken and bruised
hearts.

Use 3. To exhort all such, as for the present have not contrite and humble
spirits, to labor and endeavor for that disposition.

Motives. 1. The contrary disposition, to wit, hardness of heart, and
impenitency, is a great sin, and a grievous judgment: A great sin, Romans 2.5.
But thou after thy hard and impenitent heart, treasurest up unto thy self wrath
against the day of wrath. A grievous judgment: Exodus 9.12. And the Lord
hardened the heart of Pharaoh. See John 12.40. Now there be two kinds of
hardness of heart: 1. Sensible, that which is perceived and felt; and this may
be in the godly, as Isa. 63.17. Oh Lord, why have thou made us to err from thy
ways, and heardened our hearts from thy fear? 2. Insensible, that which is not
perceived and felt; and this indeed is a great sin and plague.

2. The second Motive. The sooner we labor after this disposition, the more
easily in likelihood we shall attain unto it: when a heart has been long
hardened with the deceitfulness of sin, it will not easily become a contrite
and humble heart; and therefore Psalm 95.7.8. To day if ye will hear his voice,
harden not your hearts. So Joel 2.12, 13. Besides, it may be hereafter we shall
not enjoy the like means this way, we do for the present.

3. Without this contrite and humble spirit (according to the Doctrine) we
cannot partake of Christ, and his benefits: this is the Messenger that Christ
ever sends before him unto those of years, (for we do not now speak of Infants)
and woe be unto us, if we do not partake of Christ, and his benefits; it had
been good for us, we had never been born.

4. Whosoever has this contrite and humble spirit, shall certainly partake of
Christ, and his benefits. Now this may greatly induce us to labor for this
disposition, when the issue undoubtedly shall be so good, and so happy. Suppose
this business be difficult and tedious, why yet such an issue must needs put us
on in it. These are the Motives.

Now we proceed to the Means of a contrite and humble spirit.

Means. 1. Prayer to God in the best manner we can; it is he that must bruise
our hard and stony hearts, Ezekiel. 36.26. I will take away the stony heart out of
your flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh; to wit, a contrite and
humble heart.

2. Because the Lord does many times make use of afflictions and judgments,
for the bruising of men's hearts; when he sends any great affliction upon us,
let us not stand out against him, but join with him: when he goes a bout to
humble us, let us labor to humble our selves, as Saul (afterward called Paul)
Acts 9.6. trembling, and astonished, said, Lord, what will thou have me to do?
When the hand of God is upon us, let us not stand murmuring and repining, but
fall to examination of our Spiritual estates and cases, as the Wiseman
advises us, Eccles. 7.14. In the day of adversity, consider.

3. Constant dependence upon the Ministry of the Word, Jer. 23.29. Is not my
word like as a fire, (says the Lord) and like a hammer that breaks the Rocks
in pieces? Now we are to know that the Law has a stroke in this work, and so
the Gospel.

1. The Law, by revealing of sin, and the woeful consequents of it, and so (the
Spirit of God cooperating) there is caused a servile fear, and trembling; a
kind of contrition, and humiliation; which the Apostle, ( Romans 8.15.) calls the
spirit of bondage, causing fear; when the Spirit of God puts an edge upon the
Law, puts a sword into the hand of the Law, to prick and wound the heart, and
to restrain it in the ways of sin for fear of punishment. Many a man and woman
hears the Law opened, and the threatenings of it thundringly denounced, but stir
not, are little moved: but when once the Lord by his Spirit puts an edge upon
the Law, then the stoutest heart trembles and quakes. Now that the Law may have
a kindly work upon us, 1. By the Law let us labor for a distinct knowledge of
sin. 2. Rightly to understand what the Curse is, which the Law threatens unto
sin and sinners. 3. Examine our selves how guilty we are of that which the Law
threatens the Curse unto; to wit, sin. 4. Finding our selves guilty, to labor
our hearts to a deep contrition and humiliation.

Now, (as we have heard before) as the Law has a stroke in this work, why so
the Gospel; more and more melting the heart, by discovering Christ, whom the
sinner has pierced by his sins; and by supporting the heart by a secret hope
of mercy, and possibility of help, in and through Christ; even as Jonah, Chap.
2. verse 4. Then I said, I am cast out of thy sight, yet I will look again
toward thy holy Temple. Or as the Prodigal Son, Luke 15.17, 18. And when he
came to himself, he said, How many hired servants of my fathers house have
bread enough, and to spare, and I perish with hunger? I will arise, and go to
my father, and will say unto him, father, I have sinned against heaven, and
before thee, etc. Now after the Law has humbled us, and the Gospel conveyed
this glimpse of hope into our hearts, it must be nourished and cherished,

1. By considering of the Lords Infinite and Almighty Power, how he is able
more and more to bruise our souls, to make us more and more capable of Christ,
and so to bring Christ nearer unto us, that we may partake of him, and his
benefits; Luke 1.37. With God nothing shall be unpossible. And Matthew. 3.9. God
is able of stones to raise up children unto Abraham.

2. The freeness of Gods mercy must be considered of; he requires nothing of
thee to procure this mercy, but shows mercy, because he will show mercy.
Suppose thou have never so many exceptions to thy self, why yet thou belonging
unto him, and his mercy being a free mercy, he will proceed with thee, until he
has made thee capable of Christ, and bestowed Christ upon thee, and his
benefits; Ezekiel. 36.26. I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and
I will give you an heart of flesh. And Isaiah 43.25. I, even I am he that
blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake.

3. For supporting of this hope, consider we of the riches of Gods mercy, unto
the proper objects of mercy, Contrite and Humble men and women; such as mourn,
because they can mourn no more for their sins; such as would fain look toward
Christ, whom nothing can satisfy but Christ; see Isaiah 55.7. Let the wicked
forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto
the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will
abundantly pardon.

Thus far by occasion of the first Member of the fourth Principle.

Now we come to the second Member thereof.

MEMBER II. By faith alone.
WHerein the Catechism further acquaints us, how we may be made partakers of
Christ, and his benefits. The Doctrine is this:

Doct. That a man may partake of Christ and his benefits, he must not only
have a contrite and humble spirit, but he must likewise be qualified with faith.

But because we have already spoken of a contrite and humble spirit, take the
point in a more brief form; as thus,

That a man may partake of Christ and his benefits, he must have faith, he must
believe.

See John 3.14.15. As Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness, even so
must the Son of man be lifted up, that whosoever believes in in him should not
perish, but have eternal life. And Acts 10.43. To him give all the Prophets
witness, that through his Name, whosoever believes in him, should receive
remission of sins. And Chapter 13. the 38, and 39 verses. Be it known unto
you, Men, and Brethren, that through this man is Preached unto you the
forgiveness of sins, and by him, all that believe, are justified from all
things, from which he could not be justified by the Law of Moses. And so Paul
and Silas to the Jailor, Acts 16.31. Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou
shall be saved. Not that faith must be supposed to be in our own power, John
3.16. But is the gift of God, Romans 9.33. the Lord requiring no more in the
Covenant of grace then he gives.

Now the Reasons of the Doctrine.

Reas. 1. Faith is the condition of the new Covenant, the Covenant of grace;
which is evident, as in the places forecited, so in other places; as Mark
16.15, 16. Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature,
he that believes shall be saved, but he that believes not, shall be damned.
And John 29.31. These sayings are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is
the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing, ye might have Life through
his Name.

Reas. 2. Faith is the only Spiritual hand, whereby we receive Christ, and
his benefits; as John 1.12. As many as received him, to them he gave power to
become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name. No faith, no
receiving of Christ, and then no benefit by him. And it is not every faith that
will do this, but only that faith which by way of propriety is called the faith
of Gods Elect, Titus 1.2 none but the Elect having it, and all the Elect being
possessed of it in this life at one time or other.

Now for the further seeing into this Doctrine, we enquire into the things
following: First, The kinds and sorts of faith, that so we may find out that
faith which will serve the turn. Secondly, Wherein the Nature and Essence of
that faith consists which will serve the turn.

1. Touching the first; there be four sorts of faith. 1. Miraculous: 2.
Historical: 3. Temporary. 4 Justifying.

1. A miraculous faith is, when a man believes that some extraordinary thing
shall be affected either by himself or others; or that some extraordinary thing
shall come to pass, for which he has some special promise or revelation. Mat.
17.20. 1 Cor. 13.2. Acts 14.9. Now the commendation of this faith is rather
from the ground of it (to wit, the special promise or revelation) then from the
gift it self. Of its own nature simply, it comes short of receiving and
applying Christ; as is evident by this reason, Because it may be in a
Reprobate: See Mat. 7.22, 23. Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have
we not prophesied in thy name, and in thy name cast out Devils, and in thy name
done many wonderful works? And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you,
depart from me ye that work iniquity.

2 The second kind of faith is an Historical faith, and that is a bare assent
(and no more) to the truth of the Scriptures; a believing that the Scriptures
are true, without resting on them, or affecting of them. Now that this faith is
too short to the purpose aforesaid, is plain, because it is to be found in the
very devils themselves, Jam. 2.19 The Devils believe and tremble.

The third kind of faith is a Temporary faith: Now this kind of faith goes
beyond the Historical in two degrees: First, In that with knowledge and assent
is joined such a profession of the truth as carries a show and form of
Godliness, as we may see in Simon Magus, Act. 8.13. Then Simon himself believed
also, and when he was baptized, he continued with Philip, etc. 2. A kind of
rejoicing and glorying in that knowledge, assent, and profession: as Mat. 13.20,
21. He that receives the seed into stony places, the same is he that hears
the word, and anon with joy receives it; yet has he not root in himself, but
dureth for a while. And John 5.35. our Savior speaking to the Jews of John the
Baptist. He was a burning and a shining light, and ye were willing for a season
to rejoice in his light. But this faith being not a well rooted faith, at the
length it vanishes away and comes to nothing, and therefore called a Temporary
faith; and being not well rooted, it is too short likewise for the business
aforesaid, is not able in a found and kindly way to receive Christ.

4. The fourth kind of faith is a Justifying faith: so called because it
apprehends that which does justify, to wit, Christ. It is likewise called a
Sanctifying faith, because it purifieth the heart, Acts 15.9. Purifying their
hearts by faith: and so a saving faith, because the end of it is salvation, 1
Peter 1.9 Receiving the end of your faith, even the salvation of your souls.
Now this faith, as it has many effects beyond the other kinds of faith, so
likewise it comprehends them all; as the Historical, and Temporary, why so the
miraculous faith; for he that has Justifying faith, if so be he had any
extraordinary revelation or special promise made unto him, he could as well
lay hold upon them as upon that Revelation and those Promises he does lay hold
upon. And if you ask me what this justifying faith is? I answer, It is that
grace of Gods Spirit, whereby a man of a contrite and humble spirit is enabled
to receive Christ and his benefits. Not but that this faith has other effects,
and a larger extent; but yet this is a principal effect of it. Thus we have
found out the faith that will serve the turn.

We come now in the second place to enquire wherein the nature and Essence of
this faith consists?

Answ. In four acts of the soul, the former two being acts of the
Understanding, the latter two being acts of the Will.

1. The first act is this, to wit, a knowing of Christ aright, and that which
the Gospel reveals to mankind concerning him.

As first, I must know that Christ is an All sufficient Savior.

2. I must know that he and all his merits are offered by the Lord to me, as
well as to any other. Mark 16.15

3. I must know that Christ is so offered to me, as I am commanded to believe
that he and his merits belong to me. Mat. 11.28

4. I must know how and upon what terms Christ is offered unto me, not only as
my Savior to free me from Gods wrath, and to bring me to heaven; but likewise
as my Lord and King, to rule and govern me, and I unfainedly and heartily to
serve and obey him; he being only a Savior to such, and unto all such: as Heb.
5.9. being made perfect, he became (to wit Christ) the Author of eternal
salvation unto all them that obey him.

This knowledge of Christ or the Gospel, is the first thing wherein the nature
and essence of justifying faith consists; it being an excellent grace, and
ever having knowledge concurring to the being of it; and hence it is, that
sometimes this faith is called the knowledge of Christ, as Isai 53.11. By his
knowledge (that is, by faith in him) shall my righteous servant justify many;
and John 17.3. This is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true
God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.

The second act of the soul, wherein the nature and essence of this faith
consists, is the assent and credit that the mind gives unto all aforesaid,
as to an undoubted truth; to wit, that Christ is indeed an all-sufficient
Savior, and that God offers him unto me, commanding me to receive him, and
that in this gracious offer he means as he says, and that he and all his
merits belong to me, if I will receive him upon those terms the Lord offers
him on. In respect of this second property, faith is called a believing of
God, as Romans 4.3. Abraham believed God, and 1 John 5.10. He that believes not
God, has made him a liar. See Exodus 14.32.

The third act of the soul, wherein the nature and essence of this faith
consists, is the consent that the will gives to this blessed offer of Christ
in the Gospel, not only for the undoubted truth, but for the incomparable
goodness, and excellency of it; as when the contrite and humble soul says not
only, this is a faithful saying, but likewise worthy of all acceptance, that
Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners: And suppose the believer
(through the sense he has of his own unworthiness) find much reluctance and
doubting, to hinder this act of faith; why yet his soul unfainedly desires,
and longs to receive Christ upon the terms aforesaid: In respect of this
property, faith is called an hungring and thirsting after Christ; as Matthew.
5.6. Blessed are they that do hunger and thirst after righteousness; to wit,
after Christ and his righteousness: And Rev. 21.6. I will give unto him that
is a thirst, of the fountain of the water of life freely.

The fourth act of the soul wherein the nature, and essence of this faith
consists, is a resting and relying upon Christ and him alone for the
obtaining of Gods favor, and eternal life. And indeed this is of all other
the chief act of the soul in true faith, and that wherein the being and essence
of it does briefly consist: In respect of this property it is called a
believing in or on Christ, or a trusting in Christ, or a receiving of Christ;
as John 3.16.18. Ephesians. 1.12, 13. John 1.12. These several phrases implying one
and the same thing. Thus we see now wherein the nature and essence of
justifying faith consists.

But the things following we must be put in mind of.

1. That there are several degrees of faith, the several acts aforesaid, being
(in those that are qualified with this grace) in some more distinct and strong,
in others more dim and weak; I mean, the former knowledge, assent, consent and
receiving: Yet the weakest faith being a true faith serving the turn to the
purpose aforesaid.

2. That in one and the same party, the several acts aforesaid are sometimes
more strong, and sometimes more weak.

And 3. That some of the acts of faith may be strong, and some of them weak in
one and the same party, and at one and the same time.

Object But may some men say, Is not this likewise an act of justifying faith
to be assured; or aussrance of Gods favor, and that Christ and his benefits
are mine?

Answ. First, Although this assurance be attainable, and some do attain unto it
in this life, to wit, in process of time, after many Trials, and Combats, after
many experiences of Gods love, after the practice of holy duties long continued
in, and constantly stuck unto (for otherwise ordinarily it is not attained
unto) why yet there be many, that (no question) have a true and right faith,
that do not attain unto it in this life, I mean to this assurance.

Secondly, This assurance is not an act of justifying faith, as it justifies;
but an act of faith following justification, or an act of experience in one
already justified by faith, or a fruit of faith; it being not properly of the
nature and essence of justifying faith. The doctrine being thus opened, we come
to the Uses.

Use 1 To inform us touching the miserable condition of diverse men and women
for the present, all such as are not qualified with this faith; no justifying
faith, no Christ; no Christ, no salvation; and if no salvation, what but
damnation? Now diverse men and women, may it not be concluded of them, that they
are altogether destitute this way?

As first, all such as are grossly ignorant; faith being a wise grace of Gods
spirit, and presupposing knowledge in some measure.

2. All profane persons, a justifying faith being a sanctifying faith.

3. All such whose hearts are not shivered and broken in some measure, in the
sight and sense of their natural misery; contrition and humiliation (ever in
those of years) being the usher to this faith. And the misery of such is the
greater, because either they make no reckoning of this grace, or presume they
have it already, when alas there is no such matter; or think it is impossible
to attain unto, or if they should go about it, that it would cost them too
much pains, or bring upon them too much damage, or trouble, by forgoing their
sinful pleasures, and profits, or exposing them to dangers and persecutions;
or else think it is so easy a thing to get, as they may obtain it when they
will, and so put off the seeking of it until their death beds: well, we see
all such as are destitute of this grace to be for the present in a woeful
condition: no measure of this grace, no benefit by Christ; and then woe and
alas.

Use 2 For trial and examination, whether we be qualified with this grace or
no, seeing it is of such necessity as that without it we cannot partake of
Christ and his Benefits. To this purpose, 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves
whether you be in the faith (that is, whether a true faith be in you or no)
prove your own selves; know you not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is
in you, except ye be Reprobates? Now if we say we have a Justifying faith.

First, How came we by it? How was it wrought in us? Did it come by hearing of
the word? Romans 10.17. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God.
Has the Law been thy Schoolmaster to bring thee to Christ? Gal. 3.24. Has
the ministry of the Law effectually discovered thy sins and miserable condition
unto thee, and so thy heart became contrite and broken? Before Christ came into
thy heart, did John the Baptist come preparing his way? Mark 1.2. This is the
ordinary way whereby the Lord brings his Elect to faith; before the Gospel work
it instrumentally, the Law prepares unto it.

2. Thou that say thou have faith, how have thou held it? Has it not been
with doubtings and fears, as the father of the possessed child; Mark 9.24.
Lord, I believe, help thou mine unbelief. It is true indeed, that doubting is
not of the nature of faith, but just contrary unto it; yet there is no faith
altogether without doubting, although it cannot be denied but as faith grows,
so doubting is expelled. Many will say, they never doubted, they thank God: but
that such persons never had faith, I need not doubt to affirm.

2. Weigh we the effects and fruits of this Grace.

1. It will make a man or a woman earnestly to desire after the word: Job
23.12. I esteemed the words of his mouth more then my necessary food; And 1
Pet. 2.2. As new born babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may
grow thereby. Amos 8.12. the Believer is described to be such an one as runs to
and fro to seek the word of the Lord, when there is a scarcity of it. Such as
in the ordinary course are indifferent whether they hear the word or no, have
an indifferent faith; I mean none, no true faith: and there be abundance of
such persons, like to the Faction in Corinth, that gloried they were neither
followers of Paul, nor of Apollo, nor of Cephas, but of Christ only. They would
seem so to depend upon Christ, that they cared for never a Preacher of them
all, nor regarded to partake of their Ministry: And so many men and women at
this day, that hope (they say) to be saved by Christ, and yet care not in the
least for the Ministry of the word; but this hope of theirs, is but a vain hope.

2. A second fruit of this faith, it is plentiful in Prayers and Supplications;
so we read of Paul in the swaddling bands of Conversion, Acts 9.11. Behold he
prays. And David, Psalm. 86.3. I cry unto thee daily: nay, Psalm. 55.17.
Evening, and Morning, and at noon will I pray, and cry aloud: And one special
thing Believers pray for is an increase of this grace, Luke 17.5. O Lord
increase our faith: So the Apostles prayed. And Mark 9.24. the father of the
possessed child cried out, Lord I believe, help thou mine unbelief. There is a
great difference betwixt the praying of such as have this grace, and such as
have it not. Such as have not this grace, praying especially for temporal
things; and if for Spiritual things, in a lip, cold, careless and carnal way:
but the Believer especially for Spiritual things, as before, and from the
heart, earnestly, as Galat. 4.6. Because ye are sons, God has sent fortht he
Spirit of his Son onto your hearts, crying, Abba father, Ephesians. 6.18.

3. The third effect and fruit of this faith is, Sins Mortification in some
measure, 1 John 5.4, 5. This grace purifies the heart, as Acts 15.9, And this
effect of faith is thus grounded.

1. Because it applies all that Christ did, and suffered, particularly to a
man, and persuades his soul, that out of his love to him, and care to keep him
from perishing everlastingly, he endured all that he did endure; as Galat.
2.20. Who loved me, and gave himself for me: and hence the Believer cannot but
love Christ again, and manifest the same by setting himself against that which
he knows Christ hates, to wit, sin. 1 John 4.19. 2 Cor. 5.14, 15.

2. The second ground is, Because this Grace unites a man to Christ, Joh. 15.5.
brings Christ into the soul; now if Christ be in the soul, sin must needs be
weakening and decaying: Many pretend faith, but where is the abatement of
corruption? See Malach. 4.2. But unto you that fear my name shall the Sun of
righteousness arise with healing in his wings: This Sun did never arise and
shine upon any heart but it brought an healing virtue with it.

The fourth effect of faith, A high esteem of the godly, be they never so poor;
and a mean esteem of the wicked, be they never so rich: so the Psalmist sets
forth the Believer, Psalm. 15.4. In whose eyes a vile person is contemned
(suppose they be never so rich and wealthy) but he honors them that fear the
Lord, be they never so mean and poor. Now many in the ordinary course, who are
they familiar with but the wicked? and whom do they oppose but the godly, and
for Godliness sake? Such are far from having any measure of this grace.

5. The fifth effect and fruit of this faith is, A fear to offend God in any
thing. Prove. 28.14. Happy is the man that fears always; to wit, to offend God:
the true Believer is this man. And Psalm. 130.4. There is forgiveness with thee
(says the true Believer to God) that thou may be feared. The contrite and
broken hearted sinner does no sooner believe his sins to be pardonable through
the rich mercy of God in Christ, but he fears to offend God in the least thing
he knows to be sin; and therefore tell such a party that unbelief is a sin,
and that he offends by doubting of Gods mercy in Christ; Oh how does he bewail
his unbelief, and earnestly strive after faith.

6. And lastly, Although the true Believer may sometimes doubt whether he has
faith or no, yet he would not part with that faith of his which he so questions
upon any terms, for any thing; and upon deliberation he would not change
Estates with any Natural man, no not with the best Civillist: neither would he
be in the same estate he was sometimes, for all the world. Thus much for the
second Use, wherein we have examined the justifying Faith.

Use 2. To exhort every man and woman to labor for this Faith, seeing without
it we cannot partake of Christ and his Benefits. Many Inducements and
Provocations might be thought of this way. As

First, If we weigh the glory they give to God who do believe: John 3.33. He
that has received his testimony, has set to his Seal, that God is true. Romans
4.20. The Apostle speaking of Abraham, says, He staggered not at the promise
of God through unbelief; but was strong in faith giving glory to God.

2. If we weigh the dishonor and injury they do to God who do not believe: as
1 John 5.10. He that believes not God, has made him a liar, because he
believes not the Record that God gave of his Son: and this is the Record, that
God has given to us eternal life, and this life is in his Son.

3 If we weigh that it is such a qualification as every man has not: 2 Thessalonians.
3.2. All men have not faith: Nay, such a qualification as but a few have, Isai.
53.1. Who has believed our report?

4 If we confider the cloud of examples this way, to wit, of Believers
(although but a few comparatively) and what they obtained by faith, Heb. 11.1.
etc.

5 If we consider, that without this grace we cannot please God in any thing we
do; for so the Spirit of God acquaints us, Heb. 11.6. Without faith it is
impossible to please God.

6 God commands us to believe 1 John 3.23 This is his commandment, that we
should believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ. And Matthew. 11.28. Come unto
me all ye that labor and are heavy laden; this coming is the motion of the
will, to wit, believing.

7. If we weigh the inducement in the Doctrine, otherwise we cannot partake of
Christ and his benefits; which if we do not, woe be unto us, Joh. 3.36. He that
believes on the Son has everlasting life, and he that believes not the Son,
shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him.

Object. But may some man say, What need all this ado? is it so hard a thing
to believe in Christ? I thank God I never found it so.

Ans. The Reason is, because thy conscience was never thoroughly awakened with a
distinet sight of thy sins, and Gods Justice pursuing thee for the same, thou
thinking thou do believe in Christ all this while, and alas, thy faith being
nothing else but presumption; but when thy conscience comes to be a wakened and
to roar in thy face, thou will find it the most difficult thing in all the
world to look beyond the cloud of Justice, to believe in Gods mercy, and to
rest on Christ for Justification and Salvation. Thus far touching the second
Member of the fourth Principle.

Now we come to the third Member of the same.

MEMBER III. Apprehending and applying Christ with all his Merits unto himself.
THis is done by faith, and faith alone, as it is in the former Member. So then
the Doctrine is this,

Doct. It is faith, and faith alone that apprehends and applies Christ and all
his merits unto a man's self. See Ephesians. 2.8. By grace ye are saved through
faith: as though the Apostle should say, it is of the free favor of God,
giving Christ unto you, that you are saved; and the only Instrument that
apprehends and applies Christ and all his merits unto salvation is faith. And
Romans 5, 1. Being justified by faith, we have peace with God, through our Lord
Jesus Christ: As though faith and faith only were the Instrument to lay hold on
Christ and his merits. But take that place for all, Romans 3.28. We conclude,
that a man is justified by faith without the deeds of the Law; faith being the
only instrument that apprehends and applies Christ to Justification. So also
Joh. 3.36. Romans 9.33. Acts 16.31.

Reason. The Ground or Reason is, Because there is no other eye nor hand for
this purpose but this; not that this faith is alone, but ever accompanied with
love and other Graces: as the eye in the head is not alone without other
senses, yet it only sees, and no other sense besides it. Love indeed claspeth
Christ and cleaves unto him, but it is for that which faith first discerns
to be in him, Christ being first the object of our Faith, and then the object
of our Love; and to speak properly, faith is the eye and hand of the soul, and
love only the hand of faith; for so the Apostle Paul speaks of these Graces,
Galat. 5.6. In Christ Jesus Circumcision avails nothing, nor uncircumcision,
but faith which works by love.

Now for the illustrating of this Doctrine, we propound these Questions. First,
Whether Faith or Love be the more excellent Grace? Secondly, Whether Justifying
faith in the exercise of it, be not of a larger extent then aforesaid? do not
as well embrace the whole word of God, as apprehend and apply Christ and his
merits?

Quest. 1. Whether Faith or Love be the more excellent Grace?

Answ. In some respects the Grace of Love is more excellent then the Grace of
Faith. First, It is more conspicuous and visible, Faith being secret and inward
(but yet by Love discovering it self.) Secondly, It is more beneficial and
commodious, Faith being the hand whereby a man receives for himself; but Love
being the hand whereby a man reaches out to others. Thirdly, It is of longer
continuance: 1 Corinthians, 13.8. Love never fails: And in this respect the
Apostle prefers it to Faith and Hope, ver. 13. of the same Chapter, Now abides
Faith, Hope, Love, those three, but the greatest of these is Love: The exercise
of Faith and Hope ceasing, when Love shall be in the greatest exercise.

Now in other respects faith does excel Love: As first, It justifies a man
before God, and so does not Love; I mean, is the instrument that way, but so is
not Love. 2. Faith (if we speak in regard of exercise) is the Cause, and Love
is the Effect; now the Cause is more excellent then the Effect. 3. What do we
reach forth by Love which we have not received by Faith?

Quest. 2. Now we come to the second Question, Whether Justifying Faith do not
as well believe the whole Word of God, as apprehend and apply Christ and his
Merits? Whether the Office of it be only restrained to Justifying?

Answ. Although Christ and his Merits be the principal Object of this Faith;
why, yet the same faith which receives Christ, and rests on him, and so
justifies, believes all the other promises made of God in Christ unto
Believers, whether they concern this life or the life to come; nay, believes
the whole Word of God, Acts 24.14. as the precepts, threatenings, etc. This
Faith not only yiedling a bare assent unto whatsoever is delivered in the
Scriptures (as concerning the truth of it) but likewise moving and stirring the
affections according to the nature of the matter believed, whether Promises,
Precepts, or threatenings. Now we come to the Uses.

Use 1. To inform us how excellently they are furnished unto whom the Lord has
vouchsafed this qualification, it being the instrument, and the only instrument
that apprehends and applies Christ and his Merits. Now we are to know, that as
there be very many who think they have this Grace of Faith, and yet have it
not; why so there be some who have it, and yet fear they have it not. The
latter of these we desire to encounter with, by answering some of their
Objections.

Obj. 1. We shall have some Christians to say, That it is true indeed, they
make a profession of the Faith in a special manner, and they dearly love Gods
Word. Gods Ministers, and Gods People, and earnestly desirous they are in every
thing to please God; but they do not know when, or by whom they were converted,
and therefore they question whether they have the grace of true faith, or no.

Ans. Although some of Gods people know and can remember the time and
instrument this way, why yet this is not required of all Gods people. The Lord
converting some even byone Sermon, others by degrees, and in a longer time, as
he best pleases. May it not suffice to find this Faith by the effects of it,
but we must trouble our selves about unnecessary circumstances? See what the
man that was born blind says in the like case, Joh. 9.25.

Object. 2. But may some men say, My faith is so little, if any, that I know
not what to say; I have many fears and doubtings.

Ans. It is true, that a great and strong faith is earnestly to be labored for
in the use of all good means.

1. Because the stronger a man's faith is, the more firm and close his union is
with Christ.

2. The clearer apprehension he has of the pardon of his sins.

3. The more boldly he goes to the Throne of Grace.

4. The more patiently he endures afflictions.

5. The more conscionably he walks in his particular Calling.

6. The more manfully he fights with all his Spiritual enemies; upon these
grounds such as have but a weak and little faith must earnestly labor to have
it stronger, and greater; but yet in the mean time these parties must not be
too much discouraged: First, Because there may be many fears and doubtings
where there is true faith. Matthew. 8.26. and 14.31. Secondly, It is not the
excellency and great measure of faith that justifies us, but the Object of
faith; to wit, Christ and his Merits. Thirdly, A weak faith, (if a true faith)
does apprehend this object effectually, and savingly, as a little hand may hold
a jewel of inestimable worth, and a palsy hand a gift of great price: He that
did look upon the brazen serpent in the wilderness but with one eye; nay but
with half an eye, was as well and fully cured of the deadly sting of the fiery
serpent as those which beheld it with both eyes.

4. The strongest faith in this world is imperfect: Abraham himself, the
father of the faithful, had his doubtings, as when he took Hagar and requested
Sarah to say she was his Sister.

Object 3 I have but a little sense and feeling, but a little assurance of Gods
favor, and of the pardon of my sins, and therefore I suspect the truth of my
faith.

Answ. It is true indeed, that this feeling and assurance is earnestly to be
endeavored after by every godly person. First, Because it is a glimpse of
heaven, a kind of heaven upon earth. Secondly, Because it makes a mam nimble
and cheerful in all manner of obedience active and passive; as Nehem. 8.10.
The joy of the Lord is your strength. and Heb. 10.34. Ye took joyfully the
spoiling of your goods, knowing that ye have in heaven a better and enduring
substance. But yet we are to know, that this feeling assurance is rather an
effect of justifying faith, then justifying faith it self; and that justifying
faith may be, and is in many in whom this assurance is not, as is plain by
diverse examples. Psalm. 22.1. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Here
was faith in David, my God, my God; but where was his feeling, when he says,
why have thou forsaken me? and so Heman the Ezrahite, Psalm. 88.14. Lord, why
castest thou off my soul? why hidest thou thy face from me? Here was but a
little feeling, a little assurance; and yet faith to be found in this party, as
is plain in the first verse of the same Psalm, O Lord God of my salvation, I
have cried day and night before thee. And so Job. 13.24. Wherefore hidest thou
thy face, and hold me for thine enemy? and 16.9. He teareth me in his wrath,
who hates me; he gnasheth upon me with his teeth, mine enemy sharpneth his
eyes upon me: What feeling was here, but of Gods anger? yet take notice of the
faith that was in this man, chap. 13. ver. 15. Though he slay me, yet will I
trust in him. The truth of it is, there is a double certainty, the certainty of
adherence, and the certainty of evidence: the certainiy of adherence is the
certainty of faith, the certainty of evidence is the certainty of assurance.
Now there may be the former certainty, adhering and cleaving to Christ by
faith, where there is not the latter, the certainty of evidence and assurance.

Answ. 2. Thou that art ready to conclude, thou have no faith, because thou
have so little feeling of Gods favor; do but for thy faith, examine it by
other effects of it, as love to Gods Word, Gods Ministers, Gods People, thy
earnest desire to please God in all things, and thou may find it; which if
thou do, thou may perceive Gods special love to thee in so excellent a
qualification.

Object. 4. But I have waited long in the use of holy means, and yet have not
attained to the blessing aforesaid; and therefore I question whether I have a
kindly faith or no.

Answ. First, We must not appoint God the time when to bestow his blessings
upon us, but must still wait his time in the use of means, suitable to the
blessings propounded.

Secondly, we do ill to conclude upon this ground, that we have no faith; we
should rather conclude hence, that the Lord for the present sees not this
blessing good for us; I tell you, every one of Gods people at every time cannot
weild the sense of his favor, and the feeling of his love, but through
corruption are apt to grow proud, or careless in the use of the means.

Thirdly, The longer we have waited, and do wait, the more plentful will the
consolation be when it comes.

Fourthly, It may be the Lord makes us to wait for it, to kindle our affections
unto it, and that we might the more prize it when we have it.

Fifthly, It may be to correct our conceit that was in us before our
regeneration, in the days of peace and security, before our consciences were
awakened, we thinking it an easy thing to obtain the assurance of Gods favor
and sins remission; for so many a natural man thinks.

Sixthly, Did not the Lord wait long upon us for our contrition and
humiliation? and will we murmur at him if we wait long upon him in the use of
means for comfort and consolation.

Object. 5. But I cannot find my self to come on in grace, in holy desires and
affections, but corruption to be more and more stirring in me; and therefore I
fear whether I have a true faith or no?

Answ. First, it may be thou do not enjoy the means in a lively and constant
way, and it may be this thine own fault, thou being too willing to live under
an unprofitable ministry.

Secondly, it may be, thou do not judge aright of thy own case: There be
times, when the true Christian is not a competent judge of his own spiritual
estate: as when the humor of melancholy is big and boisterous in him, or when
his brain is crazie through some long or violent sickness, or he is much
overgone with trouble of conscience.

Thirdly, Is it not the daily grief of thy soul that thou come on no more in
grace, and that corruption is so lively in thee? why then surely thou growest
in the root, although not in the blossom.

Fourthly, To be sensible of corruption, is a sign of a living soul, which
cannot be without a true faith.

Fifthly, The more thou see corruption, the less it is; because in seeing
it, thou hate it: it matters not so much what is in us, as what good; not
what corruptions, as how we stand affected to them.

Object. 6. But I observe others to outstrip me, who began profession long
after I begun; and therefore I suspect the truth of my faith,

Answ. First, take heed of envying the growth of others, nay much rejoice in
it, for the more grace any member attains unto (thou rejoicing in it) the
better it is for thee.

Secondly, If thou meanest by growth, gifts, as memory to carry away a Sermon,
ability to confer of the Points of Religion, and to pray in a Methodical and
enlarged way: Thou art to know that natural parts and powers, and so education,
does much in all external exercises of Religion.

3 To have a humble opinion of our selves, and a high opinion of other
Christians is good, but yet we must take heed of wronging the work of Gods
grace in our selves; so highly thinking of others Graces, as to conclude our
selves to have none.

4. If thou observe others indeed to outstrip thee (beginning profession after
thee) take notice of them to be more diligent in the use of the Means; thou
that should have been an example to them, do not thou disdain (they having
got before thee) now willingly to imitate them.

Object. 7. I cannot pray at all sometimes, and this makes me fear I have no
faith.

Ans. Thy case is such sometimes, thou meanest, as that thou can not pray in
an orderly and Methodical manner. But

1. Is not this a trouble and grief unto thee? Why then for all this thou
may have a true faith.

2. Is there not at such times an earnest desire in thee to pray, and this
manifested by sighs and groans? Thou art to know this is a good sign of the
Spirit of Adoption; and further, that the Lord can pick sense out of a confused
prayer. And for thy comfort, weigh the places following, Romans 8.26, 27. We know
not what we should pray for as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes
intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered. And he that
searches the hearts knows what is the mind of the spirit, because he makes
intercession for the Saints according to the will of God. And Psalm. 102.19, 20.
He has looked down from the height of his Sanctuary; from Heaven did the Lord
behold the earth, to hear the groaning of the Prisoner; And Psalm. 10.17. Lord,
thou have heard the desire of the humble. And so Psalm. 145.19. He will fulfill
the desire of them that fear him. Nay, Psalm. 77.4. I am so troubled that I
cannot speak; and yet breathing out prayer as well he could: see ver. 1. of the
same Psalm, I cried unto God with my voice, even unto God with my voice, and he
gave ear unto me. And so Hezekiah, Isai. 38.14. Like a crane or a swallow, so
did I chatter; but this chattering of his had a gracious effect, as we may see
in the verses following.

Object. 8. But I am so troubled sometimes with hideous and blasphemous
thoughts as I much suspect my faith; as that there is no God; that the
Scriptures are false; that all Religious courses are in vain, etc.

Ans. Thou may not hence conclude thou have no faith. For

1. Suppose thou have faith, why yet thou have an unregenerate part from whence
these thoughts may come.

2 It may be they come only from Satan, and then further then thou consentest,
they are thy affliction, but not thy sin,

3 Was not our Savior himself molested in this kind by Satan? Matthew. 4.1. etc.

4 Do not thou in grief of soul cry to God for pardon of these thoughts, and
help against them?

5 I should rather take this to be an Argument of thy faith, Satan seldom
molesting his friends (I mean, natural men and women) this way.

Object. 9. But I have so many outward crosses and afflictions upon me, and I
am so impatient under them, as I fear I have no faith.

Ans. For the former part of the Objection, it is scarce worth answering,
afflictions and crosses being the common lot of Believers in this veil of
tears, as Psalm. 34.19 Many are the afflictions of the Righteous: And Heb. 12.8.
If ye be without chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards
and not sons. Now for the latter part of the objection, impatience under
crosses, that is much to be lamented and bewailed; yet thou must not hence
conclude, that thou have no faith; because we read of diverse Believers in holy
writ, who, through humane frailty, were impatient in time of great affliction,
as Job, David, Jeremiah. These objections we thought fit to answer, for the
supporting of the poor Christian, whose faith is so much assaulted and opposed,
it being the Devils great project, as to keep men and women from faith, so when
they have it, to keep them from the comfort of it.

Use 2. To exhort every man and woman.

1. Such as have not this grace, to labor for it; it being the Instrument, and
the only Instrument that apprehends and applies Christ and all his Merits;
nay, that Instrument, without which we cannot make use of any promise made unto
the Flect; and get this grace, and get every grace. It is true, Gods Spirit
must work this grace in us, if it be wrought; yet we must use the means: But of
that in the next Principle, where we have the means of faith laid down.

2. To exhort all such as have even the least measure of this grace, to make
use of it: Is it the Instrument whereby we apprehend and apply Christ, and all
his Merits unto our own souls? Oh let us make use of it this way, often in the
use of holy means be applying him, and bringing him near unto our souls;
resting upon him for pardon and justification, and not only hold forth our
faith to the promise of pardon, and forgiveness in and through Christ, but
extend it unto all the precious promises made of God in Christ Jesus unto
Believers, as we may have occasion; whether they concern this life, or the life
to come; be they general, or particular; absolute, or conditional; express, or
implicit. This should be the wisdom of the Believer, as to acquaint himself
with the whole word of God, and to be affected with it always, as it applies
it self unto him, (for this faith does not only extend it self to the
promises, but to the whole word of God, as the Precepts, Threatenings, etc.) so
especially to acquaint himself with the precious promises dispersed here and
there in the Sacred Scriptures. Then 2. To have them in memory by frequent
mediation. 3. Often to urge them upon God in Prayer. And 4. Ever to rest upon
them as he has occasion. This is to live by our faith, and this is that which
is ever enjoined us in holy writ, to wit, the act and exercise of our faith;
the habit of faith being the Covenant on Gods part, and the act and exercise of
faith, the Covenant on our part; not but that men and women must use all holy
means for the habit, and not that the habit can act without the effectual
concurrence of Gods Spirit, exciting, and co-working. Now touching this life of
faith, we will not think much (for your better proceeding therein) to give
instance in some particular cases:

1. As first, Art thou at any time oppressed with the weight and burden of thy
sins? call to mind the promises of pardon, and forgiveness made unto such a
soul; as Isaiah 1.18. Come now, and let us reason together, says the Lord;
though your sins be as Scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow; though they be
red like Crimson, they shall be as Wool. And the 55 of the same Prophecy,
verse 7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts,
and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our
God, for he will abundantly pardon. And so Mat. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that
labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. In the case aforesaid,
such promises as these must be reviewed, meditated on, urged upon God in
Prayer, and then rested on.

2. The second instance. Do thou at any time find corruption strong and grace
weak in thee? call to mind the promises of Sanctification, or of help these
ways; as Matthew. 1.21. Thou shall call his name Jesus, for he shall save his
people from their sins (that is, not only from the guilt, but likewise from
the power of sin;) And Romans 6.14. Sin shall not have dominion over you. And so
Jer. 31.33. This shall be the Covenant that I will make with the house of
Israel: After those days, says the Lord, I will put my Law in their inward
parts, and write it in their hearts. And Isaiah. 44.2. I will pour water upon
him that is thirsty; and floods upon the dry ground: I will pour my Spirit upon
thy Seed, and my blessing upon thy Offspring. And so Ezekiel. 36.27. I will put my
Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes, and ye shall keep my
judgments and do them. These, and such like Promises thou must review,
meditate on, urge upon God in Prayer, and rest on them.

3. The third instance. Do thou doubt thy perseverance, and holding out to
the end? see John 4.14. Whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him,
shall never thirst; (that is, shall never after be altogether destitute of
grace) but the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a Well of water
springing up into everlasting life. And the fifth Chapter of the same Gospel,
verse 24. Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believes my word, and
believes on him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into
condemnation, but is passed from death unto life. And so the tenth Chapter,
verses 27, 28, 29. My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me;
and I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall
any man pluck them out of my hand: My Father which gave them me is greater then
all, and no man is able to pluck them out of my Fathers hand. These Promises,
and such like, in the case aforesaid, must be called to mind, meditated on,
urged upon God in Prayer, and so rested on.

4. The fourth instance. Do thou at any time fear the supply of Temporal
things? see Psalm. 34.10. The young Lions do lack and suffer hunger; but they
that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing. And Ps. 84.11. He will give
grace, and glory, and no good thing will he withhold from them that walk
uprightly. And so Mat. 6.33. Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his
righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you. And Heb. 13.5. Let
your conversation be without covetousness, and be content with such things as
ye have; for he has said, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee. These
Promises, and the like, in the case aforesaid, must be thought of, urged upon
God in Prayer, and rested on.

The last instance I lay forth at this time. The times being evil, Do thou
fear greater afflictions to befall thee, then thou shall be enabled patiently to
bear? see Psalm. 91.10. There shall no evil befall thee. And Romans 8.28. We know
that all things (even afflictions themselves) work together for good, unto them
that love God. These places promise that no affliction hurtful shall befall
thee; nay, that no affliction shall befall thee, but for thy good: And see
further, Psalm 34.19. Many are the afflictions of the righteous, but the Lord
delivers them out of them all. This place, and such places as this, promise
unto thee a good issue unto thy afflictions; nay, to answer thy fear. See
Isaiah 43.2. When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee; to wit,
supporting, and sustaining thee. And 1 Corinthians, 10.13. God is faithful, who
will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able. These Promises, and
such like, in the case aforesaid, must be reviewed, meditated on, urged upon
God in Prayer, and then rested on. And so in all other cases, as thou may
have occasion, thou shall find promises in holy Writ to fit thee; acquaint thy
self with them, meditate on them, urge them upon God in Prayer, rest on them,
serve Gods Providence in the use of all lawful means suitable, and often
consider of Gods Attributes, the props of faith; as his Wisdom, Power, Mercy
and Truth; and this is to make use of faith, to live by our faith. And so far
touching the third Member of the fourth Principle. Now we come to the fourth
Memmer thereof.

MEMBER IV. Is justified before God.
IN which Member, and the Member following, the Catechism acquaints us with
two special benefits, that the true Believer receives by Christ; to wit,
Justification, and Sanctification. Now as touching this Member, we commend unto
you this point of Doctrine:

Doct. Every man that apprehends and applies Christ and his Merits unto
himself, by a kindly faith, is justified before God; Romans 8.1. There is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus: That is to say, Every one laying
hold on Christ by a true faith, is a justified person. And Romans 5.1. Being
justified by faith; that is, by faith apprehending, and applying Christ and his
Merits; for so only faith justifies. And the same Chap. verse 18. As by the
offense of one, (to wit Adam) judgment came upon all men to condemnation, even
so by the righteousness of one, (to wit Christ) the free gift came upon all men
(that is to say, all true Believers) unto justification. Compare this with Romans
3.22, 30. And so Acts 13.38, 39. Be it known unto you, men and brethren, that
through this man (to wit Christ) is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins;
and by him, all that believe are justified. Now we come to the grounds or
Reasons of the Doctrine.

Reas. 1. Whatsoever the true Believer should be, should do, should suffer,
Christ was, did, and suffered for the true Believer; as Romans 10.4. Christ is
the end of the Law for righteousness, to every one that believes: that is, Let
the Law come upon the true Believer which way it will, he may answer it in the
complete obedience of Christ.

Reas. 2. The obedience of Christ, which is the material cause of
justification, was the obedience of such a person, as was not only man, but
God; and therefore sufficient, and more then sufficient for the justifying of
all true Believers, Acts 20.28.

Reas. 3. This is the end of Christ's obedience, in Gods eternal Council and
appointment; to wit, the justifying of true Believers, that all true Believers
might be justified by it; as Romans 3.25. Whom God has sent forth (or
foreordained) to be a propitiation through faith in his blood.

Reas. 4. So many as are true Believers; have that instrument or hand, which
apprehends and applies Christ, and the Merit of his obedi^nce unto themselves
for justification; for so faith only justifies, not as a quality or act, but
as an instrument or hand, receiving Christ and his Merits.

But that we may the better see into a Doctrine of so great consequence we
intend to answer the questions following 1. Wherein this justification
consists. 2. What it is, being defined. 3. The difference betwixt it and
sanctification.

Quest. 1. Wherein this justification consists?

Answ. It consists, 1. in remission of sins. 2. In imputation of Righteousness;
as we may see, Daniel 9.24. (this benefit being spoken of) there is mention
made, as of reconciliation for iniquity, so of an everlasting Righteousness.
And Zachariah 3.4. Behold, (says the Lord to Joshua) I have caused thine
iniquity to pass from thee, and I will cloth thee with change of raiment. And
so 2 Corinthians 5.21. He has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that
we might be the Righteousness of God in him. And however the Scriptures do
sometimes seem to place justification in remission of sins, ( Rev. 19.8.) why
yet the other part, to wit, imputation of Righteousness, is always employed,
and to be understood.

Quest. 2 What justification is, and how to be defined?

Answ. It is that gracious sentence of God, whereby (for Christ's Merits) he
absolveth the true Believer from all his sins, and the punishment due for
them; and whereby he accounts him Righteous unto life eternal.

A little to open the definition: First, we say, that justification is a
[sentencing,] or pronouncing of sentence; and so the word usually signifies in
Scripture; it is a judicial term, taken from the Bench of the Judge, and
signifies (by way of sentence) to pronounce a person Arraigned to be clear,
innocent, and Righteous, as Romans 8.33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of
Gods elect? It is God that justifies. 2. We call it [that gracious sentence of
God] because it was of Gods free favor to find out a remedy for poor sinners,
to give Christ the material and Meritorious Cause of justification, to give
faith whereby to apprehend and apply Christ and his Merits, Romans 3.24. Being
justified freely by his grace.

We go on in the definition, [Whereby for Christ's Merits:] that is to say, for
the Merit of his obedience, Passive, and Active; the Lord does not so show
mercy, as to wrong his Justice, and therefore it is said, Isaiah 53.6. The Lord
has laid on him the iniquity of us all. [He absolveth the true Believer from
all his sins:] That is to say, not only past, but to come in a manner, to
wit, vertually; sins past being pardoned in themselves, sins to come, in the
Subject, or Party sinning; as John 5.24. Verily, verily I say unto you, he that
hears my word, and believes on him that sent me, has everlasting life, and
shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from death unto life. It
follows, [And the punishment due for them:] The Cause being taken away, the
Effect must needs be removed; as Romans 8.1. There is no condemnation to them
which are in Christ Jesus: to wit, neither Eternal, nor Temporal.

Now we come to the second part of justification, [And whereby he accounts
him righteous:] That is, for the Righteousness of Christ imputed unto him;
according unto that style given Christ, Jer. 23.6. The Lord our Righteousness.
[Vnto life eternal:] This being annexed (to wit, life eternal) unto the
righteousness aforesaid. Hence it is called, Romans 5.18. The justification of
life. Thus far touching the definition of justification. Now we come to the
third question.

Quest. 3. What Is the difference betwixt justification and sanctification?

Answ. Although it be true, that justification and sanctification be always
inseparable, the person justified being ever sanctified; why yet there be these
differences following betwixt them:

1. The righteousness of sanctification, is a righteousness inherent in our
selves; I mean, a work wrought within us by the Spirit of God; as Ezekiel. 36.27.
I will put my Spirit within you. But the righteousness of justification, is a
righteousness without us, inherent in Christ, imputed to us; as Romans 5.19. As
by one man's disobedience, (to wit Adams) many were made sinners; so by the
obedience of one, (to wit Christ) shall many be made righteous. It is true
indeed, this righteousness of justification is received by faith inherent in us.

2. The righteousness of sanctification is not wrought in the same measure and
degree in all true Believers. A man may have grace, and true grace, and yet
come far short of others in grace; as is evident, Mat. 13.23. He that received
seed into the good ground is he that hears the word, and understands it,
which also bears fruit, and brings forth, some an hundred, some sixty, some
thirty. And although this difference, yet all good ground; and this we may see
in Hanani, who is described Neh. 7.2. to fear God above many; to wit, that he
did truly fear God. And so in Job, Chap. 1. verse 8. And the Lord said unto
Satan, have thou considered my servant Job, that there is none like him in the
earth? But the righteousness of justification is equally vouchsafed unto every
true Believer, without any difference at all; every true Believer is as fully
discharged from all his sins, as any other, is as perfectly righteous in the
sight of God, as any other; see Romans 3.22. Even the righteousness of God, (that
is to say, the righteousness of justification) which is by faith of Jesus
Christ unto all, and upon all them that believe; for there is no difference. So
then, all true Believers are not equally sanctified, but equally justified.

3. Another difference. The righteousness of sanctification is wrought in us
not all at once, but by degrees; hence it is compared Prove. 4.18. to the light
that shines more and more, unto the perfect day. And Ephesians. 4.16. to the body
of a man, which grows in stature and strength, til it come to the full
perfection. But the righteousness of justification is done all at once; it
never grows and increases at all, but is as much at our first ingrafting
into Christ, our first ingrafting into Christ by faith, as it is ever after; as
Romans 8.1. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus: That is
to say, to true Believers after they do believe. And Romans 5.1. Being justified
by faith; (not a little, or in part justified, but justified:) this faith
indeed whereby we do apprehend it, our sense and assurance of it likewise, is
not perfected at once, but grows and increases.

4. Another difference. The righteousness of sanctification, is never perfected
in this life, Prove. 20.9. Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure
from my sin? But the righteousness of justification is absolutely perfect in
this life, Canticles 4.7. Thou art all fair, my Love, (says Christ to the
Church in regard of her justification) there is no spot in thee. Though in
respect of our sanctification, we be not thoroughly cleansed from all our
sins; yet in respect of our justification we are; according unto that, 1 John
1.7. The blood of Jesus Christ, his Son, cleanses us from all sin: the Lord
accounting of the true Believer, as though there were no sin in him, and as
though he were perfectly righteous. And hence it is, that Gods people do (and
may do) more bear themselves, and rest upon their justification, then upon
their sanctification. Thus we see the difference, or differences betwixt
justification and sanctification; and so we have resolved the third question.

But before we come to the Application, we are to answer some objections.

Object. 1. If this be a truth undeniable, that all true Believers are
justified persons (for that is the effect of the Doctrine,) How comes it to
pass then, that they daily pray for remission of sins? What need have they to
do do so, remission of sins being the chief part of justification?

Answ. 1 First in general. That they have need to do so, is plain, because our
Savior commands them this, Matthew. 6.11, 12. Give us this day our daily bread,
and forgive us our debts, (that is to say, our sins:) As our Savior would
have all true Believers daily to put up and renew the Petition for Temporal
things, why so likewise the Petition for sins remission: Now, were not this
needful for them, our Savior would not have enjoined them it.

2. More particularly, diverse Reasons may be given why it is necessary for true
Believers, daily to put up this suit. 1. Hereby a sense of sins desert, and
of their own unworthiness is nourished in them, which is very behoofeful, even
for the best, so long as they are in this vale of tears. 2. They sin daily,
and therefore must put up this request daily; sin being not every way
actually pardoned, until it be repented of, and pardon of it entreated. 3. A
man may be a justified person, and yet have little assurance of Gods favor and
sins remission; this is the way to gain assurance, more and more assurance.
4. Suppose a man have great assurance of Gods favor, and sins remission, why
yet it is his duty to beg the continuance of Gods favor, and that the pardon
of his sins may be assured him with repentance: We read of many of the Saints
in holy Writ, that prayed for that of which they were before assured; and thus
our Savior himself, although he was assured that none of his sheep should
perish, as in John, Chapter 10. verse 28. I give unto them Eternal life, and
they shall never perish: yet see how he prays for them, in the 17th Chapter
verse 11. Now I am no more in the world, but these are in the world, and I come
to thee. Holy Father, keep through thine own Name those whom thou have given
me. Thus the first objection is answered.

Object. 2. But if all true Believers be justified persons, and justification
does not only absolve from all sin but likewise from all punishment: How
comes it to pass then, that the Lord does inflict so many punishments upon
Believers?

Answ. Although all the miseries and afflictions of this life, be in their own
nature punishments for sin, because they are all fruits of sin, sin first
bringing them into the world; why yet are they not punishments to all men, as
is evident by the two Reasons following:

1. God inflicteth no punishment upon any man, but for sin; but there be many
great judgments and afflictions, that the Lord lays upon Believers, wherein
he has no respect at all to their sins, as to the cause of these judgments;
he not intending therein as a Judge in a vindicative manner to correct them for
any sin; and the truth of this we may see in some examples: Job (we know) was a
man, that sometimes had many miseries and calamities upon him, insomuch that
his friends censured him guilty of some great sin or sins as the cause of these
judgments: But the Lord reproves them for this their censure, as men not
rightly understanding his servant Job, neither the manner of his proceeding
with his servants, as we may see Job 42.7. The Lord said to Eliphaz the
Temanite, My wrath is kindled against thee, and against thy two friends; for ye
have not spoken of me the thing that is right, as my servant Job has. And what
does the Lord say unto Satan, Job 2.3. Have thou considered my servant Job,
that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one
that fears God and escheweth evil, and still he holds fast his integrity,
although thou movedst me against him to swallow him up without cause?

Why, may you say, Had not Job sin enough in him to deserve as much as he
endured? Yes no question. Why then does the Lord say, that Satan moved him to
swallow up Job without cause? Surely his meaning is, that there was nothing in
Job that was the cause whereby God was moved thus to afflict him; he did not
therein punish his sin, there were other causes of it, to wit, that by this
trial of his he might make him a pattern and example of faith and patience unto
the Church for ever. And we know what our Savior says to Peter, John 21.18
Verily, verily, I say unto thee, when thou wast young thou girdest thy self,
and walkedst whither thou would; but when thou shall be old, thou shall
stretch forth thy hands and another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither
thou would not. Shall we suppose now that our Saviors meaning was thus,
Peter, when thou come to be old, will the Lord correct thee for thy sins? No,
the the Text cleares this in the next verse; This spoke he signifying by what
death Peter should glorify God: And this is that which our Savior tells his
Disciples touching the man born blind, John 9.3. Neither has this man sinned,
nor his parents, but that the works of God should be made manifest in him; as
though he should say, neither this man's sins nor his parents were the cause why
the Lord smote him with blindness; but this is the cause, to wit, That the
works of God might be made manifest in him. This is the first Reason to prove
that Judgments and afflictions are not punishments to all men, the Lord
sometimes inflicting them upon Believers, without any respect at all to their
sins as the cause of them.

The second Reason is, The Judgments the Lord inflicteth upon Believers for
their sins are not properly to be accounted and called punishments, but
fatherly chastisements and corrections only. For all punishments (to speak
properly) that God inflicteth upon any for sin, are causes and fruits of his
wrath, wherein he seeks not the good of the party punished, but the
glorifying of his own Justice upon him, and the satisfying of his most
righteous Law.

1. But first, All the afflictions of Believers are unto them Blessings and not
curses, Psalm. 94.12. Blessed is the man (that is to say, being a Believer,)
whom thou chastisest, O Lord; and James 1.12. Blessed is the man (the Believer)
that endures temptation, that is, affliction.

2. They are fruits of Gods special love to them, and not of his wrath. Hebr.
12.6. Whom the Lord loves he chasteneth: and Rev. 3.19. As many as I love, I
rebuke and chasten.

3. He seeks their good in and by these afflictions, Romans 8.28. All things
work together for good (even afflictions themselves) unto them that love God:
And 1 Cor. 11.32. But when we are judged (that is afflicted) we are chastned of
the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world. This David
professes, Psalm. 119.71. It is good for me that I have been afflicted. This is
the second Reason to prove that judgments and afflictions are not punishments
to all men; when inflicted upon Believers for their sins, they are fatherly
chastisements and corrections only.

Object. 3. You say, that Justification consists in remission of sins, and
imputation of righteousness; but how can it be that one man should be justified
by the righteousness of another, by that righteousness which is inherent in
another?

Answ. 1. The righteousness of Christ was the righteousness of such a person as
was not only man, but God, Jer. 23.6. and so of infinite merit.

2. Christ became the Believers Surety to obey and suffer in his stead ( Heb.
7.32.) and so his righteousness is the Believers by imputation, as the
Believers sins Christ's, as 2 Cor. 5.21. He has made him to be sin for us who
knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him.

3 Why may not Christ's righteousness be imputed to all true Believers, as well
as Adams first sin imputed to his whole posterity? which the Apostle plainly
tells us Romans 5.19. As by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by
the obedience of one shall many be made righteous.

4 This was the end of Christ's righteousness in Gods eternal decree and
appointment, to wit, that it might be the righteousness of all true Believers;
as 1 Corinthians. 1.30 Who of God is made unto us righteousness; agreeing with
that Joh. 6.27. Him has God the Father sealed; that is, set apart in his
eternal decree; as otherwise, why so to be the Believers Righteousness. Now
we come to the Uses.

Use 1. To inform us touching the present Church of Rome, that she may well be
called the Synagogue of Satan; and as in regard of other Errors she holds,
which raze the foundation, why so in respect of the Errors she maintains
touching this Doctrine of Justification.

As first, Although Christ has freed the Believer from eternal punishment, why
yet not from temporal, but he himself must satisfy Gods Justice for his sins
by his temporal punishment: A Doctrine, as contrary to our definition of
Justification, why so to many places of Scripture, Romans 8.1. There is no
condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus; that is, no kind of
condemnation, eternal or temporal: And Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us (to
wit, all true Believers) from the curse of the Law; but temporal punishments
due for sin are part of the Curse, as is plain Deuteronomy. 28.16, 17. Cursed shall
thou be in the City, cursed shall thou be in the field, cursed shall be thy
basket and thy store.

2. The Synagogue of Rome denies Justification by the imputation of Christ's
Righteousness; this kind of Righteousness they mock at, notwithstanding the
Scriptures so clear and evident this way; as Romans 4.6. Even as David describes
the blessedness of the man unto whom God imputes righteousness without works:
What more plain from any Text, then an imputative righteousness from this? And
so that place Romans 5.19. As by one man's disobedience many were made sinners,
(to wit, by imputation) so by the obedience of one shall many be made
righteous; that is to say, all true Believers. But how? Even by imputation. And
1 Cor. 1.30. Who of God is made unto us Righteousness, Sanctification; where
the Apostle expressly distinguishes betwixt imputed Righteousness and
inherent. And 2 Cor. 5.21. He has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin,
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. Where observe first,
That he says, We are made the righteousness of God; that is, Righteous, by
such a Righteousness as God requires, and as will abide the trial at his
judgment Seat. 2. That he says not only in the Concrete, that we are made
Righteous; but in the Abstract, Righteousness; that is, perfectly and fully
Righteous. 3. That we are made so in him, to wit, in Christ, not in our selves
inherently.

3. The Synagogue of Rome affirms Justification by inherent Righteousness,
that is to say, by works; a Doctrine contrary to the whole current of the
Scriptures; do but see Gal. 2.16. Knowing that a man is not justified by the
works of the Law; that is to say, by his holiness or inherent Righteousness;
but by the faith of Jesus Christ; that is to say, but by faith only,
apprehending and applying Christ the material and merit orious cause of
Justification: And to the same purpose Romans 3.28 We conclude, that a man is
justified by faith without the deeds of the Law. And see Believers up and down
in Scripture renouncing their works in the way of Justification; as David,
Psalm. 143.2. Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord, for in thy sight
shall no man living be justified. And Isai. 64 6. see what the Church says, We
are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags. So
John the Baptist (Mat. 3.14) to Christ, I have need to be baptized of thee: And
the Apostle Paul, Philip. 3.12. Not as though I were already perfect. And the
Apostle James, James 3.2. In many things we offend all, and so 1 John 1.8. If
we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no truth in us: The
Papists so erring in this weighty doctrine, know them to be in a woeful and
desperate estate, and especially in regard of this last error. Gal. 3.10. As
many as are of the works of the Law (that is, look to be justified by their
works and inherent righteousness) are under the curse. And Gal. 5.4. Christ is
become of non^ effect unto you, whosoever of you are justified by the law; that
is to say, so many of you as hope to be justified by your works, have no
benefit by Christ:

Use 2. For the great comfort and consolation of all true believers, they are
justified persons; and that this is no small ground of comfort is plain, if we
seriously consider the parts of justification. As first, sins remission, all a
man's sins to be blotted out of the book of Gods remembrance, and never to be
imputed unto him. Let us hear what David says in this case, Psalm. 32.1.
Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, and whose sin is covered: And no
marvel that this is David's judgment, sin being the greatest evil, and the
proper cause of all other evils; and further, this being an infalliable truth,
the cause being taken away, the effect must needs cease; all afflictions and
judgments then being but trials or fatherly chastisements. The Ministers of God
must comfort the people of God; Isa. 40.1. Comfort ye, comfort ye my people,
says your God; but how, and upon what ground? See verse 2d. Speak ye
comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare is accomplished,
that her iniquity is pardoned; and this is the course our Savior takes with
the palsy man, Mat. 9.2. Son, be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee:
and when he would comfort the penitent woman, Luke 7.48. he said unto her, thy
sins are forgiven: Hence indeed (to wit from assurance of sins pardon and
reconciliation with God) arises that peace which passes all understanding,
Phil. 4.7. no heart being able to conceive the worth of this peace, but that
only that has felt and enjoyed it; so then this part of justification unto the
true believer is no small ground of comfort. And if we consider of the other
part of justification, to wit, the imputation of Christ's righteousness, is not
that likewise unto the true believer a ground of comfort? see Isa. 61.10.
(where the Church speaking of this righteousness, says) I will greatly
rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall be joyful in my God; for he has clothed me
with the garments of salvation, he has covered me with the robe of
righteousness, as a bridegrom decketh himself with ornaments, and as a bride
adorneth her self with her jewels. It is not a little comfort the Christian
finds in that inherent righteousness which God by his spirit has wrought in
him, (though it be so stained, and imperfect as it is:) when he can find that
he has been able to pour out his soul unto the Lord, to mourn for his own
sins, and the sins of the times, or to do any other service to God with an
honest and upright heart; O what a comfort it is unto him! 1 Chronicles. 29.9. Then
the people rejoiced, for that they offered willingly, because with perfect
heart they offered willingly to the Lord: and David the King also rejoiced with
great joy. And 2 Cor. 1.12. Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our
conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom,
but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the world, and more
abundantly to you wards. But if this poor and imperfect righteousness afford
such comfort, how just cause of comfort and rejoicing has every true believer,
that he has another manner of righteousness then this, to wit, the perfect
righteousness of the Lord Jesus? Job says of his inherent righteousness,
whereby he had been so rich in good works; Job 29.14 I put on righteousness,
and it clothed me: And a goodly garment (doubtless) that was. Grace is a
goodly garment certainly; but if that garment that has so many spots and rents
in in it be so goodly, what is the perfect righteousness of Christ, that clean
and white garment? Rev. 19.8. And thus the Lord deals with the true believer,
nor only takes from him his filthy garments, Zach. 3.4. to wit, his sins: but
likewise clothes him with change of raiment; to wit; the pure and spotless robe
of Christ's righteousness, a garment absolutely sufficient to make the believer
beautiful in Gods eyes. Thus we see the great cause of comfort the true
believer has, in that he is a justified person in Gods sight.

Use 3. To exhort every man and woman destitute of faith, to labor for it;
seeing this is an undoubted truth, that all true Believers are justified
persons, their sins remitted, and they clothed with the white robe of Christ's
righteousness: and if Justified; why then the adopted sons and daughters of
God, Joh. 1.12. And so likewise Sanctified; Justification and Sanctification
being ever inseparable. Thus far touching the fourth Member of the fourth
Principle. Now we come to the fifth and last Membet of the same.

MEMBER V. And Sanctified.
HEre we have the latter benefit which the true Believer receives by Christ, to
wit, Sanctification. And for the handling of it, we commend unto you this point
of Doctrine,

Doctr. Such persons as truly apprehend and apply Christ and his merits unto
themselves, are not only Justified, but Sanctified. Or thus, Justification and
Sanctification are inseparable. The truth of this we may observe in the
coupling together of the two last Petitions in the Lords Prayer, Matthew. 6.12,
13. Forgive us our debts (or trespasses) as we forgive them that trespass
against us. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. The
former Petition being for Justification; the later for Sanctification. And the
Apostle Paul in the five first Chapters of the Epistle to the Romans, having
handled the Doctrine of Justification, presently in the beginning of the sixth
Chapter he falls upon the Doctrine of Sanctification. And do but see 1 Cor. 6
11. But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified. And Romans
8.1 There is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus: that is to say,
every true Believer is justified, and so likewise sanctified, if we heed that
which follows; who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. And Tit.
2.14. Who gave himself for us that he might redeem us from all iniquity; to
wit, justify us: and not that he might sanctify us too? Yes; see further, and
purify unto himself a peculiar people zealous of good works. Now we come to
the Reasons or Grounds of the Point.

Reas. 1 From the purity which is in God: he will have his Elect like unto
himself, to resemble himself in Holiness, to be holy as he is holy: his pity
moves him to justify them, his purity to sanctify them.

Reas. 2 The blood of Christ: which is not only meritorious and effectual to
Justification, but likewise meritorious and effectual to Sanctification; as
Hebr. 9.14 How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal
Spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead
works to serve the living God?

Reas. 3. Such persons as are justified, have faith; now faith is a part of
Sanctification: Nay further, where this grace of faith is, there likewise are
all other Sanctifying Graces.

But for the better conceiving of the Point in hand, we propound the Questions
following 1 What Sanctification is? 2 Whence it is? 3 The degrees of
Sanctification? 4 The parts of it?

Quest. 1. What Sanctification is?

Answ. It is a change wrought in a man or woman, whereby corruption is
mortifyed, and the special Image of God restored.

A little to open this Description. I say [It is a change wrought in a man or
woman.] To distinguish it from mere civility or common grace; common grace only
repressing and restraining corruption, and reforming some outward actions. We
go on, [Whereby corruption is mortified:] that is to say, the evil quality or
disposition adhering to the several faculties of the soul and members of the
body is weakened, decayed, purged, and in the end abolished. We go on [And the
special image of God restored:] We call grace the special image of God, because
the soul it self (in a general sense) is the image of God: and the special
image of God is restored; that is to say, a rectifyed and a holy quality and
disposition infused, and put upon every faculty of soul, and member of body;
that holy quality renewed which in Adams fall was lost. Thus we see what
Sanctification is.

Quest. 2 Whence is it?

Answ. 1 Negatively, not from earthly parents; no, although holy. John 1.12,
13. As many as received him, to them gave he power to become the Sons of God,
even to them that believe on his name; which were born not of blood, nor of the
will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. It is true indeed,
children descending of godly parents are holy in the Churches esteem, and
account; 1 Cor. 7.14. and that the parents holiness may be an occasion and
means of the childrens holiness, 2 Timothy 1.5, and 3.15.

2 We answer Affirmatively, from Christ: Joh 1.16 Of his fullness (speaking of
Christ) have all we received, and grace for grace. And Ephesians. 2.10 We are his
workmanship, created in Christ Jesus; that is to say, regenerated in Christ
Jesus. And from Christ two ways. 1 As the Author of it: Revel. 3 14 These
things, says the Amen, the faithful and true witness, the beginning of the
Creation of God: Now he that is spoken of in this place is Christ: and by
Creation here we understand Sanctification, of which Christ is said to be the
beginner. 2 As the Matter and root out of which it springs; as 1 Cor. 1.30 Ye
are of him in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification: And hence it is that the Sanctified are said, ( Ephesians. 5.30) to
be bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh. Not that we do exclude the Father
and the Holy Ghost in this work; the Son sanctifyeth by meriting
Sanctification; the Holy Ghost by working it; the Father by sending his Son to
merit, and giving his Spirit to work it. Now we come to the third Question.

Quest. 3 What are the degrees of Sanctification?

Answ. Although Justification has no degrees, why yet Sanctification has: And
hence it is that the Apostle John, 1 John 2.12 etc. tells us of little
children, young men, and fathers, intimating thereby the several degrees of
grace that they have who are sanctified. Hence mention is also made of babes in
Christ, as in Heb. 5.13 and new born babes in 1 Pet. 2.2. Some having a greater
measure, and some a less: and one and the same party growing from a lesser
measure to a greater; and they that attain to the most grace in this life, are
but babes in grace in comparison of the great measure of grace they shall have
in the life to come. As 1 John 5.21. Little children, keep your selves from
Idols; the exhortation being general to all the Regenerate upon earth: Them
that before he calls young men, and fathers, here he calls little children; to
wit, comparatively, comparing the measure of grace they have in this world,
with that measure they shall have in the world to come: And so we understand
the Apostle Paul, to compare his little measure of grace in this world, with
the great measure he should have in the world to come, 1 Cor. 13.11. When I was
a child, I spoke as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a child; but
when I became a man, I put away childish things: And that this is the sense I
have given, is plain from the Context.

Quest. 4. What are the parts of Sanctification?

Ans. Sanctification has two parts; 1 Mortification: 2. Vivification.
Mortification is that part of Sanctification, whereby the power, tyranny, and
strength of Original sin is weakened and decayed, and by little and little
abolished; the ground of this, being the virtue of Christ's death applied; the
same power weakening sin in us which sustained him upon the Cross, as Romans 6.6.
Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin
might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin. Vivification, the
second part of Sanctification is, that whereby the special image of God, or
inherent righteousness is restored; and the foundation of this, is the virtue
of Christ's Resurrection; the same power raising us up to newness of life, which
raised him from the dead: as Pilip. 3.10. That I may know him, (to wit, Christ)
and the power of his Resurrection: Yet this we must remember, that both the
parts of Sanctification are imperfect in this life, the godly (whilst they are
in this world) consisting partly of flesh, and partly of Spirit: And hence it
is that their life is a continual conflict, The flesh lusting against the
Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh, Calat. 5.17. They aim at perfection,
but have daily need to renew their Repentance. We now come to the Uses.

Use 1. To confute the opinion of diverse men and women, who will say they are
justified, and believe in Christ, and yet they do not at all demonstrate the
same by their Sanctification: examine their lives, and it is not the way of
holiness they prosecute, but the way of sin and disobedience: In their way and
course they do not turn to God, but from him, as the Lord complains of the
obstinate Jews, Jerem. 32.33. They have turned unto me the back and not the
face: though I taught them, rising up early and teaching them, yet they have
not hearkened to receive instruction. It is swearing, profaning of the Sabbath,
uncleanness, Drunkenness, oppression, defrauding, they delight in, and not the
ways of Gods Testimonies. Nay, diverse are so far from holiness, as that they
cannot away with those that make a show that way: of all people, they cannot
brook the forward in Religion, but oppose and persecute them all the ways they
can: Yea, how earnest against the Holy and Zealous, even diverse that are of
civil conversation? to give us light that there is a great difference betwixt
common grace and sanctifying. Well, let the profane person, and also the mere
Civilist know, that he shall dye in his sin that dies not unto his sin; and
that so many as are unsanctified are unjustifyed. According to that saying of
our Savior unto Peter, John 13.8. If I wash thee not, thou have no part with
me.

Use 2. For the great comfort and conso lation of all such as truly desire to
fear God, this being a truth, that Justification and Sanctification are
inseparable. The case being so with the Godly in this world, as that their
Sanctification is imperfect; the flesh ever lusting against the Spirit, and sin
ever present with them when they would do good: Had they no other ground to
fasten their Anchor of Hope upon but their Sanctification, it could not hold
them fast enough against the tempests of Satan's temptations, but seeing that
Sanctification (although imperfect) is an evidence of another Righteousness
which is perfect, to wit, Justification; this may bear them up and support
them. The Apostle Paul finding his Sanctification to be imperfect, the flesh to
rebel against the spirit, he cries out, Romans 7.24. Oh wretched man that I am,
who shall deliver me from the body of this death? But considering of his
Justification, he comforts himself, and ver. 25. breaks forth into the praises
of God, I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord: Now then, to make sure we
are Sanctified persons, and therefore Justified persons, that we be not
deceived in so weighty a matter, it shall not be amiss to lay down some Marks
and Signs of Sanctification. But because Civility and Formality do not a little
resemble Sanctity, it may not be unfit in the first place to distinguish them
by some notes of Difference: and then afterward to lay down the distinct
Signs of Sanctification.

1. The Formalist (in the ordinary course) cares more for the pleasing of man
then for the pleasing of God, is more for the praise of men then of God. The
Scribes and Pharisees were notable Formalists, and see what our Savior says
unto them, and of them: Unto them, Luke 16.15. Ye are they which Justifye your
selves before men. Of them, Mat. 23.5. All their works they do to be seen of
men. Such also was Saul, 2 Samuel 15.13, 30. and Jehu, see 2 Kin. 10.16 But such
as are truly Sanctified, are (in their ordinary course) more for the praise and
pleasing of God then of men; more for Gods approbation, then man's; Psalm. 44.20,
21. If we have forgotten the name of our God (say the people of God) or
stretched out our hands unto a strange God, shall not God search this out? for
he knows the secrets of the heart. And the Apostle Paul 2 Cor. 2.17. We are
not as many that corrupt the word of God: but as of sincerity, but as of God,
in the sight of God speak we in Christ: And 1 Thessal. 2.4. As we were allowed
of God to be put in trust with the Gospel, even so we speak; not as pleasing
men, but God, which tries our hearts.

2. The formalist is only for an outward righteousness, little regarding
inward: As we may see again in the Scribes and Pharisees, Matthew. 23.25.27, 28.
We unto you, Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites; for ye make clean the ^u^side
of the cup, and of the platter, but within they are full of extortion and
excess. Woe unto you Scribes, and Pharisees, Hypocrites; for ye are like unto
whited sepulchers, which indeed appear beautiful outwardly; but are within
full of dead men's bones, and of all uncleanness. Even so ye also outwardly
appear righteous unto men, but within ye are full of hypocrisy and iniquity.
But such as are truly sanctified, do as well labor for pure hearts as clean
hands; grieve for evil thoughts and desires, as well as for evil words and
actions, (I do not say so much) see Psalm. 51.10. Create in me a clean heart, O
God: renew a right spirit within me. And Psalm. 142.4. Incline not my heart to
any evil thing; and the place forecited, Romans 7.24. how the Apostle be wailes
his original corruption; O wretched man that I am, Who shall deliver me from
the body of this death?

3 The formalist will seem to make conscience of greater sins; as Murder,
Perjurie, Adultery; and the like; but for lesser sins, he makes no bones of
them; as wanton talking, rash anger, overreaching a neighbor a shilling or
two (now and then) in a bargain, swearing by faith or troth in his usual talk,
and the like. But the Sanctified person makes conscience of every thing he
knows to be sin, from the greatest to the least. 1 Samuel 24.5. David's heart
smote him, because he had cut off the skirt of Saul's garment: It was no great
matter, and yet his conscience smote him for it. The truly godly person takes
notice of what- our Savior says, Luke 16.10. He that is unjust in the least,
is unjust also in much; that is, he that favors himself in the least known
injustice, will upon occasion commit the greatest injustice. And likewise the
person aforesaid, regards what the Apostle James says, Chap. 1. ver. 27. Pure
Religion and undefiled before God, and the Father is this, to visit the
fatherless and widows in their affliction, and keep himself unspotted of the
world. The true religion much fears the least spot of sin; although every day
he show weakness and infirmity, and so have cause to renew that suite, Mat.
6.12. Forgive us our trespasses; why yet he subscribes to Solomon, Eccles.
10.1. Dead flies cause the ointment of the Apothecary to send forth a stinking
savor: So does a little folly him that is in reputation for wisdom and
honor; And he is very willing to hearken to the Apostle Jude ver. 23.
injoyning him, to hate even the garment spotted by the flesh: And to the
Apostle Paul. 1 These. 5.22. abstain from all appearance of evil; and would
feign imitate David, Psalm. 119.101. I have refrained my feet from every evil
way, that I may keep thy word. It is not any known sin, no not the least, that
he dare allow himself in the practice of. These differences are betwixt the
formallist, and the holy person.

Now we come to lay down some direct signs and marks of sanctification.

1. The first sign is A renewed knowledge, that is to say, a new light in the
mind and understanding, conceiving the things of the spirit of God, Colos.
3.10. And have put on the new man, (speaking of the holy Colossians) which is
renewed in knowledge; as though all that were sanctified had a renewed knowledge.
This is a part of Gods covenant with his Elect, Jer. 31.34. They shall all know
me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them, says the Lord. And hence
it is, that the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 4.3. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to
them that are lost. And upon this ground it is, that the sanctified are called
the children of light. 2 These. 5.5. The unsanctified may have a great deal of
literal and speculative knowledge: but they have not a jot of spiritual and
approving knowledge.

The second sign of one sanctified, is a new quality in the will; a readiness
to hear the voice of God in all things and to obey it, John 8.47. He that is of
God, hears Gods words; ye therefore hear them not (says our Savior to the
rebellious Jews) because ye are not of God. And Psalm. 27.8. (says David to
God) When thou said, Seek ye my face; my heart answered, Thy face Lord, will
I seek. The sanctified person has a flexible heart to the word.

The third Sign, new affections. As especially love to God, Psalm. 18.1 I will
love thee oh Lord my strength (says David.) And Psalm. 116.1. I love the Lord.
Thus we see sanctified persons described, Psalm. 97.10. Ye that love the Lord,
hate evil. And this love to God, the sanctified person manifests diverse ways.

1. By an earnest desire after such means as whereby he may have converse with
God; as prayer, reading, and hearing of the word, etc. How was David addicted
to the use of those means (if we look into the book of the Psalms) and so all
the Worthies of God we read of in the Scriptures: Oh how is the sanctified man
or woman crossed, if they be the least restrained of their liberties these
ways? and however the unregenerate part be backward to the duties aforesaid,
yet this they mourn for, and do not in the ordinary course omit them.

2. They manifest their love to God by a love to his children, 1 John 5.1.
Every one that loves him that begat, loves him also that is begotten of him.
See David Psalm 16.2.3. My goodness extends not to thee; but to the Saints
that are in the earth, and to the excellent, in whom is all my delight. And
Psalm. 119.63. I am a companion of all them that fear thee, and of them that
keep thy precepts. The more holy, the more watchful; the more they observe the
image of God to shine upon any, the more they love them. Such as love not the
Saints are not sanctified.

3. They manifest their love to God by an endeavor of universal obedience,
John 14.15. If ye love me, (says our Savior) keep my commandments. And verse
21. He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is (and he only) that
loves me: And therefore see what David says, Psalm. 119.5. Oh that my ways
were directed to keep thy statutes! The sanctified man out of his very love to
God, would fain keep his commandments.

Fourthly, They manifest their love to God by a grief and heaviness when the
Lord is at any time absent from them in their own apprehensions, Psalm. 28.1.
Unto thee will I cry O Lord, my rock; be not silent to me, lest if thou be
silent to me, I become like them that go down into the pit. And Psalm. 88.14.
Lord, why castest thou off my soul? Why hidest thou thy face from me? Thus we
see the third sign and mark of sanctification; a love to God, and this love
manifested, as you have heard.

The fourth sign of sanctification. A continual combat betwixt the flesh and
the spirit; Gal. 5.17. There may be a combat in the unsanctified, and is diverse
times; but that is between two several faculties, the conscience and the will;
the conscience terrifying from sin, the will pulling and haling unto it. Now
this is not a combat betwixt the flesh and the spirit, but a combat betwixt the
flesh fearing, and the flesh desiring; whereas the combat that is in the
sanctified, is in one and the same faculty. As for example, the will of the
sanctified person drawing two ways at one and the same time; the flesh one
way, and the spirit another; I mean, corruption one way, and grace another:
corruption, the unregenerate part drawing to sin; grace, the regenerate part,
at one and the same time pulling back. And so on the contrary, grace the
regenerate part moving to good; but at one and the same time the flesh,
corruption pulling back; as Romans 7.19. The good that I would, I do not; but the
evil which I would not, that I do: And many like passages we have in this same
chapter. And so Galat. 5.17. The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the
spirit against the flesh; and these are contrary the one to the other; so that
ye cannot do the things that ye would. This is an evident mark of grace; for
there cannot be this combat, but there must needs be sanctification.

Use 3. For Exhortation. And there be two branches of it.

First, to exhort all such as are sanctified, to endeavor a progress, a
growth in grace: for as we have heard, although justification has no degrees,
why yet sanctification has. And therefore such as have grace must ever be
laboring further degrees. Now to this purpose some Motives, and Means.

Motive 1. Gods command, 2 Pet. 3.18. Grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. The Thessalonians were a very holy people, and
yet 1 These. 4.10. the Apostle would have them to abound more and more.

Motive 2. This will be a demonstration to us, that the grace we have is
kindly, and of the right stamp; it being the nature of true grace ever to
desire the increase of it self. See Matthew. 13.31, 32. The kingdom of heaven
(that is to say, the kingdom of grace) is like to a grain of mustard seed,
which a man took, and sowed in his field, which indeed is the least of all
seeds; but when it is grown, it is the greatest among herbs, and becomes a
tree; so that the birds of the air come and lodge in the branches thereof. And
verse 33. Another parable spoke he unto them: The Kingdom of heaven is like
unto leaven, which a woman took and hid in three measures of meal, till the
whole was leavened. And so Psalm. 92.12, 13, 14. The righteous shall flourish
like a Palm tree; he shall grow like a Cedar in Lebanon. Those that be planted
in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in the courts of our God: They shall
still bring forth fruit in old age; they shall be fat and flourishing.

Motive 3. If we do not grow, we go back; and a declining condition is very
uncomfortable; what with the dolours inward, and the afflictions outward, which
attend such an estate. These be the Motives.

Now the Means of growth, that is to say, some inward helps this way, (for as
touching outward means, the next Principle intreates.)

Means 1. We must often by our faith apply Christ to Justification: The more we
apprehend Gods mercy in Christ unto us this way, the more our hearts turn
toward him in love and obedience: 1 John 4.19. We love him because he first
loved us: And 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. The love of Christ constrains us, because we
thus judge, that if one died for all, then were all dead. And that he died for
all, that they which live, should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto
him which died for them and rose again. The more clearly we apprehend Christ
our Justifyer, the more we find in him to be our Sanctifyer. See Ephesians 3.16, 17,
18, 19.

Means 2 We must often by our faith have recourse to Gods Promises in this
kind. The Lord has made many gracious Promises to further us in the way of
Sanctification; as Hos. 14.4. I will heal their backslidings: And Rom 6.14 Sin
shall not have dominion over you: And so Mal. 4.2 Unto you that fear my name,
shall the Sun of Righteousness arise with healing in his wings: And ye shall go
forth and grow up as calves of the stall, Jer. 32.39, 40. And Mat. 25.29. Unto
every one that has, shall be given, and he shall have abundance. Such Promises
as these we must call to mind, and be earnest with the Lord in Prayer to make
them good unto us.

Branch 2. To exhort all such as are not sanctified to labor for
Sanctification. Motives: Means.

Motive 1 No Sanctification, no Salvation; Heb. 12.14 Without holiness no man
shall see the Lord: And Mat. 5.20 Except your righteousness exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the
kingdom of heaven? and the Scribes and Pharisees were men very civil.

2 By Sanctification we shall conform to the holy God, have his special image
upon us which we had, and lost in Adam, Ephesians. 4.24.

3 Sanctification is the end of our Election, Redemption, and Vocation. The end
of our Election. Ephesians. 1.4. According as he has chosen us in him before the
foundation of the world that we should be holy. The end of our Redemption, Tit.
2.14. Who gave himself for us, that he should redeem us from all iniquity, and
purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. The end of our
Vocation, 1 Cor, 1.2. Unto the Church of God which is at Corinth, to them that
are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints.

4 Sanctification is not the least part of glory and eternal felicity. 2 Cor.
3.18. But we all with open face, beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord,
are changed into the same image from glory to glory (that is, from one degree
of grace to another) even as by the Spirit of the Lord.

5 Where there is not Sanctification, there can be no true faith: and if no
true faith, why then no Justification nor Adoption. These the Motives to
Sanctification.

Now the Means or inward helps; for as touching the outward means, the next
Principle acquaints. Sanctification (we know) consists of Mortification and
Vivification.

1 Touching Mortification: 1 Weigh and perpend that either sin must die, or the
sinner must die eternally: Romans 8.13 If ye live after the flesh (that is, if
sin be not mortified in you) ye shall die; that is to say, eternally.

2 Weigh and consider the great love of God in giving his Son to dye for
sinners, John 3.16. and wilt not thou show love to him again by fighting
against sin, which he hates?

3 Weigh and perpend the great love of Christ, who willingly underwent that
accursed death of the Cross for thy sins. Now will thou nourish that which cost
him his life?

Then as touching Vivification, the other part of Sanctification, weigh and
perpend Christ's Resurrection.

1 The efficient cause of it, to wit, the Spirit of God: And thus think with
thy self, If the same Spirit which raised up Christ from the dead dwell in me,
he shall raise up my soul from the death of sin to the life of grace: as Romans
8.11. If the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he
that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies by
the Spirit that dwells in you: and as their mortal bodies at the last day,
why so their souls in this world.

2 Meditate upon the end of Christ's Resurrection, which was, that death might
no more have dominion over him, but that he might for ever live to God; which
should be thy study and endeavor, even to live to God in a life of holiness
and Righteousness, See Romans 6.9, 10, 11. Knowing that Christ being raised from
the dead, dies no more, death has no more dominion over him; for in that he
died, he died unto sin once; but in that he lives, he lives unto God.
Likewise, reckon ye also your selves to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto
God, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

3 Meditate upon the consequents of Christ's Resurrection; to wit, his Ascension
into heaven, and his sitting at the Fathers right hand. So should thou labor
to have thy affections above, and thy conversation in heaven: Colos. 3.1, 2. If
ye then he risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ
sits at the right hand of God. Set your affections on things above, not on
things on the earth. And so the Apostle professes of himself, Philippians
3.20. Our Conversation is in heaven, from whence also we look for the Savior,
the Lord Jesus Christ. And thus much touching the fourth Principle.

PRINC. V.
Quest. What are the ordinary or usual means for obtaining of faith?

Answ. Faith comes only by the preaching of the Word, and increases daily by
it: as also by the administration of the Sacraments, and Prayer.

MEMB. 1. Faith comes only by the preaching of the Word; and increases daily
by it.
THE fifth Principle acquaints us with the ordinary outward Means whereby faith
is obtained and increased.

And first, the Catechism makes known unto us the ordinary outward Means
whereby faith is obtained; Faith comes only by the preaching of the word. And
this passage of the first Member, we commend to your consideration in the
Proposition or Doctrine following,

Doct. The preaching of the Word is the only, ordinary, outward Means for the
begetting of faith.

The Scriptures are very clear this way. Do but see Romans 10.8. That is the word
of faith which we preach. Not only the proper object of faith; but also the
proper instrument of faith: And so ver. 14. of the same Chapter, How shall they
believe in him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear (to wit,
for the obtaining of faith) without a Preacher? And in ver. 17. the Apostle
concludes the point in hand, So then, faith comes (to wit, in the ordinary
course) by hearing (that is to say, by hearing the Word preached,) and hearing
by the word of God; that is to say, by the ordinance and appointment of God. As
though the Apostle should say, Do you ask me, how the hearing of the word
preached comes to be the only, ordinary, outward means for the begetting of
faith? I answer, by the ordinance and appointment of God. Many other places of
Scripture come up to the Point in hand; as Job 33.23. Elihu speaking of the
humbled soul made capable of faith; If (says he) there be a messenger with
him, an Interpreter, one among a thousand to show unto man his uprightness; the
word is rectitudinem, or righteousness, to wit, the righteousness of faith, or
which faith apprehends. As though the Ministry of the word were the proper
means of faith. And so Matthew. 28.19. Go ye, and teach all Nations (says our
Savior unto his Apostles) the word in the Original is, make Disciples; that
is, by preaching beget men and women to the faith. And Mark 16.15, 16. Go ye
into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every Creature; (to every
reasonable Creature, Gentiles as well as Jews) and observe what follows, He
that believes;] as though the preaching of the word were the only ordinary
means for the begetting of faith. And in the same manner it follows, 1 Timothy
3.16. and the same purpose, John 17.20 Romans 1.15, 16. Now we come to the
Grounds or Demonstrations.

Reas. 1. The first Ground is, the unbelief which generally reigns in such
places and Congregations where the preaching of the Word is not. Examine those
places, and what shall we find that favors of faith? what gross ignorance?
what profaneness, and what worldliness may be observed in them? men and women
living as though they had no souls, or as though the soul were mortal, and the
body immortal; frugallity and worldly providence being the greatest perfection
aimed at. The very best in the places aforesaid (who content themselves without
the preaching of the Word) supposing gain to be Godlinss, 1 Timothy 6.5 thinking
that he is Religious enough that stores up outward things for himself and
posterity. This is one Demonstration to let us see, that the preaching of the
Word is the only, ordinary, outward means for the begetting of faith; to wit,
The general unbelief and fruits of it, which reign in those places where this
ordinance is not.

Reas. 2. The second Ground. The opposition which is in those persons who have
not faith, to the preaching of the word (especially being plain and powerful:)
To this purpose see 2 The. 3.2 (as though all unbelievers did oppose this
Ordinance, and so they do in some kind or other) Hence it is that such persons
have so many exceptions to the Ministers of God and their families; for so
sometimes the persons aforesaid reach to the Minister by causeless carping at
his Family, or by aggravating every weakness and infirmity of them in his
Family. It may be some of them are more modest then to speak against the
Minster himself; but they will labor his derogation, and to derogate from his
pains by inveying against those appertaining unto him, his Family, or
Associates. Hence it is likewise that the persons aforesaid do account the best
kind of preaching, (to wit, plain and powerful) no better then foolishness, 1
Cor. 1.21. that they say, it was never good world since there was so much
preaching; since so much preaching the times are grown hard, good housekeeping
is laid down, and all merriment and joviality is gone out of the world. And
hence it is, when they observe any forward to hear Sermons, that they say, they
are mad, or will go mad, that all such are hypocrites and dissemblers, and of
all people in the world, not to be trusted; brand them with the names of
Puritans and Precisians: Now this opposition in such as have no faith, to the
preaching of the word, is an evident Demonstration that the preaching of the
Word is the proper Ordinance for the begetting of faith: The preaching of the
word opposes unbelief, and unbelievers oppose it.

Reas. 3 The third Ground. The great conscience that the ministers of God, of
all Ages have made to discharge this Duty; as do but see Jerem. 20.9. Acts
5.42. and 6.4. and 1 Corinthians. 9.16. Woe be unto me (says the Apostle) if I
preach not the Gospel, 2 Timoth. 4.2. And so at this day, the more conscionable
Ministers are, the more they labor in the Word and Doctrine, the more diligent
they are in preaching of the Word; they well knowing, that as this is a good
means to perfect faith in those that have it; why so, that it is the only
ordinary means to beget faith, to make Satan to fall like lightning from
Heaven, to enlarge the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus.

Reas. 4. The fourth Ground. The high esteem of the preaching of the Word by
all such as have faith (by all that are kindly Believers) except in times of
dissertion, thereby intimating that it was the only outward means of their
faith: And from their high esteem of this Ordinance it is that they do so
frequently and fervently pray, that the Lord would more and more send forth
Laborers into his harvest; that they do so plot and project to live under a
faithful and conscionable Ministry: that they do so honor and reverence
painful and conscionable Ministers; that they are so liberal and bountiful to
them, that they do so grieve when any of their mouths are stopped; that they
are such frequenters of Sermons. And hence it is that they do so stir up their
Families, Friends, and Neighbors to partake of this Ordinance, Isai. 2.3. Now
this high esteem that all true Believers have of the preaching of the Word,
does not a little demonstrate the good they have received by it, to wit, Faith
and Conversion.

Reas. 5. The fifth Ground. The experience of the blessings that have attended
the preaching of the Word this way, to wit, for the begetting of faith. As
consider we first of particular persons: 2. Of particular Churches.

1. Of particular Persons, 1 Timothy 1.2. Tit. 1.4. 3 John 4. Philem. ver. 10, 19.
Nay, such desperate persons coming in this way, as many of the Priests who had
a chief hand in crucifying Christ, Acts 6.7. And some of the mocking Athenians,
who held the Apostle Paul no better then a Babbler, Acts 17.18.34.

2. Consider we of particular Churches, as Acts 18.8. 1 Cor. 4.15. Galat. 3.2.
Ephesians 1.13. Nay, all the particular persons and Churches writ unto, their faith
and conversion is ascribed to the preaching of the Word, as the only outward
means, as might easily be manifested.

Reas. 6. The sixth Ground (which is sufficient if there were no other.) The
good pleasure and appointment of God: He in his eternal Wisdom has ordained
the preaching of the Word as the only, ordinary, outward means for the
begetting of faith; as Isai. 57.19. I create the fruit of the lips, peace,
peace to him that is a far off, and to him that is near, says the Lord. By
Peace, peace, we are to understand abundance of peace, which is a fruit of
faith: By the fruit of the lips, the Ministry of the Word. And observe the word
Create, that is, I ordain: the meaning of all is, I ordain and appoint the
Ministry of the Word as the only ordinary means of faith, the mother of true
peace. And James 1.18. Of his own will begat he us with the word of truth. Why
did he beget us to the Faith with the word of truth? Because he would, because
he so pleased. And Romans 10.17. So then, Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by
the word of God. How comes the hearing of the Word preached to be the means of
faith, the only, ordinary, outward means of Faith? By the Word of God; that is
to say, by the ordinance and appointment of God. And so 1 Corinthians. 1.21. For
after that in the wisdom of God (this frame and Government of the world,
wherein the wisdom of God shines so clearly) the world by wisdom (to wit, by
that wisdom) knew not God; it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching (a
means which the world holds foolish) to save them that believe. First to beget
faith in them by this means, and then by faith to save them. And to the same
purpose are the places following, Luke 1.16. Acts 26.17, 18. and 2 Cor. 5.16,
19, 20. Thus you see that the point is very clear and evident that the
preaching of the Word is the only, ordinary, outward means for the begetting
of faith.

But before we come to the Application, we intend to answer some Questions and
Objections.

First, Two Questions. The first Question, What Preaching is? 2. What are the
signs of such Preachers as are the most likely to beget faith in men and women?

Quest. 1. What Preaching is?

Answ. Preaching (in a general and large sense) is to declare, or any ways
make known the will of God unto man. In this sense every declaration of the
will of God (be it by way of his Mercies, Judgments, or Creatures) may
improperly be called Preaching, as Psalm 19.1. And in this general and large
sense, Reading also may be called Preaching.

But Preaching in a more special and proper sense is a public action of the
Minister, whereby he opens and expounds the Scriptures, and applies them to the
use of his hearers: Nehem. 8.8. and 2 Timothy 2.15. This is the Preaching which
our Savior intends, Mark 16.15. and the Apostle Paul, 2 Timothy 4.2. and which
the same Apostle implies, Romans 10.17. as is plain, compared with ver. 14 of the
same Chapter: and so that kind of preaching which the Catechism speaks of, This
kind of preaching being the only, ordinary, outward means for the begetting of
faith.

Quest. 2 What are the signs of such Ministers and Preachers, as are the most
likely to beget faith in men and women?

A. 1. When Ministers are laborious and industrious (hence it is that the
Ministers of God in Scripture are called Stewards, Husbandmen, Laborers,
Criers) when in their private studies they give attendance to reading, 1 Timothy
4.13. when they are often in the Pulpit, 2 Timothy 4.2. and there zealous, Isai.
58.1. Such Preachers (as it were) compel men and women to come in.

2 When Ministers are much given to Prayer, Acts 6.4. 1 These. 3.10. Do but
observe how fruitful the pains of such are.

3 When Ministers preach distinctly and plainly Jer. 15.19. 2 Timothy 2.15.

4 When they are of holy lives and conversation, Acts 11.24.

5 When they are much, but unjustly opposed and persecuted by Satan and his
instruments (so were all the Prophets and Apostles) this does not a little
enlarge them in their pains. Let but the people of God observe the fruit of a
persecuted Ministry.

6 Lastly, When Ministers already and formerly have been instruments to beget
faith, the blessing of God has formerly attended their pains this way; as the
Apostle could tell the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 4.15. and 9.2. Those that have begot
to the faith, are likely still to be instruments in that kind. Now we come to
answer some Objections.

Object. 1. What will you say then of our Ancestors and forefathers (that did
not enjoy Preaching) what, did they all die without faith, and so consequently,
are they all damned?

Ans. This were a very harsh and uncharitable censure: And yet first, it must
needs be granted, that we in these times are much bound to God for the
plentiful fruition of the Ordinary means, to wit, the preaching of the word. 2
That the case of the multitude in the times aforesaid was very fearful and
lamentable, according to these places of Scripture. Prove. 29.18. and Acts 17.30
The times of this ignorance God winked at, or regarded not; that is, cared not
what became of them that lived in those times: This the Apostle Paul speaks of
those Gentiles that lived in those times when the ordinary means was not
enjoyed. And Acts 18.10. As though where the Lord has much people, many of his
Elect; he does use to send the Ministry of the word.

But notwithstanding the premises, it cannot be denied, but that the Lord had
some of his Elect in all ages; and no question, did work faith in every one of
them, either by other means (when they did not enjoy the ordinary means) or
else immediately. For in extraordinary times (when the ordinary means can
neither be had for cost nor labor) the Lord works extraordinarily, in so many
as belong to election. As at this day he works in Elect infants (that are taken
away by death before they come to years) and so in natural fools, distracted
people, and such as are born deaf, belonging to election.

Object. 2 But may some man say, me thinks the reading of the ^criptures should
be as good a means for the begetting of faith, as preaching.

Answ. First, I am so far from speaking a word against the reading of the
Scriptures, as I could earnestly desire that men and women were more frequent
and constant in that exercise; that in private (as a part of their family and
secret devotions) they would more diligently exercise themselves in the reading
of the Scriptures. And further, that they would make more conscience of
attending unto the Scriptures read in public, and not do as some, who cast not
to come to the Church or Chapel until the Minister be ready to go into the
pulpit: The reading of the Scriptures privately, and the attending unto them
read publicly, does not a little prepare and further people to profit by
preaching.

2. I answer, You do ill to compare reading with preaching; preaching being a
more likely means of knowledge, and the increase of every grace, then reading. A
man comes into a Wardrope where many rich garments are folded up together in a
narrow room; this is something: But these garments being unfolded and laid
forth to his veiw particularly; this is a great deal more for his information
and satisfaction: what is a heap of corn, to corn threshed out, and ground? a
loaf of bread in the lump, to a loaf divided and cut in pieces?

3. We must give that ordinance leave to be the ordinary means for the
begetting of faith, which the Lord in his wisdom has appointed, 1 Cor. 1.21.
It is Gods wisdom, not ours, that must appoint the ordinary means of faith.

Now we come to the Application.

Use 1. For reprehension: First, To reprove diverse in the Ministry.

First, Such as take upon them pastoral charge and have no skill, no ability
to divide the word, to expound and apply the Scriptures to their congregations:
those are they whom the spirit of God calls dumb dogs, Isaiah 56 10. It is true
indeed, many men and women praise and like well of such Ministers, say they are
honest, quiet, and peaceable men, and would have all well with little ado. But
the truth is, they are but criers without voices, messengers without legs, and
nurses without milk; and to speak plainly, no better then soul murderers. And
were but the eyes of their people opened, they would be so far from praising
and likeing of such Ministers, as they would account them an heavy and
intolerable curse. Prove. 11.26.

Secondly, To reprove such Ministers as have ministerial gifts, can preach, and
yet seldom do. The former we may call idol Ministers, and these idle Ministers:
Do such Ministers take the best, and likeliest course to beget faith in their
hearers? do they imitate the Apostles? Acts 6.4. Do they in this slothful way
of theirs behave themselves as Gods seedsmen? Eccles. 11.6. as Gods husbandmen?
1 Cor. 3.9. The husbandmans work (we know) is never at an end; Spring, Summer,
Autumn, Winter; what vacation to him in any of these seasons?

Thirdly, To reprove such Ministers as preach, and that frequently; but not to
the capacities of their hearers, and so as in likelihood they may profit; with
their quaint conceits, their mixture of languages, and their confused method,
they only tickle the ears of their people, but are never likely to come near
their hearts. The day of Penticost, when cloven tongues rested upon the
Apostles, Acts 2.6. They speak to every man in his own language. And so Nehem.
8.8. 1 Cor. 2.1, 4. And Acts 14.1. Paul and Barnabas had a regard to the manner
of their preaching; and see the effect of it; a plain methodicall, and
powerful preaching is the likliest to beget faith.

Fourthly, To reprove such Ministers as preach, and preach frequently, and
plainly; but their lives are blemished with some scandalous sin or other they
live in the practice of, Isaiah 56.11, 12 I do not deny, but such Ministers may
be Instruments to beget faith; yet

1. They are not in all points so qualified, as is fit the Ministers of God
should be: Titus 1.7.

2. They cannot upon good grounds expect such a blessing upon their pains, as
holy Ministers may; Acts 11.24. The bad life of a Preacher, does not a little
disgrace Preaching, and hinder the powerful effect of it in the hearts of his
Hearers; Romans 2.21, 22, 24. 1 Samuel 2.17.

As this Use of Reproof does extend it self to Ministers, so likewise to the
people, or Hearers; diverse of them being very careless of this Ordinance, (the
plain and powerful Preaching of the word;) and so consequently of faith: as

1. Such as live in places where this great blessing is, and yet do not value
it, highly esteem of it; and this they manifest diverse ways: 1. Being so ready
to speak evil of their painful Watchmen or at the least ready to entertain
evil reports of them, contrary to that 1 Timothy 5.19. 2. So unwilling to impart
to their outward maintenance, contrary to that, Galatiuns 6.6. and 1 Cor. 9.11.
See 2 Samuel 24.24. 3. By partaking of their pains so seldom: It may be
sometimes they will hear a Sermon (when they have little else to do,) but do
not hear constantly; contrary to that, Prove. 8.34. and 2 Timothy 4.2. Preaching
and hearing are Relatives, Ministers must not Preach to the walls.

2. To reprove such people, as live in places where Preaching is not, and yet
do not cast to remove to such places, as where it may be enjoyed; and in the
mean time, do not take pains upon the Sabbath and other days, to partake of
this Ordinance where it may be had. Surely such people little weigh the
Doctrine in hand, neither the places of Scripture following, Prove. 29.18. Mat.
15.14.

3. To reprove such people, as being to remove from one place to another, to
settle their abode never enquire after this one thing necessary; or if they be
to send their Chidren abroad, to live in this service or that, never think of
it, what Minister they shall live under, whether a dumb Dog, or a Preaching
Minister. It may be, (nay no question) if themselves be to remove, they will
enquire of the Air, Water, and other outward commodities and conveniences. And
so for their Children, whether they shall be sure to have their wages paid
them, to have meat and drink enough: but for them or theirs, living under a
conscionable and painful Ministry, is no part of their care.

4. Especially to reprove the profaneness of such as cry out, that it was
never good world since there was so much Preaching, so many Preachers. That
say, (or at the least think) of all Callings and conditions of men, Preachers
might be best spared. But how contrary these men are to God, do but see Jer.
3.17. Isaiah 30.20. 2 Kin. 2.12. and 2 Chronicles. 17.9, 10. Thus much now for this
Use of Reprehension.

Use 2. For Information. 1. To let us see how great cause we have to pity such
as do not enjoy the Preaching of the word; such poor souls sitting in darkness
and the shadow of death: and so, little likelihood of their attaining to the
grace of faith; the Preaching of the Word being the only ordinary means that
way, as we hear in the Doctrine. And the more to be pityed such persons be,
because they do so little pity themselves; for who so little sensible of the
want of Preaching, as they that have it not? Well, although they do not pity
themselves, yet let us (who know them to be the objects of pity) in pity to
their poor souls, pray (and that earnestly) for their supply this way,
according to our Saviors example and command, Matthew 9.36. etc.

2. To let us see into the hopeful condition of such as do enjoy this
Ordinance, and constantly depend upon the same. If our friends, kindred live in
such places, where plain and powerful Preaching is, and they usually partake of
the same; (although for the present we conceive them in the estate of nature,
and their way and course but carnal) why yet they are people of hope, and there
is some probability of their conversions in due time. The principal end why the
Lord does send forth, and employ his Ministers, is to gather his Elect. And
their sending to places, does argue the Lord to have of his Elect there. And
why may not thy kindred and friends be of that number?

Use 3. For Exhortation. 1. To exhort Pastors. 2. People.

1. Pastors, that they would Preach, preach, preach; that they would be
diligent in the duty of Preaching, seeing it is the only ordinary means for
the gaining of souls, and for the winning of their people to God; and so they
shall manifest, not only a great love and affection to their people, and
Congregations, but likewise to themselves: 1 Cor. 9.16. Dan. 12.3. Nay even to
Christ himself, John 21.15. etc.

2. To exhort the People, that they would not appoint God by what means to
bestow faith upon them, but would submit to his appointment and Ordinance. Then
may a man assure himself of a blessing, when he seeks it in the Ordinance of
God, in that way which God has chalked out and appointed for that end and
purpose. Why does bread nourish us, rather then the grass of the field? It is
Gods Ordinance. And if the Lord will have faith to enter by the ear, as at the
first sin did; let us not stand reasoning with him, but submit to his
Ordinance. Oh therefore all men and women, that think they have souls, (and
desire the good of them) let them make out to this Ordinance upon the Sabbath,
upon the Weekday; borrow some time of the particular calling; hear in season,
and out of season; suffer not the body to sterve the soul, the particular
calling to ingross all your time from the general. Nay, call upon your
families, friends, and neighbors this way, Isaiah 2.3. As Philip called
Nathaniel, John 1.45. etc. And the woman of Samaria fetched her Neighbors to
come to Christ, John 4.29. So let us excite and stir up one another to this
Ordinance. And thus far touching the first part of the first Member; faith
comes only by the Preaching of the word.

Now in the next place, the Catechism acquaints us with the principal outward
means whereby faith is increased. 1. By the Preaching of the word, or the
hearing of the word Preached. 2. By the administration of the Sacraments. 3. By
Prayer.

The first outward means the Catechism mentions for faiths increase, is the
preaching of the word, in these words: And increases daily by it: And from
this passage we commend this point of Doctrine.

Doct. As the preaching of the word is the only ordinary outward means for the
begetting of faith, why so it is a very good means for the daily increase of
faith. More briefly. The preaching of the word, or the hearing of the word
preached, is a very good means for the daily increase of faith.

This Ordinance is like to a kind, natural Mother, which gives suck to the
Child which she has brought forth; it being, not only the seed of faith, but
likewise the daily food of it.

The Doctrine in hand is very evident, if so be we look into the Scriptures: as
Ephesians. 4.11, 12. Romans 1.11. 1 Thessalonians 3.10. Acts 14.21, 22. and 20.32.
And 1 Pet. 2.2.

If we would have the point further argued,

1. Take we notice of the promise of God unto true Believers, constantly, and
conscionably depending on this Ordinance; Mark 4.24.

2. Of the great hunger and thirst that is in true Believers unto this
Ordinance, Job 23.12. Psalm 27.4. Amos 8.12.

3. Consult we with experience. Such Believers, as take all lawful occasions,
and fitting opportunities to partake of this Ordinance, do they not come on in
faith, and the other graces of Gods Spirit? Psalm 51.8. But such of them as are
more careless of this Ordinance, suffer sloth, and every trivial impediment to
hinder them from it, (at the least on the week day;) is not their faith little,
and languishing?

Object. But may some man say, Do you think that Sermons on the week day are to
be attended and waited on?

Answ. Yes, no question, by all men and women that can possibly find time and
leisure from their particular callings, 2 Timothy 4.2. Acts 13.42. (in the space
betwixt that and the Sabbath, as it is in the Original.) And Luke 19.47, 48.
And when they cannot partake of this Ordinance (on the week day) without the
overthrow of their particular callings; yet surely then they ought to desire
after it, and to account them happy, that may take that liberty themselves may
not: as David (when he was hindered from Gods Public Worship) does express
himself, Psalm. 84.1, 2, 3, 4. Now we come to the Uses.

Use 1. To reprove some that profess themselves to have faith, but are too
careless of partaking frequently of this Ordinance; any little sickness, pain
or cold keeping them from the Public Assembly upon the Sabbath; and the least
worldly occasion hindering them from it on the week day. Such persons do not
imitate David, Psalm 27.4. nor Mary, Luke 10.39. but Martha. Such Professors
are not like to come on in faith, have little comfort of their faith, do not by
their profession much beautify the Gospel. And surely this neglect is one main
cause, why many old Professors, are but mean Proficients in knowledge, faith,
and holy conversation; and why they are so outstriped by young Professors, that
are more diligent in the use of this means: as Prove. 10.4. and 18.15. These
persons may think themselves wiser then those that are more forward; but when
their faith comes to be soundly tried, by any great affliction, they will (by
woeful experience) find the contrary: Fiery trials are to be expected, and
looked for of all Christians; and then a great stock of faith will not stand a
man in little stead.

Use 2. To incite and stir up all true Believers constantly to depend on this
Ordinance, and if their particular callings be such, as will not suffer them
often (on the week day) to partake of it, why yet let them partake in
affection; earnestly desire after this Manna, and bless God for the liberty
that others have in this kind. It is true indeed, those that are so forward
this way, shall be called Precisians, fools, and mad people, by the worldly
wise; and that they will gad to Sermons, until they have made all away, and
brought themselves to beggary; but Wisdom is justified of her Children: and if
the like aspersions (in the same case) were cast upon the Head, well may the
Members be contented; Mark 3.21. And for beggary which they object, let the
true Believer rather hearken to Gods Spirit, then to those Carpers and
Cavillers, 1 Timothy 4.8. Psalm. 34.10. and Matthew. 6.33.

Now that we may profit, more and more profit by partaking of this Ordinance, I
will lay down some directions. 1. Some things must be done before we come to
hear. 2. Some things in the act of hearing. 3. Some things after we have heard.

1. Some things must be done before we come to hear, as

1. We must come in hatred of all sin. That this must be labored and
endeavored, see Exek. 14 1. unto the ninth verse. And 1 Pet. 2.1.2.

2. We must come with our hearts as empty of all worldly cares and thoughts, as
possibly we can attain unto: Exodus 3.5. As Abraham, when he went to sacrifice
his son in the Mount, left his Ass and his servants a good space behind him;
Genesis 22.5. So must we put away, and abandon our worldly thoughts and cares,
when we come to hear the word; labor all we can to come with empty and free
hearts this way.

3. We must come with humble hearts, and hungry appetites to this Ordinance,
(being sensible of our great need of it, that we may be further builded up)
Psalm. 25.9. Luke 1.53. and 1 Pet. 2.2.

4. We must come with a readiness and willingness, to hear and learn every
truth the Ministry of the word shall commend unto us, (as well one truth as
another, suppose never so cross to our humors) Acts 10.33. And so Ministers
are enjoined to teach, (as they have time and opportunity) Matthew. 28.20. Acts
20.27.

5. We must come with a purpose and resolution to obey and practice, so far as
the Lord in his word shall reveal himself unto us, Psalm. 119.33, 34. John 7.17.

6. We must come in faith and confidence of a blessing upon our hearing,
according as God has promised, Isaiah 55.3. and 57.19. Do we not know what the
Lord has said of his word, Acts 20.32. James 1.21, Believe we this, and expect
we the truth of it in our hearing.

7. Before we come, be we earnest with the Lord by prayer, for a blessing upon
our hearing. We must be earnest in prayer for our Teachers. 1. That their lips
may preserve knowledge. 2. That they may be faithful, in delivering the whole
Council of God unto us. 3. That they may speak powerfully to our consciences;
all which we have comprised, Col. 4.3.4. And then for ourselves, that we may
hear to edification, Isaiah 48.17. Psalm 119.18. If we must pray before the
receiving of our bodily food, much more before the receiving the food of our
souls.

8. In coming to hear the word, we must cast to come timely, and not so
foreslow the time, as but to come to a piece of the Ordinance, Nehemiah 8.1.
Luke 5.1, 2, 3. and Acts 10.33. These things we have spoken of, must be done
before our hearing of the word, in way of Preparation.

2. In our hearing of the word, some things must be labored and endeavored: As

1. You must set your selves as in Gods presence, while you are hearing of his
word, (and this will be a good means to prevent sleeping, talking, reading
gazing about, and all other unreverent behavior.) See Psalm 2.11. Especially
whiles we are serving him in the duties of his immediate worship. Thus
Cornelius and his company, Acts 10.33.

2. In hearing of the word, we must attend diligently to what we hear; not
suffering any part of that which is delivered to overslip as, Revelations 2.7.
Luke 9.44. and Acts 16.14.

3. In hearing of the word, we must labor to hear with understanding and
judgment, Matthew. 15.10. 1 Cor. 10.15. and 1 These. 5.21.

4. In hearing of the word, we must labor to hear with affection and delight,
Acts 2.41. Mark 12.37. This kind of hearing will not a little help our
memories, nor a little encourage our Teachers, Psalm. 119.16. That this kind of
hearing does greatly encourage the Teacher, is evident by common experience.

5. In hearing of the word, we must apply to our selves, Matthew. 19.25. Matthew.
26.22. This is that which the Lord calls upon us for, Isaiah 55.2 Hearken
diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is good. The best food cannot nourish
us, unless we take it, and eat it; neither the word, if we do not apply it.
These things to be done in hearing of the word, if so be we would profit by it.

Now we come to the things that must be done after the receiving of the word.

1. We shall find this no little help unto us, to confer one with another of
the word we have heard, as soon as we depart the Public Assembly; Gods people
to repeat the Sermon one to another, and to confer of it (as they go home
together) one with another, Psalm 119.272. Psalm 37.30, 31. Luke 24.15.

2. If so be we would profit by the word, we must meditate, and seriously think
of that we have heard: All the things the blessed Virgin heard of Christ, see
Luke 2.19, 51. So the good man is described, Psalm 1.2. And David himself,
Psalm 119.15, 97. This is an excellent means to make the word our own and to
grow by it.

3. Such as are Domestic Governors, (if so be they would have those under them
to profit by the word) after the Public exercise (before they go to
Family Prayer in the evening) let them examine their Family, touching what they
have heard that day in Public, confer with them of the word they have heard,
repeat it unto them, Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. Thus our Savior with his Family, Mat.
13.51. Mark 4.34.

4. Be we earnest with the Lord in Family, and secret Prayer, to write his word
in our hearts, and to give us a kindly digestion of it; it being Prayer, both
before hearing, and after, that must sanctify this Spiritual food unto us. And
in Prayer, remember we to be earnest for the good (every way) of those faithful
Instruments, of whose pains we have partaked; 1 These. 5.25. Heb. 13.18.

5. A fifth thing after hearing, (if we doubt of any thing we have heard) Let us
in a reverent and humble manner, repair to the Minister for satisfaction and
resolution; Mat. 13.38. and 19.10. Mark 7.17.

6. Sixthly and lastly, Let us presently set upon the practice of that we have
heard, (this being the end of all our hearing) Psalm 119.60. Deuteronomy. 5.1. James
1.22. etc. And thus we have done with the first Member of the fifth Principle.

MEMBER II. As also by the Administration of the Sacraments.
NOw we come to the second Member of the fifth Principle, which acquaints us
with another good means whereby faith is increased; to wit, the Administration
of the Sacraments, in these words: As also by the Administration of the
Sacraments.

But before we come to speak of the Sacraments particularly, we intend (by way
of introduction) some questions of Sacraments in general: As 1. In what they
agree with the word, and in what they differ from it. 2. What Sacraments are.
3. What are the ends of Sacraments. 4. What are the parts of a Sacrament. 5.
The union of the parts, or Sacramental union, what it is. 6. How the Sacraments
of the Old and New Testament agree, and how they differ. 7. The number of
Sacraments now in the time of the New Testament. These questions being plainly
answered, we shall the better understand the Doctrine of Sacraments.

Quest. 1. How Sacraments agree with the word, and how they differ from it?

Answ. 1. They agree in their Author, the Lord being, as the Author of the
word, so likewise of all true Sacraments, Genesis 17.10. Exodus 12.3,.11. Luke 3.1,
2, 3. Matthew. 26.26. 1 Cor. 11.23.

2. The word and Sacraments agree in this, that the one as well as the other,
is to be dispensed by lawful Ministers, Mat. 28.19.

3. In that they both offer and reach forth one and the same thing; to wit,
Christ. Thus we see in what the word and Sacraments agree

Now they differ as follows.

1. The word declares Gods Will unto us by speech; the Sacraments by visible
signs and gestures; Sacraments being a visible word.

2. The word is as a Charter, or Letter-Patent, promising all good things in
Christ unto all true Believers. The Sacraments are as seals annexed to this
Charter, confirming what the word promises.

3. By the word, faith is begun and confirmed; by the Sacraments, it is only
confirmed.

4. The word pertains to all; the Sacraments only to such as make a
profession of the faith.

Quest. 2. What Sacraments are?

Answ. They are sacred signs and seals of the new Covenant. I call them
sacred, 1. Because they are ordained of God, (he being the Author of all true
Sacraments, as we have heard) 2. Because they are ordained to holy use; as we
may observe in this brief definition: then we say, They are sacred sig^es and
seals: do but see Romans 4.11. Now what the Apostle says of Circumcision, is
true of all Sacraments; the Lord in them (as it were by Oath) confirming unto
true Believers, that he will be their God; and they again (as it were by Oath)
binding themselves to be his people; which indeed is the sum of the new
Covenant: the Lord promising unto true Believers, that he will be their God,
and they repromising unto him, to be his people.

Quest. 3 What are the ends of Sacraments?

Answ. 1. That they might be a means to preserve and spread abroad the Doctrine
of the Gospel; Sacraments themselves being a visible word, and yet no
Sacraments (I mean the outward signs) without the word; to wit, the word of
institution: and then they occasioning the Preaching of the word.

2. That so the true Church might be outwardly distinguished from all other
Sects and Companies; she having Rites, Ceremonies, and Worship of Gods devising
and appointing, and not of man's.

3. That they might be bonds of mutual love betwixt the faithful.

4 That so true Believers might swear Allegiance unto God, bind themselves to
continue faithful and obedient unto him.

5. And especially, that they might serve to confirm the faith of Gods people
in Gods promises.

Quest. 4. What are the parts of a Sacrament?

Answ. Two. 1. The sign. 2. The thing signified

The sign is the Element, or Elements; as Water, Bread, Wine, and the whole
external action conversant about the same.

The thing signified, is Christ and his benefits; or the participation and
communion of Christ and his benefits.

Quest. 5. The union of the parts, or Sacramental union, what it is?

Answ. This union is a real union, Christ and the Elements are truly and really
united. Hence it is, that our Savior says of the Sacramental Bread, this is
my body; and of the Wine, this is my blood; Mat. 26.26, 28.

But this union is not a Physical or natural union, (as the Papists hold) as
though the sign were changed or altered in o the thing signified. Neither is it
a local union (as the Lutherans dream;) as though the thing signified were
locally present, as well as the sign: but it is a mystical and Spiritual union,
and consists in the things following.

1. A natural aptness in the sign, to resemble and express the thing signified.
As, does not water naturally represent and express a cleansing; and bread and
wine a nourishing and comforting?

2. The Lords appointing and applying of such and such Elements unto
Sacramental use: as Water, to resemble Christ in his washing and cleansing
quality; Bread and Wine, to resemble Christ in his nourishing and comforting
property. This being that, (to wit, the word of Ordinance) that carries the
soul of the Believer from earth to heaven, from the sign, unto the thing
signified.

3. The Lord ordaining and appointing the outward sign, not only to represent
and resemble Christ and his benefits, but likewise as an Instrument and Channel
to convey him and his benefits really to the soul of the true Believer; the
true Believer at one and the same time receiving the sign and the thing
signified; the one Corporally, the other Spiritually. And thus we see the union
betwixt the sign, and thing signified is real, but Spiritual; and wherein it
consists

Now from the union aforesaid, it is usual in the Scrptures, (by an improper,
but Sacramental speech) 1. To call the sign by the name of the thing signified;
and contrarily. 2. To ascribe that to the sign, which is proper to the thing
signified; and contrarily.

Quest. 6. How the Sacraments of the old and new Testament agree? and how they
differ?

Answ. 1. They agree in the Author, they all being ordained and instituted by
God. 2. They agree in the thing signified; to wit, Christ and his benefits: the
Believers of the Old Testament, being as well saved by Christ, as the Believers
of the New; Romans 4.11. 1 Cor. 10.4. Now they differ diverse ways:

1. In Rites and Ceremonies.

2. In clearness. The Covenant of grace was more hidden and obscure in the time
of the Old Testament, (Christ the Foundation of it being not then come) then in
the time of the New; and so the seals of the Covenant sutably: the Sacraments
of the Old Testament pointing at Christ to come, but the Sacraments of the New,
showing that Christ is come.

3. In efficacy. The Sacraments of the New Testament (in the ordinary course)
being more effectual then the Sacraments of the Old; a greater power of the
Spirit (in the ordinary course) going with ours, then did with theirs; our
souls being more persuasive and impressive then theirs.

4. They differ in number; there was diverse Sacraments in the time of the Old
Testament, not only Circumcision, and the Passover, (Sacraments ordinary) but
likewise extraordinary Sacraments; (or as some call them, resemblances) as the
Red Sea, the Cloud, Manna, and the water of the Rock. It is: true, there was no
more ordinary Sacraments in the time of the Old Testament (no more Sacraments
for being and standing) then in the time of the New.

Quest. 7. The last question. What Is the number of Sacramens in the time of the
New Testament?

Answ. Only two: Baptism and the Lords Supper; the former succeeding
Circumoision, the latter the Passover. And both these as durable as the
Church; to continue as long as a Church upon earth. These questions of
Sacraments in general, being answered, we shall come more clearly to speak of
either Sacrament particularly. But before that, we intend some Application of
what has been delivered.

Use 1. For Repnehension. To reprove the Papists.

1. For corrupting and adulterating the true Sacraments; as Baptism, with their
Cream, Spittle, and diverse other inventions. And the Sacrament of the Supper,
they turning it into a Sacrifice Propitiatory for the quick and the dead.

2. To reprove them for their false Coin, they having devised five Sacraments
of their own; as Orders, Marriagid, Confirmation, Unction, Penance. And thus in
the case of Sacraments they add, and adulterate; a woeful Religion! they must
needs err much as touching the Covenant, when they are so left to themselves
in regard of the Seals.

Use 2. For information.

1. To inform us touching the great goodness and bounty of G d toward his
Church and people; not only to afford them his Word, but likewise his
Sacraments; all means for their Spiritual good, all means for their being, and
we being in grace.

2. To inform us touching the necessity of faith, If so be we would receive any
good by Sacraments: it being that, and that only, which discerns, and lays
hold upon the thing signified. It is not the eye and hand of the body, that can
see and apply Christ; they can but extend to the sign: that which is Spiritual,
must be Spiritually received. Alas, the wicked and unbelievers, do but receive
the outward Elements, and to their further condemnations.

Use 3. For examination. In Sacraments, as the Lord swears to us, so we to him;
he to be our God for all good unto us; and we unto him, to be his dutiful and
obedient people. But how is the Covenant kept on our part? Where is our living
by faith, our growing in mortification, in self-denial? Where is our courage
for Gods truth, our zeal for his glory, our love to his Saints? Try we, try we
how far we have broken our Covenant; be we ashamed of it, bewail we it, and
labor we amendment. Alas! the most, they rest in the thing done, in a bare
formality, little stir up themselves to make good their promise ratified by
solemn oath; nay, are not earnest with the Lord to enable them this way. Thus
much touching Sacraments in general.

We come now to speak of the two Sacraments particularly. And first of Baptism,
and (going along with the Catechism) in this form of Doctrine.

Doct. The Sacrament of Baptism, is a good outward means for the increase of
faith. The Point is proved by these Scriptures; Matthew. 28.19. Mark 16.16. Acts
8.37. and 10.47. and Acts 18.8.

Reas. 1. Taken from the nature of Sacraments in general; they are not only
signs, but seals; the Lords greatest means for the confirmation and increase
of his peoples faith; he in them (as it were) taking oath for their full
security, Heb. 6.17, 18. So the Lord is pleased to condescend to our weakness,
and our belief; as (for the support and increase of our faith) he does not
only afford us his Promise, but Oath; not only his Covenant, but Seals.

Reas. 2. Taken from the Sacrament that Baptism succeeds, to wit, Circumcision;
Circumcision was a good outward means to confirm and increase faith, Romans 4.11.
and then can Baptism be of less use and efficacy?

Before we come to the use of the Doctrine, we intend to answer diverse
questions concerning Baptism.

1. What Baptism is. 2. The ends of it. 3. The parts of it. 4. The necessity of
it. And 5. The efficacy of it.

Quest. 1. What Baptism is?

Answ. It is the first Sacrament of the Gospel, whereby we are washed with
water, in the Name of the Father the Son, and the Holy Ghost; to signify and
seal our ingrafting into Christ, our communion with Christ, our new obedience,
and admission into the visible Church. Somewhat to open this description:

1. We say, It is the first Sacrament of the Gospel; because it is to precede
the Lords Supper. The sons and daughters of men, are first to be baptized,
before they approach, or should be admitted to the Lords Supper: that is, no
unbaptized person should adventure, or ought to be admitted to the Lords Table.

2. We say, Whereby we are washed with water; for so the word Baptism
signifies, a dipping in water, or sprinkling with water.

3. We say, In the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost: this
being the very form of Baptism that must be observed. And for the meaning of
these words, In the Name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; it
is as much as to say, as that the Party baptized, is consecrated to the worship
and service of the Trinity.

4. We say, To signify and seal our ingrafting into Christ, Gal. 3.27.

5. To signify and seal our communion with Christ: That is to say, to signify
and seal that we are made partakers of Christ and his benefits, Acts 2.38. Romans
6.3.

6. To signify and seal our new obedience, Mat. 3.7, 8. 1 Pet. 3.21.

7. Lastly we say, to signify and seal our admission into the visible Church:
As this was one end of Circumcision, so likewise it is of Baptism, which
succeeds Circumcision: Thus Saul was admitted into the visible Church, Acts
9.18. The Jailor and his Family, Acts 16.33.

Quest. 2. What are the ends of Baptism?

Answ. There be diverse ends of Baptism:

1. That this and that Party might be admitted Members of the visible Church,
John 4.1. as though Baptism were an outward mark of a Disciple, and a means of
admitting into the visible Church.

2. That it might be a pledge unto us of our ingrafting into Christ, the
remission of our sins, and Regeneration; Galatians 3.27. Acts 22.16. and
Titus 3.5.

3. That it might be a testification of our duty toward God, and a binding of
us to perform obedience unto him; and therefore Mark 1.4. it is called the
Baptism of repentance, or of amendment of life. And Luke 3.7, 8, 12.

4. That so we might be put in mind of afflictions, our supportation in them,
and deliverance out of them; (we being dipped in the water, or sprinkled with
water, but not drowned) afflictions (as we may see Matthew. 20.22.) are sometimes
termed by the name of Baptism.

5. That it might signify the unity of the Church, and might be a means of the
same, 1 Cor. 12.^3. Ephe^. 4.5.

^uest. 3. What are the parts of Baptism?

Answ. They are either outward, or inward. The outward is the sign, and the
word. The sign is the element of Water, and the Sacramental action on the
Ministers part, and on the Receivers part; the Sacramental action on the
Ministers part, is, not only his washing of the Party with water, but likewise
his putting the Party into the water, or toward the water; his continuing the
Party in the water, or toward the water; and his taking the Party out of the
water, or from toward the water. The Sacramental action on the Receivers part,
is:

1. The presenting of him or her unto the Minister to be baptized.

2. The receiving of external washing by water.

The other outward thing is the word.

1. The word of institution, or the Ministers Commission in this kind, Matthew.
28.19.

2. The word of promise, Mark 16.16.

3. The distinct pronouncing of this form: I baptize thee in, or into the Name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

The inward thing, or thing signified, is Justification and Sanctification. The
water represents, and shadoweth forth the blood of Christ, 1 John 1.7. The
Ministers washing of the Party with water, signifies and seals the double
washing aforesaid; to wit of Justification, and Sanctification; 1 Cor. 6 11.
The Ministers putting the Party into the water, or toward the water, signifies
and seals the Mortification of sin in the Party. The Ministers continuing the
Party in the water, or toward the water, signifies and seals the burial of
sin, or continual increase of Mortification in the Party; and his taking the
Party out of the water, or from toward the water, the Parties Vivification, or
raising up to newness of life; Romans 6.3, 4, 5. The Parties presenting to
Baptism, and his receiving of the external washing, signifies and seals, how he
consecrates himself to God and how he utterly renounceth the flesh, the world,
and Devil, 1 Pet. 3.21.

Quest. 4. What is the necessity of Baptism?

Answ. Baptism is not simply and absolutely necessary, so as there is no
salvation without it; for this were to make it equal with Christ's blood, and to
send all to the pit of Hell that die unbaptized; although the fault be no way
in themselves, or Parents. But yet it is necessary in part, or by consequence;
and in a double respect:

1 In regard of Gods Ordinance, the Lord having commanded it to be used, it is
necessary it should be used in obedience to his command. He that carelessly
neglects, or wilfully contemns any Sacrament which God does enjoin him to
use, let him look unto it, Genesis 17.14.

2. In regard of our need thereof; naturally we are dull in conceiving of
things Spritual, slow in believing the good things promised in the word, and
very doubtful to apply them to our selves; and therefore we have great need of
such helps and means.

Quest. 5. What is the efficacy o^ Baptism?

Answ. It is only effectual unto the Elect, and at what time the Lord sees the
fittest, and the best.

Now we come to the Uses:

Use 1. For Confutation. 1. To confute the Papists, and diverse ways:

1. They corrupting this Sacrament by adding unto water diverse inventions of
their own; as Cream, Oil, Salt, Honey, Spittle, Crossing, and the like. Thus
they go from the first institution, adulterating the Ordinance of God: Look we
at the first institution, and are not those their additions confuted, and to be
rejected?

2. To confute their absolute necessity of Baptism (as though none dying
unbaptized, could be saved) when not the want, but the continued contempt of
Baptism damnes; see Acts 2.39. and 1 Cor. 7.14.

3. To confute that Doctrine of theirs, they holding that this Sacrament
confers grace by the very work done; and so they equal it to the blood of
Christ, exclude the work of the Holy Ghost, and (upon the matter) affirm that
all baptized persons shall be saved. But do but see Acts 8.13, 21, etc. and
diverse other Doctrines the Papist have concerning baptism, which are directly
contrary to the Scriptures.

2. To confute the Anabaptists, who first, too much derogate from baptism; they
making it only a sign, but not a seal; a sign of Christian profession, but not
a seal to confirm faith, and a means to increase it; contrary to what has been
delivered, and unto that direct place, Romans 4.11. unto which Baptism succeeds.

2. To confute the Anabaptists their denying of Baptism to the Infants of
Christian Parents. But 1. Why not they to be baptized, as well as Jewish
Infants to be circumcised? 2. They being within the Covenant (as the Children
of Christian Parents are, Genesis 17.7. Acts 2.39) must not the seal needs belong
unto them? as see Act. 2.38, 39 3. This being typified in the time of the Old
Testament, which may be observed 1 Cor. 10. Children as well passing through the
red sea, as elderly people. 4. Christ's command, Mat. 28.19 the Apostles must go
into all Nations, teaching such as were capable; and so many as did submit to
the Gospel must be baptized, they, and their Children (Children being a great
part of any Nation) 5. Christ's example, Matthew. 19.13.14. And how must little
Children come to Christ, but in his Ordinances? and what Ordinance are they
capable of, but this? 6. The Apostles practice, Acts 16.15, 33. 1 Cor. 1.16. It
is not said, there was no little Children in those houses, or if there were,
that they were left unbaptized; but whole households baptized, without any
distinction or exception.

And as touching that objection of the Anabaptists:

Object. We do not read in the new Testament of any one particular Infant that
was baptized.

Answ. I answer. Neither do we read in the new Testament of any women to
partake at the Lords Table. But do they think no women did? or that women now
should not? Therefore those persons are to know, that to deny necessary
consequence, is to deny a great part of the Scriptures.

Object. But suppose the Parents be Christians by a general profession, but yet
their lives dissolute, may their Children be admitted to baptism?

Answ. First, We do not read of any Jewish Infant that was brought to be
Circumcised, which was put back for the wickedness of his parents.

2. The immediate parents are not only to be regarded, but also the Ancestors,
Romans 11.16.

Use 2. For Reprehension. First, To reprove such Ministers as take upon them to
baptize, and yet unqualified men; altogether unable to lay forth the Doctrine
of Baptism unto their people; meddle with that which themselves understand not.
Is such a person fit to represent God, who knows neither the nature of the
Covenant, nor of the Seals: Is it not (the Minister standing in Gods stead to
the people) as if the Lord sealed a Covenant to his people which he knew not
the meaning of, no nor of the Seals: Although I will not say, the Baptism of
such is a nullity; yet I may say warrantably, that such Idol Pastors have
nothing to do to baptize, it being an utter inverting, or absolute wronging of
our Saviors prescribed order, Mat. 28.19. and to the same purpose the Apostle
Paul, 1 Corinthians. 1.17. He being (and so all Ministers) sent first, and
principally to preach, and then to baptize.

2 To reprove the great presumption of such women as do take upon them to
baptize.

Object. But did not Zipporah circumcise her child? Exodus 4.24. etc.

Answ. The Question is not what she did? but ^hether she did well or no? In all
probability, not: First, because she seems (her husband being untowardly weak)
to prevent his doing of it. 2 She doing it in anger: And 3 With contempt of
Circumcision. But that it is unlawful for women to baptize, is evident, 1 Cor.
14.34. the Apostle, not permitting a woman to teach ministerially. And if not
to teach, why then not to baptize (baptizing being a Ministerial action as well
as preaching.) Therefore such women as have been guilty this way, have great
cause to humble themselves.

3 To reprove the most parents, few of them endeavoring to present their
children to baptism as they ought.

1 Not considering (and bewailing it) that they have been instruments to convey
sin and death to their children.

2. Not examining themselves whether they be in the Covenant or no, and so
their children infolded and comprehended, Genesis 17.7. Acts 2.39.

4 Not earnest with the Lord by Prayer, to remember his Covenant with them and
theirs, and to make it good to them and theirs.

4. Not stirring up their faith to apprehend the Promise for themselves and
children.

5 Not rejoicing to see their children admitted into the visible Church; nay,
to see their ingrafting into Christ confirmed and sealed by Baptism. Alas, the
most Parents make a mere complement and matter of form of it: and when it is
over, suffer their children (elder and younger) to run riot, never urging them
with the Covenant on their part.

4. To reprove such persons, as when Baptism is to be administered (without any
extraordinary occasion) depart the Congregation before, not staying until the
Ordinance be solemnized: As though they were unwilling to be put in mind of
Gods Covenant with themselves in Baptism, the great benefits sealed unto them
in the same: or rather, as though they had no mind to be remembered of their own
Covenant made with God in Baptism, as desirous to make good the same: nay,
hereby demonstrating themselves to have no voice in admitting others into the
visible Church; or seeming by their careless departure not to value their
privilege: Nay, hereby denying to do that office for others, which others have
done for them, to wit, to help in prayer for the party or parties to be
baptized.

5. To reprove diverse of Gods people, too seldom calling to mind their Baptism
(the Solemn Covenant in that Ordinance ratified and confirmed betwixt God and
themselves) And this is one reason why they are so weakly assured of Gods
favor, and of sins remission; why their corruptions are so strong and
unmortified; why their Graces are so weak and out of exercise; why they have no
more power and might against all their Spiritual enemies; why (after a fall)
they are so long in recovering and raising up again; not speedily considering
that Baptism (although but once administered) extends to all sins, past, present
and to come.

6. To reprove the most Baptized persons; having the badge of Christians, but
living like Infidels: the mark of God in their foreheads, but the mark of the
Devil in their lives and conversations; never seriously consider the solemn
Oath they took to God in Baptism; there swearing that they would renounce the
flesh, the world, and the Devil; how they there consecrated themselves to God,
but live as though they had then consecrated themselves to the Devil:
Christians in name, but the Devils slaves in deed, living in all manner of
disobedience and impiety, having taken Gods Press-money, but living to fight
against Him, his Ministers, his People, his Ordinances, his Laws. But let those
forsworn runagates know, that a woeful Strappado attends them in this life and
in the life to come. So much for this Use of Reprehension.

Use 3. For Trial and Examination; Whether we be inwardly baptized or no,
whether we find the efficacy and power of Baptism in some measure, or no: If we
do not, it is not the outward Baptism that will serve the turn. It was the
manner of the Jews to stand much upon outward privileges Jer. 7.4. Mat. 3.9.
Romans 2.25. and so we diverse of us, stand much upon our outward Baptism; but if
we be not inwardly baptized, we are no better (in Gods esteem and account) then
Turks and Infidels: and if we live and die without inward Baptism, our outward
Baptism shall but aggravate our condemnations. Outward Baptism (it is true,) is
the Seal of Regeneration, but the Word is the seed of it: therefore try and
examine we what work the Ministry of Gods Word has had in our hearts, whether
by this immortal seed, we be begotten to God or no, 1 Cor. 4.15. Ephesians. 1.13. 1
Pet. 1.23. Observe we what effect the Ministry of the Word has had in us: what
new light has it brought into our minds, what new quality into our wills; what
change has it wrought in our affections and conversations? Especially examine
we our affections: First, What love is there in us to God? Do we so love him,
as we must needs be often chattering unto him, calling him Father
affectionately? Gal. 4.6. 2. What love to Gods word and the Messengers of it?
Job 23.12. 1 Pet. 2.2. Acts 16.15. Gal. 4.15. Many that stand much upon their
outward Baptism, have no affection to the Word and the conscionable Ministers
of it; they cry out, There was never good world since there was so much
preaching. But where is the power and efficacy of the baptism of such? 3 What
love to the People of God? 1 John 3.14. But many a baptized person (of all
people) cannot endure them. Well, do we observe the renewing and change
aforesaid to be wrought in us? then we are baptized with the Holy Ghost. Can we
demonstrate our true Conversion by the Word? then the Seal is properly ours.
The more lively we feel the new Creature in us; the more we find the power and
efficacy of baptism.

Use 4 For Exhortation: 1. Te exhort Parents in presenting their children to
baptism, to examine themselves whether they themselves ever came into the
Covenant by an actual faith or no: If they have not, let them labor for faith
by a constant dependence upon the Ministry of the word: To present a child for
the Seal of Regeneration, and themselves to be in the estate of nature; alas,
what comfort can it afford unto them? A man to bring his child for the Seal of
that which himself has not, nay, which he has no affection unto; Is it not an
uncomfortable piece of business? But ^f the parents be come into the Covenant
by an actual faith; why then, let them make use of their faith in this business.

First, By calling to remembrance the free and gracious Covenant which God has
made with them and theirs, Genesis 17 7 Acts 2.39. that although their child, or
children (by natural generation) be lumps of sin, and under wrath, yet in
regard of Gods Covenant and free acceptance, they are beloved, holy, and
blessed.

2 By being earnest with the Lord to make this Ordinance effectual to their
child in his own good time.

3 By apprehending and fastening upon the Promise for them and theirs.

4 By rejoicing to see the livery of Christ put upon their child, their child
so honored.

5. By educating their children accordingly, Ephesians 6.4.

2 To exhort all Baptized persons.

First Such as are unregenerate and in the estate of nature, manifesting no
less by their way and course.

First, That they would consider what they are doing; even acting the parts of
treacherous and foresworne persons, proceed just contrary to their Vow and Oath
in Baptism.

Secondly, To consider what a deal of ingratitude they manifest to God, thus
abusing his Livery: he that prevented them with this Sign and Seal of the new
Covenant before they had any ability to conceive of it; that was found of them
before they sought him; that put a pledge into their bosoms concerning his
gracious meaning toward them, did they not show themselves careless of it:
nay, he that by his Sacrament so provoked them to embrace the Covenant.

3 To exhort them that they would never rest until such time as they have a
feeling of that renewing power signified in Baptism; to wit, the power of
Christ's death mortifying sin in them, and the virtue of his Resurrection
raising them up to newness of life. To this purpo^e let them be earnest with
the Lord in praye^ as well as they can, follow hard after the p^werful
preaching of the Word, that so they may attain to Regeneration, whereof Baptism
is the Seal. It is true, if they take this course they shall be called Puritans
and Precisians. But let them remember their solemn Vow and Oath in Baptism, and
not regard the malice of Satan, and the reproaches of men.

2 To exhort such as have true grace, are regenerate, often to meditate upon
their Baptism for the helping of their faith. Is any temptation violent? any
corruption strong? any grace weak? nay, has Satan and corruption given the
foil, prevailed in particulars? Why then, call to mind thy Baptism, Gods
Covenant with thee signified and sealed in it: this is an excellent way to get
up thy faith, and so to get thee up being fallen, and to keep thee up being in
the fight and combat. For we are to know, that the signification, force, use
and fruit of this Ordinance, does not continue only for a moment of time, but
for the whole course of a man's life. Thus much for Baptism.

Now we come to the Sacrament of the Supper; and commend the Doctrine of it
unto you in the point following.

Doctr. As the Sacrament of Baptism is a good outward means to increase faith;
why so especially the Sacrament of the Supper. But having spoken of Baptism,
take the Doctrine more briefly: The Sacrament of the Lords Supper is an
excellent outward means to increase faith.

Do but see 1 Cor. 10.16. As though the Apostle should say, The participating
of the Supper, is it not an excellent Sign, Pledge, and Means of our growth
in Christ, to increase our faith? And 1 Corinthians. 11.26. Ye do show the Lords
death; to wit, as to others, so to your own faith, for the increase and
confirmation of it.

Reason 1. The Sacrament unto which this succeeds (to wit the Passover) was an
excellent means this way; that is to say, for the increase and confirmation of
faith.

Reason 2. In the Sacrament of the Supper there is such a lively picture and
representation of Christ and his benefits, Galat. 3.1. Crucified among you, As
by the preaching of the word, so by the administration of the Sacraments;
especially by the administration of this Sacrament.

Reas. 3. This was one principal end why Christ instituted and ordained this
Sacrament, to wit, that his peoples faith unto the worlds end (in the
conscionable celebration of it) might be increased, and confirmed.

Now for the opening of this Doctrine, we intend to answer diverse questions. 1.
What this Sacrament is. 2. The difference betwixt it and Baptism. 3. The parts
of it. 4. What is to be done of us, that in the use of this ordinance, our
faith may be increased.

Quest. First, What the Lords Supper is?

Answ. It is the second or latter Sacrament of the Gospel, wherein by bread and
wine duly administered and received, the true believer is fed and nourished
unto eternal life.

A little to open this description. It is the second, or latter Sacrament of
the Gospel; because in order, baptism is to precede and go before it: wherein
by bread and wine, elements, first not very hard to be come by. Secondly, Very
apt unto the purpose appointed; to wit, to signify and seal spiritual food,
nay very apt (wine being appointed and afforded as well as bread) to signify
and seal a complete feast to the soul, full and perfect nourishment by the Lord
Jesus, the thing signified; Duly administered and received] that is, when the
persons administering and receiving, are rightly qualified; and the same rites
and actions punctually observed which the word of God prescribes and enjoynes;
the true believer he being the party only that is capable of this feast, and
unto whom it belongs, is fed and nourished unto eternal life. The bread and
wine not only representing the body and blood of Christ, but exhibiting and
conveying them to the soul of the believer for his spiritual nourishment.

Quest. 2. How the Lords Supper differs from baptism?

Answ. First, We will show briefly wherein they agree: Secondly, wherein they
differ.

They agree in these things. First, they both represent whole Christ to the
soul. Secondly they both seal up whole Christ to the soul (we mean by whole
Christ, as Christ for justification, so for sanctification.)

1 Now these Sacraments differ diverse ways. First, in order, baptism goes
before, and the supper follows; as being, goes before growing. Secondly, In
frequency; Baptism is but once to be received, the Supper often. We are but
once born; but after we are borne, we have need of frequent nourishment.
Thirdly, they differ in the elements and external rites. Fourthly in their
particular ends; Baptism being properly the seal of regeneration, but the
Supper properly the seal of growth, and confirmation. The former, the seal of
Christian being; the latter, the seal of Christian well being.

Quest. 3. What are the parts of this Sacrament.

Answ. They are either outward, or inward: The outward, as the sign, and the
word. By the sign we mean the elements of bread and wine, and the sacramental
action on the Ministers part, and on the receivers part. The The other outward
thing is, the word (the word added to the element, or elements, makes a
Sacrament.) Now by the word here we are to understand, First the word of
institution or command; do this Secondly, the word of promise; this is my body
which is given for you; this is my blood, which is she d for you. The inward
thing, or thing signified, is the body aad blood of Christ given and shed for
our sins; and our spiritual eating and drinking of them for our nourishment
unto eternal life.

Quest. 4 What is to be done of us, that in the use of this ordinance our faith
may be increased?

Answ. Something we must do before receiving; something in and about the act of
receiving. And something after we have received.

1. For the first part of the answer; what we must do before our receiving.
This the Apostle acquaints us with 1 Cor. 11.28. Let a man examine himself, and
so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup. Now we are to know, that
when the Apostle says, let a man examine himself, he does not leave it to our
choice and discretion; as let a man examine himself, if he so please. But the
Apostle speaks imperatively; that is, I enjoin and command from the Lord every
one, before they receive, to practice this duty of self-examination; that they
sequester themselves from all other occasions, and in their thoughts make
choice of fit time and place, and so seriously fall upon this business. And if
it be demanded, what we must examine our selves of or about. I answer, first,
whether we have some measure of saving faith or no. For first if we have no
measure of this grace, how can we expect an increase of it by the Sacrament; an
increase of that we are not at all possessed of? 2. If we have no measure of
this grace, what have we to do at the Supper of the Lord? it being an ordinance
to confirm and strengthen faith where it is already begun, and not to begin it
where it is not.

3. If upon serious examination we find no measure of this grace begun in us,
hereby we shall (or at least should) be occasioned more earnestly and
constantly to depend upon the ministry of the word, that this grace may be
wrought in us, and so in time, we fitted to approach to the Lords Table. And 4.
If upon examination it appear we have some measure of this grace; hereby we
shall not only be encouraged to present our selves at the Lords Table; but
hereby likewise, not only this grace of faith, but all other graces (fitting a
worthy communiacant) will be pointed, quickened, and stirred up in us; that so we
may more profitably and comfortably receive. And this is one main reason why
this duty of self-examination must be renewed as often as we partake at the Lords
Table, it being an excellent means to quicken and set on work the graces of
Gods spirit, that so we may receive more worthily. Now in affirming, a man must
examine himself before he partake at the Lords Table; it is not our purpose to
justle out self-examination at other times; as though a man were never to
examine himself but then: For he that does not practice a weekly, nay, daily
examination, it is to be feared, will be far to seek in this Duty, when he
should by it prepare himself to the Sacrament. Although we make some difference
betwixt the weekly or daily examination, and the examination before the
Sacramen^, the former being but a reviewing and considering of our daily
disobedience and unkind dealing with the Lord, every way so kind and gracious
unto us, the better to prepare and fit to secret prayer: But the latter being a
trial of our selves, how we are qualified as fitting Communicants.

Now to lay down some Marks and Signs of a true saving faith; 1 Do we observe
our selves very short in this Grace; and is it a trouble and grief unto us?
Mark 9.24. Many speak of a good faith they have had ever since they were born,
and thank God they have always been freed from doubting; but such persons are
far from a true saving faith. But if upon a true sight and sense of our
misery we would feign apply Christ, and the promise of pardon and forgiveness
in and through him, grieve because we can come no nearer Christ, and can get
him no nearer unto us. This is a good sign.

2. What means do we use that we may grow in faith? Do we pray earnestly for an
increase of it? Luke 17.5. many seldom or never employ themselves this way,
seldom or never pray for faith; an ill sign, whatsoever they think of
themselves. 2. Do we earnestly hunger and thirst after the ministry of the
Word, that so we may grow in this grace? 1 Pet. 2.2 Diverse regard not this
ordinance, are very indifferent whether they partake of it or no: This is a
very bad sign. 3. Do we love a Saint, as a Saint; even a poor man or woman
that we persuade our selves to be truly religious and godly, better then the
richest man or woman irreligious or ungodly? 1 John 3.14. Psalm. 16.2, 3. Many
persons, of all people, they cannot away with the forward in religion, have not
a good word for them; a very ill sign, 4. Is there in us an earnest endeavor
after universal obedience? although we daily take up our arrows short, yet we
do not favor our selves in this known sin or that, but mourn for it, strive
against it (although the corruption inward and unknown to others) Psalm. 18.23.
and 119.101. Heb. 13.18. But if our course be uneven; we obey in some things,
but have no care to obey in other things, in all things; it is an ill sign;
Mark 6.20. And such is the obedience of the most.

This is the first thing we must examine our selves of and about, to wit,
whether we have saving faith or no: which if we have not some measure of we
have nothing to do at the Lords Table; but if we come, come upon our peril;
and to the great indangering of our selves. And yet such persons must not sit
down satisfied without the Sacrament, but must earnestly (in the use of all
other means) labor for faith, that so at the length they may warrantably and
comfortably partake of this ordinance. This I say, is the first thing we must
examine our selves of and about, before our receiving, Whether we have some
measure of saving faith or no.

2. The second thing, we must examine our selves of and about, before we
partake at the Lords Table (if so be we be such as have formerly, and
heretofore worthily received) is how we have profited in faith and other graces
since the last time we received. The Lords Table is a feast of growth, and the
Lord expects at our hands that the oftener we come to his Table, the more we
should come on in grace. Now if upon examination we find our selves to grow, we
may come with the more boldness and courage, that so we may still make a
further progress (our experience of receiving good at this feast, putting us
on.) But if so be upon examination, we find our selves to have been bad
proficients, have suffered grace to go out of exercise, this or that corruption
to get head, we must be the more humbled and dejected. And the greater our
slips and falls have been, the more to make our hearts soft and tender by
courses of humiliation; the more earnest we must be with the Lord for pardon
and forgiveness, and that he would bless our approaching unto, and proceeding
at his table, that so we may renew our spiritual strength, and come on in the
course of Christianity.

And one thing we would add, even to those that carry themselves the most
holily and watchfully betwixt Sacraments; that seeing they gather and contract
so much rubbish and soil in the intermission, as they stand in great need to
quicken and stir up their desire to the Sacrament, and all other graces fitting
worthy communicants; that these, I say, would by extraordinary prayer (before
they come to the Sacrament) quicken, and stir up the graces of Gods Spirit in
themselves, that so they may receive the more worthily. And thus much now
touching what we must do before we receive, if so be we would receive to the
increase of our faith.

The second thing is, what we must do in and about the act of receiving, if so
be we would receive worthily; and to the increase of our faith?

Answ. Such as have prepared themselves, as aforesaid; First, must labor to
make sure to partake of all the public ordinances before the administration of
the Sacrament. they must not come dropping in when the Minister is at prayer,
or in his Sermon; but should take all the ordinances before them. 2. Betwixt
the Ministers going out of the pulpit and his repairing to the Lords Table;
stir up thy self by considering that now thou art upon a great business, to
renew thy covenant with the Lord, and the Lord with thee; he to continue thy
gracious, faithful and allsufficient God in and through Christ, for thy good
every way. And thou to continue his servant in better obedience then ever
hitherto thou have performed unto him: and as the Lord intends fairly and
faithfully toward thee; so earnestly desire and resolve the like toward him.
3. When the Minister does address himself to the Celebration; then seriously
summon thy outward senses and inward affections to attend the whole business
in hand. Let nothing done at this sacred feast fall to the ground, but employ
thy outward senses upon the elements, and upon the sacramental acts of
Minister and people; and consider with thy self (for the inciting and stirring
up of thy faith) that they are all signifying and sealing, as before thou have
heard: and so, whilst thou art thus employed, thou shall not only receive the
bread and wine of the Lord, but the bread and wine which is the Lord; as the
one outwardly, so the other inwardly. Thus we have heard what must be done in
and about the act of receiving.

Now we come to the third thing, what must be done after we have received.

Answ. 1. We must be willing to join with the congregation in praise and
thanksgiving; and so like wise in our liberality to the poor. Matthew. 26.30.
Heb. 13.16. 1 Cor. 16.1, 2.

2. After we are departed the congregation, we must labor to keep up our
faith, verily persuading our selves that the Lord will not fail a jot of his
covenant renewed with us; but as he has said, and sealed, so he will work in
us and for us. It is Satan's manner with some good communicants, presently after
they have received, to stir up in them thoughts of unbelief; as though their
communicating were to no purpose, but had been altogether in vain. But in this
case, let them remember that the flesh of Christ is meat indeed, and his blood
drink indeed; and that the Lord in the Sacrament does not mock the prepared
soul, but intends fairly and in faithfulness.

3. Sometime that day, in secret, take a survey and review of thy receiving;
what inward converse there was betwixt thee and the Lord in that business,
what secret signs and passages of love; how thy affections were stirred and
moved, and how they continue. Now in this survey and review, if thou find there
has been little stirring and moving, but rather deadness and dullness: then
thou have just cause to suspect that there was some great want in thy
preparation, which if (upon examination) thou perceivest, thou must greatly
humble and judge thy self, that so thou may not be judged of the Lord. 1 Cor.
11.31. But if upon examination thou find that thou seriously endeavoredst to
prepare thy self, as did befit this sacred business; although thou must be
sensible of the affliction, yet thou must not be too much dismayed, but in the
Lords means, wait the Lords time for the fruit of the Sacrament; remembering
what the holy Ghost says, Psalm. 97.11. Light is sown for the righteous, and
gladness for the upright in heart. Now on the contrary, if in this survey and
review thou do find thou did speed well at the Sacrament, that thou had
sweet converse with the Lord, thy affections graciously stirred and moved, and
so continue: Oh, then thou have great cause, 1. To bless and praise God. 2.
From this experience of his love to be confidently earnest with him, that thou
may daily find and feel the fruit of the Sacrament. And 3. Upon this ground,
have thou not cause to be forward to this feast another time; nay at all times
as thou see a call? And 4. and lastly, have thou not cause the more carefully
to look to the covenant on thy part; as thou have vowed, so to pay; as thou
have promised new obedience, better obedience, so to endeavor the performance?
Psalm. 76.11. and 116.14, 18. Eccles. 5.4, 5. And thus now we have answered the
fourth question; what must be done of us, that in the use of this Sacrament our
faith may be increased. We come to the Uses.

Use 1 To inform us touching the great wrong the Popish teachers labor to do
the people of God, as concerning this ordinance, by their altering, adding,
detracting, annihilating. 1. By their altering, they changing the nature of
this ordinance, turning this Sacrament into a propitiatory sacrifice for the
sins of the living and the dead; the Minister into a sacrificing Priest, and
the communion Table into an Altar. 2. By adding a multitude and world of
ceremonies to this ordinance, of their own inventing, and which have no
footsteps in the word of God; they so contrarying this business, as though
they were in hand with some masking show, or acting some stage play. 3. By
detracting, they depriving the people of the wine, as though they were
unwilling they should have a full meal. Nay 4. They altogether annihilating
this ordinance, by their cursed transubstantiation; teaching, upon the words of
consecration, that the elements cease to be, in regard of their substance; and
that they are changed into the body and blood of Christ. Thus, and many other
ways, do the popish teachers go about to wrong Gods people in regard of this
excellent ordinance, a special means which the Lord has appointed for the
increase and furtheranee of his peoples faith.

Use 2 To reprove diverse persons. 1. All such as adventure to this Sacrament,
not being qualified with saving faith; How can such persons expect an increase
of that which they are not at all possessed of? nay, what have such to do at
the Lords Table? The truth is, they have no call unto it; but in coming, they
partake unworthily in a high degree. If such as are true believers may partake
unworthily (as is very evident in the example of the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 11.17.
etc.) How unworthily do they partake? alas, what do all such when they receive,
but exceedingly profane this holy ordinance? And that this is no little sin,
do but see 1 Cor. 11.27. that is, guilty of the death of Christ. Now it is a
great sin to be guilty of the death of any man; but to be guilty of the death
of an innocent man, of the death of the innocent Lamb of God, of his death who
was God as well as man; how foul and horrible a crime is this? If the death of
Abel did lie so heavily upon the conscience of Cain, Genesis 4.13. How should the
death of the Son of God lie heavy upon their consciences that are guilty
thereof? And the Apostle tells us, to receive unworthily (as they must needs do
in a high degree, that have no measure of saving faith) is to be guilty of the
death of Christ: His meaning is, that all such as receive unworthily; do (upon
the matter) consent unto the horrible fact of Judas, and the Jews, in their
crucifying of Christ. But this is the misery, that men and women will not
believe the word of God, but their own thoughts, and conceits; what they will
say, or at least think. Are we not baptized persons? Do we not profess the
Gospel? Do we not come to the Church? And do we not come in our intents and
meanings, to receive good at the Lords Table? And will you make us guilty of
the same sin that Judas and the Jews were in their crucifying of Christ, and
to consent to that bloody and horrible fact of theirs?

I answer, the Apostle affirms no less of all unworthy receivers. And it is an
undoubted truth which you have heard; that all who are not qualified with some
measure of saving faith, receive unworthily in a high degree.

1. Oh then, first we see all persons grossly ignorant (coming to the Lords
Supper) to be in a woeful case; there can be no saving faith in such: this faith
ever presupposing some measure of knowledge in the mysteries of religion. Alas!
how many approach to this Sacrament, and cannot tell what a Sacrament is; what
this Sacrament is; what are the ends why this Sacrament was ordained; neither
how it should be received?

2. See we all p^ophane persons (coming to this Sacrament) to be in a
lamentable case; I mean swearers, drunkards, whoremasters, prophaners of the
Sabbath; etc. It being plain, that such have no measure of the grace aforesaid;
saving faith ever purifying the heart, Act. 15.9. And if the heart be in some
measure clean, it will appear in the life.

3. See we many others (partaking at the Lords Table) to be in a woeful case,
such as have some measure of knowledge; and it may be are of civil conversation.
But they are inward opposers of sincere preaching, and so of sincere
professors; they would either have no preaching at all, or else especially
approve of that which does the most tickle the ear. And so for professors of
religion that are forward, they have no mind, no affection unto them; think
they are but half witted people, factious, and turbulent; have no delight in
their company. Now such persons are far from the grace aforesaid. And this one
thing I would have you to take notice of; many we have, that are very forward
after the Sacrament in their kind, needs they must receive at Easter however;
and yet have no desire after the powerful preaching of the Word, care not much
whether they ever hear a powerful Sermon or no. That that we would give you to
understand of such persons, is this; that their desire after the Sacrament is
not a kindly desire, and from Gods Spirit; but a popish, preposterous, and
corrupt desire. Thus we have reproved the unregenerate and unbeleevers
adventuring to the Lords Table; and as you have seen their sin, 1 Cor. 11.27.
so you may the punishment attending them for the same, ver. 29. that is,
Judgment; temporal, eternal, if they do not truly and seriously repent for it.

The second branch of this use of reproof extends it self to diverse who are
qualified with some measure of saving faith. First, (the Lords Supper being
such an excellent means to increase and confirm faith) that they do no more
frequent it; when as they might often partake conscionably, and comfortably; no
impediment being in the way but their ignorance, sloth, or this needless fear,
or that. 1. Their ignorance, not thoroughly receiving information what an
excellent help this would be to their faith and other graces: and how the Lord
commands them to receive often; 1 Cor. 11.6. As for other ends, so to show
forth Christ's death until his coming to judgment. Or 2. Their sloth; they
being unwilling to set upon that preparation which is required of those that
receive worthily: as though this were so difficult a thing to those that use a
daily examination, and upon occasion inure themselves to courses of
humiliation. Or 3, This or that needless fear: As happily, because their faith
is so little, and therefore that they should not receive worthily: Whereas this
should greatly induce them to hasten to this feast of fullness for the
strengthening and increase of that they complain to be so little: the Sacrament
being the proper portion of such, especially belonging unto those truly
sensible of their wants. If we look at the first celebration of this ordinance,
we shall upon examination find, that our Savior did administer to those that
were far from perfection; nay full of infirmities. And thus we reprove diverse
true believers 1. for not coming often enough to the Lords Supper, no just
impediment lying in their way. 2. To reprove diverse true believers, who come
(and it may be frequently) to the Sacrament; but it is in a customary way, a
sleepy careless way, do not reexamine their faith, do not (by extraordinary
prayer) so stir up their graces, as befits them in the act of receiving, do not
earnestly labor spiritual consideration; summon their outward senses and
inward affections to attend the whole business in hand. And after they have
received, little observe the fruit of their receiving: Now such are to know,
that partaking in this manner at the Lords Table, they partake unworthily in a
degree. And hence it comes to pass, that they are so far from gaining
spiritual strength by this ordinance, as they occasion the Lord to bring diverse
temporal judgments upon them; as we may see in the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 11.30.
Oh therefore let all such know, they have great cause to mourn for what is
past, and better to look to the matter for time to come. And thus we have done
with the use of reproof.

Use 3 For Exhortation. 1. To exhort all such as have not some measure of
saving faith, earnestly to labor after it by a constant dependence upon the
ministry of the Word, that so in time, in due time, they may safely and
comfortably approach to the Lords Table. Alas, otherwise they will be so far
from receiving good by this ordinance, as they will eat and drink damnation to
themselves. The truth of it is, this ordinance is not to be carelessly neglected
by any of competent years, and wit; (for you must not think the Sacrament to be
a feast for children, fools, or the distracted and mad:) I say, it must not be
carelessly neglected ( Numb. 9.13.) by any of competent years, and wit: And yet
notwithstanding, none must approach unto it, but such as are qualified with the
grace of saving faith; for if they do, they partake unworthily in a high
degree; and so become guilty of the body and blood of Christ; that is, upon the
matter, join with Judas and the Jews in the death of Christ; approve of that
horrible fact of theirs, and so eat and drink damnation to themselves. And it
will not serve the turn, for those destitute of the grace of faith; to say,
they have received, and often received heretofore; they having the more to
repent of, and mourn for.

The second branch of this Use of ex hortation. To exhort all true believers,
and that diverse ways. 1. That they would often present themselves at the Lords
Table (as often as possibly they can) no just impediment lying in the way;
especially living in places where this ordinance is often celebrated. Do but
see 1 Cor. 11.26. Paul's (...) here implies (...); as often as ye do it,
therefore do it often; it being such a means not only to show the Lords death
one to another; but likewise to show it to our own faith, for the increase and
strengthening of it; and increase and help on this grace, and we increase and
help on all the other graces; and come on in grace, and corruption decaies.

2. To exhort all true believers in coming to the Lords Table, that they
earnestly endeavor to come preparedly, that so they may receive worthily (that
is to say) acceptably to God; and then no question it will prove a profitable
receiving to their own souls. Many true believers receive unworthily in some
degree, and fail much of the good they might receive by this ordinance for want
of due preparation; they are too slight in examination: and for extraordinary
prayer to be performed sometime before the day of their receiving, they are too
backwward unto, and too careless in.

3. To exhort them in the act of receiving, that they labor to discern the
Lords body; that is, put a difference, and distinguish betwixt the outward
elements, and common bread and wine; although not in their substance, why yet
in their use; and so seriously intend the whole business, stirring up their
inward affections by a serious employing of their outward senses; that so
Christ and his benefits may be received and welcomed into the arms of their
enlarged and extended faith. Many believers, in the act of receiving, fail much
in spiritual consideration, and so their affections are little moved and
inflamed. If 1. When the Minister sets apart the Elements, thou would
consider that even so God the Father from all eternity did set apart Christ to
be the Redeemer of mankind. 2. When he consecrates the Elements by the Word and
Prayer, thou would consider that even so in the fullness of time, God sent his
Son into the world to accomplish this work of Redemption. 3. When thou see
the Minister to break the Bread, and power out the Wine, thou would meditate
upon the accursed death of Christ, and shedding of his blood for all true
Believers. 4. When the Minister comes and gives the Bread and Wine unto thee,
if thou would consider that even so God the Father reaches and gives his Son
and all his merits unto thy faith. 5. When thou take and receivest the
Elements at the Ministers hands, thou would stir up thy self to apprehend and
receive Christ and his benefits by the hand of faith. And then sixthly, and
lastly, In eating and drinking the Elements, thou would earnestly endeavor
more and more nearly to apply Christ, and to feel thy Spiritual union with him:
Such consideration in the act of receiving, would be the way not only to
receive the Sign, but at one and the same time the thing signified.

4 To exhort all true Believers after they have received: 1. To labor to keep
up their faith, assuring themselves the Lord is no deceiver; but will be sure
to make good his Covenant with them. 2. As we have already heard; sometime that
day in secret take a review of thy receiving, and after it proceed as thou have
been directed. 3. Remember to make good thy Vows, and to demonstrate both to
thy self and others, that thou have got Spiritual strength by this Feast of
growth; thou walking more conscionably and comfortably in both Callings. Its
said of the fainting Egyptian, 1 Samuel 30.11, 12. when he had eaten and drunk,
that his spirit came again to him: So if thou eat and drink in faith, thy
Spiritual life will be revived, and thy strength increased.

And thus we have done with the second Member of the fifth Principle: Now we
come to the third and last Member.

MEMBER III. And Prayer.
THis Member acquaints us with another good outward means whereby faith is
increased, to wit, Prayer. And hence we commend this Point of Doctrine unto you:

Doctr. Prayer is one good means for the increase of faith. See Luke 22.32. I
have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not. So the father of the possessed
child thought Mark 9.24. And the Apostles, Luke 17.5. and Jude 20. Praying in
the Holy Ghost; that is, by the help and assistance of the Holy Ghost; this
being an excellent means to confirm and bring on faith.

Reason 1. This is a good means to increase any grace of Gods Spirit in us, and
therefore a good means to increase our faith. That it is a good means to
increase any grace of God Spirit in us, see Luke 11.13. How much more shall
your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask it? that is, the
Holy Spirit in a greater measure.

Reas. 2. Hereby faith is exercised; to wit, by faithful Prayer, and the more
faith is exercised, the more it grows and increases, Ephesians. 6.16, 18. Psalm.
6.8, 9. see we the former part of the same Psalm, and we shall observe David's
faith to get up in Prayer: So Psalm 62.2, 6.

R. 3 The Rule of Contraries: This duty omitted and neglected, faith goes out
of exercise, slackens and decays. Now we come to the Uses.

Use 1 For Trial and Examination: 1 Do we use Prayer? if we pray seldom or
never, let us not wonder if we be poor in the grace of faith; Prayer being the
key that opens all Gods Treasures. Such as are strangers to Prayer, cannot be
thoroughly acquainted with faith.

2. But do we use to pray? then in Prayer are we earnest after faith for an
increase of this grace? Many in prayer are more for temporal things then
Spiritual: but this is to pray in a carnal manner. And diverse in prayer that
beg spiritual Blessings, and yet sue for them but in a carnal way; not seeing
any beauty and excellency in them, neither finding any taste or relish in
them; but only because they are convinced they cannot be saved without them. So
then the Question is. Whether in Prayer we be more earnest for faith, and the
other Graces of Gods Spirit, then for Temporal Blessings. And then in suing for
spiritual Blessings; whether the beauty we see in them, and relish we find in
them, do much induce and move us to be earnest at the Throne of Grace for them.

3. Do we use Prayer? and in prayer are we earnest for faith in the manner
aforesaid? observe we then the fruit of our praying, Psalm. 85.8. He will speak
peace to his Saints; to wit, by stirring up and increasing their faith. Surely,
suing for faith, as aforesaid, we shall (upon examination) find an increase of
it. And this is the great wheel in the Clock; come on in this grace, and come
on in every sanctifying and saving grace.

Use 2. For Inquisition. Seeing Prayer is one good means to increase faith, to
enquire into the Doctrine of Prayer. As first, What Prayer is, and the parts of
it? 2. The necessity of prayer, and the Motives to it. 3. The Objections
against Prayer, and the Answers of them. 4. The Qualifications of true and
acceptable prayer.

First, What prayer is, and the parts of it?

Answ. We are not now speaking of the requests and suits we make one to another
(in our civil converse here in the world) which may be called civil prayer. But
of Religious Prayer which we thus describe. It is an opening of the desire of
the heart, or a pouring out of the foul to the Lord. 1. I say, It is an opening
of the desire of the heart, or a pouring out of the soul. See Psalm. 62.8. 1 Samuel 1.15.

2. I say, It is a pouring out of the soul to the Lord, he only being the
object of religious prayer: it is he and he only that sees and knows the heart:
he and he only which is present in all places, to hear the prayers of all his
people: he and he only which is Almighty to help.

Now the Parts of prayer. In Scripture we find diverse divisions of prayer: but
in 1 Timothy 2.1. we have the parts of prayer punctually laid down: 1.
Supplication. 2. Precation, or petition. 3. Intercession. 4. Thanksgiving. By
supplication we understand humble suit to the Lord for his favor, and pardon
of sin; and in this part of prayer, we have the confession of sin implied. By
precation or petition, the second part of prayer, we understand a begging of
all other things needful for soul and body. By Intercession, the third part of
prayer, we do not understand an entreating for others (as diverse interpretors
do) for not only this part of prayer, but all the parts of prayer are here
enjoined to be performed, as in the behalf of our selves, why so in the behalf
of others. But we understand by it a contending with God for the prevention and
removal of judgment. By Thanksgiving, the last part of prayer, we understand a
rendering praise to God for his blessings and mercies. Thus then we see that
prayer consists of 4 parts, Supplication, Precation, Intercession, and
Thanksgiving.

Now we come to the second thing concerning prayer, to wit, What necessity of
it, and the motives unto it.

I answer, It is an excellent part of Gods worship Psalm. 95.6. where, by bowing
down and calling upon God, is meant, to worship him. Hence the place of Gods
worship (by way of excellency) was called the house of prayer, Isa. 56.7.

2. By the duty of prayer the Lord is much glorified; for hereby, all his
attributes are acknowledged: Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity confessed:
The purity and holiness of his Law subscribed unto: His promises in the
Gospel professed to be believed, the accomplishment of them to be hoped for,
and expected: and he blessed and praised for his mercies.

3. Gods command. The Lord commands us to pray, Psalm. 105.4. 1 These. 5.17.

4. The example of Christ, and all the worthies mentioned in Scripture. Luke
3.21. and 9.18, 28, 29. and 6, 12. And so all Gods people mentioned in holy
writ (they all were adicted to prayer.

5. The misery that attends those that neglect this duty, Jerem. 10.25. Matthew.
26.41. Ezekiel. 22.30, 31. Dan. 9.13.14.

6. This is a good means to easy our hearts. This Hannah knew well, 1 Samuel 1,
15. And Job, Job 16.20. And so all practial Christians.

7. Our continual, and innumerable necessities, inward and outward.

8. The promise of supply and help, Psalm. 50.15. and 91.15. Matthew. 7.7.

9. The dignity of this duty; hereby a mortal worm has conference and
converse with the greatest majesty.

10. The power and efficacy of prayer compare Genesis 32.11. and 33.4. And 2 Samuel
15.31. and 17.23. See Exodus 14.15. and 15.25. Matthew. 17.21. Remember Hezekiahs
and Isaiahs prayer, and so Esters and Mordecai's. In the primitive Church, Anno
175 the army of Christians was called the thundering legion; because upon their
prayers God scattered their enemies with thunder. And the very heathen in those
times could observe, that the Christians were able to obtain any thing by
prayer. And what man or woman of religious observation (in these our times) but
may speak of the efficacy and power of prayer. Now we come to the third
particular, the objections against prayer.

Object. 1 May some ignorant men and women say, the Lord knows our wants before
we pray: and then to what purpose should we pray?

Answ. We do not pray because the Lord knows not our wants. But

1. Because it is his command that we pray, Phil. 4.6. 2. That we may
demonstrate our selves sensible of our wants, which the Lord will have us to
be, Psalm. 34.18. 3. Hereby we acknowledge the Lord to be the fountain of all
good. 4. This is the condition the Lord ties us unto, if so be we would have
him to impart his blessings unto us, Prove. 2.3, 5. Jer. 33.2, 3. Matthew. 7.7.

Object. 2 But the Lord in his eternal counsel has decreed what blessings we
shall have, and what blessings we shall not have; and his decree cannot be
altered.

Answ. All this is true; but yet as the Lord has decreed the end, why so the
means; and in the ordinary course by the means works to the end. The Lord had
decreed to give the Gentiles to Christ; but yet see what he says unto him,
Psalm. 2.8. Ask of me etc. And so he had decreed (as he was pleased to make
known) the return of the Jews out of the captivity: Yet see what he says,
Ezekiel. 36.37. I will yet for this be enquired of by the house of Israel. Nay
Daniel knowing the very time when this great deliverance should be, does not
thereupon forbear prayer, but is the more earnest in prayer, Dan. 9.2, 3. And
the Prophet David, although it were revealed to him that the Lord would
establish his house, and the kingdom upon his posterity, yet does not cease to
pray in that kind, but rather prays, 2 Samuel 7.11, 12, 18, 19, 25, 26, 27, 28,
29.

2. I answer, Although by prayer we cannot alter Gods decree, why yet by prayer
(it being hearty and holy) we alter our selves; the heart thereby being put
into a fitting frame, and so we made capable of Gods blessings.

Object. 3 But there be diverse men and women that are far from the practice of
true and kindly prayer, who enjoy the blessings of God in great abundance.

Answ. It is true, but yet sanctifying grace (which is the best blessing) they
do not enjoy the least measure of it: sanctifying grace and kindly prayer, they
ever go together; want the one, and want the other; and have the one, and have
the other. Zach. 12.10. It is but outward blessings, and common graces at the
most, which unpraying persons do enjoy.

2. These blessings which the persons aforesaid do enjoy, they enjoy them
rather for the good of others, then for the good of themselves; suppose health,
wealth, strength, wit, learning. Cyrus was a man of great parts and power; but
was it not for the good of the Church, rather then for his own good? Isa. 45.4.

3. There is a great difference betwixt the having of blessings through the
providence of God, and the having them from the mercy of God, and his special
love in Christ. Unpraying persons have blessings only the former way, and not
in mercy.

4. The blessings such have, it were better for them to be without them, they
proving but snares unto them; and they living to abuse them to their own utter
overthrow.

Object. 4 But there be diverse that use prayer, and have prayed for this and
that blessing a long time but yet come short of it.

Answ. This may be true; and for the reasons, and upon the grounds following.

1 It may be the parties we speak of, live in some known sin, or sins,
unrepented of; and then what promise have they of audience? Psalm. 66.18. Job
11.13.14.

Or 2. It may be they ask such things as would not be good for them to enjoy;
and then it is no unkindnesse, but love in the Lord, to deny them. See we how
the promise runs, Psalm. 34.10. Matthew. 7.11.

Or 3. It may be they ask in an evil manner; in their prayers prefer temporal
blessings to spiritual; or if they be earnest for spiritual blessings, it is
not because of the excellency and beauty of them; but only because of the
necessity of them, because without them they cannot be saved. Or it may be,
they ask heedlesly, and irreverently; do not consider of the Lords majesty and
greatness. Psalm. 2.11. and 5.7. Or it may be they ask coldly and faintly, Jam.
5.16. and are such suitors like to speed? Or it may be they go in a proud way
to God, as the Pharisee, Luke 18.11. not with a through sense of their own
unworthiness and wants, as the Publican and Prodigal, Luke 18.13. and 15.21.
Or else it may be, they do not ask in faith; that is, do not lay the promises
before them, grounding their confidence upon them. Or do not in their prayres
set before them the worthiness of their advocate and high Priest, who sits at
his fathers right hand to present their prayers unto him, and to make them
acceptable unto him. Now the persons we are speaking of, asking in an evil
manner (to wit, in the manner aforesaid) it is no wonder that they speed no
better, Jam. 4.3.

Or 4. Suppose they do not live in any known sin unrepented of; and that the
things which they ask would be good for them in Gods time, and that they pray
in a right manner. Suppose all these things; why yet there may be diverse good
reasons why the Lord does defer and delay them. As 1. Hereby to make trial of
their faith, as we may see in the woman of Canaan, Matthew. 15.22. etc. Although
the Lord did intend to grant her suit; yet he deferred her, and put her off
long; and all for the trial of her faith, ver. 28. Or 2. He defers them the
more to humble them; He intended to take from Paul that messenger of Satan
wherewith he was b^ffeted; but not so soon as he would have had it, Paul was
not yet sufficiently humbled, but in danger to have been puffed up with his
former revelations, 2 Cor. 12.7, 8.9. As if the Lord had said; it is too soon
for thee (Paul) to be rid of that thorn; thou must be brought to a greater
pitch of humilliation. Or 3. He defers them to make them more earnest and
importunate in prayer, as we may see in the examples before alleged (to wit
the woman of Canaan and Paul.) Or 4. He defers them lest they should think that
they merited by their prayers (although never so fervent.) Dan. 9.17, 18, 19.
Or 5. He defers them that they might be more able to use, and manage those
blessings he means to bestow upon them. This was one cause why he deferred to
bring David to the kingdom, that he might be the better able to manage it when
he came to be possessed of it. 6. Or lastly, He defers them that he might cause
them to account more highly of the good things they obtain of him by prayer.
The good things that are easily and readily come by, are usually lightly
esteemed: After the Spouse had lost her welbeloved long, it is said, Cant. 3.4.
She held him etc.

5. And in the last place, for answering of the objection; we are to know, that
the Lord grants requests diverse ways.

1. When he gives the particular blessing begged. As Genesis 20.17. 1 Samuel 1.27.

2. When denying the particular thing begged, he gives a better thing. As Genesis
17.18, 19, And 2 Samuel 12.16. compared with verse 24.25 of the same chapter.

3. When though he neither grant the thing begged, nor a better thing in the
same kind; why yet he supporteth by his grace, and gives strength to bear the
want of it. As 2 Cor. 12.9. And Psalm 138.3. Hebr^ 5.7.

4. When the particular blessing begged is not given and afforded; why yet the
Lord warmes and cheeres the heart, by assuring that the person and prayer is
accepted, Philip. 4.6, 7. Psalm. 35.13.

5. Lastly, When the particular blessing is not obtained, neither inward
comfort afforded, and yet the Lord gives to hold out in prayer: ability and
strength to pray when God seems to neglect, is a special work and fruit of
Gods Spirit. Romans 8.26. Now God cannot but hear and regard the voice of his own
spirit: for verse 27. he knows, that is, approves it. And Psalm. 10.17. See
also thus have we answered the main objections against prayer.

We come now to the fourth thing propounded touching prayer, to wit, the
qualifications of true and acceptable prayer: or the conditions, and requisites
of acceptable prayer.

First, the person or party praying must be in Christ, and such an one as does
not live in the practice of any known sin, Genesis 44. God had respect first to
Abel, and then to his offering. See Jam. 5.16. Psalm. 4.3. If the party be not
in Christ, or evangelically contrite, he has no promise of audience: or if the
party live in the practice of any known sin, what promise of audience? Psalm.
66.18. Joh. 9.31. God hears not sinners: that is, living in the practice of
known sin. So 1 John 3.22.

Secondly, If we would put up acceptable prayers, we must make sure that our
suits and requests be grounded upon the word, that we ask nothing but what the
word of God warrants us to ask: we must not ask as seems good unto our
selves; but according to Gods will, and as his word allows. The sons of
Zebedee and their mother were reproved, Matthew. 20.22. because they asked they
knew not what; 1 John 5.14.

3. If we would have our prayers acceptable to God, we must come before him in
all humility, that is, with a lively sense and feeling of our own unworthiness
and wants, Psalm. 51.17. Isa. 66.2. Jam. 4.6. God gives grace, shows favor to
the humble. Thus Jacob, Gen 32.10. and the Publican, Luke 18.13, 14.

4 If we would have our prayers acceptable and prevalent, we must put them up
with fervency and importunity, James 5.16 Psalm. 55.17. This fervency not so
much consisting 1. in the loudness of the voice, as in the wrestling of the
heart. Moses uttered never a word, Exodus 14.15. and yet great was the fruit of
his Prayer; Romans 8.26. And

2. This fervency arising, not only from a sense of want, but likewise from a
hope of prevailing.

3. This fervency being mingled with sincerity, we having good ends in this or
that we would obtain of the Lord by Prayer, Romans 12.11. and not that we may
consume it on our lusts.

4. And lastly, This fervency bounding and terminating it self in a willing
submission unto Gods wise Decree; we refering the time and manner of Gods
accomplishing our requests unto his good pleasure, Psalm. 40.1. It was the sin
of the Israelites, that they limited the holy One of Israel; Psalm 78.41: they
preseribed to the Lord what they would have for their provision, and when they
would have it.

5. If we would have our Prayers acceptable and prevalent, we must make sure to
present them in the Name, Merit, and Mediation of Jesus Christ. This is the
condition of condition; come we never so well qualified to prayer, we can have
no boldness in it, this condition being omitted; there being so great a
distance betwixt God and us, his Majesty and Holiness, and our sinfulness and
vileness; nothing being due to us and our best prayers in our own names, but
shame and confusion; all the former qualifications do but, make way for this
condition; this being the principal requisite of acceptable prayer: To this
purpose see John 16.23. the latter part of the verse; and Rev. 8.3. Upon this
Altar we must lay the sacrifice of our prayers; it is this Priest that must
present them to his Father, that they may be acceptable and prevalent.

6. If we would have our prayers acceptable and prevalent, we must ask in
faith; I mean, confidently believing, that (according to Gods promise, Mat.
7.7.) we shall be heard, our prayers granted in some kind, James 1.5. and 6.7.
Mark. 11.24.

7 Lastly, If we would have our prayers acceptable and prevalent, we must take
heed of omitting thanksgiving; Psalm 50.14, 15. Phil. 4.6. Thankfulness for
former favors, is an excellent means to prevail in our present requests.

Thus much as touching the fifth Principle.

PRINC. VI.
Quest. What is the estate of all men after death?

Answ. All men shall arise again with their own bodies to the last judgment;
which being ended, the godly shall possess the Kingdom of heaven: but
unbelievers and reprobates shall be in hell, tormented with the Devil and his
Angels for ever.

IN this sixth Principle, we have three notable heads of Divinity or Common
places, expressed, or employed. 1. Death, which is employed from the words [shall
rise again] for there cannot be a Resurrection without death. 2. The general
Resurrection. 3. The last Judgment, with the consequents thereof; both
expressed in this Principle.

For the first of these heads, to wit, Death, The Doctrine is this:

Doct. There is no man nor woman, living, or shall live, but must dye: Or thus,
Death is unavoidable; Death cannot be avoided. There be three kinds of death,
Corporal, Spiritual, and Eternal. Corporal death, is the privation of the soul,
when the soul is severed or separated from the body. Spiritual death, is the
death of the soul in sin. Eternal death, is the death of the soul and body in
Hell. It is the first kind of death, to wit Corporal; that the Doctrine runs
upon. As there be certain common Principles, which run through all Arts, so
this is a general Rule which concerns every man; all men must dye, As sure as
death is our usual Proverb. But

1. See we how frequently and infallibly the Scriptures hold forth this truth.
2. Consult we with experience. 3. Come we to the Reasons. 4. To answer some
objections. And lastly, to the Inferences or Uses.

First, see we how frequently and infallibly the Scriptures hold forth this
truth, Psalm. 89.48. 2 Samuel 14.14. Joshua 23.14. 1 Kings 2.1, 2. Job 30.23.
Psalm 103.15, 16. and 146.3, 4. Eccles. 3.1, 2. and 7.1, 2. Isaiah 2.22. and
40.6. and 51.12.

2. (concerning this truth) Consult we with experience. The ten Fathers (of
whom we read in the book of Genesis) who lived every one of them almost a
thousand years, yet dyed at the length, every one of them. Some dye in the
womb, some in their Infancy, some in their youth; but they that live the
longest, at length their turns come. It is not worldly wisdom, or worldly
Prerogative, not outward strength or beauty, not place or grace, that can, or
ever could exempt in this kind.

Not worldly Wisdom, Psalm 49.12. Foolish Nabal died, so did politic
Ahithophel. Nor worldly Prerogative, Princes, Kings, and Emperors dye, and have
dyed as well as others, Psalm. 82.5, 6. Did not Nimrod, Ahasuerus, Sennacherib,
Nebuchadnezzar, and Alexander the great dye? Behold, the great King of all the
East is dead; so that great Soladine of Babylon, and Conqueror of all Asia
commanded to be proclaimed; he dying in the City of Askalon, commanded that his
shirt should be carried up and down the City upon a spear with this
Proclamation, Behold the great king of all the east is dead. And as worldly
Wisdom, nor worldly Prerogative can exempt in this kind, so neither outward
Strength, nor Beauty. Who stronger then Samson? and yet he dyed. Who more
beautiful (for a man) then Absalom, (for a woman) then Sarah? and yet they both
dyed. Neither is it Place or Grace that can exempt in this kind; I mean by
Place, the Climate or Situation. Ask the fields and possessions, and how many
names have they changed! In former Ages they were said to be such a man's, then
his, afterward another; now they are said to be this man's, and in short time
to come they shall be called, I cannot tell whose fields and possessions: Hence
it was, that Hormisda did so answer Constantine the Great, who telling him of
the beauty of Rome, the stately buildings that were there, the goodly Statues,
and sumptuous Temples, says he to Hormisda, Do thou think there is such a
City again in all the world? To which Hormisda replies, Surely there is none
comparable unto it; yet has it one thing common with all other Cities, men dye
there, as they dye in other places. Lastly. Neither is it Grace, is it
holiness, that can exempt in this kind: Envious Cain dyed, so did righteous
Abel: Abimelech the Infidel dyed, so did Abraham the Father of the faithful:
Ishmael the son of the Bond woman dyed, so did Isaac the son of the Freewoman:
Esau, whom God hated, dyed, so did Jacob, whom God loved: Incestuous Amnon
dyed, so did chaste Joseph: railing Rabshakek dyed, so did praying Hezekiah:
wicked Saul dyed, so did good Jehoshaphat: Hard-hearted Pharaoh dyed, so did
tenderhearted Josiah: Simon the Sorcerer dyed, so did Simon the Apostle. And
thus touching the truth of the point in hand, we have consulted with
experience: Now in the third place we come to the Reasons.

Reas. 1. Is taken from Gods Decree; It is a Statute enacted in the highest
Court, the Court of Heaven, that man should once dye; and therefore an
unrepealable Statute, a Statute that cannot be reversed; to this purpose, see
Hebrews 9.27. Job 7.1. and 14.5, 14.

Reas. 2. Is taken from the matter whereof all men are made, (I mean their
bodies) to wit, Earth; Genesis 3.19. 2 Cor. 5.1. Some are more painted then other
some, but all earthen vesse^s; some more clear then other some, but all
glasses; all built of earth, and born of women, and so must dye.

Reas. 3. Because every man and woman has that in them, which is the cause of
death, to wit, sin; it is that which is as poison in the spirits, and as
rottenness in the bones: sin brought in death, even Christ himself, although he
did never sin, yet because he became our Surety, stood guilty of our sin, death
seized upon him. Now we come to answer some objections, and then to the Uses.

Object. 1. But we read of some persons, of some particular men, that did not
dye; as Enoch, Genesis 5.24. Heb. 11.5. and Elijah, 2 Kings 2.11.

Answ. 1. Particular and extraordinary examples, do not frustrate general Rules.

2. The persons forementioned had that, which to them was in stead of death; to
wit, a change. Although they did not dye after the manner of other men, yet it
was with them, as it shall be with those who shall be found alive at Christ's
second coming, 1 Cor. 15.51, 52. they shall have a sudden, and almost
unperceivable change, which to them shall be in stead of death.

Object. 2. There is a promise made, John 11.26. that those that believe in
Christ shall never dye.

Answ. The meaning is, Eternally: the true Believer shall not dye eternally.
And for corporal death, the nature of it is altered; the sting of it is taken
away to such a party, 1 Cor. 15.55. Now to the Uses.

Use 1. For Reprehension, and it consists of diverse Members or Branches.

1. To reprove all such, as immoderately and excessively mourn for their
deceased friends, death being the common condition of all men: This was David's
failing, he exceeded, went over in passion, when news was brought unto him of
the death of his son Absalom, 2 Samuel 18.33. Although somewhat he might be
excused, because his son dyed so doubtfully (as touching his future estate)
which (no question) did aggravate David's sorrow; for then indeed have we the
most cause to sorrow and mourn, when our Children, Kindred, and Friends are
taken away by death in the act of sin, or before ever they began to dye to sin:
yet in this case did Aaron quietly and patiently submit unto Gods disposing
hand, Levit. 10.3. And David himself, another Child of his, dying, (of whom he
had more hope, and better assurance) carries the matter a great deal more
patiently and cheerfully, 2 Samuel 12.22, 23. Nay Job 1.21. Indeed many (their
Friends, Kindred, Children dying doubtfully in regard of their future
condition) have great cause to mourn, because they themselves gave them no
better example, gave them no more instruction to further them in religious
ways. And so diverse, that have had religious friends taken from them by death,
have great cause to mourn, because they made no better use of their good
example and holy society, when they enjoyed them.

2. To reprove such as offend in the other extreme, see their husbands, wives,
children, kindred, nay hundreds taken away by death, but little lay it to
heart, do not make a serious Application of it to themselves, contrary to that,
Eccles. 7.2. Alas, many are like Stocks and Blocks, who when they see this
party and that dye, nay multitudes before their eyes, do not say within
themselves, my turn will come ere long; the time is approaching, when I and my
outward estate must be parted, when I and my friends must be parted, when my
soul and body must be parted; and so labor more and more to fit themselves for
death: imitating Moses, who observing many in the Wilderness to be taken away
by death, cries out, O teach us to number our days, etc. Psalm. 90.12. Nay,
although they see diverse of the godly taken away by death, (which is ever a
forerunner of wrath and judgment) yet do not lay it to heart as befits them:
See Isaiah 57.1.

3. To reprove all those, that wholly (or for the most part) do set their love
and liking upon the things of this world, prosecute and pursue outward things,
as though they were always to enjoy them; not weighing the point in hand,
neither the uncertain circumstances that attend this certainty, time, place,
and manner: As for the time, no man knows when he shall dye; in the night, or
in the day; in winter, or in summer; in youth, or in his latter age. And so for
piace, no man knows where he shall dye, whether at home, or abroad; in his bed,
or in the field; in the Market, or in the Church. And so for the manner or kind
of death, no man knows how he shall dye; whether suddenly, or by a lingering
sickness; whether by a violent hand, or by a natural course. And yet to see how
men and women heap up this thick clay, vehemently labor to feather their nests
here in the world; and the Psalmist gives the reason, Psalm. 49.11. And so the
Prophet Isaiah, Isaiah 28.15. And we may observe no less in that fool, Luke
12.20. Whereas on the contrary, men and women should imitate Job, chapter 14.14.
and be advised by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.29, etc. A man abuses the world, when
he looks upon worldly things, as things that he shall enjoy always.

4. To reprove all such, as cannot endure to think of death, to be told of
death: You strike them into a melancholy fit, when you put them in mind of
their death; those persons are far from imitating those Worthies in Scripture,
whom we read to have made their Sepulchers in their life time; as Asa, 2 Chronicles.
16.14. Nay, in their Gardens, (the place of their solace and delight) as Joseph
of Aramathea, John 19.41. Nay, those persons come short of some of the Heathen
we read of, as D^mocritus, who was wont to walk among the graves, that so he
might the better meditate upon death. And so it is reported of those
Philosophers called Brachmanae, that they were so much given to think upon
death, that they had their graves always before their gates; that both going
out, and coming in, they might be put in mind of their latter end. And so the
ancient Egyptians (in the midst of their mirth at their solemn seasts) were
wont to have the image of Death brought in and laid before them, with these
words, Hoc intuens, epulare; Beholding this Image, eat and drink; that being a
means they used to make them eat and drink more moderately. And surely one
special cause why the most are so unprepared for death, is because they have no
desire to think of it to be put in mind of it. And thus now we have done with
the use of reprehension.

Use 2. For Information; to inform us, that although death be unavoidable, why
yet we must be so far from hastening our own death, by neglecting the means of
life, or by laying violent hands upon our selves, as we must use all good means
for the preserving of our natural life, and lengthening our days here upon
earth, (and all this employed in the sixth precept.) Not that we deny, but that
(in some cases) a man or a woman may desire death rather then life: As 1. When
they are thoroughly convinced, and sufficiently resolved, that the Lord shall
have more glory by their dying, then by their living: No question this was one
reason, why Samson desired death; he knowing, that thereby he should slay more
of Gods enemies, then he had done in all his life time: and hence it was, that
the holy Martyrs heretofore did so willingly dye, nay did so joyfully desire
death; because they were persuaded, that God should have so much glory by their
death. 2. In consideration that they cannot live here on earth, but daily
offend their good and gracious God: to desire death in this case, is not a
loathing to live, but a loathing to sin; and so much is employed in the Apostle
Paul his exclamation, Romans 7.24. 3. In consideration that they cannot live in
this world, but see and hear the Lord much dishonored by the wicked: this was
that which did so vex the soul of righteous Lot, 2 Pet. 2.8. And no question
this was one special cause, why Elijah desired death; to wit, the wickedness of
the times he lived in. And so Rebecka, the wickedness of her Daughter in law,
Genesis 26.34, 35.27.46. 4. In consideration that until death, they are absent
from Christ, do not so fully and perfectly enjoy him, as they shall do after
death. 2 Cor. 5.6, 7, 8 Philip. 1.23. Nay, so the whole Church is brought in,
Rev. 22.20. Now in the cases aforesaid, it is lawful for a man or a woman to
desire death, rather then life, not that they may neglect the means of life, or
hasten their own death, (this way or that way) no nor impatiently wish death;
this was the fault of the old Israelites, as Exodus 16.3. Nay, Moses himself
(this way) failed, Numb. 11.15. And did not Rachel, Genesis 30.1. And so Jonah
4.1, 2, 3, 8. And what more common in these times, then for men and women (when
great calamity is upon them, or imminent) impatiently to wish death. Thus much
for this Use, the Use of Information.

Use 3. For Exhortation: and it consists of diverse parts or branches.

1. To exhort every one of us (seeing death is unavoidable, cannot be avoided)
much to think, and often to meditate (and that seriously) upon our own death;
and this being done of us, it will be a good means to prevent much evil in our
practice; and much to put us on in the ways of goodness.

To prevent much evil in our practice: as

1. Dissoluteness, or looseness of life: Durst any man give himself liberty to
be drunk, if he seriously weighed, he might be struck with death whiles he is
drunk, as Elah the King of Israel was? 1 Kings 16.9, 10. Or durst any man
commit uncleanness, if he could seriously think of this, that God might strike
him suddenly while he is in that filthy act, as he did Zimri and Cosbi? Numb.
25.8.

2. A frequent and serious meditation of our own death, will be a good means to
prevent our vigorous and cruel proceedings with others; see Job 31.13, 14.
Matthew. 24.48, 49. Amos 6.3.

3. This will be a good means to prevent our over-love, and immoderate use of
outward things: To this purpose is that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.29. If we do
not see death stand at the end of all our earthly profits, at the end of all
our worldly pleasures, we shall too eagarly pursue them; and having obtained
them, shall too much solace our selves in them.

4. This will be a good means to prevent the danger of death; I mean, to take
away the sting and terror of it, death being like unto the Basilisk; if it see
thee before thou see it, it will be thy death; but if thou see it first, thou will be the death of it.

And as the frequent and serious meditation of our own death, will be a good
means to prevent much evil in our practice; so likewise it will be a good means
much to further us in the ways of goodness: as

1. Hereby we shall be minded to be more painful and profitable in our places,
Eccles. 9.10. and 2 Pet. 1.13, etc.

2. Hereby we shall be made more meek, and patient in all our sufferings and
afflictions, Phil. 4.5. James 5.7, 8. This is that which will make quiet in all
provocations: This'is that which will comfort in all discouragements: I shall
shortly be sent for, I shall shortly be called from hence; then I shall be
righted then I shall be cleared, then I shall have rest.

3. Hereby we shall be made more watchful, the thing being so certain, and the
circumstances so uncertain, (as time, place, and manner) See Mark 13.35. and
Luke 21.34.

4. And lastly, this will be a good means to work in us a care to prepare for
death. A man that seriously concludes he must dye, will not that man go about
to set his house in order, his heart in order, all in order? And thus now we
have done with the first part, or branch of this Use, which has been to exhort
every one of us much to think, and often to meditate (and that seriously) upon
our own death, which (as you may perceive) will not be a little advantageous in
our Christian course.

2. The second part or branch of this Use is, to exhort us (every one of us)
seeing death is unavoidable, cannot be avoided, that we would labor to prepare
and fit our selves for death. But before we come to hold forth the means, we
will propound some Motives.

Motive 1. Now the first Motive we have in the Doctrine it felf; death is
unavoidable.

Motive 2. This is the main errand of our life. God did not send us into this
world to sin, and ^o glut our selves with the creature, but to bring him some
honor, and then to dye. The Factor is not employed to take his pleasure
abroad, but to negotiate for his Master, and then to return home.

Motive 3. Death is but once; and that stands in need to be well done, which
can be but once done; Heb. 9.27. once, and no more. An Hourglass, when it is
run out, may be turned again; but in this case it is otherwise.

Motive 4. When death has done with thee, then God will begin with thee. Thou
must once dye, and after this come to judgment. Heb. 9.27. Then no more
praying, no more fasting, no more any Prophet to come unto thee in the Name of
the Lord: thou shall not lie a few years in flames of wrath, and then get leave
to come out, that thou may amend thy life: Oh no! if once there, for ever
there.

Motive 5. Lastly, consider with thy self, it will be as much as thou can do,
to do the work of death; therefore prepare, and get all thy other work done
before. Then happily thy friends about thee (loath to part with thee, and thou
with them) will disquiet thee, extremity of pain will be upon thee, and perplex
thee, Satan busy with thee, thy conscience active and stirring: It is no
little, no easy work, to do the work of death.

Thus much for the Motives: Now to come to the Means, whereby to prepare and
fit our selves for death.

Means. 1. We must make sure to repent of all our known sins; that is, call
them to mind, unfainedly bewail them, heartily confess them, earhestly crave
pardon of them, purposing by Gods help to forsake them all. Such as dye
impenitently, dye in their sins; and that is a woeful and a lamentable dying, as
our Savior tells the Jews, John 8.21, 24.

Means 2. We must make sure of Christ, that Christ is ours, that we are clothed
with his Righteousness, 1 Cor. 15.56, 57. If thou have got Christ into thine
arms by faith, thou may boldly look death in the face, Romans 8.36, 37. Phil
1.21. Having a good Christ, thou may be confident of a good death; Luke
2.28, etc.

Means 3. If we would be sitted and prepared for death, we must make sure to
have renewed natures; such being only fitted for the Bridegrooms coming, as
have Oil in their Lamps; (An outward prosession will not serve the turn, unless
we have that we make profession of) See Revel. 20.6. and Revel. 22.17. The
Spirit and the Bride say, Come. If a man have got the Spirit (the sanctifying
graces of Gods Spirit) into his soul, to beautify it, as the Bride is with her
Ornaments, why then he may say to Death, Come, and to Christ, Come Lord Jesus,
come quickly.

Means 4. That we may be prepared for death, we must learn to bear (and that
willingly and patiently) the crosses and troubles, wherewith the Lord is
pleased daily to exercise us. see Matthew. 10.37, 38. Luke 9.23. And so the
Apostle says of himself, 1 Cor. 15.31. that he did dye daily: his meaning is,
that (by his patient and willing bearing of those daily crosses he was subject
unto) he learned every day to dye. So think with thy self, If I cannot endure a
little, how shall I endure more? If I cannot endure a light cross, a small
affliction, how shall I bear the pangs of death when they come? As Agamemnon
first overcame the Lacedaemonians by wrestling, and then by fighting: And
Bilney (the Martyr) first burned his finger in the Candle, that after he might
the better endure the burning of his whole body at the stake.

Means 5. We must labor for heavenly-mindedness, sit loose to the creature,
have in us a holy indifferency concerning all things sublunary. That which the
Apostle says of the love of money, 1 Timothy 6.10. that it is The root of all
evil; and the cause why many are even pierced through with many sorrows (the
truth whereof is never more seen then on their deathbeds) may be likewise said
of the love of any other worldly thing; (the overlove, which is the Apostles
meaning in the place cited) and therefore the counsel is good, Psalm 62.10.
Matthew 6.19. and 1 Cor. 7.29, etc.

Means 6. If we would be preprared, and fitted for death, we must walk
sincerely, Prove. 10.9. 2 Kings 20.3.

Means 7. If we would be prepared for death, we must walk fruitfully, Eccles.
9.10. Galatians, 6.10. 1 Timothy, 6.17. etc. Luke 16.9.

Means 8. Lastly, such as have Families and outward estates, (that they may be
the better ^^^ pared for death) should set them in order, Isaih 38.1. And
although I mention this the last, to do this before sickness, (in time of
health) will be great wisdom: By doing this, they will not dye more quickly,
but more quiet^y. And thus now we have done with the second branch of this Use.

3. The third branch of this Use, is to exhort so many as are in some good
measure prepared for death, (although the Doctrine contain a most certain
truth, yet) not to be d^smayed, nor too much discouraged; and this upon the
grounds following:

1. Because it must be but once done, Heb. 9.27. Let me dye, (says Seneca a
heathen man) and what hurt comes by that? I can be bound no more, I can be sick
no more, I can dye no more.

2. Because death is a conquered enemy. Christ overcame this enemy, and not
only for himself, but for all his; Isaiah 25 8. Hos. 13.14. 1 Cor. 15.57.

3. Because this battle being fought, we shall be freed from that which has
troubled us all our life long; to wit, sin. Death is the Funeral of our vices,
and the Resurrection of our graces. Death was the daughter of sin; and in death
shall that be fulfilled, The daughter shall destroy the Mother.

4. Because then they shall be freed from all their toil and labors: It is a
difficult thing to pray, the execution of the particular calling not easy; but
see Revelations 14.13.

5. Because then immediately (after this battle fought) they go to God, ever to
be with him, and to have a Crown of glory put upon their heads by him, 1 Thessalonians.
4.17. 2 Timothy 4 8.

6. And lastly, because diverse of Gods people heretofore, were so far from
fearing of death, as that they desired it, Genesis 49.18. Luke 2.28, etc. Romans
7.24. Philip. 1.21, 23. And thus now we have done with the Commonplace employed
in the sixth Principle, to wit, Death.

NOw we come to the second Head or Common place; to wit, the general
Resurrection: and receive it in this Doctrine:

Doct. It is a most certain truth, that there shall be a general Resurrection:
That all the dead shall rise again with their own bodies at the last day.

The Scriptures are very clear and evident in this point. See Job 19.25, 26,
27. Isaiah 26.19. John 5.28, 29. Acts 24.15.

The Grounds and Reasons of the Doctrine. And first we will lay you down
Reasons, why the bodies of the godly must be raised again at the last day; and
then, why the bodies of the wicked must be then raised.

Reasons why the bodies of the godly must be raised again at the last day:

Reas. 1. Because the Lord is their God, is in Covenant with the godly, in
Covenant with the whole man; not only soul, but body. This is our Saviors
Argument to the Sadduces, who denied the Resurrection, Mat. 22.31, 32. As
touching the Resurrection of the dead, have ye not read that which was spoken
unto you by God, saying, I am the God of Abraham and the God of Isaac, and the
God of Jacob? God is not the God of the dead, but of the living. Our Saviors
meaning is this, The God of Heaven speaking to Moses ( Exodus 3.9.) of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, (who being in Covenant with God, but all dead long before the
Lord then spoke unto Moses, yet) speaks of them as alive; thereby intimating
the Resurrection of their bodies, that their dead bodies should be raised again
at the last day; and if their bodies, why then the dead bodies of all that are
in Covenant with God.

Reas. 2 Christ himself has undertaken this; to wit, to raise up the dead
bodies of all his at the last day, John 6.39. And is not this an easy thing
with him, he being not only man, but God? See Mat. 22.29. Phil. 3.20, 21.

Reas. 3. Christ is risen, therefore the dead bodies of all the godly shall
rise again at the last day. This is a true and sure consequence: for 1. Christ
rose again, that he might raise them. 2. Christ is their Head, and they his
Members: seeing then Christ their Head is risen, they also his Members
doubtless shall rise; for the glory of the head requires this, that he have his
members suitable, and in like condition with himself. 3. The same Spirit is in
them, which is in Christ raised; he joyneth and uniteth them with Christ, and
works the same in them, which he does in Christ; But he has raised Christ,
therefore he will raise them.

Reas. 4. To this end the bodies of the Elect were made, that in them (as
Temples) the Holy Ghost might dwell for ever; therefore their bodies shall rise
again at the last day, and live for ever.

Reas. 5. This great truth denied, (that the bodies of the godly shall be
raised again at the last day) overturns all Religion, 1 Cor. 15.12. unto the
nineteenth. Thus you see the Reasons why the bodies of the godly must be raised
again at the last day. Now we come to lay you down the Reasons, why the bodies
of the wicked must be raised.

Reas. 1. Because the Scripture delivers this in plain and express terms, 3
Cor. 5.10. John 5.28, 29. Acts 24.15.

Reas. 2. The threatenings and comminations, that lie against the wicked; Matthew.
10.28. Mark 9.43. and so to verse 49. besides diverse other places.

Reas. 3. The Justice of God requires this. The wicked do not only sin in
soul, but in body; therefore their bodies must be raised again at the last day,
that so they may be punished in both. Thus you see, that not only the dead
bodies of the godly shall be raised again at the last day, but also the dead
bodies of the wicked. Yet (observe) with a double difference: 1. In regard of
the efficient. 2. In regard of the final cause. The bodies of the godly shall
rise by the power of Christ their Head; the bodies of the wicked, by the power
of Christ their Judge: The bodies of the godly shall rise to eternal glory, the
bodies of the wicked, to eternal condemnation.

For the further opening of this Doctrine, we intend 1. To answer some
objections. 2. In brief to lay before you the manner or method of the general
Resurrection. 3. And lastly, the Uses.

First to answer some objections.

Object. 1. From Eccles. 3.19.20.

Answ. 1. Solomon does not speak here in his own person, but in the person of
an Epicure or Atheist. 2. Suppose Solomon do here deliver his own judgment, he
speaks nothing here of the estate after death; but only delivers thus much,
That as beasts dye, so men dye; the one, as well as the other.

Object. 2. From 1 Cor. 15.50.

Answ. By flesh and blood here, we are not to understand the body simply, but
as it is clothed with sin and corruption, and so indeed it shall not inherit
the Kingdom of God; but as it is immortal and glorious it shall.

Object. 3. From 1 Cor. 15.44. So then it may seem our bodies at the last day
shall rise Spiritual bodies, and not consisting of flesh and blood.

Answ. The Apostle does explain himself verse 53. There shall not be a change
in substance, but in quality. The bodies of the godly shall then be immortal,
incorruptible, not needing means of corporal nourishment, nor subject to
infirmities; but nimble, strong, and impassible, void of all deformity and
uncomliness, of perfect stature, glorious, etc. The bodies of the wicked then
shall be immortal also, and incorruptible; but passible, to endure the
punishment inflicted upon them.

Object. 4. That bodies resolved to dust and ashes, should rise again, is not
this impossible?

Answ. Luke 18.27. Genesis 18.14. Luke 1.37. The Almighty God that made all things
of nothing, is not he able to restore the body, although turned to dust, burnt
to ashes, or devoured by wild beasts?

The manner of the Resurrection.

The next thing we promised, is to lay forth (in brief) the manner or method of
the gen^ral Resurrection.

1. In the first place, when the last day of the world is come. Christ on a
sudden (in the same visible form he went to heaven) will come in the Clouds
with his Angels, and the souls of his Saints departed, Acts 1.11. Judges 14.15.

2. The Trumpet of God shall then sound, the voice of the Archangel shall then
be heard, Christ shall command, and call upon the dead to rise, and come to
judgment; 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. John 5. 28, 29.

3. Immediately, presently upon this, the souls of all the godly deceased shall
en^er into their bodies, and then their bodies rise to life eternal; and so the
souls of all the wicked deceased, shall return into their bodies, and then
their bodies rise to eternal condemnation, John 5.28, 29.

4. Such as shall then be alive, shall have a change on a sudden, in stead of
death and Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.51, 52.

5. The Angels shall then gather the Elect, and chase in the Reprobates from
the four Wind^s of heaven, and present them before Christ. Matthew. 24.31, and
25.31, 32. Now we come to the last thing, the Uses.

Use 1. For Confutation. 1. To confute, as the old Sadduces, so the Atheists of
our time, who imagine the soul to dye with the body; and so an end of both.
That this was the opinion of the Sadduces, see Mat. 22.23. Acts 23.8. That this
is the opinion of the Atheists of our time, is very evident by their lives and
conversations. 2. To confute such, as not distinguishing betwixt a Spiritual
and corporal Resurrection, do deny, that the body shall rise again at the last
day. They confess the soul to be immortal, but they acknowledge no other
Resurrection, but Regeneration, the souls rising from the death of sin to the
life of grace: the bodies Resurrection they utterly deny. Of this wicked
opinion Hymeneus and Philetus seem to have been the Authors, 2 Timothy 2.18.

3. To confute the Anabaptists, who deny that the very self-same bodies which
we now have, shall rise again; but affirm that God (at Christ's second coming)
will make new bodies; new bodies, not only in regard of quality, but in regard
of substance.

Use 2. For Terror to all such as live and dye in their sins, as live and
dye unrepentant. Consider, that even that body, which thou have used as a
weapon and instrument to pride, to swearing, to profaning of the Lords day, to
drunkenness, uncleanness, lying, and the like, shall rise again: And as thou
have done in it that which thou should not, so thou shall receive in it,
that which thou would not: that hand, those feet, those adulterous eyes,
that blaspheming tongue, shall rise again to receive condign punishment: thou
shall no sooner peep out of thy grave, but thou shall see him come to judge
thee, whom thou have pierced, despised, disobeyed. If the wicked might cease to
be after this life, and dye as the beast does, O then it would be well with
them, because then there would be an end of their misery; but the wicked must
after this life, rise again to condemnation, which is the accomplishment of
their eternal woe and wretchedness. A ruful and doleful case to consider; and
yet it is the condition of all impenitent sinners. If a man were bidden to go
to bed, that after he had slept, and was risen again, he might go to execution,
it would make his heart to ache within him; yet this (nay a thousand times
worse) is the state of all impenitent sinners: they must sleep a while in the
grave, and then rise again, that a second death may be inflicted upon them both
in body and soul, which is the suffering of the full Wrath of God, both in body
and soul eternally. The case being thus, that counsel of the Apostle Peter
would be considered of by the wicked, and before it be too late, Acts 3.19.

Use 3. For Comfort and Consolation to all the godly. The Apostle Paul
traversing this Doctrine of the bodies Resurrection, 1 Thessalonians. 4.13, etc.
observe his close, verse 18. Although the days of this life be days of woe
and misery, yet the day of the Resurrection, shall be unto all the godly a time
of refreshing and felicity; Acts 3.19. Those hands that have been lfted up in
prayer, and stretched out to relieve the poor Saints; those feet that have been
forward to go to Sermons, those eyes that have wept for the sins of the times,
but first and principally for thine own sins; that have wept again and again
for the offense of a good and gracious God; that tongue which has glorified
God, that body which has suffered for Christ, shall rise again to be partaker
of all his glory. Upon this ground, the godly heretofore in their greatest
miseries have comforted themselves; See Job 19.25, 26, 27. and Isaiah 26.19.
This was the comfort of the poor Jews under Antiochus Epiphanes, they looked
for a better Resurrection, the remembrance whereof, was as sugar, to relish the
bitterness of the Cross, Heb. 11.35. Nay upon this ground, see the Apostle Paul
triumphing over death, 1 Cor. 15.55, 56, 57. And see what he says, Phil. 3.21.
Six things shall befall the body of the godly at that day:

1. Immortality, so as they can never dye again, 1 Cor. 15.53.

2. Incorruptibleness, they shall never be inclined to putrefaction, or any
corruption, 1 Cor. 15.53.

3. Spiritualness, 1 Cor. 15.44. and that in diverse respects: 1. Because they
shall be possessed fully by the Spirit of God, so as they shall be both
governed by the Spirit, and be subject to the Spirit wholly. 2. Because they
shall live as the Angels in Heaven do, without meat, or raiment, or any other
bodily helps or sustenance. 3. Because they shall be for nimbleness as it were
spirits.

4. The fourth thing that shall befall the bodies of the godly at that day, is
Power; for of bodies full of weakness, and subject to many calamities, and
distresses, and pains, they shall be raised in power; that is, strong, able,
and impassible.

5. Perfection, for they shall be free from deformity, unhandsomness, lameness,
etc. and become most beautiful and comely; neither infancy, nor old age
hindering them; but shall appear in full age and beauty.

6. Shining and Splendour: as the sun or stars in the Firmament, the body being
clothed with a Celesti^l glory, and Divine light, Dan. 12.3. Matthew. 13.43.
Thus much for the Use of Consolation.

Use 4. For Instruction, or to point out unto us diverse duties.

1. If we believe the Resurrection of the body, we must be moderate in mourning
for our Christian friends deceased. Our Savior Christ did weep for Lazarus:
And when Stephen was stoned to death; some that feared God buried him, and made
great lamentation for him; and therefore mourning for the dead is not
altogether unlawful; yet remember we must, what the Apostle says to the
Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 4.13.

2. This Doctrine of the Resurrection, should teach us to have the very body in
honor, and not to transgress against it. Seeing our bodies must be raised
again at the last day, we must take heed of polluting and defiling them by
Gluttony, Drunkenness, Uncleanness, and the like; 1 Cor. 6.13, 14. 1 Thessalonians.
4.3, 4. 2 Cor. 7.1. Romans 12.1.

3. The consideration of this great work of the Resurrection of our bodies,
should teach us to trust God in other matters, and believe his Promises, though
there be never so great unlikelihood of the accomplishment, in respect of the
outward means and appearance, Romans 4.17. to the 22.

4. We should be very careful to get assurance, that our bodies shall rise
gloriously, have a glorious Resurrection. And that we may be assured, we must
make sure of a justifying faith, such a faith as will rightly apprehend and lay
hold on him who is the Resurrection and the life, John 11.25. And then we must
make sure of the first Resurrection; not only pretend our selves to have
faith, but make sure it be, as a justifying, so a sanctifying faith; for so a
justifying faith ever is. To rise in soul we must make sure; that is to say,
from the death of sin, to the life of grace, Rev. 20.6. Romans 8.11.

5. And lastly, we should earnestly endeayour to live as the children of the
Resurrection, Luke 20.36. as those that believe a glorious Resurrection;
heavenly, harmlesly, and fruitfully. 1. Heavenly, Philippians 3.20, 21. 2.
Harmlesly, Acts 24.16, 17. 3. Fruitfully, 1 Cor. 15.58. Thus we have done with
the second Member of this Principle, as we reckon.

Of the day of judgment.
THe second Commonplace being finished, we come now to the third, which we lay
forth in this Doctrine:

Doct. 3. Immediately after the general Resurrection, shall be the last
Judgment. Or thus: It is a most certain truth, that there shall be a day of
judgment:

The Scriptures are very clear and abundant in proof of this point. Begin we
with that ancient testimony alleged in the Apostle Jude, Jude 14.15. See Dan.
7.9, 10 Eccl. 12. v. last Matthew. 12.36. Acts 17.31. Romans 14.10. 2 Cor. 5.10.
The Reasons of the Point.

Reas. 1. Gods Decree. Heb. 9.27. As the Lord has appointed the former, so the
latter.

Reas. 2. The particular judgments the Lord inflicts in this life upon persons
and places; as the burning of Sodom and Gomorrah, the drowning of the old
world, the plaguing of Egypt, and the desolation of Jerusalem; did not all
these typifie the general judgment? Luke 17.26. etc.

Reas. 3. The consciences of men and women (even the least enlightened and
awakened) tremble at this great truth and so prove it, Acts 24.25.

Reas. 4. The justice and goodness of God. The justice of God requires that it
should go absolutely ill with the wicked the goodness of God requires that it
should go absolutely well with the godly: but neither of these come to pass in
this life, and therefore there must be a day of judgment, that both these may
be effected.

Reas. 5. The fifth and last Reason. This is the end of the general
Resurrection, to wit, the general Judgment. Men and women must be raised
again, that they may be judged. But here we meet with an objection.

Object. May some man say, The whole world consists of Believers and
Unbelievers. But as touching Believers, it is said John 5.24. that they shall
not come (...), in judicium, to judgment.

Answ. The meaning is, not to the judgment of condemnation; and so indeed the
last translation renders it.

Object. And then as touching Unbelievers, (so remaining) it is said of them,
John 3.18 that they are condemned already.

Answ. It is true, so they are. 1. In Gods Decree. 2. In Gods word. 3. In their
own consciences. But yet the manifestation and finishing of this judgment is
reserved unto the last day.

But for the opening of so weighty a Doctrine, we intend to answer the
questions following. 1. How this judgment is distinguished from other judicial
proceedings. 2. When the day of judgment shall be. 3. Who shall be the Judge.
4. And lastly, What shall be the manner of proceeding at that day.

Quest. 1. The first question is, How this judgment is distinguished from
other judicial proceedings?

Answ. This we may let you see in diverse Epithets given to this judgment: as
1. It is called the last judgment: (so the Catechism entitles it:) And so it
is, for after it there shall be no other; the sentence passed then, can never
be reverst; there can be no appeal from that Judge and judgment. 2. It is
called the general judgment. God judges men and women in this world, and that
both in life and death: He judges them whilst they are living by correcting
his people for their scapes and infirmities, by punishing the wicked for their
transgressions and rebellions. He judges every man and woman at death. But
then shall be a general judgment of all, 2 Cor. 5.10. 3. It is called a
manifest and open judgment: And so it shall be, for the proceedings then,
shall be in the eye and view of all the world. 4. It is called a sudden
judgment: And so it shall be, in regard of the wicked; Even as the flood came
upon the Old World, when they were wantonizing, and deriding that preacher of
righteousness. 5. And lastly, It is called an eternal judgment: Not that the
Judge shall sit for ever, sifting matters, and debating causes; but it is so
called, from the effect; for the issue will be this, The eternal weal and
happiness of the godly, and the eternal woe and misery of the wicked.

Quest. 2. The second question. When the day of judgment shall be?

Answ. In likelihood, it is not far off, if we compare some Texts, and our
times, as Luke 18.8. Matthew. 24.37, etc. 2 Timothy 3.1, etc. The truth of it is,
were but Rome ruinated, and the Jew called, what should hinder that great day?
And in how little time can the Lord effect these two great works? But touching
the precise day, see Mat. 24.36. But why does the Lord conceal this day? Answ.
1. That he might hereby bridle our curiosity, Acts 1.7. 2. That the wicked
might not defer their repentance, Psalm 95.7, 8. 3. That the godly might be
occasioned to continual watchfulness, Mark 13.33, etc.

Quest. 3. The third question. Who shall be the Judge?

Answ. God. All the Persons in the Godhead, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: All
the three Persons shall judge, as touching their consent and Authority; but the
particular execution of this judgment is committed to the Son; it is he that
shall execute this vengeance, and as he is the Son of man, John 5.22, 27. 2 Timothy 4.1. Acts 10.42. and 17.31.

Object. 1. But the Apostles shall judge the twelve Tribes of Israel, Mat.
19.28.

Answ. It is true, the Apostles shall judge the twelve tribes; but how? to wit,
by their Faith and Doctrine; the example whereof will take away all excuse from
the Israelites: 2. They shall be as Justices on the Bench, and consent to
Christ's judgments.

Object. 2. The Saints shall judge the world, 1 Cor. 6.2.

Answ. It is true, 1. As sitting with the Judge, and approving of his sentence,
as the Apostles before. 2. As they are Members of Christ the Judge: and 3. As
their example shall be alleged to condemn the wicked.

Quest. 4. The 4th and last question. What shall be the manner of proceeding at
that day?

Answ. That we may the better resolve this question, we are to consider. 1. The
Preparation to this judgment. 2. The judgment it self. The Preparation is
twofold, 1. Of the Judge. 2. Of them to be judged. The Preparation of the Judge
consists in four things. 1. In the Commission he has from his Father, ( John
5.27.) which then shall be manifested to all the world. 2. In the clothing of
his Humane Nature with a wonderful Majesty and glory, Matthew. 25.31. Matthew.
16.28. compared with Mat. 17.1, etc. 3. In his Train, which shall be thousand
thousands of Saints and Angels, and that in their splendour and beauty; Dan.
7.9, 10. Jude v. 14. Matthew. 25.31. 4. In the choice of a place where to sit,
and the erecting of a glorious Throne whereon to sit, Matthew. 25.31. Rev. 20.11.
Thus much touching the Preparation of the Judge. Now for them who are to be
judged; they must be prepared four ways: 1. By Citation or Summons. 2. By
Resurrection. 3. By Collection. 4. By Separation.

1. By Citation or Summons, which shall be a great shout from heaven, John 5.28.
Mat. 24.31. 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. As Christ now uses the Ministry of man, so then he
will use the Ministry of Angels.

2. Upon this shall follow the Resurrection; Every thing shall give up its dead,
Rev. 20.13. And such as are found alive shall be changed; They shall not dye, but
be changed; and not in regard of substance, but in regard of quality; 1 Cor.
15.51, etc.

3. Upon this shall follow their Collection. The raised and changed, all, both
Elect and Reprobate, shall be gathered by the Angels from the four Winds of
heaven, from every place under the sun, and convented before the Judge, Mat.
24.31. and 25.32.

Lastly, shall be the Separation betwixt the Elect, and the Reprobate; the Elect
to go on Christ's right hand, and the Reprobate enforced to his left, Matthew.
25.32, 33. Thus much for the Preparation to this judgment, (the preparing of
the Judge, and them to be judged.)

Now we come to the judgment it self: Wherein consider three things. 1. By what
Law man shall be tried. 2. By what Evidence. 3. What the sentence shall be.

1. Touching the first, Such as never heard of Christ, must be tried by the Law
of Nature, (those Notions being sufficient to make them inexcusable) Romans 2.14,
15, 16. Such as have lived in the visible Church, shall be tried by the written
Law and the Gospel; Romans 2.12. Job. 12 48. The absolution of the godly, shall be
principally according to the Gospel, but confirmed by the Law; the condemnation
of the wicked, shall be principally by the Law; but shall be confirmed by the
Gospel.

2. Now we pass to the second, By what Evidence? Answ. By the opening of three
books. 1. The book of Gods Remembrance. 2. The book of Consience. 3. The book
of Life or Election. Rev. 20.12.

3. The third thing the Sentence, what it shall be: See the sentence that shall
be passed upon the godly, Matthew. 25.34. And see the sentence that shall be
passed upon the wicked, Matthew 25.41. Thus we proceed to the Uses.

Use 1, For Terror to the wicked and ungodly, such as go on in their sins
impenitently, as 2 Cor. 5.10, 11. Romans 2.4, 5, 6. and Eccles. 11.9. It may be
they are now in jollity; but that day must come, that they may be in absolute
misery. You have heard that the Judge must come, and in what manner; and that
the whole world must be convented before him: Alas, (the Parties we are now
speaking of) what will they say at that day? An accusing conscience within them,
Hell beneath them, the good Angels and Saints on the one hand them, ready to
give approbation to the sentence passed upon them; the Devils on the other
hand, attending to carry them away with them; and they before an angry Judge,
ready to pass the irrevocable sentence upon them. O how will they be able to
stand before this Judge! Rev. 1.7. Belshazzar ( Dan. 5.5, 6.) did but see a
man's Handwriting on the Wall, and how was he perplexed! Felix did but hear the
Doctrine of the last judgment preached, and did not he tremble? Acts 24.25.
Nay, see we the terror of this day to the wicked, Rev. 6.12, etc. Alas! a day,
wherein not only their sinful actions and words must be brought to light, but
even their sinful thoughts and cogitations; Eccles. 12.14. 1 Cor. 4.5. These
things have thou done, these things have thou spoke, nay these things have thou
thought. But will ye see more plainly what shall become of particular Malefactors
at that day, as what shall become of Antichrist, and his Abettors and
followers, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. to the 13. Of all Apostates, Heb. 10.26, 27. Of all
Persecutors, Jude 15. Of all Hypocrites, Psalm. 50.16, etc. Of all censorious
persons, that censure others for the faults they themselves live in the willing
practice of, Romans 2.1, 2, 3. Of all Covetous and Merciless persons, James 5.1,
etc. and 2.13. Matthew. 25.41, 42. etc. Of all Whoremongers and unclean persons,
Heb. 13.4. Eccles. 11.9. Of all Liars, Rev. 21.8. and 22.15. Of all Gluttons
and Drunkards, Luke 21.34. 1 Cor. 6.10. Lastly, Will you know what shall become
of all them that do not obey the Gospel, all ignorant persons and unbelievers?
2 Thessalonians. 5.8.

Object. May the wicked man say, It is a great while to the day of judgment.

Answ. Surely no: 1. See 1 Pet. 4.7. Jam. 5.8. 2. The signs and forerunners of
the last judgment, are the most of them accomplished already. 3. Suppose it
were a great while to that day, yet the day of thy death (which will be the day
of thy particular judgment) cannot be very far off.

Things being so, (that we may draw to an end of this Use) how much does it
concern such as go on in an evil way, to break off their sins by Repentance, as
Psalm 50.22. Nay further, let them consider the Lords command, (and upon this
ground) Acts 17.30, 31. The times of this ignorance God winketh at; (that is,
regards not, cared not what became of the multitude in those times) but now
commands all men every where to repent, etc. O! therefore be they earnest
with the Lord, to give them what he commands; both old and young, how should
they labor Repentance in the use of all good means; the Lord not only
commanding it, but so graciously promising to the Repentant, Ephesians. 5.14.
Proverbs 28.13. Isaiah 1.16, etc.

Use 2. For the great comfort and consolation of all the godly: In this world
they are many times evil thought of, but then will be the day of their clearing;
they are now troubled with the remainders of sin, and affliction hanging upon
them as a consequent, which causes them many times to sow in tears; but the^
they shall reap in joy: now is their fight, but then will be the time of their
Coronation. Must it not needs be very comfortable to them, to see him come
their Judge, who was judged for them? their Savior, he who lived and dyed for
them, to see him coming as Judge of all the world? what a comfortable sight and
meeting will that be? Was it not a very comfortable meeting of Joseph and his
Brethren, when he discovered himself unto them? And how comfortable is the
meeting of man and wife (truly loving) having been long asunder! Him, their
Christ, whom they labored so long, and so often, to have full familiarity
with? Him, whom they have so often sought in his Ordinances, and for whose
absence they have so often mourned? O the affection that he will then manifest
unto them! Not a good purpose, not a good thought of theirs will he conceal: not
an evil thought of theirs (in any part of their life) will he charge them with.
What joy and comfort will the pronouncing of the sentence afford unto them? Mat.
25.34. and then they to be so advanced, as to join with their Judge in judging
of wicked men and Angels? 1 Cor. 6.2 3. We go no further in this Use, because
of the Doctrine following; desiring to reserve every thing for its proper place.

Use 3. For Exhortation, to exhort Christians diverse ways:

1. To be frequent in self-judging, so at the day of judgment they shall not be
condemned with the world. Nay, so in this world they shall avoid many particular
judgments, which otherwise will befall them, 1 Cor 11.31, 32. Now this
self-judging does comprise the particulars following: 1. Self-examination,
touching the sins a man is guilty of. 2. Sins confession, which must be serious
and hearty. 3. Self-condemnation, which is a passing of sentence against a man's
self at the Bar of Gods Justice. 4. An appeal unto the Throne of grace, or an
importunate suing for pardon in and through Christ.

2. To take heed of rash judging, Romans 14.10. 1 Cor. 4, 5. Now this is rash
judgment, 1. When our Christian Brethren do well, to say they do ill. 2. When
they do ill, to make it worse. 3. When a thing is doubtful, to take it in the
worst part.

3. To exhort Christians, that when at any time they have any doubtful business
or matter to be controverted, they would be willing to refer themselves to the
judgment and censure of their godly Brethren, 1 Corinthians 6.1, etc.

4. To be sober, prayerful, watchful, heavenly-minded, and fearful to offend
God, even in the least thing, Luke 21.34, 35, 36. 1 Pet. 4.7. Rev. 14.7. So the
Apostle Paul, Acts 24.15, 16.

5. To labor for patience, when at any time wrongs and injuries are done unto
them, 2 Thessalonians. 1.5, 6, 7. James 5.7, 8.

6. To exhort Christians to be loving, merciful; and bountiful to their
Christian Brethren in their distresses, Matthew. 25.34, 35, 36.

7. And lastly, to persevere and hold ou^ in good courses even unto the end 2
Epistle of John. v. 8. Rev. 3.11. Thus much for the Doctrine of the last
judgment. Now we should proceed to the two consequents of it, viz. 1. The
eternal happiness of the godly. 2. The eternal misery or damnation of the
wicked: We shall only speak of the first here, having largely handled the 2d in
another place.

Of the first Consequent of the last judgment.
THe first consequent of the last judgment we commend unto you in the Doctrme
following.

Doct. The godly, all the godly, (when the last judgment is ended) shall
possess the Kingdom of God. Though that woman Matthew. 20.20. etc. desired a
special privilege for her two sons, (wherein she seems very ambitious) yet so
much she takes for granted, that Christ's Kingdom shall be possessed of the
godly, all the godly: and by the rule of contraries, 1 Cor. 6.9. Ephesians 5.5.
But more plainly, Matthew. 8.11, 12, 13. and 13.43. and 25.34, 46. Acts 14.22. 2
Cor. 5.1. Romans 2.7, 10. Several Grounds.

Ground 1. Gods Decree: The Lord in his Eternal Counsel has ordained and
appointed them to this possession, to possess his Kingdom: and so we are to
understand that passage, from the foundation of the world. Matthew. 25.34. That
is, before the foundation of the world; to wit, from all eternity: See Romans
8.30. The Apostle speaks as of a thing past, because it was Decreed, a thing
set down in Gods Decree. And Acts 13.48. Hence it is, they are said to be
written in the book of Life, Phil. 4.3. Rev. 21.27.

Ground 2. Christ's Purchase. He by his obedience Passive and Active, has
purchased Gods Kingdom for all the Elect; Ephesians. 1.11.14, 1 Thessalonians. 5.9. Heb.
10.19, 20. Now the godly, all the godly, do manifest themselves to be of that
number.

Ground 3. Christ's Intercession, on earth, and in heaven: On earth, John 17 24.
In heaven, Rom: 5.10. John 14.2, 3.

Ground 4. Whilst they are here on earth, they receive of his anointing, and
so become Spiritual Kings and Priests: Spiritual Kings, whereby they are apted
and fitted for Gods Kingdom: Spiritual Priests, whereby they daily (as they
are enjoined, Mat. 6.10.) pray for it, Rev. 1.6. and 5.10.

Ground 5. Gods Promise and Oath, John 3.16. and 10.28. 1 John 2.25. Heb. 6.17,
18.

Ground 6. Christ their head (in their flesh) is ascended into Gods Kingdom;
and where the Head is, there the Members must be in due time: and to prefigure,
and the better to assure this, some of the Members are there already, as En^ch,
and Elias, and those mentioned, Matthew. 27.52.53.

Before we come to the Application, we have some questions to answer: the first
is, touching the evils the godly shall be freed from, when they possess that
Kingdom. The second question, is touching the place it self. The third question
is, touching the good which the godly shall enjoy in that Kingdom.

Quest. 1. The evils which the godly shall be freed from, when they possess Gods
Kingdom: Facilius dicere possumus, quid ibi non sit, quam quid ibi sit, says
Augustine.

1. They shall be freed from Hell, have an everlasting discharge from that most
woeful and horrible place, Romans 8.1. Rev. 21.8.

2. They shall be freed from sin; there shall be no more blindness in their
minds, no more rebellion in their wills, no more disorder in their affections;
nay, they shall be freed from the power and possibility to sin, be in a better
condition then ever Adam was: In his best estate he might sin; but they shall be
confirmed as the good Angels, Isaiah 60.21. 1 Pet. 1.4. Mat. 22.30.

3. They shall be freed from all sorrow, shame, and grief, Isaiah 25.8. Rev.
21.4.

4. They shall be freed from all Adversary power, all enemies corporal and
Spiritual, and the fear of them; there shall be a perpetual triumph without War,
or fear of War, Luke 21.28.

5. They shall be free from the displeasure of God; he will never be angry with
them any more, Rev. 22.3.

6. They shall be freed from all thraldom, servitude, and bondage: all
Oeconomical, Political, and Ecclesiastical Relations shall then cease; with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, they shall sit down in the Kingdom of heaven.

7. They shall be freed from all toil and labor, all the labor and toil of
both callings, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7. Heb. 4.9. Rev. 14.13.

8. They shall be freed from all uncomilness of body, all bodily deformity; 1
Cor. 15.44. Phil. 3.21.

9. They shall be freed from all the means of a natural life, and from the
inconveniences that attend the same; there shall be no need of meat, drink,
sleep, raiment, physic, marriage, Matthew. 22.30. Rev. 7.16.

10. They shall be for ever freed from all the evils aforesaid.

Quest. 2. Now we come to the second question, and that is touching the place
it self, which the godly (after the last judgment) shall possess; to wit, the
Kingdom of God.

Answ. It is the heaven of heavens, or third heaven; a place far above al
visible heavens, the place whither Christ (in his humane nature) ascended. 1. A
place very large and ample, and therefore called that great City, Rev. 21.10.
and John 14.2. 2. A place very bright and beautiful, Rev. 21.11. Col. 1.12. 3.
A place wondrous pleasant and delightful, and therefore called Abraham's bosom,
and Paradise. 4. A place very safe, for there will be none but friends, neither
can any enemy enter there. 5. A place durable, and of continuance; Heb. 13.14.
2 Cor. 5.1. 1 Pet. 1.4.6. A wondrous rich place, and therefore called a
Kingdom; nay, an heavenly Kingdom; nay, Gods Kingdom; to intimate, that in that
place there is a confluence of all good things, beyond all expression and
imagination, Ps. 87.3.

Quest. 3. The last question: And that is touching the good which the godly
shall enjoy in Gods Kingdom.

Answ. 1. In general, 1 Cor. 2.9. And if in this world, why then sure in a far
greater measure when they shall be possessed of his Kingdom, as the Psalmist
has it, Psalm. 16.11. 2 More particularly, 1. They shall enjoy themselves (both
soul and body) in perfection, Ephesians. 5.27. 1 John 3.2. And this is shadowed out
unto us by those pure white garments, Rev. 3.4.5. and 6.11. 2. They shall enjoy
the blessed company one of another, and society with the blessed Angels, Heb.
12.22, 23. The lowest person there, shall be as an Angel. Nay 3. There they shall
enjoy Christ, have immediate communion with Christ, and by virtue of that
communion, have immediate communion with the Father and the Holy Ghost, and so
have a Crown of glory put upon them, and enjoy a perpetual and everlasting
Sabbath. That they shall have immediate communion with Christ, see Phil. 1.23.
Rev. 22.3, 4. That they shall have immediate communion with the whole Trinity,
see Mat. 5.8. and 18.10. And then, That they themselves (when they come to be
possessed of heaven, 1 John 3.2.) shall have a Crown of glory put upon them, 2 Timothy 4.8. 1 Cor. 9.25. James 1.12. 1 Pet. 5.4. And that they shall enjoy a
perpetual and everlasting Sabbath, See John 3.16. Matthew. 25.46. Heb. 4.9. And
thus we come to the U^es.

Use 1. For Reprehension, to reprove the ungodly, and then the godly. To
reprove the ungodly, and that diverse ways. 1. For their mean esteem of the
godly, they thinking of them as base and unworthy, when as (be they never so
low in civil respects) they are great Princes, Heirs to an eve^lasting
Kingdom, James 2.5. 2. To reprove the ungodly for their mean esteem of
godliness, they taking it to be but folly and madness. But is that a foolish
and mad course that leads to bliss, that tends to eternal happiness? See 2 Pet.
1.11. 3. To reprove the ungodly, because they do no more value Gods Kingdom,
no more value heaven, they preferring their lusts and the things of this world
unto it; their lusts which are their Spiritual diseases, and will be their bane
and undoing, utter undoing: the things of this world, which are but as Counters
and Cherty stones comparatively: Well, it would be thoroughly weighed: 1 Cor.
6.9. Heb. 2.14. Psalm 119 155.

2. To reprove the godly: 1. When at any time they envy the trappings, and
outward prosperity of the wicked; whereas their portion is so little, and their
heaven so short. Alas, they have but a short heaven; but doubtless shall have an
everlasting hell: Mat. 25.46. 2 To reprove the godly, because they do not often
enough meditate of this Kingdom, this heavenly Kingdom prepared for them, the
evils they shall then and there be freed from, what a glorious place heaven is,
and the good they shall there enjoy. From this neglect it is, they are so
entangled, and taken with things terrene and sublunary, that they are so
impatient under crosses and afflictions, that they find the practice of holy
duties so difficult

Use 2. For Comfort and Consolation to all the godly. He that has looked upon
them with grace, bestowed sanctifying grace upon them, intends them eternal
glory. And what indeed is grace, but the beginning of glory? or what is glory,
but the perfection of grace? The truth is, they are subordinate the one to the
other, there being not any specifical difference, but only gradual. See 2 Pet.
1.11. and 1 Pet. 1.3, 4, 5. Well then, let the godly man, the godly woman (to
their comforts) remember what our Savior says unto them, Luke 12.32. The same
may be said of other passions; Grieve not, faint not little flock, because it
is your Fathers pleasure to bestow a Kingdom, an heavenly Kingdom upon you:
Oppose this to all hardships, crosses, and afflictions, nay death it self, and
be comforted. See Romans 8.18. 2 Corinthians. 4.17, 18. Rev. 14.13.

Quest. But how should we know whether we be truly godly or no?

Answ. 1. Saving grace is of an humbling nature, makes a man nothing in
himself, low in his own eyes, to rest upon Gods free favor in Christ for
justification, Romans 7.24, 25. Mat. 5.3. 2. Saving grace is of a purging nature,
it purges out corruption, purifieth the heart, Acts 15.9 1 John 3.3. 3. Of an
heavenly nature, it will be pulling up our hearts from these earthly vanities,
will be soaring upwards from whence it came, Phil. 3.20. Heb. 11.13, 14, 15, 16.
4. It is of a growing nature, (especial^y the public means being enjoyed in
power) Mat. 13 31, 32, 33. Psalm. 92.12, 13, 14.

Use 3. For Exhortation: To exhort the godly, and then the ungodly. 1. To
exhort the godly, and that diverse wa^es: 1. To bless the Lord, to study the
prais^s of their good and gracious God in Christ, for th^s his superabundant
love unto them; manifested in ordaining them to a Kingdom in providing for them
(before all worlds) a Kingdom, an everlasting Kingdom, his Kingdom; and in due
time to give his Son unto them, to purchase it for them; and then at the
length to Regenerate them unto it: 1 Pet. 1.3, 4. 2 To exhort the godly, to
take heed o^ carnal security, and of suffering grace to go out of exercise. The
Apostle Paul is very frequent in this Exhortation, Phil. 2.12. Romans 13.11, etc.
1 Thessalonians. 5.5, 6. etc. Nay, 3. To be constant, forward, and zealous in the way
of godl ness, Matthew 10.22. Rev. 2.10. Galathians 6.9. 1 Cor. 15.58. Matthew.
11.12 But here now we meet with two objections.

Object. 1. But may some man say, This is sooner said then done, the way of
godliness (through the backwardness and averseness of the unregenerate part)
being so painful and difficult.

Answ. 1. The spirit is ready, although the flesh be weak; so our Savior: So
the Apostle John likewise, 1 John 5.3, 4. And you know what the Apostle Paul
says, Phil. 4.13.2. Why should not the godly be willing to take as much pains
for heaven, as others do for hell? To observe the Superstitious, the Profane,
the Covetous, what pains they take to go to hell; rise up early, sit up late,
and all to go to hell. 3. Would it not much dulcifie, often to meditate upon
the end godliness tends unto; to wit, happiness, everlasting happiness, Romans
2.7, 10.

Object. 2. But such as are forward and zealous, we observe them many times to
be necessitated, to be opposed, and persecuted.

Answ. 1. But thou do not see into their inside, the inward man, the grace
and comfort that lodges there, 2 Cor. 4.16. Acts 5.41. Heb. 10.34. We read of
a worthy Germane, Philip Lansgrave of H^ss^, who being a long time Prisoner
under Charles the fifth Emperor; and being demanded what upheld him all t^a^
time, he answered, that he felt the Divine consolations of the M^^ty^s. And
this is that indeed which Christ p^^miseth to the persons aforesaid, (even in
this life) Mark 10.29, 30.2. Will not a Kingdom, an everlasting Kingdom make
amends for all their outward necessities, afflictions, and persecutions? see
Mat. 5.10, 11, 12. See Moses, Heb. 11.24, 25. And the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor.
4.17, 18. He opposes glory, to affliction; heavy, massy, substantial glory, to
light affliction; eternal glory, to moment any affliction; And therefore we
faint not (says he) whatsoever we suffer: and thus our Savior.

These two objections b^ing answered, we go on to the other Members of the
Exhortation: Then 4. To exhort the godly, not only to grow in love one toward
another, but more and more to desire society one with another; and the reason
is this, because the time is coming, when they must live together, and that for
evermore. Hence it is, that the Apostle Peter exhorts godly Husbands, to carry
themselves lovingly toward their godly Wives; 1 Peter 3.7.5. To exhort all the
godly in any case to labor heavenly-mindedness, to use the world, as though
they used it not; feelingly to know and profess themselves to be Strangers and
Pilgrims here, and so they will manifest that they wait for this Kingdom, Heb.
11. from v. 13, to v. 17. To this our Savior exhorts, Matthew 6.19, 20. And so
the Apostle Paul, Col. 3.2.6. To exhort the godly, that they earnestly strive
with all patience to undergo afflictions and crosses: when it shall please God
to reach out unto them a cup of afflictions, and bid them drink a draught of it
to the bottom, the meditation of this heavenly Kingdom must be as Sugar in
their Pockets, to sweeten the Cup withal. See again Romans 8.18. 2 Cor. 4.17,
18. Heb. 11.26. I could be content (says Augustine) to endure the torments of
hell, to gain this joy, rather then to lose it. Ignatius (as some say, Paul's
Scholar) being threatened as he went to Martyrdom with the cruelty of torments,
answered with courage, Fire, Gallows, Beasts, breaking of my bones, quartering
of my members, crushing of my body, all the torments of the Devil together, let
them come upon me, so I may enjoy the Lord Jesus and his Kingdom. These six
ways (from the Doctrine in hand) we have exhorted the godly.

2. Now we come to exhort the ungodly, such as (for the present) are so; to
exhort them to consider of this Kingdom, of this heavenly Kingdom, the
excellency of the place, the evils which all the godly shall be freed from
there, and the good they shall enjoy there; and will they lose this Kingdom for a
little labor, come short of it for a base lust? are the pleasures of sin for a
season, to be compared with the everlasting joys of heaven? nay, to be
compared with the inward consolations that the godly have in this world? Psalm
4.7. 1 Cor. 2.9. And will they not take as much pains to go to heaven, as they
have done all this while to go to hell? O yes, say they, we would fain make out
for heaven, take any pains for the Kingdom you are speaking of, resemble we
would the Merchant spoken of, Matthew. 13.45. Why then this you must do: Holiness
(as you have heard) is the way to Happiness, Godliness to the Kingdom of
Heaven: You must labor to be godly. Now godliness cannot be had without
Christ, therefore marry the Heir; get the King, and the Kingdom is thine too.
When Christ comes into a soul, he comes attended with a train of graces. But
this is the business: Thou will not make out for Christ, until thou see and
feel thy lost estate. Why then, that thou may be acquainted with Christ,
nay, marry Christ, that thou may be brought to a Legal contrition, nay, to
an Evangelical contrition, and so made fit to be espoused to Christ, thou must
in the outward means take the Kingdom of heaven by violence, Mat. 11.12.
constantly attend to the word of the Kingdom, (for so it is called, Mat.
13.19.) imitating them we read of, Luke 51. See John 6.27. Romans 1.16. and 10 14

Thus we have now done with the first Consequent of the last Judgment; to wit,
Eternal happiness or salvation. We should now proceed to the other, to wit,
Eternal misiry or damnation; but that we have spoken of in opening the last
Member of the second Principle, and threfore we refer the Reader thither.

Laus Deo.

