THE FAITH OF THE CATHOLIC CHVRCH, Concerning the EUCHARIST.

Invincibly proved by the Argument used against the Protestants, in the Books
of the Faith of the Perpetuity, written by Mr. Arnaud.

A Translation from the French.

Printed at Holy-Rood House, 1687.

Errors to be Corrected,
Page 40. line 18. I know not. p. 50. l. last r. (...) more easily. p. 89. l.
1. r. came. p. 214. l. 6. r. put out a p. 225. l. 23. r. for those. P. 262. l.
3. after day. r.? l. (...) after procedurer,? also l. 9. after not r.? also l.
18. in stea^^ of that it was not, r. was it not.

ADVERTISEMENT TO THE PROTESTANTS.
THe sole Title of this little Book, is capable to make you sufficiently
understand, that the attentive reading of it, may be of great importance to
you. It treats of a Mystery, on the account of which, you have been made
conceive the greatest aversion from the Catholic Church: And which you have
been made to look upon as the greatest obstacle of your Reconcilement to it.
There is no Person of good sense among you who will not avow, That if your
Religion be false in this point, you ought to forsake it; and that you ought to
give no credit to your Ministers, if it be found that in the matter of the
Sacrament, they have made you mistake Error for Truth. You have no assurance
that you are not thus misled; for they dare not say that their Church is
Infallible. Do not then neglect so easy means to examine whether it be so or
not; and refuse not a few hours application to the most important Affair you
can have in the World, which is that of your Salvation.

Your Ministers ought not to hinder you from this application: For if you find
nothing solid in what is here proposed to you, you will be inclined to adhere
more closely to them. And if on the conttary, the Truth appear to you with such
evidence as obliges you to embrace it: What other thing should hinder it from
having the same effect on them, but a selfish stubbornness; which should not be
a motive to you to follow them, but rather to forsake them.

Perhaps they will tell you, there is nothing here proposed to you of new,
nothing but the same Argument which Mr. Claud has answered; and consequently
that it is not worth your taking notice of it.

But the contrary is true: For if here were offered to you a new Proof of any
Article of our Faith, which you had not heard discoursed of before; you would
not miss to say, That you ought to expect what your Ministers could answer to
it: But this you cannot say here; for never was there a Debate so agitate on
either part as this whereof you have here the result.

That little Book of the Perpetuity, where it was supposed that the Eastern
Societies believes what we believe concerning the Eucharist; while it was yet a
Manuscript, was impugned by a Manuscript-Answer of Mr. Claud, wherein he
maintained that the said Supposition was false, and that excepting the Roman
Church, Transubstantiation and the Adoration of Jesus Christ in the Eucharist,
were two things unknown to the whole World; and that neither the Greeks, nor
the Armenians, nor the Russians, nor the Jacobites, nor the Ethiopians, nor
generally any Christian, save only those who are subject to the Pope, believes
any thing of these two Articles.

After this, the little Perpetuity was printed, with a Refutation of the Answer
made by Mr. Claud: In which Refutation were brought most clear Testimonies of
what he had so boldly denied, concerning the Faith of the Christians of the
East. But as it was judged the contrary could not be maintained; so that point
was not insisted on at length.

Mr. Claud sets out a great Volume against that little Book: And not yielding
to the Proofs that were brought against his Assertion, he employed all what he
had of Wit and Dexterity to support what he had asserted, viz. That
Transubstantion and the Adoration of Jesus Christ in the Eucharist, were
believed in no place of the World, except in the Roman Church

To this Book of Mr. Claud's, was opposed the first of the three great Volumes
of the Perpetuity; wherein the truth of the matter of fact impugned by him, was
confirmed with such force, with Proofs so convincing, with Testimonies so
irrefragable and so numerous, that no Man in the World would believe that one
could yet pertinaciously maintain a thing so manifestly false.

But we were mistaken in this, Mr. Claud did not yet give over, but employed
all kinds of artifices and subtilties to put out the eyes of those of his
Party, that they might not see the Faith of the Roman Church concerning the
Eucharist; in the most formal and express Testimonies of all the Oriental
Societies.

But this Opiniatorness served only to make the truth shine forth more
brightly; for it was the cause of procuring a great many more new Testimonies,
and whole Books published by the Greeks in certain circumstances, that it is
impossible but the most unreasonable must succumb if so be they be obliged to
reflect seriously on them.

This was made appear in the general Answer to that Book of Mr. Clauds, and in
the last Book of the Third Volume of the Perpetuity: And Father Paris,
Canon-Regular of the Congregation of St. Genevieve, a most learned Divine, has
made two Books on the same subject; which joined with those I have mentioned,
have made this matter of fact evident in the highest degree.

This is the fruit of that long Dispute, which has verified that Saying of St.
Augustine (De Civit. Dei, lib. 16. cap. 12) That God permits several points of
the Catholic Doctrine to be impugned by Heretics with many artifices, to the
end that the Catholics being obliged to defend them, they may be examined more
exactly, illustrated more clearly, and maintained more vigorously.

Mr. Claud has written nothing since that time on this matter; (his last Answer
is in the year 1670.) And there are five Volumes which he has left unanswered:
(The last of these five Volumes is in the year 1675.) The two last Volumes of
the Perpetuity, the general Answer, which is in 1671, and the two Books of
Father Paris. And yet, Gentlemen, it is very strange, that notwithstanding of
this silence of Mr. Claud, so publicly notorious; it is given out amongst you,
that he has written last, and that his Books are not answered: For I know this
has been said by several persons, and particularly by Mademoiselle de Suze, to
a Priest a Friend of min.

I have set down to you the progress of this famous Debate, to let you see you
have no reason to say in this occasion, we are expecting till our Ministers
shall have taught us what is to be answered to this Argument. They have done
all you could expect from them on this subject; they are exhausted: They have
spoken, they have answered, they have replied, they have (if I can use the
word) duplied. So that it is no more a process to be instructed; it is all
instructed already, and they can do no more for their part to put it in a
condition to be discerned on.

But who shall be the Judge of it? It shall be every one of you, according to
the Principles of your own Religion: For according to the Principles of ours,
there would be no question at all; because on one hand our Church has all the
marks, by which it has been judged since St. Augustin's time, that we ought to
acknowledge it the true Church of Jesus Christ And on the other, we believe
that Jesus Christ has given to his Church an infallible Authority, to which
every particular person is bound to submit. But your Church is grounded on
another Maxim directly contrary; and you are made to believe, that every one of
you have right to examine and judge, after all your Ministers assembled in a
General Synod could say unto you.

Make use then of the liberty which is given you, even to the end you may be
sure if they had reason or not to give it you. Read and Judge; but read with
such attention and care, as you would bring to comprehend an Affair upon which
depended the Life of one of your best Friends; and judge with that Conscience
and sincerity of Heart, with which you would desire to be judged, if your Life
or Death depended on the Judgment they were to make of you. And indeed, there
is no less at the stake in this occasion; only with this difference, that these
Men who should Judge you, could not preserve your Life, but for a little time,
nor condemn you but to a Death, which sooner or later you could not eschew:
Whereas it is of far greater importance to you to discern in this process,
after the instruction that is given you of the same; for in judging it aright,
and having nothing but God before your eyes, you may eschew a Death which never
ends; a Death which all those will incur who have been made to look upon as a
Damnable Error, the Ancient and perpetual Faith of the most sublime Mystery of
our Religion, and may put your selves in a condition to enjoy one day a Life
eternally happy, after having received the pledge thereof by the real and true
partaking of the Worlds Savior, wherewith the Catholic Church nourishes her
Children.

THE FAITH OF THE CATHOLIC CHVRCH, Concerning the EUCHARIST.
Invincibly proved by the Argument used against the Protestants, in the Books
of Mr Arnaud, entitled, The Perpetuity of the Faith, etc.
THere is no Christian can deny, that a Doctrine regarding one of the principal
Mysteries of Religion, such as is the Eucharist * The Controversy of the
Eucharist is one of the most important of those which makes the separation
betwixt the Roman Church and the Protestants, says Mr. Claud, p. 1. of the
Preface of his Answer to Mr. Arnaud. The Article of the Eucharist, in my
Judgment, is one of the most essential, says M. de Larroque, Minister at Rouen,
in his Preface to the History of the Eucharist.
, which had been always believed in the Universal Church, is a Doctrine taught
by the Apostles to the first Believers We shall then have proved the Doctrine
of the Real Presence, such as the Roman Church now believes it, to be the
Apostles Doctrine, when we shall have proved it to be that which has always
been believed in all the Churches of the World. Now it is impossible but it must
have been always believed in all Churches. If being certain it was universally
believed in some Ages, we can demonstrate that it could not proceed from an
innovation or change of its ancient Faith, that the Church of these Ages began
to believe it. The business will be completely done then, if we can make out
this: And thus we make it out.

SECT. 1. ARGUMENT.
All the Churches both of the East and West, were found to be united in the
Belief of the Real Presence toward the beginning of the eleventh Century, and
they are found to be yet united in the same Belief, excepting only some new
Sects of the last Age. But it is impossible this Belief should have been
established of new (or by an innovation of their ancient Faith) in all these
Churches; and yet no trace nor memorial of that Innovation appeared: And it is
certain there has appeared none at all, neither from Paschasius his time, to
that of Berengarius; nor from Berengarius his time, even to this day. Therefore
it is certain that the Doctrine of the Real Presence, is the perpetual Doctrine
of the Church; and consequently none can maintain the contrary, without being
an Heretic.
THe first Proposition, which is called the major, has two parts; one that the
Churches of the East were united in the same Faith, concerning the Eucharist,
with the Roman Church, in Berengarius his time: The other, that they are united
with the same at this time.

The second Proposition, which is called the minor, has likewise two parts:
One, that supposing the truth of the major, as to Berengarius's time, it is
impossible that the innovation pretended by the Calvinists, to have been made
in all Churches, from Paschasius to Berengarius, could be made in that time.
The other, that if it was not made in that time in all the Eastern Churches, it
would be impossible it could have been made from Berengarius's time, to this
day.

SECT. 2.
The general Proof of the major, in respect of Berengarius his time.

A Matter of fact unanimously asserted by contemporary Authors, who cannot be
suspected to have been deceived, or intending to deceive; and which has not
been contradicted by those who were most concerned to contradict it, ought to
be held for most certain and undoubted.

But we have shown from the very beginning of the first Treatise of the
Perpetuity, and in the first Tome, 2 Book 7 Chap. and 9 Book 1 Chap. That all
those who wrote against Berengarius, Adelmanus who had studied under S.
Fulbert, Hugo Bishop of Langres, Deodurnus Bishop of Liege, Lanfrancus
Archbishop of Canterbury, Durandus Abbot of Troarn Guitmondus Archbishop of
Aversa in Italy, did all of them reproach to him, That he had separated himself
from the unity of the Holy Church; that he scandalized the whole Church; that
none before him had dreamed of his Follies; that his Heresy was so notorious,
that there needed not a Council assembled to condemn it; that he impugned what
the Church taught througbout the World: That the Berengarians had not for
themselves one sole Town, nor so much as one Village: And in a word, that there
needed no more but to ask the Latins, the Greeks, the Armenians, and generally
all the Christians of whatsover Nation, and all would answer, That they
believed the change of the terrestical substance of the Bread and Wine, by the
infallible, incomprehensible, and miraculous operation of the Omnipotence of
God, into the essence or substance of the Lords Body.

We did likewise show it was not credible, that all these Authors were
mistaken, or knew not if there were any Churches holding Berengarius his
Opinion or not: Lanfrancus a Native of Italy, who had been a Monk at Bec,
afterward Abbot of Caen, and at last Archbishop of Canterbury, could bear
witness of the Sentiments of a great part of Europe: Deoduinus and Adelmanus
could serve as witnesses for Germany, and Guitmondus for Italy, where the
Greeks were mixed with the Latins; and Hugo for France. Nor can it be said they
intended to deceive the World, because there is not any probability that so
considerable Men, would have been so imprudent as to advance against their
Conscience, so important a matter of fact: concerning which, it had been easy
to have covered them with shame, had it not been true.

Finally, it is there made out farther, that neither Berengarius nor his
Sectators, did object to these Authors, that their Reproaches of the novelty of
their Opinion was false; or that it was not contrary to all the Churches of the
World: That we find not they cited any Author either of the Eleventh or Tenth
Age, as favorable to their Opipion; but were forced to go seek it in some
passages of St. Augustine, interpreted according to their fancy, and in the Book
of John Scot Ae^rgene: And that they found themselves so straightened by that
Argument of the uniform Belief of all Churches, as they had nothing to say, but
that after the Gospel was preached to all Nations, and the World had believed
it, and the Church was formed, augmented, and fructified; it fell afterward
into Error, by the ignorance of those who understood not the Mysteries; and
that it was perished, and remained extant only in their Party.

It ought then to be held for certain and undoubted, that all Christian
Churches were found united in the Belief of the Real Presence, in the time of
Berengarius, about the beginning of the Eleventh Age. And this is what
Aubertin, lib. 9. p 943. (a most Learned Protestant) acknowledges at least as
to the Latins: For he pretends that the Innovation was made in the darkness of
the Tenth Age: That those of the Eleventh had sucked in with their Milk, the
Belief of the Real Presence. Hac Opinione una cum Lecte imbuli.

SECT. 3.
The particular Proof of the same Major, in regard of the Greeks in the time of
Berengarius.

AMong many Proofs which may be seen in the First Tome of the Perpetuity, lib.
2. c. 5, 6, 7, 8. etc. I shall content my self with one only.

During the Eleventh Century, when the Heresy * The Heresy of Berengarius
consisted in denying the Real Presence of the Body of Jesus Christ in the Holy
Sacrament.
of Berengarius made so much noise in the Latin Church, when it was condemned
by nine Councils; whereof some were held in France, and some in Italy; the
Greeks had several Churches and Monasteries in Italy; and the Latins had also
Churches at Constantinople: Whence it was not possible, that being so mixed
together, either of them could be ignorant of the Sentiments of one another,
especially in respect of a Mystery; concerning which, there was risen up a
Heresy in the Judgment at least of the Latins.

Wherefore it is inconceivable, that if the Greeks had been Berengarians at
that time, (as Mr. Claud would have it believed) they should have without the
least bustle or noise, suffered the Latin Church to condemn as an Heresy their
Sentiment in the matter of the Eucharist: And that the Latins on their side
should have said nothing to the Greeks, seeing them maintain that same Heresy
which they had so recently condemned in the person of Berengarius.

Now it is certain that these two Churches did not at that time, nor
afterward, upbraid one another on this matter; although they were never more
inclined, nor had greater provocations to have done it, if there had been any
ground for it. For it was at that time there arose the hottest debate that
could be imagined, betwixt Michael Cerularius Patriarch of Constantinople, and
Leo Archbishop of Acride, Metropolitan of Bulgaria on one side, and Pope Leo,
and the whole Latin Church, on the other. Nothing could parallel the bitterness
and animosity of the Greeks. Michael and Leo of Acride did write in the year
1053, (which is the very same year wherein Berengarius was condemned in two
Councils both held in Italy, one at Rome, and the other at Vercelli) to John
Bishop of Trani in Apulia. This Letter was most bitter: They upbraided the
Latins in several things: That celebrating the Eucharist in Azimis, they
communicated with the Jews: That they eated strangled meats: That they did not
sing Alleluia in Lent: But not so much as one word of the Faith of the
Eucharist. And this Letter having been communicated to Pope Leo the IX. He
wrote thereupon a Letter to that Patriarch and Archbishop, wherein after having
defended the Latin Church on the point of Azimis, he complains of the violence
of the Patriarch Michael, who had caused shut up all the Churches of the Latins
that were at Constantinople: And he extols the modesty of the Roman Church, in
that there being several Churches of the Greeks both within and without the
City of Rome; yet they were not hindered to observe the Traditions of their
Ancestors. Because (says he) the Roman Church knows well that the diversity of
Customs, according to Times and Places, is no ways prejudicial to the Salvation
of Believers, when they have the Same Faith. Whence it appears, that although
there were then a great number of Greeks in Italy, whose Sentiments in matter
of the Eucharist, Pope Leo could not be ignorant of; he was persuaded there was
no more but a diversity of Customs in point of the Eucharist, by reason of the
Azimis, betwixt the Greek and Latin Church; and that both these Churches had
but one and the same Faith of that Mystery. And consequently he was no le^^
persuaded that the Greek Church believed the Real Presence and
Transubstantiation, as well as the Latin: For a^ to the Latin Church, the
Calvinists doe^ not deny that she believed both those points at that time.

This is farther confirmed by another Letter which Michael Cerularius wrote the
year following (when he could be no more ignorant of the condemnation of
Berengarius) to the Patriarch of Antiochia: which as the forementioned is full
of Accusations against the Roman Church, to persuade him to forsake the Popes
Communion; amongst which Accusations, there were some altogether calumnious, as
that the Latins did not Honor St. Basil and Sr. Chrysostom; and yet not so
much as a word of their Belief of the Eucharist, which had been a far more
considerable ground of separation, if the Greeks had not had the same Faith on
that matter, than the ^ifles which they objected to the La^ins: That their
Priests raised their Beards: That their Monks eated fat: That their Bishops
carried the Effigies of a Lamb.

And by what passed at Constantinople betwixt Cardinal Humbertus, one of the
most zealous Adversaries of Berengarius, whom Leo the IX. sent thither to
compose matters in Controversy; and the Greeks whom Michael had exasperated
against the Latins. This Cardinal having there on several occasions spoken so
clearly of the Eucharist, according to the Belief of the Roman Church, that it
is impossible the Greeks did not understand him; or that they would have
sufferd him, if they had not had the same Faith.

And lastly, by the Council held at Placentia in Italy, in the year 1095, under
Victor the II. where the Berengarian Heresy was again condemned, and the
Catholich Faith declared in these terms: That the Bread and Wine being
consecrated on the Altar, are changed not only in figure, but absolutely and
essentially into the Body and Blood of the Lord. Which cannot be said to have
been unknown to the Greeks, the Ambassadors of the Emperor Alexius Comnenus
having been present at this Council. So that if the Greeks had not been of the
same Faith with the Latins in that point, it is impossible but so surprising a
decision would have strangely startled them; and in this astonishment made them
advertise the Emperor and all Greece of the same.

SECT. 4.
Proof of the Minor as to the first time, that is, the Proof of the
impossibility of an Innovation, whereof no memory remained, which the
Calvinists must say was made in all the Churches of the World, from the end of
the Ninth Age, to the beginning of the Eleventh. First member of this Proof.

THe Major being proved in regard of the first time; that is to say, it being
to be held for certain, that in the time of Berengarius, all the Churches of
the East, especially the Greek Church, had the same Faith of the Eucharist,
which the Roman Church had; which the Calvinists does not deny to have at that
time believed the Real Presence and Transubstantiation. If it was not the
ancient Faith of the Church, these Churches must have changed their Belief of
this Mystery by an Innovation whereof themselves were not sensible, nor did
perceive, and of which no trace nor memory has remained perceivable to us: And
this is what is said to be impossible, in the First Part of the Minor of the
famous Argument of the Perpetuity.

The Calvinists on the contrary pretend, that this not only was not impossible,
but that it had de facto come to pass by a Book of Paschasius a Monk of Corbie,
made in the beginning of the Ninth Age. They accuse him to have been an
Innovator or Broacher of a new Doctrine, and to have been the first Author of
Transubstantiation; they set up incontinently Adversaries against him: But they
suppose that this Book of Paschasius, and his Scholars who defended it, did
insensibly corrupt the minds of a great many Men, and that this made such a
progress, during the ignorance and darkness of the tenth Age, that those of the
Eleventh, though become more ^lear-sighted, having sucked in this opinion with
their Milk, made it pass for truth. Hinc contigit, says Aubertin, page 443. ^ut
in sequenti saeculo, quamvis literati^res facti, hac tamen opinione cum lacte
^mbuti, illam tanquam veram confidenter obtruserint.

This is what the Salvation of Calvinists is grounded upon: If this Romance be
not true, there is no Salvation for them, because there is none for those who
overturns or destroys in so important a matter, the ancient Faith of all the
Christians of the World, and who have taken the same Faith for the greatest
pretext of their schismatical separation from the Church.

Now we have shown in several places of the Books of the Perpetuity, that never
was there a Fable worse contrived, though Mr. Claud thinks it the most exact
and best invented that could be: For what is there (says he) more reasonable,
than to say that Paschasius his Opinion, adorned with the Colors of Antiquity
although in reality it was but a Novelty, supported with a little Philosophy,
extolled by these big words which ignorants admire, and proposed in Ages like
the Ninth and Tenth, did find at the beginning some Sectators, who induced
others to follow them, until at last it became the strongest, and was
established by the assistance of violence and Authority

But its his pleasure, to the end he may render this Innovation less absurd,
never to represent it with those circumstances, with which it must of necessity
have been accompanied, if it had fallen out.

The first is, that about the end of the Ninth Age, and the beginning of the
Tenth, all the Bishops, Priests, Monks, and Laics, having been instructed in
the Belief of the Real Presence of Jesus Christ in the Eucharist (which ought
to have been, according to the Calvinists, the common Belief of the Ninth Age)
they abandoned without resistance and without debate, the Faith of their
Forefathers, to follow a new Opinion, introduced by a Monk of France.

The second is, that this comes to pass without noise or tumult.

The third is, that this change is made at the same time, and after the same
manner, in all the Churches of the World, it being, as we have already
demonstrated, that they are all found to have been of the same Faith of the
Real Presence, in the beginning of the Eleventh Age.

The fourth is, that no trace of this change remains; and the memory of it so
abolisht, that in the Eleventh Age immediately following that wherein they say
that Innovation was made, no person had heard tell of it, as appears
sufficiently, in that there being in the year 1003, a Council held at Orleans,
(Spicileg. Tom. 11. p. 675.) wherein were condemned as Heretics, two Priests,
for having denied amongst other things, that the Bread is changed into the Body
of Jesus Christ in the Eucharist.

But because of these four circumstances, the two last are they which shows
more palpably the impossibility of this change, and are least exposed to be
eluded by any wrangling; I shall content my self to set down here, how these
two circumstances are pressed in the Ninth Book of the First Tome of the
Perpetuity.

The first is treated of in the third Chapter, which has for Title, Examination
of Engines of Retrenchment, or Means by which Mr. Claud exempts himself from
making the Doctrine of the Real Presence, preached to the greatest part of
Christians. And here is what is said of it.

How happy should Mr. Claud be, if the Effects followed his Words, as his Words
follows his Desires; and if to make things true, it were enough that he assured
them to be so, as it is enough for him to desire them, for assuring them! Then
we should easily see come to pass that wonderful change he unundertakes to make
in the Tenth Age: But the ill is, that the things which are without him, and
those by past Events, have an inflexible and unva^iable certainty, which suits
not at all with his Desires: And so it falls out, that he reckons of them on
his side as he pleases himself; and on the other, the things remains still
quite contrary to what he says of them.

The Question, says he, p 641. is not of the whole-World; it is only of the
Occident, and of the Provinces subject to the Obedience of the Pope. That is to
say, I will not have this to be the question; I will not be at the pains to
explicate, how the Doctrine of the Real Presence and Transubstantiation was
introduced in the East, in the Patriarchates of Constantinople, of Alexandria,
of Jerusalem, and Antiochia, in the Churches of the Armenians, Nestorians, and
Jacobites: I will not trouble my self to guess how it did penetrate into
Ethiopia, Muscovia, Mesopotamia, Georgia, Mingrelia, ^oldavia, Tartaria, and
into the Ind a's; I had better say it is not there, I will have sooner done,
and by this means I will free my self of a great many difficulties.

Mr. Claud, if he pleases, will permit us to adverrise him, that he is Man, and
nor God; and consequently neither his Words nor his Wishes are operative. He
would not have the Doctrine of the Real Presence, to be in all these great
Provinces: But it is and will be in them, whether he would or would not, the
matter does not at all depend upon him: And we have made it appear by Proofs,
which we judge himself will not gainstand.

So that notwithstanding of all his Wishes, the question is to know how the
belief of the Real Presence, could be introduced in all these places, if it had
not still been in them. Cerrain it is, that it is there established, and reigns
and domineers absolutely. There is no other known, no memory that ever any
other Doctrine was there. All these Nations are persuaded they hold it by
continual succession from their Forefathers It is manifest they have held
always this Doctrine, since the time the Berengarians were first heard of; and
that in this point they were still united with the Roman Church. Mr. Claud must
then tell us, who has made them embrace this Doctrine: But how can he do it,
since the reason why he would exeem himself from entering into this question,
is, because he finds that not only solid Proofs, but even Inventions and
Fictions fails him; all his Machines become useless to him. He talks to us of
Paschasius, of Disputes, of the Intrigues of Monks, of the Violences of the
Court of Rome. And to render all this heap of Dreams and Visions ridiculous,
there needs no more but to oblige him to cast his eyes on two third parts of
the World, which knows neither Paschasius nor his Book; and are so far from
acknowledging the Pope, that they are most passionately bent to contradict him
in all they can.

Let Mr. Claud tell us therefore, who did persuade them to a Belief which he
pretends to be directly contrary to Scripture, to Fathers, to Reason and Sense?
What Preachers did produce so great an effect? How comes it to pass that none
of all these Nations did resist this Innovation? How comes it to pass that all
of them have forgot they changed their Persuasion, and takes their present
Doctrine for that which the Apostles established in the Church, and which has
descended even to them by the succession of their Bishops.

Mr. See page 2. of the General Answer.
Claud wearies his Imagination to invent an impertinent Fable of a young Monk,
who without going out of his Convent, and without being heard tell of abroad,
yet changes the Faith of the whole Occident: He torments himself to accompany
this Fable with a thousand fantastical suppositions: He exhausts all his
Figures, and all his big Words, to dazzle a little the eyes of the simple; and
to hide from them the absurdity of this Romance.

But he takes no heed that all his endeavors are in vain; there remains more
than two thirds of his Work to be done; without which, all the pains he takes
are to no purpose; he must yet find other Paschasius's to carry this Faith into
all the Societies separate from the Roman Church, and into remote Provinces:
All these Paschasius's must have the same success, that no person contradict
nor oppose their Enterprises; that no person perceive them renversing the
ancient Faith; and in a word, they must all have accomplished their work at the
same time, when Berengarius shall happen to start up, to the end he might with
some ground of reason say, That the Church was perished, and there was no more
remnant of it than those who followed him (Lanfrancus, cap. 23.)

I see very well that Mr. Claud for all his stoutness, succumbs under the
greatness of this Enterprise: It frights him, he gives it over, he asks pardon,
he would wish with all his heart, that that this made no part of the Question.
The Question (says he) is not of all the World. But there is no moyen to be
complaisant to him: The Question is of the whole World, whether he will or will
not because that Belief is established throughout the World. This depends
neither upon him nor me: It is a necessary part of this great Question, and
which draws all the rest after it. Wherefore since by a constrained confession
of his inability, he acknowledges he cannot say there was made an universal
change of Belief in the whole Orient, he must needs abandon all the rest, and
avow that all his moyens are ruined, all his Engines shattered, all his
Projects renversed, and all his Suppositions destroyed.

If he say it was Paschasius who invented this Doctrine, and that it could
never have fallen into the brain of another, we show him an infinite number of
Christians, who neither knows Paschasius, nor his Book, and who yet makes still
profession of this Doctrine; and here he is convinced of timerity and imposture.

If he tells us, That the Popes did by their Authority and Violences, concur to
make it be received; We shall let him see those great Nations, over whom they
have no Jurisdiction, in which they are not acknowledged, and amongst whom
their Decisions have neither Credit nor Authority; and who notwithstanding are
no less tenacious of the Faith of the Real Presence, as those People who are
most submitted to the Holy See; and this does farther point him out as a
Deceiver of the World, by groundless and improbable Fables.

If he talks to us of Cabals and imaginary Intrigues, of Disputes of
Philosophy, by which he pretends this Doctrine was established; we shall show
an infinite number of People, who neither knows the School Philosophy, nor
never disputed of these matters; and amongst whom even the imagination of Mr.
Claud himself could never make the Intrigues of the Court of Rome active; and
who yet believes the Real Presence as we do: And lo here also all his
Reckonings and Fables annihilated.

This is what regards the third Circumstance; which is, that this Innovation
should have been made at the same time in all the Churches of the World: Which
renders it so evidently impossible, that Mr. Claud could not extricate himself
otherwise (as we have shown) than by an Engine or Machine of Re^renchment,
whereby he would have ^s believe, against all truth, that the ^oint
controverted in this matter, is not ^he belief of the whole World, but on^y
that of the Occident, and of the Provinces submitted to the Obedience of ^he
Pope.

SECT. 5
The Second Member of the Proo^ of the impossibility of an insensibl^ change,
from the end of the Ninth Age, to the beginning of the Eleventh.

THe fourth Circumstance, viz. That this Innovation ought to have been made in
a manner so imperceptible, as that no tract thereof remained to posterity, is
treated in the ninth Chapter of the same Book, which has for Title, Examination
of the Engines or Means of Execution, in which is shown the impossibility of an
insensible change. I would wish one should read it entirely, for they would
have greater satisfaction: But not to be too prolix, I shall transcribe here
the most necessary.

The inutility of the preceding means made use of by Mr. Claud, gives us no
ground to expect great matter from those he pretends were made use of to bring
to pass this insensible change. So it may be seen in the Description thereof,
made on his own proper words, that he knows not what to lay hold on, and
employs contradictory means. Sometimes he makes the Real Presence established by
the noise of Disputes, page 300. Sometimes he avows there were no Disputes in
the Tenth Age, in which he pretends this change was made, page 651. So here we
have right to ask of him in the first place, that he would take his option; and
that in choosing one of these chimerical moyens he should confess he advanced
the other falsely and timerariously.

Yet it must be granted, that if the contradiction be evident, it is in some
manner necessary; and he was forced to it by the consequence of his false (...)
it was impossible the Belief of the Rea^ Presence should be introduced into the
Church, in case it had not always been in it, without a great number of
Disputes and Contestations; and therefore at first he lays hold on this moyen,
as absolutely necessary for his purpose. These Meanings or Senses, says he,
were assaulted by the noise of Disputes, page 30. But when he saw that these
Disputes did necessarily draw after them Writings on either hand, and that he
could produce none; he repents himself of the step he had advanced, and retires
back in contradicting himself by a pretty Antithese as we have seen: I conclude
indeed, says he, page 400. that since there were no Writings on the matter,
there were no Disputes about it. The consequence in my opinion is reasonable;
but I do not conclude, that there having been no Disputes, therefore the
Doctrine of the Church was not assaulted. The consequence is not good; was
established without being defended.......... I conclude indeed, that if there
had been Disputes on the point, Ignorance had not subsisted: But I conclude
likewise, that Ignorance has subsisted, because there were no Disputes.

If we require proofs from Mr. Claud. that the Real Absence (which he calls the
Doctrine of the Church) was assaulted by false Philosophy, by the Intrigues of
Monks, and hy the Authority of the Court of Rome, which was never more fierce
nor more powerful. He would be no less straightened than he is, to produce
Writings and Disputes; for there is as little likelihood in the one as the
other. Never was there any thing more remote from Philosophy true or false,
than all what remains of the Writings of the Tenth Age: And if there was any
ignorance greater in this than in other Ages, it was only of Aristotle's
Philosophy, and Humane Literature: For the Ecclesiastics of that time, applied
themselves only to the reading of the holy Scripture and the Fathers.

That Authority of the Court of Rome, which Mr. Claud says was never so fierce
nor so powerful, and by which he will have the true Doctrine to have been
attacked, is also a fiction not only timeratious and groundless, but
notoriously false, and contrary to the truth of History: For not only the
Court of Rome was neither fierce nor powerful in the Tenth Age, but was
extremely depressed; for the Emperors taking upon them to make depose the
Popes, and elect others; it may be said, that during all this Age, the Roman
Church was under the dependence of the Temporal Power, and consequently was
never less in condition to make a new Doctrine be recevied by the whole Church,
as it was never farther from enterprizing it.

These Intrigues of Monks are mere fables, without likelihood and without
ground. The Monks of these times were either disorderly and thought little on,
changing the Faith of the Church; or reformed, as these of the Congregation of
Cluny, the Camaldulenses established by St. Romuald in Italy, the Monks of
Germany reformed by the Bishops. There were also several other Reforms made in
France and Germany, of which mention is made in the Book of the Perpetuity: But
all these Reforms aimed at the withdrawing of the Monks from the Intrigues of
the World, and not to entangle them therein. We have yet extant the Life of St.
Mayeul, written by St. Odilon, that of St. Odo written by an Author
contemporary; those of St. Odilon and St. Romuald, written by Petrus Damianus.
As all these persons were persuaded of the Real Presence; St. Odo speaks
honorably of Paschasius in his Conferences; St Odo saw Berengarius, Petrus
Damianus survived the condemnation of his Heresy, and condemns it every where
throughout all his Books; so they would have made no difficulty to avow, that
they whose Lives they wrote, had labored to establish the Belief of the Real
Presence. They would have thought Intrigues for such a subject honorable; and
taking from them the name of Intrigues, they would have made them pass for
works of their Zeal for the Truth.

And yet we find not that it is observed of any of these holy religious Men,
that they contributed any manner o^ way to root out the Opinion contrary to the
Real Presence, nor to spread that Doctrine abroad.

I knew not if Mr. Claud has been at the pains to reflect on this Observation,
and if he sees the consequence that springs from it. So that to help him to
draw them, I entreat him to consider, that if it was true that the Doctrine of
the Real Presence had been established in the Tenth Age, and pagated into all
the Provinces of Christendom. It must be absolutely necessary, that all those
who were reputed for Piety and Learning in these times, had their part in its
establishment, and labored for the same. And as there can hardly be imagined a
greater work, than to persuade this Belief to all the Ecclesiastics, and to
all the People, to overcome all the oppositions of their Reason and their
Senses, fortified by the multitude, and by being accustomed to other more easy
and more humane Cogitations: It would have doubtless been the principal
Occupation of these Paschasites; and these Paschasites who should have so
changed the Faith of the whole Church, could be no other than Men who were
considered as the Heads of the Religion of that Age, and who by their Authority
drew the Ecclesiastics and People after them.

Now we have the Lives of the most part of these persons, written by Authors
contemporary, or at least of the following Age.

We can reckon more than twenty of them (whom I omit for brevity) and resume
the Discourse by this reflection.

But it is not said neither of these Saints, nor of any other, that they
preached the Doctrine of the Real Presence; that they were zealous for its
establishment; that they converted many persons to this Belief: And that which
should have been their chiefest occupation, and the principal object of their
Zeal and Devotion, according to Mr. Clauld's fancies, is not so much as
observed by the Historians, save only by St. Odo Archbishop of Canterbury,
Uncle to St. Oswald; but in a manner far from giving ground to think that the
Belief of the Real Presence was not that of his time. The History of St. Odo,
which William of Malmsbury draws from Osborn, carries only that several
persons doubting of the verity of the Eucharist, he confirmed them in the Faith
by a Miracle, in showing the Host changed into Flesh. Plurimos de veritate
Dominici corporis dubitantes, says William of Malmsbury, it a roboravit, ut
panem Altaris ver sum in carnem, and v^num calicis in sanguinem, propalam
ostenderet, and denuo in pristinam speciem retorta, usui humano conducibilia
faceret, Guil Malmsb. in Odone. The matter of fact is acknowledged by the
Protestants themselves, though Baleus no less than Aubertin ascribes it to the
Devil, mendacibus Satanae miraculis.

This proves indeed that there were in St. Odo's time, some persons who doubted
of the Real Presence; which is no strange thing, being that the Mysteryitself
is capable to excite these kind of doubts: And besides this, John Scot had
retired himself to England, where he might have made some private Disciples of
his Doctrine.

But here its manifestly seen, that this doubt was condemned by Odo, Head of
the English Church; who having been looked upon as a Saint by those of his time,
and not accused of Error by any, is an unquestionable Witness of the Faith of
the Church of England, during the Tenth Age

The same Osborn in the Life of St. Dunstan, chap. 44. speaks likewise of the
Eucharist, but only occasionally, and to show how much this Saint was
replenished with the Spirit of God: Being returned, says he, to the Altar, he
changed the Bread and Wine into the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, by the holy
Benediction: And when he had given the Blessing to the People, he left once
more the Altar to preach; and being inebriated with the Spirit of God, he spoke
of the verity of the Body of Jesus Christ, of the future Resurrection, and of
Life eternal, in such a manner, that one would have thought they heard speaking
a Man already beatified. Lo here the rank which was given to the Article of the
Real Presence in the Tenth Age.

It ought moreover to be concluded from the example of St. Odo, that if all the
Authors of the Lives of Saints had had any such thing to be related of those
whose Lives they wrote, and if they had had ground to remark the Conversions
they had made, they would not have omitted to have done it; and consequently
their silence is an evident proof, that these Saints never had it in their view
to inspire the Doctrine of the Real Presence; that they never dreamed of this
project: And as it could not have been established by others than by them, it
follows that it was not established by any person in that Age, because it
needed not, being the ancient Belief of preceding Ages.

After having remarked what ought to have been found in the Lives written
particularly of the Saints of that time, we pass next to the Histories, Annals,
and Chronicles.

The same observation may be made on the Historian Ditmarus Bishop of
Mersbourg, who at least had no less intention to write the Ecclesiastical
History of his time, than that of the Temporal State of Germany: His great
Birth did not suffer him to be ignorant of what passed in his time: He was an
intimate Friend of all the Bishops of his Age; and he makes the Eloge of
several of them in his History, wherein are reckoned to the number of eleven:
He speaks of a great many others, and makes his own Life in his History; but he
neither mentions of himself, nor of any other that took pains to establish the
Belief of the Real Presence.

Will Mr. Claud say that all these Bishops had no part in this Work, or that
the matter was not worth the remarking? Will he pretend that to withdraw
Germany from an Opinion which the Paschasites must have looked upon as a
detestable Crime, to persuade the World a Doctrine so contrary to Reason; and
which they judged so necessary for Salvation, was a thing too trivial to appear
in the Eloge of these Bishops?

We find the same silence in all the other Historians of the Ninth and Tenth
Age, how sollicitous soever they were to transmit to us the Affairs of the
Church. There are reckoned up ten, what Histories, what Annals or Chronicles,
which says not so much as one word of that establishment of the Real Presence,
of these Disputes, of these Conversions, nor of the Zeal of the Bishops of that
time, to instruct all the people in that Doctrine,

In a word, as Mr. Claud who is acute enough to forsee what ought to be, misses
not to rank amongst those means which could advance the establishment of the
Real Presence, the Intrigues of Courts, the Combinations of great Men, the
Interests of Bishops and other worldly Engines; and which he says he would have
remarked, if he had been living at that time: It must be granted to him, that
Intrigues which should have had so great effects, ought to have been most
remarkable; and yet we find no mention at all made of them, in any of the
contemporary Authors, who wrote the Lives of the Princes and Princesses of this
Age, as in Wittichindus, Ditmarus, Glaber, Rodolphus, Helgaldus, Odilo, and
several others. Many proofs are there seen of the Zeal of these two Princes for
Religion; and it is hard to find any who were more careful, who had more favor
for the Church, and who had more esteem and affection for the holy Bishops and
Religious Men of their time. And if it was true that the Doctrine of the Real
Presence was introduced in their time, it must have been by their Authority and
favor. Whence comes it then, that that Zeal, and all these Actions which
should have flowed from it, have not been observed by any Author: And that in
the telling us of these Kings, of these Princes and Princesses, they make no
mention of their particular Devotion to the Real Presence, nor of the care they
had to establish it more and more among the faithful.

And yet according to Mr. Claud, these Princes ought to have had a great hand
in that Innovation, no less than the Pope and the Bishops, seeing that to make
it the more credible, he supposes Pascasius his Doctrine, ought to have been
established by the help of Violence and Authority. But it was found altogether
established then, when Berengarius proposed his figurative Sense: So there must
have been before Berengarius, either Princes or Popes, or Bishops, who employed
Violence or Authority, to set it in that height of credit it was found in
before Berengarius appeared. How comes it then, that in so many Histories,
Annals, and Lives of holy Bishops, nothing of all that is to be seen.

The prodigious silence of so many persons, on a matter so important as the
universal change of Belief, which could no have come to pass, without the
participation of all these he speaks of, will stand for a most evident
demonstration to all judicious persons; there being no method more convincing
to prove Negatives of this kind; for it ought not to be pretended, that these
Authors should have prophesied, that there were to come Men so audacious as to
assert that the whole Church had changed her Faith during this Age, or that
they were obliged to belie beforehand so ridiculous an Imagination.

I pretend then that the Minor is most clearly proved in respect of the first
time; that is to say, the impossibility of a change, whereof no trace should
have remained, which the Calvinists must pretend to have been made in all the
Churches of the World, from the end of the Ninth, to the beginning of the
Eleventh Age, is most solidly demonstrated. There remains then no more but to
prove the second part of the Major; that is, the unanimous agreement of all
these Churches at this present time.

And the second part of the Minor, to wit, That it is impossible they should be
found at present in this union, by an insensible change as to the Faith of the
Eucharist, which should have happened in all the Churches of the East, in the
time that has run since Berengarius till now. And this is a thing more easy,
because the truth of things nearer to us is discovered.

SECT. 6.
Proofs of the Major in regard of the present time; that is to say, that the
Eastern Churches, especially the Greek Church, are of the same Faith that the
Roman Church is concerning the Eucharist.

I Cannot tell if ever there was a matter of fact proved by so many pieces and
irrefragable Testimonies, as the Agreement of the present Eastern Church with
the Roman, in the Belief of the Mystery of the Eucharist, that is, of the Real
Presence, Transubstantiation, and Adoration.

They are all to be seen, some in the First Tome of the Perpetuity, Book 12.
others in the first Book of the General Answer; and more at length in the Third
Tome, Book 8. Where they are found altogether marked at the end in a Table
which here follows.

For the Greek Church of the Patriarchate of Constantinople.
A Writing of a Nobleman of Moldavia, concerning the Belief of the Greeks,
entitled, Enchiridion, sive stella Orientalis.

Letter of M. Olarius, concerning the Belief of the Muscovites and Armenians.

Extract of a Synod held in the Isle of Cyprus, in the year 1668.

Attestation of a Priest and Canon of Muscovia, and of three other Muscovites
in the Ambassadors Train, concerning the Belief of their Nation.

Confession of Faith required by Methodius from Doctor Cicada.

Extract of the Book of Agapius, Monk of Mount Athos, entitled, The Salvation
of Sinners.

Attestation of eight Superiors and Monks of Mount Athos.

Attestation of Methodius Patriarch of Constantinople.

Attestarion of the Superior of Mount Athos, concerning Agapius.

Attestation of seven Archbishops of the East.

Attestation of the Church of the Ifland of Anaxia.

Attestation of the Church of the Isles of Cephalonia, Zacynthus, and ^^thaca.

Attestation of the Isle of Micone.

Attestation of the Isle of Milo.

Attestation of the Church of the Isle of Chios.

Attestation of a Superior and the Monks of the Monastery of Mauromale.

Letter of M. Panjotti.

Attestation of the Patriarch of Constantinople, of three other Patriarchs
preceding him, and of the Metropolitans of that Patriarchate

Attestation of the Churches of Mi^grelia, Colichis, and Georgia.

Attestation of the Vicar Apostolic, ^esident at Constantinople.

Attestation of M. Casimir, Resident ^t Poland.

Attestation of M. Quirino, Refident ^f the Republic of Venice.

Attestation of M. Fieschi, Resident of Genoa.

Attestation of the Ambassadors of ^he the Republic of Ragusa.

Attestation of the Community of ^he Perots, as well Supetiours as Offi^ers.

Attestation of M. Taisia, on the ^eath of his Son, communicated by the Greeks.

Extract of some Decisions of the Church of Constantinople, sent to the
Russians.

The Answer of Marcus Donus of ^he Isle of Candia, sent to Mr. Claud.

Attestation of the Monastery of St. George.

Extract of the Treatise of Meletius Syrigus, against Cyrilius Lucar.

For the Greek Church of the Patriarchate of Alexandria.
Extract of a Letter of the Patriarch of Alexandria, sent to Constantinople.

For the Greek Church of the Patriarchate of Antiochia.
Profession of the Faith of the Greek of the Patriarchate of Antiochia,
concerning the Eucharist.

Condemnation of the Calvinists by Macarius Patriarch of Antiochia, o^ the
Greek Nation.

A new Condemnation of the Calvinists by the Grecian Church of the Patriarchate
of Antiochia, under the Patriarch Neophilus, signed by the Patriarch
Archbishops, Curats, Priests, Deacons and others.

Apology of Sotericus Panteugen^^ to the Patriarch of Antiochia, and to the
Council, concerning the matters o^ which he was accused.

For the Grecian Church of the Patriarchate of Jerusalem.
Letter of Nectarius Patriarch of Jerusalem, to Paysius Patriarch of Alexandria.

Extract of a Synodical Treatise, composed by Docitheus Patriarch of Jerusalem;
and by a Synod at the Dedication of the Church of Bethlehem, signed by sixty
two Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Curats and other Ecclesiastics.

Extract of the Treatise of Elias Patriarch of Jerusalem, concerning the
Mysteries, drawn from an Arabic Manuscript of the Kings Bibliotheck.

For the four Patriarchs together.
A Book entitled, The Orthodox Confession of the Oriental Church, approved by
the four Patriarchs.

Approbation of the second Edition of the same Book.

For the Maronites.
Act or Treatise of the Marionites of Antiochia, concerning the Faith of their
Churches.

For the Armenian Church.
Attestation of the Armenian Patriarch, who is presently at Rome, concerning
the of Belief the Armenians in matter of the Eucharist.

Attestation of Vscanus Bishop of St. Sergius in the Greater Armenia, given at
Amsterdam.

Attestation of the Patriarch and of several Priests and Armenian Bishops
residing at Alippo.

Attestation of the Patriarch of Ermeazin, concerning the Belief of the
Armenians.

Attestation of the Armenian Archbishops of Constantinople, of Amasea, and
Adrinople.

Attestation of the Patriarch of Cis, at number 10.

Attestation of the Armenians of Cairo.

Attestation of the Armenians of Ispahan in Persia, at number 16.

For the Church of the Syrians.
Attestation of the Patriarch of the Syrians, concerning the Faith of their
Churches, in matter of the Eucharist, 12.

Condemnation of the Calvinists by the Church of the Syrians at Damascus.

Extract of an Arabic Manuscript of the Kings Bibliotheck, showing the Belief
of the Jacobites concerning the Eucharist, in the Tenth Age.

For the Nestorians.
Attestation of the Patriarch of the Nestorians of the Town of Diabeker.

Extract out of the Missals and Prayer-Books of the Nestorians.

For the Church of Cophtes.
Attestation of the Patriarch of the Cophtes.

Another Attestation of the same, concetning the Eucharist In particular.

These Attestations are to be found at the end of the Third Tome of the
Perpetuity of the Faith, either at length or by citation of other places of
these Books.

I know not if Mr. Sphanhemius, Professor at Leyden, will yet be so bold as to
say, as he did in his Strictures against the Bishop of Condom's Book, that no
regard is to be had to all these Attestations, as being given by the miserable
Greeks, who can be made to say any thing one pleases for Money: A quibus nihil
non pretio extorqueas. And so we have ground to think, that they continued
still in the Opinion of the Calvinists concerning the Eucharist, even when they
seem to condemn it with the greatest zeal. But I persuade my self there is no
honest man but will conceive indignation at an Answer so unreasonable, which
leaves us no moyen to be assured of the Religion of any People. The least that
those deserves who makes use of it, is to doubt whether they be Christians,
Jews, or Mahometans; there being left them no way to hinder us from believing
that they are in their heart any thing we please to suspect them of.

But to deprive them of all means of being able by their most unjust and
extravagant Calumnies, to brangle those who shall read this little Treatise, I
shall choose one only of all these Testimonies, which is the Book of the
Orthodox Confession, whereof the History is set down in the General Answer,
Book 1. Chap. 9. in these terms.

If one should set himself on purpose, to contrive the Idea of an Act proper to
decide the matter in question betwixt us, he could not in my Judgment require
other conditions, and other circumstances than those I am going to speak of.

1. That it be signed and authorized by the four Patriarchs, and by the
principal Bishops and Ecclesiastics of the Eastern Church.

2. That it appear, that those who made and approved it, had not any
intelligence with the Latins, and that they continue in all the particular
Sentiments of the Greek Church.

3. That it was made for the particular necessities of the Greek Church,
without that the Latins had any hand in it.

4. That the terms thereof be peremptory, and contain so clearly the Doctrine
of the Real Presence and Transubstantiation, that Mr. Claud cannot elude them
by his ordinary subtilties.

Now all these circumstances are exactly found in the Act which I shall here
set down, whereof a Patriarch of Jerusalem named Nectarius, has taken the pains
to make the History in a Letter at the beginning of it, and here it is.

Peter Mogilas who had been ordained Archbishop of Russia, by Theophanes
Patriarch of Jerusalem, having assembled three of the most Learned Bishops his
suffragants, and the most pious Theologues of his Archipiscopal City, to banish
away the Errors and Superstitions of his People, resolved with them by
unanimous consent, to draw up a Confession of Faith, on the Articles of the
Christian Doctrine, and to cause it be received and approved by the Church of
Constantinople, and by the Synod which was there assembled.

To bring this to pass they composed a Book on the Articles of Faith, which
they entitled, The Confession of Faith of the Russians. And then they
entreated the Church of Constantinople to appoint those they should depute into
Moldavia in quality of Exarcks, to examine it together with those whom they
should send on their side.

The matter was executed as it was thus projected. The Synod of Constantinople
did depute into Moldavia Porphyrius Metropolitan of Nice, and Meletius Syrigus
Theologue of the Great Church; to whose Piety and Learning, the Patriarch of
Jerusalem gives very ample commendation: And the Deputies of the Russians being
met there, that Confession of Faith was examined with all exactness possible.

But yet they did not content themselves with this examination, and to render
this piece more Authentic, they thought fit to send it to all the four
Patriarchs of the Eastern Church, and to submit it anew to their Judgment.

These Patriarchs then having received and examined it, found it so conform to
the Belief of their Church, that not only they approved it, and signed it with
their own hands, with many other Bishops, but they appointed moreover, that
instead of the Title it had before of Confession of Faith of the Russians, it
should be thenceforth called, Confession of Faith of the Eastern Orthodox
Church.

After the Letter of this Patriarch of Jerusalem, containing the History
abovementioned, we find at the very beginning of that Confession, the
Approbation and Subscription of four Patriarchs, of nine Bishops, and of all
the principal Officers of the Church of Constantinople.

The Approbation of the four Patriarchs, is dated in the year 1643, in the
Month of March, and that of the Letter of the Patriarch of Jerusalem, which was
prefixed only to the Print is only in 1662. This Confession no, having been
printed in Greek till long time after it was made, and not being distributed
before but in writ^ because the Turks permits no Printing in their Empire.

As to all the other Conditions we have pointed at, they are likewise found in
that Confession.

The Latins meddled not in it any manner of way; it was allenerly made for the
utility of the Greek Church. It was composed by the Greeks, examined by all the
Heads of the Estern Church: These who composed it had no aim to gratify any
person.

It is now more than forty years since it was made and more than twenty since
it was printed.

Yea it appears the Hollanders were employed for the printing of it, for
certainly the Types are of Holland.

All the Doctrines controverted betwixt the Greeks and Latins are therein
openly asserted, and the Authors of this Confession can be no ways suspected to
have had any sway or inclination for the Roman Church.

So that it is hard to imagine or deny a Book less suspect, more authorized,
more authentic, and of which greater assurance can be had that it contains the
true Sentiments of the Eastern Church.

There remains no more but to see what it contains: And in this manner it
begins to explain what regards the Eucharist.

QUESTION 106. Which is the third Sacrament?
IT is the holy Eucharist; that is, the Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ, under the appearances of Bread and Wine, Jesus Christ being therein
truly, properly, and really present.

Here is enough for any other than Mr. Claud. But that he may not toil his mind
to seek here some evasion, I beseech him to hear what is read in the following
Interogation, it concerns the Conditions necessary for the celebration of this
Mystery, and it has these express terms: In the fourth place, the Priest must
be persuaded, that at the time when he consecrates the holy Gifts, the
substance of the Bread, and the substance Wine, is changed into the substance
of the True Body and of the True Blood of Jesus Christ by the operation of the
Holy Ghost, who is invocated at that moment.

Here is already these mysterious words; without which, Mr. Claud thinks the
Real Presence cannot be expressed, nor Transubstantiation; and with which he
must then avow that it is most formally expressed: For himself grants, that the
word Transubstantiation is not necessary when the matter is thus explained: But
yet if he will require farther that we let him see the Greek Church using and
authorizing it, he may be satisfied therein by the following words.

After the words of Inovocation, at the same instant Transubstantiation.
((...)) is made, and the Bread is changed into the True Body of Jesus Christ,
and the Wine into his True Blood, the appearances of the Bread and Wine
remaining by a divine Economy. First that we may not see the Body of Jesus
Christ with our Eyes but by Faith in leaning on those words. This is my Body,
this is my Blood; and by so doing that we may prefer his Words and his Power,
to our own Senses; which acquires the beatitude of Faith, according to what is
said, Blessed are those who have not seen, and yet have believed.

Secondly, That because Humane Nature has horror to eat raw flesh; (...) that
seeing we ought to be united to Jesus Christ, by the participation of his Body
and Blood, that Man might (...) have aversion from it. God has provided for
this Inconvenient, in giving to Believers his proper Flesh and and Blood, under
the vails of Bread and Wine.

There remains no more to condemn the Calvinists, but to determine that this
Sacrament ought to be adored with the same Honor that Jesus Christ is
worshipped, that is to say, Latria, and that it is a true Sacrifice; and these
are seen in that Confession, in the folding terms:

The Honor you ought to render to these dreadful Mysteries, ought to be the
same which you render to Jesus Christ himself: So that as St. Peter speaking
for all the Apostles, said to Jesus Christ, Thou art Christ, the Son of the
Living God; so every one of us worshipping with Latria Sovereign Worship these
Mysteries, ought to say, I believe, Lord, and confess that you are the Christ
the Son of the Living God, who came to the World to save Sinners, of whom I am
the chief.

Moreover, this Mystery is offered in Sacrifice for the Orthodox Christians,
both Living and Dead, in hope of the Resurrection to Life eternal.

And a little after: This Mystery is propitiatory before God, both for the
Living and the Dead. The clearness of these Words, suppresses all reflections,
which could do no more but obscure it

Hitherto is what was said in the year 1671. But whereas it was thought then by
the Characters, that this Book had been printed in Holland, it was afterward
known to be certain; and we have learned the History of it from M^ Nointel,
Ambassador of France at the Port, who writ to Paris in these terms the year
1672 as is to be seen in the Third Tome of the Perpetuity, Book 8. Chap 14.

The 15th of February one of my Friends has told me, that having dined with M.
the Resident of Holland, and the Discourse falling upon the Religion of the
Greeks, mention was made of the Book entitled, The Orthodox Confession of the
Catholic and Apostolic Church of the East, as justifying her Belief of the
Real Presence and of Transubstantiation.

M. the Resident Discoursed of the origin of the printing of this Book; for he
told him that M Panajotti having sent the Copy into Holland to be printed there
on his expenses, the States would not let his Money be taken; but to gain his
favor, had caused most carefully to print it on their own Charges; and had
entrusted several Boxes of the Impression to their Resident to be made a
present to M. Panajotti.

The fourth of March I ordered Fontain to go to M. the Resident of Holland, to
thank him for what he had sent me by his Secretaty, before his Voyage to
Smyrna, and to offer him his Services at the Port whither I was dispatching
him. He entreated him that he would do me the favor to give me one of these
Books, entitled, The Orthodox Confession of the Catholic and Apostolic
Church of the East: And to let me know how it was printed, and by what means
some of the Copies thereof had come to his hands. The Resident having testified
how sensibly he was obliged by my civility, assured Fontain that he and all
that was in his House, was at my service; and he gave him two of the Books
which I desired, telling him they were the only two that remained; and that as
to their printing, Desbrosses who was here Secretary in the year....... there
being then no Resident, was desired by Mr Panajotti to cause print in Holland a
form of Catechism, which he gave him in a Manuscript, declaring that he would
make the expenses; that this Secretary having informed the States they caused
print it on their Charges; that it cost them four thousand pounds to fill the
Boxes, in which were many Copies.

M. the Resident added, That being at that time named to come and reside for
the States at Constantinople, he was appointed by them to take the charge of
these Boxes, and to make a Present of them to M. Panajotti: And that there were
a dozen and half of Copies Bound after the Holland manner, whereof he presented
him twelve; and as to the other six, there were no more undisposed of, save
only these two which he had given me.

Finally, That which should complete the Conviction of the most incredulous, if
any could be, after what is said, is what is set down concerning the same Book
of the Orthodox Confession, in the said Tome of the Perpetuity, Book 8. Chap.
15.

In the mean time that these Acts and Attestations of the Greek Church were at
the Press, the Secretary of the Ambassador arrived at Paris from
Constantinople, to bring to his Majesty the Ratification of the Treaty
concluded with the Port, and brought with him the Originals of several
Authentic Attestations, which the Patriarchs of the East had entreated the
Ambassador to cause present to the King, for justification of their Faith
against the Calumnies of the Calvinist Ministers. There was amongst these
Attestations a Manuscript very sumptuously Bound, which Mr. Panajotti made a
Present of to his Majesty to be conserved in his Library, and to serve for ever
as a Testimony of the Faith of the Or^ental Church.

This Manuscript is one of the Originals of the Orthodox Confession; it is
Subscribed by the Patriarch of Constantinople, by many Bishops, and by several
Officers of the Church of Constantinople: But whereas the Printed Copies are
only in Greek, this Manuscript is in Greek and Latin, the Latin being no less
Original than the Greek.

There is prefixed to it a new Approbation of Dionysius, bearing that M.
Panajotti has caused ^et out a new Edition of it, at the request of the
Patriarch, and that this Gentleman has distributed gratis Copies throughout the
whole East. Here follows that Attestation.

Dionysius by the mercy of God Archbishop of Constantinople the New Rome, and
Ecumenical Patriarch.
THose who make the holy Books their daily study, and applies themselves
continually to them, do certainly reap thence very great fruit for Salvation,
for it is as a way in which they cannot go astray, which leads in a supernaural
manner, those who aim straight at eternal Glory, and which procures them a
happy end; it being according to the Scripture, that he is blessed who
meditates day and night in the Law of the Lord.

Wherefore considering that the reading of this Orrhodox Doctrine may be very
profitable, which having been Composed some years ago by the Orthodox Doctors,
approved, received, and confirmed, by the Venerable Patriarchs our
Predecessors, and printed some time after by the care, pains, and expenses, of
the most Wise and Orthodox Signior Panajotti, first Interpreter of the
Emperors of the East and West, our Dearest Spiritual Son full of Piety and
Divine Zeal, with an extraordinary prudence, has gratis distributed Copies
thereof round about to Christians for the public good. And all the Copies that
were Prinred, being employed in this Distribution which was made of them;
several persons who earnestly demands so profitable a piece, cannot have it we
Judged it our duty to provide for this, and to solicit the same Signior by
his accustomed bounry, to supply this want, and put remedy to it by a second
Edition; holding out to him that he would thereby aquite to himself Reputation
not only equal to that he has already throughout the World, and whereof no
person is ignorant, but a better and far surpassing it; to wit, that by which
noble Actions becomes immortal. And as he has a fervent zeal and passionate
desire of the public good, so he has not neglected our Counsel; but on the
contrary, has incontinently by Gods help putten it in execution, and by a
second Impression, has given of new a great number of Books to the Faithful; by
so doing, rendering a piece of important service to the Author of them, in not
suffering his Work to be buried in obscurity: for M. Meletius Syrigus, Doctor
of the Great Church, has by order of the Patriarch and Synod, labored most
carefully to review and set the Book in order. Therefore ye Orthodox
Christians, receiving favorably this Book of the Orthodox Doctrine, as pious
and profitable to Souls, give thanks for it to the common Benefactor, and keep
it well without ever neglecting the reading of it, for Life eternal is found in
the Meditation of the holy Scriptures; which I wish all of us may attain to in
Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom be Glory for ever. So be it. The year 1672. in
the Month of July. Indiction 5.

Seal of the Patriarch, Dionysius of Constantinople.


But this Original being in Greek and Latin, I though that if it was needless
to set down the Greek Text, which being a strange Language, would be understood
by few, it would be fit to insert here in the Latin Tongue, what is there said
of the Eucharist, and which has already been cited in French in the General
Answer.

QUESTION 106. Quodnam sit tertium Mysterium?
EEt Eucharista, sive Corpus and Sanguinis Christi Domini sub specibus panis
and vini, and realis presentia. Hoc Sacramentum excillit all^is, and magis
conducit saluti animae nostrae: in hoc enim Sacramento omnis gratiae bonis
Christi fidelibus manifestatur and praesentatur.

In the following Question.
ANimadvertendum est ut Sacerdos habeat talem intentionem, quod ipsa vera
substantia panis and substantia vini Transubstantientur, in verum Corpus and
Sanguinam Christi, per operationem Spiritus Sancti cujus invocationem facit tum
temporis ut perficiat Mysterium hoc orando and dicendo Mitte Spiritum Sanctum
in nos, and in haec proposita dona, and fac hunc panem pretiosum Corpus Christi
tui; quod autem est in hac calice, pretiosum Sanguinem Christi tui, transmutans
per Spiritum Sanctum. Statim enim ad haec verba fit Transubstantiatio, and
Transubstantiantur panis in verum Corpus Christi, and vinum in verum Sanguinem
Christi, remanentibus solum speciebus visibilibus, and hoc fit secundum divinam
dispositionem propter duo. Primo ne videamus Corpus Christi, sed credamus illud
esse propter verba prolata a Christo Domino, Hoc est Corpus meum, and hic est
Sanguis meus, plusquam sensibus nostris. Siquidem pro hoc promisit nobis
beatudinem dicens; Beati qui non vident, and credunt. Secundo quia natura
humana abhorret usum vivae carnis; and quoniam debet homo uniri Christo Domino
per communicationem carnis Christi Domini, and Sanguinis Christi Domini; ne
igitur abhorreret constituit Dominus dare carnem suam, and Sanguinem suum in
esum, and potum sub specibus panis and vini. De quo diui Damascenus and
Gregorius Nyssenus fusius disputant.

De Exibendo Honor qui debetur kuic Mysterio tanquam ipsi Christo.
Quemadmodem sanctus Petrus de de ore omnium Apostolorum dixit: Tu es Christus,
Filius Dei viventis, ita and nos dicimus cultu Latriae, Credo, Domini, and
confiteor quod tu'es Christus, Filius Dei vivi. Est etiam id Mysterium
Sacrificium pro vivis, and defunctis iis qui in spe resurrectionis mortui sunt;
quod Sacrificium ad extremum judicium non cessabit.

There is at the end of the Manuscript an Act of Legalization of the
Ambassador, who gives Testimony of the Truth of what I have related, whereof
the tenor follows.

WE CHARLES R FRANCIS OLIER of Nointel, Counselor of the King in his Councils
in his Court of Parliament of Paris, and Ambassador for his most Christian
Majesty at the Ottoman Port, do certify and attest, That the present Latin and
Greek Manuscript, entitled, The Orthodox Confession of the Church of the East,
was consigned into our hands by the Signior Panajotti, first Interpreter of the
Port; who having assured us that it would serve efficaciously to establish the
verity of the Book bearing the same Title, printed by his care, seeing it is
one of the Originals of it, and has the Original Signatures of the Patriarchs
at it: He did out of Zeal to vindicate his Church from the Affronts put upon
it, entreat us to deal with his Majesty, that he would be so good as to accept
of it for the Confusion of those that would call it in question. And as he
looked upon it as a matter of Conscience and Honor in imitation of the
Patriarchs and Prelates of his Church, to put the matter of fact contested, in
the greatest evidence possible; he sent us the last year an Approbation of the
same Book by Dionysius the Patriarch, then holding the Sea of Constantinople,
which we set before that Manuscript. All these Verities being certain, to the
end none may doubt of them, we make no difficulty to confirm them by our
Subscription, and the Seal of our Arms, and the Counter-Seal of our first
Secretary.

Given at our Palace on the Channel of the Black Sea, the Eleventh of
September, 1673. Olier de Nointel, Ambassador to his Majesty at the Ottoman
Port. By my said Lord his Command. Le PICARD.

What can one say against this proof? Is not this piece as decisive as if it
had been made in the Sorbonne or at Louvain? Is it not beyond all suspicion of
having been extorted by the Roman Catholics? Can any imagine that it could
have been altered in the printing, coming only from the hands of a Greek, a
Person of Quality most zealous for his Religion, to those of a Protestant, who
sent it to Amsterdam, where it was printed at the Charges of the States? Can
any thing be imagined more Authentic in the Greek Church, seeing we find that
having been at the very first approved by the four Patriarchs, and several
Bishops, it has still continued to be in so great esteem, that the new
Patriarch of Constantinople desired to have it reprinted, that it might be the
more easily spread over all and every where.

There remains then no more but to prove the second part of the Minor, to the
end it may be said that we have invincibly shown the Faith of Catholics
concerning the Eucharist, to be the ancient Faith of the Church.

SECT. 7.
Proof of the second part of the Minor, which is, that it is impossible there
should be made an insensible change in the Bell of of the Eucharist in all the
Eastern Churches, during the time that has interveened betwixt Berengarius and
us.

THere would be no need to be at the pains to prove this, if Mr. Claud, and the
Ministers who have putten in his hands the Defense of their Cause, were not
altogether unreasonable; for having proved most clearly in the second Section,
that these Churches were found united in the Belief of the Eucharist in
Berengarius his time; and in the preceding Section, that they are presently
united in the same Faith: to imagine that it was by an insensible innovation
happened in that interval, they come to the condition they are in at this day,
it must be feigned that the Eastern Churches having embraced the Opinion of the
Real Presence in the Eleventh Age, they should resume some time after, that of
the Real Absence; and then again by an insensible change they should have
fallen back again into the same condition wherein they certainly were in the
Eleventh Age, in believing as they do certainly at this day, the Real Presence,
Transubstantiation, and the Adoration of Jesus Christ in the Eucharist. It Is
ealsiy percieved how ridiculous this fiction would be.

But because Mr. Claud would not acknowledge this argreement of the Eastern
Churchs with the Roman in Berengarius his time, for no other reason but because
it pleases him to pretend all is false which seems disadvantageous to his
Cause; we have thought fit to follow him in his wanderings, and to let him see,
that setting aside all what proves that agreement in Berengarius his time,
there is nothing more contrary to common sense, than that which he would
persuade as most possible, viz. That the Greeks having believed, as he supposes
the Real Absence, until the end of the Eleventh Age, did since that time by an
insensible Innovation, whereof no memory remains come to believe the quite
contrary, that is, the Real Presence, Transubstantiation, and Adoration, which
is the state they are found in at this day.

And it must be carefully observed, that what we have demonstratively proved,
reaches not only to show that some particular persons of the Greek Church, or
even some or several of their Churches entirely believes what I say; but that
it is the manifest Belief of the whole Body of these Churches; as it is that of
the Roman Catholic Church. This then ought to have been the effect of that
pretended insensible Innovation, in whatsoever time it is placed during the six
Centuries of years that have intervened betwixt Berengarius and us. And this is
what we have shown in the third Tome of the Perpetuity, Book 8. Chap. 21. to be
the most incredible of all Chimaeras; so I need no more to prove the second
part of the Minor, but to set down here what is written there.

The least spark of common sense perceives instantly, that it was impossible
that the Latins being mixed throughout the whole East since the Eleventh Age,
with those Societies separated from the Roman Church, being strongly persuaded
of the Real Presence, having it most present in their minds more than any other
Article, punishing in the West with all sorts of rigor those who doubted of
it, and examining carefully all the points of Belief of these Societies, which
did not agree with their own; that these Latins, I say, should not have
perceived, during the whole space of six hundred years, that these Societies
had another Faith than they concerning this Article; or that perceiving they
should have thought fit to dissemble it; and that in like manner those Oriental
Societies could continue six hundred years, either without perceiving in the
Latins that difference of Belief in so important an ^rticle, or without
upbraiding it to them, in so many Writings they made against them.

Of these two parts, which are equally ridiculous, Mr. Claud betakes himself to
the second, in his third Answer, by maintaining that this came to pass by the
policy of the Latins upon one hand, and by the timerousness of the Oriental
People on the other; and this we have refuted in the General Answer, by
representing only the absurdity of this supposition, according as we shall set
it down here.

Mr. Claud supposes in the Greeks, and in all the other Societies of the East,
that is, in an infinite number of Men, a timerousness of six hundred years,
hindering them all to rise up against the Latins, and to treat them as Idolaters
on the Doctrine of the Real Presence. He stops the Latins mouth on the same
point, by a piece of policy of six hundred years continuance. Neither Charity,
nor Zeal, nor the natural inclination Men has to tell the Verity, nor Hatred,
nor Interest, never makes any of the Latins nor any of the Greeks belie
themselves. The Latins are feared to offend the Greeks by this reproach, even
then when they are putting them to death; and the Greeks are feared to offend
the Latins on this point, even when they are dying for their Religion, or being
in security, they abandoned themselves to the greatest violence of their hatred.

And what is yet more wonderful, is, that the means by which the Latins are
combined in this politic reservedness are so hidden, that they could never yet
be discovered in the least; so far extended, that they are practiced by the
Popes, by the Cardinals, by the Bishops, by the Priests, by the Monks; by the
Soldiers, and by the curious Travelers; and so efficacious, that they never
suffered any one person to bewray the secret. They suffer all the other
passions to act against the Greeks, they suffer the utmost rigours to be
exercised against them all kind of reproaches to be made to them, even such as
naturally seems by the thread of the discourse to lead to the accusing them of
not believing the Real Presence, if it could have been made with truth; but it
stops their Pen and Tongue precisely when it comes to the point of passing to
that; and this for the space of six hundred years, not in one only place, one
only Town, one only Province, but in the greatest part of the World.

Here is what Mr. Claud endeavors to persuade those of his Religion, and which
he pretends to have rendered probable. Without this twofold supposition of a
timetousness of six hundred years, domineering in all the Christians of the
East, and smothering all other passions: and that of another Policy equally
lasting amongst the Latins, practiced by them with an inviolable fidelity, and
suppressing also in them all the feelings and inclinations of Nature; Himself
must avow that the Greeks, and other Oriental Societies, believe the Real
Presence. This is what all his Answers are reduced to. It is this rare
invention which is the ground of the extraordinary satisfaction he declares he
has of his Work. It Is by this he pretends to have overthrown the Argument of
the Perpetu^ty. But if he be a Man to feed himself with his own dreams, I hope
there are few who will be of his humor in that, and who will not allow me to
conclude against him,

1 That the union of these matters of fact we have set down, proves with an
entire certitude, that the Greeks and other Oriental Societies to whom they may
be applied, believes the Real Presence, as the union of the same matters of
fact proves, that the Calvinists believes the Trinity and Incarnation.

2. That this consequence extend^ farther, and shows not only that the Greeks
and other Christians of the East, are presently persuaded of that Doctrine; but
that they have been always persuaded of it since Berengarius; and consequently
that includes entirely the matter of fact which is found in the first Volume of
the Perpetuity; and that it destroys in particular the whole second Book of Mr.
Clauds Answer, to which he had given for Title. Nullity of the Consequence: And
which is most easy and most important to make appear.

He strains himself in that Book to prove that the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, could have been introduced amongst the Greeks and other
schismatical Societies, by the mixture of the Latin Church with them, by the
Missioners whom the Popes sent thither, and by the power which the Latins had
over the Christians of the East. But granting to Mr. Claud all the matter of
fact he alleges, there needs no more but to tell him in one word, That they
prove exactly the quite contrary of what he pretends, and that it cannot be
better proved than by these very same matters of fact.

That which always deludes him, is, that whereas humane Things are tied to
innumerable circumstances, which most frequently renders them possible or
impossible, easy or difficult, he disjoyns them from all the circumstances to
which they are tied, to make metaphysical Questions of them, which he considers
in a speculative and abstract manner, as if the matter in hand were of a World
separated from ours, whereof we knew no news.

He examines in the Air that question, Whether it was possible that
Transubstantiation (under which he will have the Real Presence comprehended,
though he dare not say it) should be introduced since Berengarius, in the
Societies of the East. And he thinks it enough to find some vagrant causes,
which has a remote and metaphysical proportion with that effect. Hence it is
that he tells us stories which are as useless for him, as they are useful being
turned against him. But to undeceive him, there needs no more but to oblige him
to consider them such as they are, and to cloth them with all the
circumstances which are really annexed to them.

First therefore it is certain that the Latins have not totally reduced these
Societies to an union with the Latin Church: if they converted some particular
persons, they converted not the whole Body of them: they were not able to make
them quit their ancient Opinions, nor change their ancient Discipline, to which
for the most part they adhere as closely as ever.

Let Mr. Claud then include in the first place this circumstance in the
question he treats, and let him examine not whether it be possible in general
that the Latin Missioners persuaded all these People of the Doctrine of the
Real Presence. But whether it be credible that these Missioners, not having
been able to make be received in any of these Societies, neither the Doctrines
of the Roman Church, nor the points of Discipline in which they disagreed from
her, nor to pacify their minds toward that Church, nor hinder them to treat
her as heretical; yet they generally succeeded in making be received in all
these Societies, a Doctrine so strange, as that of the Real Presence must have
seemed to those who had been Educated in another Belief.

He must besides add to this Questistion, his double Supposition of a general
timerousness amongst all the Oriental Christians, and a general policy amongst
the Latins, during all the time he appoints for this change; for as in the
progress of this introduction, it cannot be shown that the Greeks, and other
Oriental People unconverted, did withstand the Latins in this point, or took
thence ground to upbraid those who had not yet embraced their Faith; Mr. Claud
is bound to show us that this introduction is possible with these two
circumstances; that is to say, he ought to make appear it is possible that all
the unconverted Eastern People seeing a new Doctrine spread amongst them, did
for fear of the Latins, suppress all what natural Jealousy and the Principles
of their Religion could furnish them of Reasons and Arguments against so
strange a Doctrine, and that all of them suffered it without any resistance to
be introduced in the whole World.

He must also show it possible, that all these Missioners, who conversed
amongst these People, and who knew them to be infected with the Error of
Berengarius, who all looked upon this Error as a damnable Heresy, who
instructed them carefully on this point, who saw their Doctrine received by
some and rejected by others, could all without any apparent reason, observe a
silence on this point so Religious; that none of them accused these Nations of
the Error of Berengarius, none inserted it into the Catalogue of their
Heresies; none gave notice thereof to the Popes; none of them made any Books
for their Conversion; none used any rigor against those who refused to believe
the Doctrine of the Real Presence, how great power soever he had to use it:
That none in any Book made ostentation of the success of his preaching on this
point; none is found to admire that astonishing aliance of so extraordinary a
docility to receive this Doctrine, with so inflexible opiniatorness to reject
all other Doctrine inculcated to them; and that finally they all conspired to
deprive us of the knowledge of so great an event.

This is what Mr. Claud should have undertaken to persuade possible, if he
would have destroyed that consequence which he impugns in the Title of that
second Book, and which he establishes by the whole Book it self. But as he
durst not so much as attempt it, there needs no more to renverse all that Book,
but to show him what he had to prove, and to make be observed that the mixture
of the Missioners and the power of the Latins over the Greeks and other
Oriental Christians proves very ill that they could make them receive the
Doctrine of the Rea^ Presence with these circumstances* but proves perfectly
that it is impossible on one hand they should not have discovered that Error
in the Greeks and other Eastern Christians, if it had been amongst them; and
yet less possible on the other hand, that they should not have upbraided it to
them, and endeavored to root it out, if they had discovered it. Whence it
follows, that never having done it, by Mr. Claud's own confession they must
have been altogether free of it. It Is the only rational conclusion can be drawn
from the matter of fact alleged by Mr. Claud in his second Book, and it were
to lose time to refute it after another manner. There needs no proof to
establish a matter which Reason perceives with so great evidence.

SECT. VIII.
Some Consequences which may yet b^ drawn from this Argument, and which
necessarily follows from the agreement of all Christian Societies in the belief
of the Real Presence and Transubstantiation, which i^ proved in this Book.

AS the Scope of this Book was only to illustrate more the Proo^ of the
Perpetuity of the Faith of the Church concerning the Eucharist; (...) think it
fit to set down here some Consequences which springs from it, and some clearing
which may be drawn from it, t^ overturn the Arguments of the Calvinists, and to
fortify the Proof of the Catholics.

The first of these Consequences i^ so much the more considerable, that i^
ruins instantly the chief Objections o^ Protestants, and cuts off innumerable
important Contestations, which overcharging the Understanding, makes it ^ose
the sight of Truth.

These who are acquaint with the manner how the Protestants impugns the
Doctrine of the Church, concerning this Mystery, knows their strongest
endeavors are employed to turn to their own sense, the Words by which Jesus
Christ did institute it; and to this they strive to reduce the Question. They
make long Treaties, composed of many Metaphysical Arguments, to find their own
Opinion in these Words, This is my Body; they employ long Discourses to explain
every Term: The Word This, the Word Is, the Word Body, and all that aims to
persuade that these Terms are not to be taken in a proper and literal sense,
but ought to be understood in a Figurative and Metaphorical sense, by supposing
that Jesus Christ intended only to teach us by them that he made the Bread the
Figure of his Body.

As there is nothing less certain than these Arguments, which have no other but
obscure Principles, so they agreed not among themselves, but only in the design
of impugning the Doctrine of the Church: And when the Question was to explain
the meaning of these Words, they fell into the confusion of innumerable
different Explications, which Luther reduces to seven, and compares to the
seven Heads of the Beast in the Apocalypse, * Habet sacramentaria secta jam, ni
fallor, sex capita uno anno nata: mirus spiritus qui sic dissentiat sibi.
Carolstadii (...) fuit una. quae cecidit. Zuinglii est altera quae cadit
oecolampa dii figuratum and Silesia quae cadit. Cecedit and quarta Carolstadii
qui sic verba disposuit, quod pro vobis traditur est corpus meum. Quinta surgit
jam and stat in Silesia. -- Hi omnes spiritus invicem diversi, argutis dimicant
diversis, omnes jactant revelationes precibus and lacrimis impetratas. Luth.
Ep. ad Spalatinum clasis 2. locor, comm. cap. 15. page 48.
some have placed the Figure in the Word Is, others in the word Body; some have
put one kind of Figure in them, some another kind; and by the different
Shuffling together of the Explications, they have given to every one of the
Terms, they have produced an extreme great variety of different meanings.
Carolstadius will have the word This, to relate to the Body of Jesus Christ
which sat at the Table: Zuinglius rejects this Explication, and will have
Jesus Christ to have given no more but a simple Figure of his Body. Calvin
rejects Zuinglius his sense, no less than Luther's, and maintains they are both
in the wrong, (Treatise of the Supper at the end.) Socinus rejects Calvin's
sense, and the Quakers rejects them all.

These differences and variety of Opinions are inevitable, as often as men will
regulate by Philosophical Reflections and Arguments, these matters whereof they
should judge by simple impression, and good sense. One is dazzled, and loses
himself in these Metaphysical Cogitations, and ceases to understand what he
understood before: and that which breeds no difficulty to those who play not
the Philosopher, and follows simply Nature and common Sense, in the
signification of the Terms, becomes obscure and inexplicable when it is made the
object of these kind of speculations. Many Examples of this might be given, but
for brevities sake they are omitted.

Certain it is, when Jesus Christ pronounced these Words, This is my Body, he
spoke not to be understood only by Philosophers and Metaphysicians: one the
contrary, they are the last to whom he would allow the understanding of these
Divine Vereties, because their ways are most opposite to the ways of Faith. He
designed that his Religion should be followed by multitudes of simple People,
and those who reasons little, and dives not to the bottom of things. Who then
can doubt but that we ought to judge of the sense of these fundamental Words,
ordained to instruct us in the belief of this Mystery, by that general and
common Impression, which these kind of People receives, without so many
reflections: And consequently that these common Impressions are the rule of the
meaning of these Words, This is my Body; seeing otherwise it would follow that
Jesus Christ should have led into error all those who following Nature and
common Sense, should have bona fide understood these Words in the sense they
imprint naturally.

The Question then is only to find the simple and natural Impression which the
Church has received by these words. Now what more proper means could be made
choice of to perceive the sense these words are taken in without Philosophy,
and without Metaphysick, in following simply Nature and common Sense, than to
consult in what sense they were de facto, taken since the Apostles to this day,
by all the Christians of the World, who were not concerned with our Disputes?
And this is seen by the agreement of all Christian Societies in the belief of
the Real Presence, which we have so clearly and solidly proved in this Book;
for it is manifest they entered not in that belief, but in taking the Words of
the Institution of the Blessed Sacrament in a literal sense; and in
understanding that after the Consecration, the Bread became the true Body of
Jesus Christ.

They did not amuse themselves to play the Philosopher on the meaning of the
word This, on the meaning of the word Is, on the meaning of the word Body; they
did not study the tropes and figures, but without so many boutways, and
reflections, they all conceived that it was the very Body it self of Jesus
Christ. This is what these words bred in their minds; this is what they
expressed by their Professions of Faith.

Mr. Claud, and several other Ministers, would indeed persuade us, if they
could, that there is nothing more natural and easy to find than their
figurative sense they give to these Words. For when there is no more to be done
but to assert things boldly, and to make show of much confidence, these
Gentlemen never find themselves straightened. But to see how little sincere they
are in this matter, there needs no more but to read what we have answered to
them in the two first Books of the second Tome of the Perpetuity. Certainly if
that figurative sense was so easy to be found, how came it to pass that all
these Christians, who compose those great Societies of the East and West, and
who for so long a time, have believed the Real Presence, did not perceive it?
How came it to pass that Luther * Epistola de argentinenses tome 7. Witemb.
fol. 502. Gravibus curis auxius in haec excutienda materia multum desudabam,
omnibus nervis extensis, me extricare conatus sum, cum probe perspiciebam hac
re Papatui me valde incommodare posse... verum me captum video nulla via
elabendi relicta; textus enim Evangelii nimium apertus est and potens, etc.
who sought after it so long time, as a mean which he thought would be so
advantageous for him to vex the Pope, as he says himself, could never find it?
And that after he had bent all his endeavors to that purpose, totis nervis
extensis, he avows that the Text of the Gospel is so clear, and so strong for
the Real Presence, that it was impossible for him to get himself rid of it. How
did this figurative sense. I say so easy to be found, not show it self to this
man, who is reputed among them as Calvin (Live. du. lib. arb. page 311. in
Opus.) assures us for an excellent Apostle of Jesus Christ, who has erected
their Church of new?

Finally, how does Zuinglius, who is also one of their Holy Fathers, declare
that several years after he had rejected the Real Presence, he knew not yet how
to explain these Words, This is my Body, by these words. This signifies my
Body; and that he learned this famous Explication, which he calls a happy
Pearl, foelicem Margaritam; only from the Letter of a Hollander, which he found
in the Cloakbag of two of his Friends, who came to consult him: * Epistolam
istam cujusdam, and docti and pii Batavi, soluta sarcina communicarum. In ea
foelicem hanc margaritam, est pro significat, hic accipi inveni. Zuing. Ep. ad
Pomeranum, Tom. 8. f. 256.
and that it was only by an advertisement he had in a Dream, from a Spirit,
which he says he knew not whether it was white or black (In subsidio Euchar.
Tom. 2. f. 249.) that he learned a passage of Exodus, which he thought most
proper to defend his Key of Figure, as himself call it, if this sense was so
natural, and so easy to find?

Mr. Claud proposes in his third Answer, Page 26. as a means which he pretends
is infallible to assure him that beliefs concerning a Mystery, such as is the
Eucharist, are not formaly in certain Passages, where they are said to be, to
wit, says he, when the eyes do not perceive them, and that they are not in
them, in equivalent Terms, or are not drawn from them by necessary and evident
consequents, when common sense does not discern them therein. And he adds, that
this proof, although negative, is of the highest degree of evidence, and
greatest certainty. But not to stay here to show the horror as a Christian
should have at this impious reasoning, which justifies all Heretics; for they
need say no more than Mr Claud does: If the Truths he would have us believe
were in Scripture in formal Terms, our eyes would perceive them; and if they
were there in equivalent Terms, or might be drawn thence by evident and
necessary consequences, our common sense would discern them, etc. For although
they do ill in rejecting a Truth, yet it is true that they do not perceive it:
Not to insist, I say, on this, I need no more but to make use of this Argument
against him, and tell him, that if the Belief, and figurative Sense of the
Protestants were in formal Terms, in the Words of Jesus Christ, our eyes would
perceive them; if they were there in equivalent Terms, or might be thence drawn
by evident and necessary Consequences; our common sense would discern them; but
after having made an exact search by all manner of ways, our eyes and our
common sense declares they are not there in any of these ways; therefore they
are not there at all.

What can Mr. Claud deny in this Argument? Not the first Proposition, for it is
his own word for word; nor must it be the second, for it is undoubtedly true;
because certain it is, that neither our Eyes nor our common Sense discovers to
us that figurative sense and belief of Protestants, concerning the Eucharist,
where they say it is contained: They are not then there according to his
principle.

Perhaps he will say that our preoccupation, hinders us to perceive what seems
to him so clear and natural; but besides, that we will say the same to him; we
will oppose to him so many millions of Christians of the East and West, who for
so many preceding Ages, believe the Real Presence, and who never perceived
that metaphorical and figurative sense. We will oppose to him Luther, whom
Zuinglius considers as one Eye of the Protestant Church, ( Vnum Corpus sumus,
Caput Christus est, alter oculus Lutherus est, Zuing. Tom 2. f. 359.) who could
not perceive this figurative sense be so much desired to incommodate the Papacy
with, and who was so far from being preoccupied against this figurative
explication, that on the contrary he had a violent inclination leading him
toward it, as he declares himself by these words, which he adds in his Letter
to those of Strasbourg: Prohdolor! plus aequo in hanc partem propensus sum. Mr.
Claud then must avow that his belief concerning the Lords Supper, is not in
holy Scripture, seeing we do not perceive it there, and seeing so many millions
of Christians never found it there.

I conclude therefore that he is mistaken, with all those who imagines as he
does, that there is nothing so clear and natural, as his figurative sense in
the Words of Jesus Christ.

So horrible a mistake in these Gentlemen's measures should indeed convince
them, that all their Arguments must be false, and all their ways deceitful: And
I see nothing more unreasonable than wilfully to continue to follow Guides, who
draws them so far away from the nature and true rule of Expressions.

For seeing that the true meaning of the Words of Jesus Christ, is doubtless
that which he intended to signify by these words; and that the sense in which
they were to be taken, was not unknown to him; can it be doubted that he had
the intention to express the meaning in which these words have been actually
taken by all the Christians of the World, for so many Ages bygone, rather than
that in which they were understood by a small number of Berengarians in the
Eleventh Age, whose Ringleader did thrice abjure his Doctrine as an Heresy,
and by a few Sects of the late Age, who mutually condemn one another of Error
and Impiety, viz. the Socinians, the Anabaptists, the Quakers, the
Independents, the Calvinists, etc.

I know well that Mr. Claud pretends that the Believers of the first eight
Centuries, which he calls the fair days of the Church, ( Answer to the Treatise
part 2. chap. 3. p. 295.) during which he says, error durst not appear, did
understand the words of Jesus Christ in the sense those of his Religion
understands them: But we have now right to suppose the contrary, as a matter
beyond debate, because we have proved it in so convincing a manner in the last
two Tomes of the Perpetuity, that he has not been able to answer to it; and we
have so secured the proofs of Catholics from the Cavils and Subtilties of the
Ministers, that it is impossible they can obscure them.

But though we had not shown, as we have done in these Works, that the
Believers of these first Ages had no other Belief concerning the Eucharist, but
that which we have at present; it is enough to have shown by unquestionable
proofs, which are reduced to a compend in this Book, the union and agreement of
all Christian Societies for so many Ages, in the belief of the Real Presence,
because that union and agreement decides instantly the sense of Tradition, in
letting us see, that seeing this Doctrine could not be established by
Innovation, it must be the original Doctrine of the Church, and consequently
that the Believers of the first Ages, had the same belief concerning this
Mystery, as those of the following Ages.

SECT. 9.
The Argument of the Perpetuity serves also to decide the Controversy,
concerning the meaning of the expressions of the holy Fathers, in matter of the
Eucharist.

THe Argument which proves the Agreement of all the Eastern Societies with the
Roman Church, in the Belief of the Real Presence for so many Ages, does not
only show us Tradition concerning the literal sense of the words of Jesus
Christ. It also decides instantly the Controversy we have with the
Protestants, concerning the meaning of those expressions which are found so
frequent in the Books of the holy Fathe: 1. Tertul. contra Marc. c. 4. Eusebius.
Caesar. in Parall. Damasc. l. 3. c. 45: Cyrill. Hierosol. 4. Catech. mist Greg.
Nyss^ de Bab^ Chr^sti. Aug Sermon: 87. de div^^sis citat: a Beda ^n Epist. ad
Corinth. c. 10.2. Gaud. tract. 2. in Exodus 3. Greg. N^ss. Orat. Catech. Amb. de
init. c. 4. Cyrill. Catech. 4. mist. Eusebius. emiss. Sssrm. 5. de Pasch. 4.
Justin Mart. Apol. 2. Iraen. l. 4. c. 4. Theoph. Antioch. 6. Chrysostom. Hom. 83. in
Matthew. 7. Aug. Ep. ad Janua. 2. Optat.
That the Bread is made the Body of Jesus Christ. 2. That of Bread and Wine are
made the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ. 3. That the Bread and Wine are
changed, converted, and transelemented into the Body and Blood, and in to the
Substance of the Body of Jesus Christ. 4. That they are the Body and Blood of
Jesus Christ after the consecration 5. That we are made partakers of the Body
and Blood of Jesus Christ. 6. That we touch and eat the Body and Blood of Jesus
Christ himself. 7. That the Body of Jesus Christ enters into the mouth of
Believers. 8. That his Body and Blood dwells upon our Altars: That it is the
proper Body of Jesus Christ: That we receive truly his precious Body: That it
is truly the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ.

This Controversy consists to know if these words, and innumerable others like
them which are found in the Books of these holy Doctors, ought to be taken in
the proper and literal sense, as the Catholics maintain, or if they are to be
understood in a figurative and metaphorical sense, as the Ministers pretend.
Now this Question is decided by the Agreement of all Christian Societies in the
Article of the Real Presence since the Apostles, it being they could not
believe that Doctrine, unless they had taken these expressions in a proper and
literal sense.

I know that Aubertin strives to elude all these passages of the Fathers, which
the Catholics make use of to prove their Doctrine, by proposing other passages
which seem like to them, and which both in Scripture and in Fathers are taken
in a metaphorical sense: And I must avow, that if in this point he shows no
great exactness of Judgment, at least he lets us see he is a man that has read
very much; for that collection he makes of Expressions, seeming like to those
he would explain, could not have been done without a great deal of labor: And
I may say, that in taking from this Minister that comparison of metaphorical
Passages, with those we make use of, we take from him all what has any show,
and what might dazzle simple people. Wherefore it is most important to make
appear the abuse he makes of these comparisons.

And for this end there are two ways, the one longer, and the other more short.
The first is, to set down precisely by Arguments the difference of these
expressions which he compares, and to show that they are no ways alike; and
that the one ought to have been understood in a metaphorical sense, and the
other for simple and literal expressions: And this is what we have done in the
second Tome of the Perpetuity, in a manner so convincing, as has made Mr. Claud
unable to reply; and we have shown there, that all these comparisons of
expressions which Aubertin makes, are all false, and discovers him to have had
no exactness of Judgment.

This way is no doubt very good for those who have leisure to apply themselves
to this examination, and who have their Understandings framed for these
somewhat-abstract Considerations: But it is long, because there are a great
number of expressions and passages to be explained. And it must be moreover
granted, that it is not the ordinary way men uses to discern Expressions by,
they distinguish very well those that are different, they do not confuse them
together, they miss not to give one meaning to the one, and another meaning to
the other, without making express reflections, unless very seldom on the
differences that are betwixt them. Yea, there are many people who are not
capable to make those reflections, and yet never are mistaken in the sense of
these different Expressions. How then do they distinguish them? By a simple
view of the Understanding, by an impression which makes it self be perceived,
they know these Expressions have different meanings, though perhaps they would
be much puzzled to point out the difference betwixt them. It Is after this manner
that men judges almost of the diversity of all things in the World.

It is then manifest that the common way men has to distinguish Things and
Expressions, is the diversity of impressions they make upon the mind: So
whoever is certain that Words form different impressions on the Mind, knows at
the same time that they are different, whether he can or cannot explain what
distinguishes them: Men requires no more, and they stand not in need of that
perplexity of reasoning.

Wherefore to renverse all those comparisons of Expressions, which Aubertin has
made with so much toil and labor, it is enough to answer, That Impression,
which is the more common and surest Rule of the distinction of Expressions,
distinguishes and sets apart all those he alleges as like; because men by
following their impression, have always taken the one in one sense, and the
others in another sense.

He says these words of Jesus Christ, This is my Body, are like to those others
of the Scripture, The seven Cows are seven years: The Rock was Christ: The King
is the Head of Gold. But we tell him he is mistaken, and at the same time we
let him see it by a certain and decisive proof; to wit, that never any person
believed that the Cows were really seven years, nor that the Rock was really
Jesus Christ, nor that the King Nebuchadnezzar had really a Head of Gold: But
all the Nations of the World, have upon these Words of Jesus Christ, This is my
Body, believed the consecrated Bread to be really the Body of Jesus Christ, as
we have shown in this little Book, and consequently those Expressions are very
far different.

He says that expression of St. Gregory Nazianzen, That the Bread is changed
into the Body of Jesus Christ, is like to that of St. Jerome, That all what we
think, what we say, and what we do, is changed by the fire of the Holy Spirit;
or what St. Cyril says, That we are changed into the Son of God: But without
setting down here what is said in the second Tome of the Perpetuity, Book 6.
where we have explained these Expressions, and others which this Minister
objects, as like to whose which carries, that the Bread is changed into the
Body of Jesus Christ, etc. and where we have shown the difference betwixt them:
To renverse this Sophism of Aubertin, it is sufficient to say they are
certainly different, seeing the one has never imprinted that idea on any
person, that thoughts, words, and actions were really changed into a spiritual
substance, or that we are really changed into the Son of God: And that the
others have persuaded all the Nations of the World, that the Bread was really
changed into the very Body of Jesus Christ.

Lo here the surest Rule for the difference of Expressions, and there needs no
more but to apply it to all the false comparisons of Aubertin, and other
Ministers, either out of the holy Scripture, or holy Fathers: For still we find
that the common and universal impression of all Nations, has so distinguished
those Expressions which they propose as like, that they never have confounded
them together; and that they have always taken the one in one sense, and the
other in another.

This shows that all the subtility of the Ministers, tends only to obscure
common sense, and their way of arguing terminates in blindness, as well as in
Heresy. Let men act according to the common impression, and they will have no
difficulty to understand that when St. Chrysologue says, That Gold changes Men
into Beasts; he does not mean that it changes them really into Beasts: and the
same impression has on the contrary made them judge, that when in the
Liturgies, we pray God to send his Holy Spirit to change the Bread and the Wine
into his Body and Blood, we understand that we pray him to change them really
and effectually: they never had the least difficulty concerning the meaning of
these expressions: they distinguished them perfectly, and did always take them,
the one in a Figurative Sense, the other in a Sense of Reality.

What then do the Ministers pretend, when they compare all these Figurative
Expressions of the Scripture and Fathers, with that in which it is said, that it
is the Body, the proper Body, the true Body, the very self same Body of Jesus
Christ, etc. and endeavors to persuade that the one and the others must be
taken in the same Figurative Sense. They pretend by the exterior and material
resemblance of these Terms, to which they apply their minds, to smother the
view and clear sentiment, by which we distinguish so neatly those expressions
without any confusion; that is to say, they endeavor to extinguish in men, the
light of common Sense, and to render them material and stupid, by filling their
minds with these vain subtilities. This is sufficient for any reasonable man to
reject all that vain Pomp of Comparisons, in which are represented as like
these expressions which men have never confounded together as like. And there
needs no more to overturn all what is considerable in Aubertins Book
consequently the noble Victory, which Mr. Claud says * Answ. to the 2.
Treatise chapter 1. p. 50.
that Book has obtained over the Roman School is no more but a mere illusion of
this Minister.

Mr. Claud in his third Answer, Book 5. Chap. 10. allows of this manner of
discerning expressions, and even things themselves, by the impression and
sentiment which they form, no less than by an exact observation of the
differences which distinguishes them. But he would have us to let him see that
in the first six Ages, the expressions of the Fathers were taken in a Sense of
reality; and the others which the Ministers propose, as like in a Metaphorical
Sense; and not to seek that difference of impression in the following Ages,
supposing that the Doctrine was changed in them. He ought then to be content
seeing we have satisfied his demand, how unreasonable soever it be, for we
have proved to him in the second Tome of the Perpetuity, to which he could not
answer that difference of expression of the Fathers, as like to those which we
produce, and we have confirmed this Proof in the third Tome, and in the general
Answer, in such a manner, as he is beaten down under it, in letting him see
that all he could say to persuade the change he supposes in the Doctrine of the
Eucharist, is the most manifest Proof of his want of sincerity. To this comes
all he has written to maintain as he has done, with an inflexible
opiniatorness, that fable on which he has employed all his Eloquence, and his
big Words. There needs no more, for his silence shows sufficiently that he is
convinced.

SECT. X.
The figurative Explication, which the Calvinists give to these words, This is
my Body, renders them altogether incapable to prove their Belief concerning the
Eucharist, to those who deny it.

THere is no Error which the Calvinists have taken more pains to vindicate
themselves of, than that of admitting no more but simple Signs, and without
efficacy. For as the suspicion people had, that they taught this Heresy,
confirmed by the reproach made them ordinarily by the Lutherians, and even by
some Catholics, rendered them very odious, they used all their endeavors to
take it away, and show it was a Calumny. All their Writings, all their
Declarations, all their Confessions of Faith are full of formal Condemnations
and Anathema 's against that Error, that the Eucharist conrains no more but
simple Figures. * Apud Hospini, hist. Sacrament. 2. part. fol. 124, 128, 135,
147.


Afrer these express Condemnations, they cannot refuse to avow that if this
Error they so earnestly condemn, and which they charge upon the Socinians and
Anabaptists, be a necessary consequence of the Figurative Sense they give to
the Words of Jesus Christ, and if this Sense puts them into an absolute
inability to prove their Belief concerning the Supper; it follows necessarly,
according to their Principle that this sense is false; and that their
explication is erroneous. Now there is nothing more easy to prove than this
their inability, to justify themselves of this Error which they condemn, and
to prove their Belief to the Socinians and Anabaptists, and all who will deny
it; for there needs no more but to propose, what they teach in their Confession
of Faith, in their Catechisms, and the Books of those who are Authors of them,
and then to require the Proof thereof from the Scripture, which according to
them is alone sufficient to ground their Faith.

They say in their Catechism, Sunday 51, where they speak of the Supper that
Jesus Christ represents to them by the Bread his Body, and by the Wine his
Blood. And in the 37 Article of their Confession of Faith, That in the Supper,
God gives them really and in effect that which he figurates therein. In their
53 Sunday, That Jesus Christ, with whom their Souls are inwardly nowrished, is
in this Sacrament, and that they are made participant of his proper Substance;
or as they speak in their own Confession of Faith, That they are therein
nourished and quickened by the Flesh and Blood of Jesus Christ.

It Is according to this Persuasion and Belief that Calvin, who is the Author of
this Catechism, says, in the 4 Book of his Institutions, Chap. 17 n. 11. That
in the Supper, Jesus Christ is really given us under the Signs of Bread and
Wine; yea his Body and his Blood by which he has purchased Salvation to us, and
thereby we are made participant of his Substance. And his is conform to what
Beza says in the conference of Poissy, as he relates him self in his
Ecclesiastical History Tom. 1. p. 496. That the thing signified in this
Sacrament is offered and given us of the Lord, as truly as the Signs of it,
that the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ which are truly communicated to us, are
truly present in the use of the Supper, although they are neither under, nor
beside, nor in the Bread and Wine, nor in any other place but in Heaven. And in
the page 515, that we are made participant only of the fruit of Christ's death.

This is the Calvinists Doctrine concerning their Cene or Supper, and for which
we maintain they cannot give Proofs from the Scripture alone unless they
renounce the figurative sense, they give to the Words of Jesus Christ.

The question is nor here of the manner according to which they say they
receive all these things, whether it be by Faith, or otherwise; but of what
they receive: nor is the question here of Mr. Clauds analogical and
metaphysical Arguments, but of clear and precise Proofs from Scripture, seeing
they are solemnly bound to show there all their points of Faith.

If they allege these words, Take, eat, this is my Body, a Socinian will
answer them, that they should not pretend to receive any other thing, than what
Jesus Christ has commanded to be taken, but according to them, he intended only
to say Take, eat, this is the Figure of my Body, therefore they receive only
the Figure, and not the Body.

If they reply, that these Words contain a Promise, and that Jesus Christ
promised to give them his Body in giving them a Figure of it. The Socinian will
answer, he sees not that Promise in the Words of Jesus Christ, and he will
oppose to them what Zuinglius says Tom. 2. f. 371. That these words of Jesus
Christ contain no promiss at all, Nihil in his nobis promissum est, and on the
margent; Christi verba hoc est Corpus meum promissionem nullam continent. And
what Calvin says in his manner of reforming the Church, page 122. second of his
Opusc. that he who seeks in the Sacrament more than the promises contain, the
Devil has bewitched him: And he will conclude from the Principles of these two
Reformers, that one ought to seek no more in this Sacrament but a Figure:
unless he be bewitched by the Devil.

So that holding to Zuinglius, it must be said the Socinians have reason to
laugh at the Promises the Calvinists think to find in these words, This is my
Body: and in holding to what the Calvinists says of this Promise, all the
Anathema's they pronounce against the Socinians fall back on Zuinglius himself
who agrees with them, that there are no Promises in these words, This is my
Body.

That is already no small advantage that the chief of all the Sacramentarians,
he who is pretended to have been raised up by God, to re-build anew the
pretended Reformed Church, is anathematized by those who call them selves his
Disciples. But lest the fancy take them to quite Zuinglius, to preserve that
promise, I maintain moreover that Zuinglius reasons well, according to their
common Principles, and it is only Calvin and his Sectators who reason ill.

For by what subtility can they discover in these words, Take, eat, this is my
Body, taken in a figurative sense, a Promise made by Jesus Christ to give truly
his Body? This is a Figure of my Body, is that to say, take, eat, I promise to
give you really my Body? Is this a reasonable Conclusion? This is the Figure of
the Body of Jesus Christ, therefore this Figure contains or conferrs really the
same Body.

Does not common sense dictate the contrary, that it is not necessary that a
Figure contain, or confe^r the thing signified; that they are two things
altogether distinct: and to use the Examples themselves, alleges to prove
their figurative sense; when Joseph says to Pharaoh, the seven Kowes are seven
Years, did he mean that the Kowes contained the seven Years. When God said to
Moses that the Lamb was the Passage, he meant according to Protestants, it was
the Figure of the Passage, but he meant not that the Lamb contained or
conferred the Passage.

These Gentlemen, who make so great use of Logic in all their Books, should
they not have acknowledged that the Conclusion depending on two Premises or
Propositions, that which is in question, viz. that the Eucharist contains or
conferrs the Body of Jesus can have no connection with that other, viz. the
Eucharist is the Figure of the Body of Jesus Christ, but by an universal
Proposition; viz. all Figures contain or communicate the thing they signify;
from which it would follow, that the Eucharist being the Figure of Jesus
Christ's Body, it should communicate his Body: but as that Major is
extravagant, the connection the Ministers would make of their consequence that
the Eucharist communicats the Body of Jesus Christ, or it is efficacious of the
Body of Jesus Christ, with that Explication, that it is the Figure of the Body
of Jesus Christ, is no less impertinent.

I find not in all the Calvinists Books but one Argument to support this
absurdity; which is, that it is unbeseeming to God to feed us with an empty
Spectacle; and therefore, we must certainly believe, that when he establishes a
Sign, the verity of the thing signified is also present. Whence they conclude
that God having established the Bread as the Sign of his Body, by these words,
This is my Body, the verity of the same Body must be joined to the Bread, and
it must be communicated to us by his Spirit: for, unless one will call God a
deceiver (says Calvin) he dare not say that a vain Sign, and void of the verity
is proposed by him, ( Just. book 4. chap. 17. n. 10.)

I protest hitherto it was not possible for me to find the least spark of
common sense in this Argument, and I can not enough admire how People who makes
so solemn profession, to admit nothing but Scripture, or evident and necessary
consequences drawn from it, should take the boldness to propose under the name
of Holy Scriptures, such reaveries and dreams.

For what ground were there to accuse God of deceiving, if commanding us to
take no more but the sign of his Body, he gave no more at the same time but the
Figure of his Body? Is it to cheat men, to give them precisely what is promised
them? Why is it a vain delusory thing, and unbeseeming God to establish a
Figure of a thing absent? Was it a vain and delusory thing to make the Paschal
Lamb a Figure of the Angels passing by the houses of the Israelits, when he
destroyed the first born of the Egyptians? And would it be to argue in any
manner supportable to say according to Calvin's opinion, that seeing the
Paschal Lamb was a Figure of that passage of the Angel, therefore that passage
must always have been present; otherwise God had been a deceiver in proposing
false signs.

Mr. Claud in his Answer to Father Nouet, page 320. compares that expression he
attributes to the Jews, when they celebrated their Easter: This is the bread of
affliction, which our Fathers eated in Egypt, to these words This is my Body;
and he says, that Jesus Christ, in substituting the memorial of the new
Covenant to that of the Old, he would retain the same form of expression, and
in stead of saying; this is the bread of affliction, etc. he has said, this is
my Body which is broken for you: so that according to this Minister, this Bread
of affliction are two Memorials, the one of the Old Testament, and the other of
the New, expressed after the same figurative manner * See the answer to this
objection of Mr. Claud, in the 2 Tome of the Perpet. P. 196.
in ascribing to the Sign the thing signified. Now it were ridiculous to
conclude and say; that the bread the Jews eated in celebrating their Easter,
being the Figure and Memorial of the affliction their Fathers endured in
Egypt, ought to have been accompanied with the thing signified, and
communicate to them the efficacy thereof, lest it had been a deceitful sign. It
is no less absurd, will a Socinian say to Mr. Claud to pretend to prove that
the Eucharist would be a deceitful sign, if the Body of Jesus Christ were not
therein communicate and received.

The institution of Sacraments is an arbitrary thing, depending wholly on the
will of Jesus Christ; he has made them the Instruments of his Graces in the New
Testament, to which he was not obliged; he could, if he had pleased have
instituted among the Christians, pure signs, destitute of efficacy, as he had
instituted among the Jews; these sig^s would neither have been vain, nor false,
nor delusory, they would have produced the Effect for which they should have
been ordained by God; which is to represent to us the things signified, and
this representation having nothing in it self but what is lawful, though God had
not annexed any Grace to it, there had been no ground to say that he had
deceived men by a vain or empty show. There must then be a promise of Grace
joined to the establishment of a sign, to conclude rationally that the thing
signified is joined with it, and consequently these words This is my Body,
taken in the meaning of the Calvinists, containing no more but the institution
of Bread, as a sign of the Body of Jesus Christ. It Is a manifest absurdity to
assert they import a promise and engagement on God's part, to give really his
Body to those who should take the Signs of it.

Perhaps the Ministers will answer, true it is, the promise of that real
receiving the Body of Jesus Christ, which they believe is not contained in
these words, This is my Body, but it is contained in other Passages, as in the 6
chap. of St. John, and in these words of St. Paul; 1 Cor. 10. The Bread which
we break is it not the communion of the Body of Jesus Christ. This is what must
be examined in few words.

As to the 6 of John, it is clear they cannot make use of it to prove their
belief concerning the Eucharist, seeing they hold with the Lutherians, that the
Evangelist speaks not of this Sacrament in all that Chapter, There is no word
of the Supper here, says Calvin on the 53 verse. but of the continual
communication of the Flesh of Christ which we have without the use of the
Supper. And he adds, These of Bohemia have not adduced this passage
pertinently, to prove that all in general should receive the Cup. They could
not then be thought to deal seriously, if they should allege this Chapter to
prove their belief concerning the Supper, since they judge the Evangelist does
not speak of it therein.

As to the passage of St. Paul, I confess that being taken in the true sense,
which is that of the Real Presence, it includes that of receiving the Flesh of
Jesus Christ, which is a consequence of that Presence: But it cannot rationally
be concluded according to the Calvinists, for first Zuinglius cuts off at one
stroke all the consequences they can draw from it, by pretending that the Greek
word (...) does not signify Communion or Participation of the Body of Jesus
Christ, but a company of People who live upon the Body and Blood of Jesus
Christ, and that by eating this Bread, one declares himself a member of the
Church, Tom. 2 fol. 211.258.342.

Besides this explication of Zuinglius whose Authority should be considerable
to the Ministers, because of the rank he holds among those who have erected
their Church of new. They themselves furnish us with others, which destroy all
the consequences they can draw from that passage: for who can hinder a Socinian
to explain these words of St. Paul in a figurative sense, as themselves explain
these of Jesus Christ and who can hinder him to say that these words must be so
rendered. The Bread which we break is it not the sign or figure of the Body of
Jesus Christ, as they render these others, this is the sign or figure of my
Body.

Now how can they conclude from thence, that in receiving this Figure, they
receive really and in effect the thing figured, unless it be by a great number
of groundless suppositions, and by supplying from their own imaginations what
the Scripture says not at all. They must then, will they, nill they, confess
that the figurative sense they give to the words of Jesus Christ This is my
Body is altogether false, it being so manifestly contrary not only to that
which all Christians who believe the Real Presence, since the Apostles have
given to them, but also to the Principles of the Ministers. They must therefore
renounce it to defend their belief concerning the eating and receiving the Body
and Blood of Jesus Christ in their Supper.

Here is moreover another advantage drawn from the main Argument and we cannot
sufficiently admire the care the Divine Providence has had to guard this
Mystery of our Faith with so great abundance of Proofs, against the
incredulity of men

For it must be observed, that although commonly it follows not that he who errs
in one Point, errs also in another altogether distinct from it. Yet God has so
disposed things, as it follows necessarily, that if the Calvinists err in any
one of the Points upon which we accuse them of Heresy; their Doctrine
concerning the Eucharist is false, and ours is true. To be convinced of this,
there needs only to consider two Principles, the one of Right, the other of
Fact, both equally certain.

The first is, It Is impossible the truth of the Mystery of the Eucharist
should be known only by a Society of Heretics, and that all other Societies
should be in error, concerning so capital and important a Point; for if this
supposition were possible, it would be also possible that the whole World might
be in error, and that there were no Orthodox Church at all, seeing that only
Society, which should know the truth of the Mystery of the Eucharist would be
Heretical in all other Points and all the other Societies would be Heretical in
point of the Eucharist.

The second is, There is none at present in the world, but only the Society of
the Calvinists, and those who have sprung from it, or have risen up with it, as
the Anabaptists, the Socinians, and Quakers, who deny the Real Presence. This
cannot be doubted of after the Proofs we have above set down.

Wherefore, it follows necessarily that if the Calvinists had reason to deny
this Presence, all the other Societies must have been in error as to this
Point: and it being impossible, according as I have said, that the truth of
this Mystery should be known only by Heretics, there needs no more but to
convince the Calvinists of Heresig upon any other Point that is common to them
with the Sacramentarians to conclude, thence demonstrativly that they are also
Heriticks in matter of the Eucharist, because otherwise it would follow, that
notwithstanding of their being Herericks, they alone should know the truth of
this Mystery, which is altogether impossible.

Wherefore they are not consequences only probable, but entirely certain and
demonstrative: To say the Calvinists are Heretics, in condemning as Idolatry,
the Invocation of Saints, the Honor that is given to their Relics, as is
invincibly proved in the Answer to the writing of a Minister, upon several
points of Controversy. Therefore their Doctrine concerning the Eucharist is
false.

The Calvinists are Heriticks in rejecting Prayer for the Dead, in promising
Salvation to their Children dead with out Baptism etc, as we have demonstrated
in the last chapter of the Defense of the Faith of the Church, for answer to a
letter of Mr. Spon. Therefore their Doctrine concerning the Eucharist is false.

The Calvinists are Heriticks in believing that the state of the Church was
interrupted, in so far as it was necessary according to them, that God should
raise up People, in an extraordinary manner, to erect the Church of new, This
we have likewise proved, so as admits no reply, in the first part of the Answer
to Mr. Spon. Therefore their belief concerning the Eucharist is false.

So there needs no more but to convince them of error upon any Point they have
taken for pretext of their separation from the Catholic Church, to conclude
that their belief in point of the Eucharist is false.

How remote soever these particular consequences seem to be from these
Principles, the two general Maxims we have fixed; That it is impossible this
Mystery should be known only by Heretics; and yet the Sacramentarians only
deny the Real Presence, joins and knitts them together by an indissoluble knot.

Wherefore all the Proofs of other controverted Points, are convictions of the
error of the Calvinists in point of the Eucharist. And this is what ought
carefully to be remarked, that it is sufficient to convince them of error upon
any article of Faith whatsomever, to conclude the same of their Doctrine of the
Eucharist.

As this Mystery supports the whole Catholic Religion, so the same whole
Religion supports it; all the Proofs, which establishes the several Points,
that divides us from the Calvinists, meet and join in this, and consequently
forms such abundance of light and conviction, that it is impossible those who
sincerely open the eyes of their Soul to look upon it, to restrain themselves
from crying out in a rapture with the Royal Prophet, Testimonia tu a credibilia
facta sunt nimis. Psalm. 92.

SECT. XI. The Conclusion.
Where once more the invincible Strength of this Argument is exposed.
I Can hardly persuade my self that the Ministers, who have so high an esteem
of reasoning, as that they ground their Faith upon it, seeing they cannot find
it in the Scripture, but by the help of their consequences, can resolve so to
overthrow the Rules thereof, as that not being able to find any thing of
falsehood either in the Major, or Minor of a Regular Argument, will yet hazard
to deny the conclusion of it. And at the same time. I can less understand what
they can say to obscure the clearness and evidence of what was proved in the
Major and the Minor. It seems then there is good ground to conclude that they
will be forced to acknowledge, that in the Book of the Perpetuity, it is most
solidly proved. that the Faith of the Roman Church, concerning the Eucharist,
which is the same with that of all the Oriental Churches, is the ancient and
perpetual Faith of the Christians of all Ages, and that consequently their
opinion which is contrary thereto, is a manifest Heresy.

Yet this is a thing we do not hope for, unless it be of some particular
person, whom God may touch by his Grace: But as to the generality of the
Ministers, we know their Genius better, than to promise to our self that they
will yield to the Truth how manifest soever it may be, they are too much
infatuate with their ridiculous Opinion of being come out of Babylon, as to be
able to resolve to return again to it. That which will seem most convincing to
them, will pass in their conceit for a song of Tire, which imitats the Tune of
the songs of Sion, or for a crafty seducing of the Beast of the Apocalypse,
whose horns are like those of the Lamb. They will rather choice to put out
their own eyes than to be attentive to it. They will say Mr. Claud has given
satisfaction to all that, and it is only an idle repetition of what has been
confuted by their most Reverend Brother, and deserves no answer. Or if they
make any, it will not be in answering directly and precisely to every Article;
and in representing sincerely the Proofs which support all what is asserted, by
referring to the Books whence they are taken, being for brevities sake, we were
obliged not to set them down at length; but they will do nothing but confuse
and ravel the Dispute by new incidents, to break the thread of it, and thereby
hinder the simple People of their Party, from seeing so easily the truth
through the clouds, wherewith they will endeavor to cover it.

But do what the Ministers will, I can hardly believe that these who have Wit,
Conscience, and Honor amongst the Protestants will not be persuaded by this
Argument, that what we believe of the Eucharist, and what all those great
Societies of the East, believes with us, is the common and perpetual Faith of
the whole Church, and consequently, that of the Apostles.

For as to the matters of fact, which shows the agreement of these Churches
either in Beringarius his time, or at this time, they are too well grounded to
be questioned in sincerity; so it is not like they can doubt of the truth of the
Major, which is proved in Sect. 1. and 5.

And as to the impossibility of an Invisible Change, these matters of fact
being supposed, it appears so easily of it self, as it would seem we ought not
to have sought Reasons to make it be better perceived, if Mr. Claud's
pertinaciousness had not obliged us to it: But yet we needed no more, but to
lay open the incredible absurdities, which are naturally included in the
imagination of this insencible change, to set the falsehood of this Fable, upon
the highest Point of evidence.

All I fear, Gentlemen, is that the adherence you have from your Infancy, to a
Religion you thought true, hinder you in the middle of this enquiry, and that
by a mistaken humility, you dare not contradict your Ministers, for your
Fathers did not adhere to the new Reformers, in forsaking the Church, but
because they had inspired them with that criminal presumption, that they ought
not make account of the Fathers or Councils, but every one could, and ought to
make himself Judge of the Fathers and Councils, by the light he should imagine
to have found in the Scripture, after having invocated the Holy Spirit: it is
most just you make use of the same Privilege, in respect of your new Masters,
seeing hitherto they have not taken the boldness to say they were the only men
who might be followed with all security, and without any ground of fear of
being misled. This is all I ask of you, your Ministers have so often told you,
that you must not believe men in matter of Religion, because all men are liars.
Begine at them with the Practice of this Rule, and with judging of the Rule it
self, for perhaps it is not so generally true as they pretend: but making it
general they cannot say it is not true in respect of them.

I doubt not but you will confess they have still represented to you
Transubstantiation, which they call a Monster, and the adoration of Jesus
Christ in the Sacrament, which they call Idolatry, as two things unknown to the
whole world, save only to the Roman Church, and that neither the Greeks, nor
the Arminians, nor the Russians, nor the Jacobits, nor the Ethiopians, nor
generally, any Christian beside those who submit to the Pope, believes any
thing of these two Articles. These are Mr. Claud's words, ( Preface of his
answer to Mr. Arnaud, page 759) and as they all look upon him, as the great
Defender of the pretended Reformed Churches, it is very like they all speak the
same Language, and though they should not so boldly maintain so great a
falsehood, it is most certain they are very careful to conceal from you the
general agreement of all these great Societies with the Roman Church, not only
in point of the Eucharist, but likewise in many other points; as the Sacrifice
of the Mass, Prayer for the Dead, the Invocation of Saints, the Honor of their
Images and Relics, for which they have always induced you to condemn us as
superstitious, and Idolaters. You cannot now doubt any more, that they have
maliciously disguised the Truth to you, concerning all this; what confidence
then can you have in them, in beholding clearly that they cheat you in matters
of that importance, where your Salvation is at the stake.

Perhaps you will say, there is none but Mr. Claud, who is guilty of this
fault, and that it is true he is much to be blamed, for denying things so
unquestionable, as is the great agreement of all those Churches with the Roman,
in all these Points. But as we have already shown them, (Tom. 3 of the
Perpetuity, page, 805.) that it was not, to take part in a procedure so
unbeseeming, and disingenuous, as is that of Mr. Claud, to have suffered in a
common Cause, that he who had taken upon him their defense, should establish it
upon a notorious falsehood, and for four or five years debate, about a matter of
fact, which ingenuity and sincerity ought to have made be acknowledged the
first day, ought they not to have publicly disaproved this procedure, and not
have permitted, that in the enterprise of defending what they take for truth,
the truth should be wounded by imposing upon the whole ' East, to believe what
it believes not.

Mean while, consider if there be any Minister who disaproved Mr. Claud during
so long a time as that Dispute lasted, and very far from that, there is very
lately one of the most Famous and Learned Professors, (Mr. Spanhemius) of the
united Provinces, who heaps up Praises on Mr. Claud, for the advantages he
pretends he has carried in this Dispute, whereof the chief Point was to know,
if the Oriental Churches, did really agree with the Roman, in point of the
Eucharist, and who with a wonderful confidence, affirms that his Illustrious
Brother has exposed to open view, the vanity of the suppositions of his
Adversary, by which he can mean no other but the principal matter of fact,
which the Author of the Perpetuity had taken for the ground of his whole
Discourse, viz. that all the Churches of the World were united in the Faith of
the Real Presence, in the time of Berengarius, as they are likewise at this
present time. Lo here what Mr. Spanhemius dares call most false suppositions,
vanissimas Hypotheses, although you see with your own eyes, that they are
undeniable truths. But you ought to be much more astonished to see that he is
not ashamed, to make the most authentic, and most solemn attestations, that
ever a Church did give of her Faith, pass for precarious Testimonies, which
ought not be noticed, as having been given by Mercenary Souls, who betrayed
their Conscience, in letting themselves be corrupted for money, Tom. 3. of the
Perpet. 806.

For what can you conclude from that but that among those of your Party, no
reguard is had to the truth, and those who reigns in it, by the confidence
people has in them, and by the Authority they attribute to themselves, care not
by what means they keep the People adhereing to them; that falsehoods are
equally good to them as truths, when they produce this effect, and provyding an
Author make noise, and be able to amuse the World with the sound of his words,
the most intelligent amongst the Calvinists, are glad to let him be doing, and
considers always as an advantage, the impression they make thereby upon the
generality of their Party.

But you ought not stop here, it is yet more important for you to consider that
Mr. Claud did not engage himself to the denial of so certain matters of fact,
and the other Ministers to applaud his Art, to color these falsehoods, but
because they saw no other way to extricate themselves from the difficulty they
were in. To suppose, as they did, that all the Churches of the world had been
for nine Ages, without believing the Real Presence, and to find them all united
in this Belief at the beginning of the eleventh Age, without that any one
perceived this change, or any mark or memory of it remaining, is a Chimere so
absurd to be maintained, that they themselves were amazed at it. Therefore to
give it a little more liklyhood, it was needful, to restrict this Innovation,
within the limits of the Latin Church, and to pretend that all the rest had not
changed, and were all Berengarians, and had always been such, when Berengarius
was condemned in the West.

You cannot then be persuaded of the contrary (as there is no man of good
sense, but ought to be, by only reading what I have said in the 1 and 2 Sect.
and yet more by reading the Chapters I have marked of the 1 Tom of the Perpet.)
you cannot, I say, be convinced of the agreement of the Greek Church of that
time, but you must conclude, that, that pretended Innovation, without which,
Calvinism cannot subsist, is a work of the Father of Lies, for it ought to have
had place in all the Churches of the World, as well as in the Roman; which they
well saw was so inconceivable, as Mr. Claud cries out for fear, lest he be
necessitate to show how its possible that insensible change was made at the
same time, over all the World, The Question is not of the whole World, The
Question is of the Occident, and of the Provinces subject to the Obedience of
the Pope.

But the condition of the Greeks at present, and of all the other Oriental
Communions threw back your Ministers into the same difficulty: for if they had
granted, that they also held all at present the Real Presence,
Transubstantiation, and the Adoration, and are persuaded they never had another
Faith, whom could they have made believe that this had happened four or five
hundred years since, by an insensible change in all these Communions, of whom
many have no connection with one another, it being they mutually accuse others
of Heresy, without so much as one person perceiving the Innovation. Therefore
it was needful to say farther, that it was false the Oriental Churches were of
this Faith, and that this could not be true, but only of some Latinised Greeks,
and not at all of the true Greeks.

But they are of this Faith, whether Mr. Claud will or not, you are doubtless
persuaded thereof. But beware, lest for want of application, to the most
important Affair you have in the world, which is that of your Salvation, you
smother the natural consequences you ought to draw from this conviction, for
you ought to say,

1. Our Ministers have cheated us hitherto, in denying many years
pertinaciously, and as far as can be judged against their own Consciences, in a
dispute of Religion, a thing which is more clear than the light of the day, we
have then no reason to trust our selves to so blind guids, and so void of
sincerity.

2. They deny or dissemble matters of fact, so certain and important to be
known, for no other Reason, but because being acknowledged to be true, the
pretended Innovation in the belief of the Eucharist, in all the Churches of the
World cannot subsist; I cannot then be convinced, as I am of the truth of these
matters of fact, but I must also be convinced that that Innovation is a dream
invented by Aubertin and other Ministers, because they saw well without that
they could not hinder themselves from being looked upon as Innovators and
Heretics.

3. Its not only in the belief of the Eucharist, that these great Oriental
Societies agree with the Roman Church; it is also in the Sacrifice of the Mass,
in Prayer for the Dead, in the Invocation of Saints, in the Honor given to
their Relics and Images, which our Ministers incessantly represent to us, as
Doctrins of Antechrist, for which we ought to have made separation from the
Roman Church, and which are the most common subject of their invectives against
that Church* Now I see clearly all that is ill grounded, since all other
Christian Communions, who are not subject to that pretended Antechrist, have on
all that, the same Faith which the Roman Catholics have: I have therefore
great reason to fear, that I cannot in conscience continue to stay with
Calumniators and Schismatics, and consequently, I cannot do better than to
return back whence our Fathers ought not to have come forth:

I think there is no intelligent Person will deny these consequences to be
just; yet it is so great a matter to change Religion, that the conviction of
the understanding is not sufficient for that effect, God must besides, touch
the Heart with his Grace, Prayer must beg this Favor from him, and Hope must
expect it from his Mercy.

FINIS.
Approbation of the Doctors,
WE underwritten Doctors in Theology, of the faculty of Paris, do certify we
have read (...) Book, Entitled, The Faith of the Catholic Church concerning
the Eucharist, invincibly proved, etc, with a Preface in form of a Letter to
the Gentlemen of the pretended Reformed Religion, by M -- We have found them
conform to the Rules of Faith, and most profitable for the conversion of
Heriticks: The Author sets down therein, in Abridgement, what is contained in
several Volumns, to the end he might facilitate the means of being instructed
of the Truth of this great Mystery, to those who might not have the leisure to
read these Volumns entirely. This is the judgment we^ ^^ke of this little, but
excellent Work, at Paris, the o^ of November, 1683.

AUGET of the House of Sorbon, RICHER of the House of Navarr.



