Pietatis in Parents Disquisitio: OR, The Duty of CHILDREN TOWARD THEIR
PARENTS: Truly Examined and Stated.
In a Letter to a Friend in the City.
SIR,
YOUR kind Lines, with the Prints you were pleased to send me, I have received,
for which I return you many Thanks; and though I do much approve of the Letter,
written to a Friend in the Country, in the defense of the Rights of
Primogeniture, yet I must declare to you, that I am afraid the exposing of such
a Letter to public view, may prove an Encouragement to all Elder Sons to live
disobedient and disorderly Lives, seeing the ill Practice of some Fathers, in
Disinheriting their First-begotten Sons, is so much exploded thereby; and
therefore I conceive the Publication of it is somewhat unseasonable; when we
see, that the Son does not only not Honor his Father, but even Dishonors
him, and is ashamed of him. He is so far from Loving him, that he rather hates
him; so far from fearing him, that contrariwise, he mocketh and contemns him:
And instead of Serving and Obeying him, he rises up and Conspireth against
him: If the Father be angry, the Son labors to anger him more: Briefly,
scarce any Duty of a Child toward his Father is seen now a days. O execrable
Impiety! And to show you, that I my self abhor such an Impious Behavior of any
Son toward his Father, I will endeavor to draw you a Scheme of that Piety or
Duty, which all Children do owe to their Parents by the Laws of God, of Nature,
and of Man.

The Piety or Duty then of Children toward their Parents may be reduced to six
Heads, comprehended in these very Words; Honor thy Father and thy Mother.

1. The first is, the Duty of Reverence, and that not only in External Gesture
and Behavior, but also Internal, which is that Sublime and Sacred Esteem and
Veneration a Child ought to have of his Parents, as the Authors and Original
Causes of his Being, as also of his good and well Being; which Reverence
toward Parents shall be evidenced from Scripture, from Nature, and from the
Civil Law of the Romans.

I. From the Holy Scripture.
Honor thy Father and Mother, (which is the first Commandment with promise)
that it may be well with thee, and that thou may live long on Earth, Exodus
20.12. Deuteronomy. 5.16. Mat. 15.4. Mar. 7.10. Ephesians. 6.2. and 3. From whence (Sir) we
may make these Remarks:

1. That Reverence to Parents is placed next to the Honor due to God: Nature
(says Plutarch) and the Law, which does preserve Nature, has given the first
place of Reverence and Honor, after God, unto the Father and Mother: And Men
cannot do any Service more acceptable to God Almighty, than graciously and
lovingly to pay to their Parents that Begot them, and to them that brought them
up, the Usury of new and old Graces, which they have lent them; as contrariwise
there is no Sign of an Atheist more certain, than for a Man to set light by,
and to offend his Parents.

2. That the 5th Commandment only has a special Promise annexed thereunto, to
show, that a more plentiful Blessing in this kind follows from the Obedience
of this Commandment, than of the other that follow: Hence it is called by the
Apostle St. Paul, the first Commandment with Promise; it being the first in
order of the second Table, and the only Commandment of that Table, which has
an express Promise, and the only Commandment of the Ten, that has a particular
Promise.

II. From Nature.
Our Parents are as Gods, (...), Earthly Gods, as Hierocles calls them,
Conspicuous and Visible Gods, who do imitate the Invisible and Unbegotten God,
in giving Life unto others. And therefore Proculus says, that the Father is the
Image of God; and Plato calls Parents God's Images or Representatives, to whom
we owe our Reverence, as to the Gods themselves, says Aristotle; yet not such
an Obedience and Reverence as is infinite and unlimited; so that this Duty of
Reverence of Children toward Parents, the very Infidels, Ethnicks and Pagans,
by the Instinct of Nature, do Instruct them. Add hereunto a farther
Illustration of the Awe and Reverence we owe our Parents, taken from Heathen
Nations. Amongst the Lacedaemonians this Custom took place, that the younger
sort rose up from their Seats before the Aged: Whereof, when one asked the
Cause of Teleucrus; It is (quoth he) to the end, that in doing this Honor to
whom it belongs not, they should learn to yield greater Honor to their
Parents.

The Arrogance and Irreverence of a Child was the Cause, that one of the Ephori
published the Law of Testaments, whereby it was permited to every one from that
time forward, to appoint whom he would his Heir. This Law served well to make
Children to pay the Duty of Obedience and Reverence to their Parents, and to
cause them to be afraid of displeasing them. To be brief, you will find among
the Romans, that the Child was not admitted to plead his Father's Will after
his Death, by way of Action, but only by way of Request, using very Humble,
Honorable and Reverent Speech of his Dead Father, and leaving the whole Matter
to the Discretion and Religion of the Judges. But here may be started this
Question; Whether in sitting or otherwise, the first Place and Prerogative of
Honor, be due to the Father, a Private Man, or to the Son, that is a
Magistrate?

The Solution of this Question propounded, we find given in Aulus Gellius, Lib.
2. Cap. 2. viz. In publicis locis, atque Muneribus, atque Actionibus patrum
jura cum filiorum, qui in Magistratu Sunt, Potestatibus Collata inter quiescere
paululum, and connivere: Sed cum extra Rempublicam in Domesticare, atque Vita
Sedeatur, Ambuletur in Convivio quoque familiari Discumbatur; tum inter filium
Magistratum, and Patrem privatum, publicas Honores Cessare: Naturales atque
genuinos exoriri.

Buda in his Annotations upon the Pandects, has observed many good Things
belonging to the Roman Judgments, which curious Spirits may look into: Among
the rest, of the great Respect and Honor that was given to Magistrates.
Concerning which Matter, we may use as a good Testimony, that which we read in
Plutarch, of Fabius Maximus his Son, when he was Censor, who seeing a far off,
that his Father came toward him on Horseback, and that his Sergeants, in
regard of Fatherly Reverence, had not caused him to alight, did himself Command
his Father to set Foot on Ground, which Command the Old Man, the Father,
cheerfully and willingly obeyed, saying, Domestic Power must give place to
Publick-Authority.

III. From the Civil Law of the Romans.
How unworthy soever Parents be in respect of their Personal Defects; yet such
as God and Nature have placed under their Authority, are to count them worthy
not only of Honor, but also of all Honor. Children being not herein so much
to look unto their Persons as unto the Ordinance of God, who has placed them
over their Children; and wisely to consider, that in respect of that Dignity
and Power received from above, not of their Personal Virtues, all this Honor
and Reverence is due unto them; Licet Legum Contemptor and Impius Sit, tamen
Pater est: Although he be a Contemner of the Laws, and a Wicked Man, yet is he a
Father notwithstanding, says the Emperor Justinian, Novel. 12. Cap. 2. And
Persona Patris, says the Lawyer Vlpian, Filio semper Honesta and Sancta videri
debet: The Person of the Father ought always to be accounted Honorable and
Sacred to the Child, D. 37. 15, 9. Add hereunto these Texts of the Roman Laws,
C. 2. 42, 2. D. 22. 3, 8. N. 155. Cap. 1. D. 37. 15, 1. D. 27. 10, 4. D. 2. 4,
6. C. 8. 47, 3. which prove, that the Duty of Piety and Reverence toward
Parents, is an Obligation never to be Cancelled; and therefore let the Man be
what he will, the name of a Father to his Child is Venerable and Awful.

2. The second Duty is that of Love, which Children owe to their Parents, as
their Parents do also to them, the want of which natural Affection, is reckoned
among the most odious Vices, Romans 1.31. They are to bear their Parents a real
Kindness, such as may make them heartily desirous of all manner of Good to
them, and abhor to do any thing that may grieve or disquiet them.

And seeing Children must labor to please their Parents in all things, it is
certain, that no Action, Gift or Disposition in them is more acceptable, or
contenteth Parents better, than to see good Will, and an assured and certain
Friendship among themselves.

It is reported, that Apollonida, Mother to King Eumenes, and to three other of
his Brethren, accounted her self Happy, as she said, and gave great Thanks to
God, not for her Riches or Principality, but because she saw her three Younger
Sons, as it were a Guard to their Elder Brother, who lived freely and most
safely in the Midst of them, with their Swords by their Sides and their
Javelins in their Hands. Contrariwise, when King Xerxes perceived, that his Son
Ochus lay in wait for his Brethren, to put them to Death, he Died for
Displeasure thereof. Therefore Euripides said, that Wars between Brethren are
grievous, but most of all to their Parents; because he that hates his Brother,
and cannot abide to look upon him, must needs also be offended with him that
Begat him, and her that Bare him.

Sir, I shall conclude this Duty of Children toward their Parents, by putting
this Case, viz.

If my Father and my Son happen to be in such a danger of Life, as one only can
be preserved and freed from it, what can Prudence persuade me to do?

To which Question the Moralist offers to return this Resolution for me; that I
ought rather to Succor my Father than my Son. 1. Propter Sunguinem. 1. Propter
Reverentiam and Gratitudinem Patri Debitam. 3. Propter Disparem Restitutionis
Rationem Pater semel Amissus Restitui non Potest: Filius Amissus Restitui
quandoque Potest per Successionem alterius filii. Fredericus Windelinus, Lib.
1. de Recta vita, Cap. 5. Quaest 12.

And now you shall hear what the Frenchman Charron says, in answer to the same
Querie: The Duty of Children toward their Parents (quoth he) is so certain, so
due and requisite, that it may not be dispensed withal by any other Duty or
Love whatsoever, be it never so great. For if it shall happen, that a Man see
his Father and his Son so endangered at one and the same instant, as that he
cannot Rescue and Succor them both, he must forsake his Son and go to his
Father, though his Love toward his Son be greater. And the Reason is, because
the Duty of a Son toward his Father is more ancient, and has the greater
Privilege, and cannot be Abrogated by any latter Duty.

3. The third Duty that Children do owe to their Parents, is that of Obedience;
which is not only contained in the Fifth Commandment, but expressly enjoined in
other places of Scripture, as Ephesians. 6.1. Children, obey your Parents in the
Lord, for this is right; and again Colos. 3.20. Children, obey your Parents in
all things, for this is well pleasing to the Lord; which Obedience must be
yielded even to the roughest and hardest Commands of a Father, according to
that most remarkable Example of the Rechabites, who to obey the Command of
their Father, never drank Wine in all their Lives.

But it may be here Queried, Whether Children are obliged to yield Obedience to
all the Commands that shall be given by their Parents?

It is Answered, that Children owe their Parents an Obedience in all things,
unless where their Commands are contrary to the Laws of God and of Nature, and
to the Municipal Laws of their Country; for in these Cases the Duty to God and
Nature, and to the Laws of the State, must be preserved; and therefore if any
Parents should be so ^^^ked, as to require Obedience to such kind of Commands,
Children then offend not against their Duty, though they disobey those Commands;
which Solution of the Querie, shall be fortified by these several Authorities
following:

It was the Advice of St. Paul, Children obey your Parents in the Lord; upon
which words St. Hierome thus glosseth; For Children not to obey their Parents,
is a Sin; but because Parents may happily Command that which is unlawful;
therefore he adds in the Lord. And St. Chrysostom expounds them, Children obey
your Parents in the Lord, that is, in all things, wherein you shall not disobey
God. Musonius expresses himself thus; If a Son shall refuse to yield Obedience
unto a Father in such Commands as are impious and ungodly, he shall not be
accounted as disobedient, injurious or wiced. Aulus Gellius approves not of
this Opinion, That a Father is in all things to be obeyed. For (says he) what
if he command his Son to betray his Country, to kill his own Mother, etc.
therefore the middle way is best and safest: In some things we must, in other
some we must not obey. So Seneca the Father, All Commands oblige us not unto
Obedience. So Quintillian, There is no necessity that Children should execute
all their Parents Commands; for there may be many things, which though commanded,
may not lawfully be done; as if a Father command his Son to give his Suffrage,
or to pass a Sentence contrary to his Judgment, or to bear Witness to that
whereof he is ignorant. If my Father command me to burn the Capitol, to possess
my self of such a Fort or Castle; I may lawfully answer, These things I must
not do. I will conclude this point of Duty with that Story of Agesilaus, who
may be unto Children a good Schoolmaster therein; for being requested by his
Father to give Sentence against Right, he was not ashamed to deny him
graciously with this Answer. You have taught me (O Father) from my youth to
obey the Laws, and therefore I will now also obey you herein, by judging
nothing against the Laws.

4. The fourth Duty of Children toward their Parents, is that of Succouring
them in all their Wants and Necessities of what kind soever; whether Weakness
and Sickness of Body, Decayedness of Understanding or Poverty, and Lowness in
Estate, as appears, 1 Timothy 5.4. Matt. 15.4, 5.6. Mark 7.12. Author of the Whole
Duty of Man, Part 14. Sect. 16. p. 291, 292. Archbishop Usher in his Body of
Divinity, p. 262. Edit. 1648. Amesius in his Cases of Conscence, Lib. 5. Cap.
22. Question 3d. and Doctor Hammond in his Paraphrase and Annotations on 1 Timothy
c. 5. v. 4. and 8. Having cited both Scripture and some Divines for the
enforcing of this Duty of assisting and ministering to Parents in all their
Needs and Necessities, we will see what the Civil and Canon Laws dictate for
the nourishing them in their old Age, their Impotency and Want.

By the Civil Law of the Romans, Children are obliged unto their Parents to
provide for their Sustenance, so far forth as the Ability of Children will
reach unto; for it is very unnatural, that the Parents should want, so long as
the Children have means to relieve them. In which case, if the Children refuse
to yield Comfort unto their Parents, the Judge may interpose his Authority, and
enjoin them to maintain their Parents according to their Ability, and as to his
Discretion shall seem meet; which if Children should deny to yield unto, the
Judge may, by Distress of their Goods taken, and sold to the value thereof,
compel them to perform his Order; and yet that only in such case of
Maintenance, and not to discharge Debts, wherein their Parents stand bound unto
their Creditors, D. 25. 3. 5. c. 8. 47. 5. c. 5. 25. 1, and 2. c. 6. 61. 8. 5.
D. 27. 3. 1. 4. Ridleys View of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Law, Part 4. c. 2.
Sect. 1. p. 376. Edit. 1675.

As for the Canon Law, we find therein a Case of one Hubaldus, who had sworn
that he would not Administer to the Wants of his Mother and his Brethren, and
it was thus; St. Augustine being consulted with about this Hubaldus, who (to
save his own Life, being threatened) had bound himself by Oath to marry his own
Concubine, and to thrust his own Mother and Brethren out of doors, and never to
relieve them, gives this Resolution of the Case. That as to his Marriage with
his Concubine, whom he had long enjoyed, his Oath was binding, for that was no
sin: But as to his not relieving his Mother and Brethren, it could not bind
him; for qui non alit, necat; to deny them Necessaries, was no better than to
kill them; and no Oath can oblige to a sin so unnatural. Gratian causa, 22.
Quest. 4. c. 22.

From the Civil and Canon Laws I come (Sir,) to tender you some excellent
Examples to be found among the very Heathens, of the great Love and natural
Affections of Children toward their Parents, that were under very hard
Circumstances; and I will begin with that of Antigonus, the second Son of
Demetrius, which is worthy to be noted. For when his Father, being Prisoner,
sent him word by one of his Acquaintance to give no Credit, nor to make Account
of any Letters from him, if it so fell out that Seleucus whose Prisoner he was,
would compel him thereunto, and therefore that he should not deliver up any of
those Towns which he held: Antigonus contrariwise wrote to Seleucus, that he
would yield up all the Lands he had under his Obedience, if he would deliver
his Father.

We have another notable Example of Filial Love and Piety in Cimon the Son of
Great Miltiades, whose Father dying in Prison, as some say for Debt, and not
having wherewithal to bury his Body, much ^^ss to redeem it, being Arrested for
the Debt, whilst it was carried to the Burial, according to the Laws of that
Country, this Cimon sold himself and his Liberty for Money to provide for his
Funeral: He with his Plenty and Goods relieved not his Father, but with his
Liberty, which is dearer than all Goods; yea, and Life too. He helps not his
Father living and in Necessity, but dead, and being no more a Father nor a Man.
What had he done to succor his Father living, wanting, and requiring his Help?

We have a third rare Example of daughter-like Piety; which was, that a
Daughter gave Suck to her Father, who was condemned to die of that ancient and
usual punishment of Famine, which never suffers a found Man to pass the
seventh day. The Jailer spying this Act of Piety, gave notice thereof to the
Magistrates, which being known to the People, the Daughter obtained pardon for
her Fathers Life.

5. The fifth Duty of Children is that of not attempting or enterprising any
Thing of Importance, without the Advice, Consent and Approbation of their
Parents, and especially in Marriage: For in the case of Marriages, the Holy
Scriptures tell us plainly, That Children ought not so much as to attempt to
bestow themselves in Marriage, without their Parents Direction and Consent,
especially Daughters, Genesis 24.1, 2. and 21.21. and 27.46. and 28.1, 2.9. Judges
14.2. 1 Cor. 7. v. 36, 37, 38. Deuteronomy. 7.3. Jer. 29.6. Genesis 29.19. By which Texts
it is evidenced, that the Father must be the efficient Cause of the Marriage of
his Children; That the beginning and ground of Matrimonial Contract is from the
Consent of the Parent, and the reason to persuade Children to this Duty is
ready at hand; for seeing their Parents have taken such Pains and Travel in
bringing them up, they should reap some Fruits of their Labors in bestowing of
them. Besides, they should give them this Honor to esteem them better able,
and more wise to provide for their comfortable Marriage, than themselves are.
From Sacred Story, let us try what the Law of Nature, and the Roman Laws do
pronounce, touching the Consent of Parents in the Matrimonial Contracts of
their Children. As to the Law of Nature, this Question is started by Grotius,
Whether the Consent of Parents be by the Law of Nature requisite to a perfect
Marriage? Which, though some affirm, yet he is of Opinion, that by the sole Law
of Nature, the want of the Consent of Parents nulls not a Marriage; for (says
he) those that hold the Affirmative are mistaken, for that all their Arguments
can enforce no more than this, That it is agreeable to the Duty they owe to
their Parents, to crave their Consents; which he easily grants them, provided
that the Will of their Parents be not manifestly unjust. For if Children be to
reverence their Parents in all things, surely they ought to do it most
especially in such things, wherein the whole Nation is concerned, as in
Marriages. And yet it cannot hence be inferred, that a Son has not a moral
Right to dispose of himself, if they consent not. For he that Marries, ought to
be of mature Age and Judgment, and he is to forsake his Fathers House, so that
he is herein exempted from his Fathers domestic Discipline; and becomes from
thence (...), Master of himself. And although the Duty of Love and Reverence do
oblige him to ask the good Will of his Parents, yet does not the Breach of that
Duty null the Act of his Marriage. That other Nations did make void such
Marriages was not from the Law of Nature, but from the Will of their
Lawmakers. Grotius of the Rights of War and Peace, Lib. 2. c. 5. Sect. 10.

As for the Civil Law of the Romans, it is thereby provided out of the
principles of the Law of Nature, that the Marriage of Daughters without the
Consent of Parents should not be ratified, and the Primitive Church, both by
Doctrine and Practice, did in this part approve of those Laws. For the
Punishment appointed for such Marriages was, that neither Husband or Wife, nor
Marriage nor Dowry, should be acknowledged; and that the Children which should
be born, should be esteemed as Bastards, Instit. 1. 10. 12. D. 23. 2. 2. D. 23.
3. 68. Amesius in his Cases of Conscence, Lib. 5. c. 35. in fine.

By Texts of the same Law it further appears, that the Consent not only of the
Parties themselves, but of their Parents is necessary, if the Contractors were
sub potestate Parentum, the like Reason seems to be for Consent of Tutors,
Instit. 1. 10. in princ. D. 23. 2. 2. 35. D. 23. 2. 18. c. 5. 4. 18. D. 23. 2.
34. But it is now (says an Author) received for a general Opinion, that the
good Will of Parents is required, in regard of Honesty, not of Necessity,
according to the Canons, which exact necessarily none other Consent, but only
the Partys themselves, whose Conjunction is in hand. The Woman's Lawyer, Lib. 2.
Sect. 3. p. 53. Edit. 1632.

6. The sixth and last Duty that Children do owe to their Parents, is that of
enduring mildly and gently the Vices, Imperfections and testy and impatient
Humors of Parents, their Severity and Rigor; and therefore now no Unkindness,
no fault of the Parent can acquit the Child of this Duty: But as St. Peter
tells Servants, that they must be subject not only to the good and gentle
Masters, but also to the froward; so certainly it belongs to Children to
perform Duty not only to the kind and virtuous, but even to the harshest and
wickedst Parents. If a Father promise any thing to his Children, they have a
full Right to his Performance; but in case he prove dishonest, he does not
thereby lose his Right to govern them, nor can they be excused from their Duty
of Reverence, Honor, Love and Obedience toward him. To be short, If indeed
Parents have Infirmities, if guilty of Errors and Misdemeanors, it must be the
Childrens business to cover and conceal them, like Sh^m and Japhet, who while
cursed Cham published and disclosed the Nakedness of their Father, covered it.
The very Heathens may be our Schoolmasters in this matter of hiding and
patiently bearing with the Infirmities and Severities of Parents.

Ames parentem si aequus, si non feras; Thy Parents love if good; if bad, yet
bear. Terentius Hecyra; nam matris far injurias me, pietas jubet; to bear
with Parents, Piety commands.

That of Cicero in his Oration for Cluentius is remarkable: Non modo reticere
homines parentum injurias, sed etiam aequo animo ferr^ oportet; Men ought not
only to conceal the Injuries of their Parents, but to bear them with Patience.

A Young Man of Eretria, that had been long Educated under Zeno, being
demanded, What he had Learned? answered, Meekly to bear his Father's Wrath. Add
to this, that has been said of the Duty of mildly enduring the Severity and
Rigor of Parents, the famous Story of Manlius, and it is this; The Tribune
Pomponius having Accused the Father of this Manlius, in the presence of the
People, of many Crimes, and amongst others, that he over-cruelly handled his
Son, enforcing him to Till the Earth: The Son goes to the Tribune, and finding
him in his Bed, putting the point of his Dagger to his Throat, enforced him to
Swear, that he would desist from his Pursuit he made against his Father,
desiring rather to endure his Father's Rigor, than to see him Troubled for it.

All these forementioned Duties ought to be performed by Children, who indeed
will find no difficulty in them, if they do but seriously consider, how
Chargeable they have been to their Parents, and with what Care and Affection
they have been brought up. But they shall never attain to the right Knowledge
thereof, until they enjoy Children of their own, as he that was found to
bestride a Hobbyhorse, playing with his Children, desiring him who so took him
in the Act, to be silent, until he were himself a Father, accounting him till
that time no indifferent Judge in this Action.

Thus (Worthy Sir) having freely laid before you the true Extent and Latitude
of that Natural and Religious Piety, which Children owe to their Parents, I am
now to beseech you to wink at what is written amiss in this long Letter, and
what is not so to afford it a kind Entertainment, as coming from him, who is
Cordially,

Your most Affectionate Humble Servant, J. B.

Postscript.
SIR,
SInce you have been so kind as to send me some of your City Pamphlets,
particularly that written in defense of Primogeniture, I will make you some
kind of Requital, by presenting to your view, the Causes (and none other
besides) which the most Famous and Renowned Emperor Justinian has been pleased
to Ordain, as Proofs sufficient for the Convicting Children of Ingratitude, and
consequently Obnoxious to the Penalty of Exheredation. Now if the Person lately
Disinherited, be Guilty of any one of those Causes, he well deserves the
Punishment he has met withal: But if not Guilty of any one of them, I must even
concur with the Author B. J. in Condemning that Usage the Son has had from the
Father, as Impious, Cruel and Unnatural.

The Just Causes then of Disinheriting Children, specified by the said Novella
Constit. C. 3. Quae Sunt Justae Exheredationis Liberorum Causae.
Justinian, are in number Fourteen, and they are these which follow, and thus
Englished: 1. If any Son has laid violent Hands on his Father. 2. If a Son has
offered to his Father and his Family some Lewd and Dishonest Injury, as by
Marrying himself to a Common Whore or Strumpet. 3. If a Son shall Accuse his
Father in such Criminal Matters as do not immediately touch the Prince and the
weal Public. 4. If a Son constantly Converseth with such Fellows as are guilty
of Ill, Lewd and Mischievous Practices. 5. If a Son makes an attempt to destroy
his Father's Life, either by Poison, or any other ways. 6. If a Son has
Carnally known his Stepmother, or his Father's Concubine. 7. If a Son be a
Calumniator, or one that Forges an Accusation against his own Father; whereby
he has sustained great Trouble, Damage and Expense. 8. If a Father has the
Misfortune to be clapped up in Prison, and his Son is requested by him to Release
him out of Jayl, and the Son refuses to do it. 6. If a Son be Convicted of
hindering his Father from making a Will; and if afterward the Father has an
opportunity to make one, he is Empowered to Disinherit such a Son by his last
Will and Testament. 10. If a Son, contrary to the Will and Pleasure of his own
Father, presumes to turn an Actor upon the Stage, or become a Mimick, and in
this way of Living shall persist. 11. If a Father is minded to give his
Daughter in Marriage to some particular Man, and to that and proffers with her
a Portion according to the strength of his Estate, and the Daughter refuses to
consent to such Marriage, but rather chooses to lead a Wicked, Lewd, Debauched
and Luxurious Life. 12. If a Father chance to be wholly deprived of his Wits,
and his Son will take no Care of him, whilst he remains in such a sad
Condition; the Father may, if he has the good Fortune to come once again to his
Reason and Understanding, deprive his Son for such Ingratitude of his
Inheritance, by a last Will and Testament. 13. If a Father has the ill Luck to
fall into Captivity, and his Son do not speedily Redeem him out of this
Calamity; and afterward the Father has the good Fortune to make his own Escape
out of Slavery; the Father has it in his Power to write this in a Will, as a
just Cause of Ingratitude, and thereby Disinherit his Son. 14. If a Father,
that is well known to be Orthodox, perceives his Son not to be of the
Catholic Faith, nor to Communicate in Holy Church, wherein the most Blessed
Patriarchs do Preach and Publish with one Consent and Agreement the Faith that
is most Right and Orthodox; the Father has Power and (...) for this very (...)
Brand his Son with a M^^^ of ^ng^^tit^^e, as to make him ever incapable of
Inheriting his Estate.


FINIS.
Advertisement.
Jus Primogeniti: Or, The Dignity, Right, and Privilege of the Firstborn;
Inquisited and Defended against the Impious Practice of some Fathers, in
Disinheriting their First-Begotten Sons. In a Letter to a Friend in the
Country. By B. I. Esquire

LONDON, Printed for R. Battersby at Staple-Inn, next the Bars in Holborn,
1700.


