Some REASONS Humbly Proposed to the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons
Assembled in Parliament, why the Quakers Principles and Practices should be
Examined, and Censured or Suppressed.
As also, some Reasons why I thus proceed.
I. AS it is the Privilege of every freeborn Englishman, as well as his Duty,
to discover to the Government what he thinks may be of dangerous Consequence,
either to Church or State; so I have taken it to be my Duty, for many Years,
and I am still of the same Mind.

II. Because, as in the Quakers ancient Books, so in their late Apology, etc.
they seem to allow of an Examination, saying, Blame not before Examination;
first Understand, and then Rebuke.

III. Because I do not understand, that the Petitioners desire otherwise;
namely, that the Quakers Errors should be censured before Examination; nor
desire Persecution, or the Alteration of the Liberty granted Protestant
Dissenters by the Act of Toleration.

IV. Because it is morally impossible, to know what the Quakers Principles are,
or what they really hold, by the Books they publicly present; since it is
plain, their Books carry two Faces, and are fitted for the Compass of all
Occasions, and to serve every Turn. Some entitled, This is only to go among
Friends; some, This is only to go among Friends, and not otherwise; some,
Written only for Friends who can read it: Other some inscribed with this
Direction, To be scattered among the Ignorant, Simple, and Blind People; some,
For the spreading of Truth; some, For Teachers and Professors, Ministers and
Magistrates, etc. In one sort they pretend to own Jesus of Nazareth to be the
Son of God, and Redeemer of the World, whilst in the other sort they utterly
deny the same, saying, That the Outward Person that suffered was properly the
Son of God, we utterly deny. In one sort they pretend to own the Scripture
Trinity, i. e. Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, whilst in the other sort they say,
Your Imagined God beyond the Stars, and your Carnal Christ, is utterly denied
and testified against by the Light; to say that Christ is God and Man in one
Person, it is a Lie. In one sort they highly value the Death and Sufferings of
Christ, while in the other sort they say, That the Sufferings of the People
(called Quakers) in this Age, is greater, and more unjust, than the Sufferings
in the Days of Christ, his Apostles, or any time since. What was done to Christ
and his Apostles, was chiefly done by a Law, and in great part by the DVE
Execution of a Law. In one sort they pretend to value the Scriptures above all
Books in the World, whilst in the other sort they Contemptuously call them
Carnal, Dust, Death, Beastly Ware, Serpents Meat, etc. And that we may as well
condemn the Scriptures to the Fire, as their Books. Nay, further, G. Whitehead
being asked, Whether the Quakers do esteem their Speaking to be of as great
Authority as the Scriptures? He answered, That which is spoken from the Spirit
of Truth in any, is of as great Authority as the Scriptures or Chapters are,
and GREATER. Which Book, Truth defending the Quakers, etc. in Title Page, is
said to be given forth from the Spirit of Truth in G. Whitehead, and G. Fox,
Jun. and consequently that Book, though but of 3 d. price, is of greater
Authority than the Bible; all which show it morally impossible, to know what
the Quakers Principles are, by that sort of Books they publicly present.
Wherefore Examination is as essentially necessary, in order to a right
Understanding of the Quakers Principles, as that, mentioned 1 Kings 3.23, 24.
where the Wisdom of Solomon was manifest.

V. Because W. Penn tells us in his Defense against the Bishop of Cork, P. 38,
79. That where the Quakers are supposed to differ most (from the Christians)
there they differ least, i. e. in Doctrine; and where they are believed to
differ least, there they differ most of all, etc. And thereupon an Examination
is highly necessary. And in order to find out this Mystery, viz. where the
Quakers differ most of all from the Christians, and yet least suspected, give
me leave to search, till I find it out: And 1st, does it lie, whether W. P. be
a Pr -- nt or a Pa -- st? No, for the Nation is fully satisfied in the Truth of
the last. 2dly, Is it in the Carnality of the Christians? No, for the Carnality
of the Quakers, their Number considered, far exceed them, as showed in the Cage
of Unclean Birds. See my Pilgrims Progress, etc. p. 127, to 145. 3dly* Is it in
their Meekness, Gentleness, and Patience? Is it in their Non-persecution; not
giving Names for, or Personal Reflections about Religion? No, this is out of
doubt, no Mystery; for of all Mankind, none like them, for Bitterness of
Spirit; for Hell-fetcht Names, as if the Furies of Hell possessed them: And for
Persecution, had they Power, there is none like them; their Fining, and
Imprisoning for Conscience sake, in Pensilvania, is a Demonstration. What then?
I answer, touching Government; where they are not more against the English
Government, but as Arbitrary in their own; and in this Mystery of Iniquity,
they are least suspected; and touching that, I think Father Penn has spoke more
Truth than he is aware of; but to Particulars.

VI. In one sort of their Books they pretend to love, own, and honor the King;
yea, to pray for all Men; for Kings, and all that are in Authority; but in
their contrary sort of Books they tell you, That all KINGS and EMPERORS sprung
up in the Night since the Days of the Apostles, among the ANTICHRISTS: That
they own no King but Jesus, nor no Government but the Government of the Lamb:
That they are Traitors against Christ, that desire an Earthly King. Do you read
(say the Quakers) that there were any Kings since the Days of the Apostles, but
among the APOSTATE CHRISTIANS: That Kings are the SPIRITUAL EGYPTIANS -- Oh
what a Sincerity was once in the Nation! What a DIRTY NASTY thing it would have
been, to have heard talk of a House of Lords among them! -- A Parliament chosen
by most Voices are not like to act for God, and the Good of his People -- It
was through Ignorance that the People subjected themselves to Hereditary
Government, or to the Government standing in a single Person successively --
And our Nation have been under the Bonds of Slavery in this Respect.

So that having at last found out this Mystery, viz. where the Quakers and the
Christians differ most of all, though least suspected, as I have at large showed
in my Pilg. Prog. etc. p. 14, 15, and p. 37, to 127. I shall first draw a
Scheme of the Quakers Yearly Meeting, or Convocation, which in Form and Figure
is somewhat like the Council of Trent, and then show the Danger of it, which is
least of all suspected.

The QUAKERS SYNOD.


Note, Reader, That in Anno 1650. there was as little Probability to see them
in School. sit thus in Council, and to have one of them Elected a Member to sit
in the Honorable House of Commons, as there is now to see them a Parliament
Anno 1750. And therefore it highly concerns the Government to take Care of
Posterity, both with Relation to Church and State.

Touching the Quakers Government within the Government, and opposite to it, as
can be proved from Matter of Fact and Practice.
HAving obtained the Key to unlock William Penn's Mysterium Magnum, in his
Defense against the ^ishop of Cork, p. 38. 'And yet where we are vulgarly
apprehended to differ most, we differ least; I mean (says Penn) in Doctrine; p.
97. and where we are believed to differ least, we most of all differ, etc. For
indeed, as (...) Doctrine, though the Quakers differ from the Christians, as
much, if not more than the Jews, as is well made ap^ear in a late Dialogue
between a Churchman and a Qua^er, yet I am of W. Penn's Mind, that where they
are be^ievd to differ least, there they differ most of all; namely, ^ouching
Government: And this I shall make appear ^ro^ the Quakers Government, which at
first appeared as (...) little Cloud, about the Breadth of a Man's Hand, but
^ow begins to overshadow the Land: And if God be ^ot merciful to us, and
inspire our Governors with a God^y Zeal, to stop the Growth of it, may prove
like that of Mahomet, who stuck at nothing, until he had overrun ^he Eastern
Churches; and the Government of the Quakers are with as much Keenness levelled
against the English Government, as well as the Christian Religion, as Ma^ome's
was, though least suspected: A short Account thereof I shall give in these
following Particulars.

I. Touching our English Government, viz. 'The Lord is Fisen to overturn, to
overturn Kings, Princes, Governme^ts and Laws, Burrough's Works, p. 244. Again,
Dreadful is the Lord, and Powerful, who is coming in his Power to execute true
Judgment upon all you Judges, and to charge all your Laws, ye Kings, and all
you Rulers must down and cease, and all you underling Officers, which have been
as the Arms of this great TREE, all your Branches must be cut down, with the
same Power tha^ cut down the King, ( i.e. King Charles I.) who reigned ove^ the
Nation, whose Family was a Nursery for Papist^, and for Bishops: Sing all ye
Saints, and rejoice, cla^ your Hands, and be glad, for the Lord Jehovah will
reign, and the Government shall be taken from you pre^ended Rulers, Judges and
Justices, Lawyers, and Constables. All this TREE must be CVT down, and Jesus
Christ (in us) will Rule alone. News coming up out of the North, p. 18, to 22.

II. Having given this short Hint of their ancient Antimonarchial Principles,
and they tell us they are the same still, and not changed, neither have they
deviated from their ancient Principles in any one Point: I am now come to show
how formidable their Government already is, and that their Yearly Meeting (of
which you see a Figure) is this great TREE, which ought to be CVT DOWN: To use
their own Phrase together, with all its Branches, as Monthly, Quarterly, Six
Week, and Second Day Meetings; which, though I grant therein, is both Preaching
and Praying, yet their Business is Government, and not within the meaning of
the Act of Toleration. And as it stands in Opposition to the English
Government, is of dangerous Consequence; considering 1st, Their Principles of
Infallibility. 2dly, That their Light within is the higher Power, to which
every Soul ought to be subject. 3dly, Their Belief in the Motion of their
Inspired Prophets. 4thly, That to their Light within all Power in Heaven and
Earth is committed, as they teach in Josiah Coal's Works, p. 93. and W. Smith's
Primer, p. 13, 43, 44. quoting (though quite beside their Matter) John 5.22. and
by Authority thereof, when in Counsel Assembled, they exercise their Power,
Civil and Ecclesiastical.

III. For once every Whitsuntide they have a Yearly Meeting or Convocation,
made up of Deputies from all Parts of England and Wales, together with their
Teachers and Agents from beyond Sea, where they sit in Counsel Eight, Ten or
Twelve Days together, more or less, where they make and constitute certain Laws
and Canons Ecclesiastical, for the Government of their Society throughou^ the
World: Which, as it is more than the Bishops and Clergy of the Established
Church can Legally do, without License from His Majesty, and more than any
Protestant Dissenting Society desire to do; so is this their Practice against
the King's Prerogative, the Rights of Parliament, and the Fundamental Laws of
the Land, as at large appears from these Statutes; 28 Hen. 8. c. 19.21. 27 Hen.
8. c. 15. 3 Edw. 6. c. 10, 11. 1 Eliz. c. 12. Magna Charta, c. 29. Pet. Right.
5 Eliz. c. 1. 1 Edw. 6. c. 2. 37 Hen. 8. c. 17. 8 Eliz. c. 1. 1 K. W. and
Mariae, N. 307. If the Quakers say I am unreasonable in this Discovery, let
them remember this Maxim, Propter quod unum quodque est tale, illud ipsum est
Magis tale.

That for which a thing is such,
The thing it self is more such.
IV. At this Yearly Meeting they vertually (though not verbally) Repeal such
Parts or Branches of the Laws, as do not Quadrate with their Light within, and
thereby absolve the King's Subjects (if the Quakers may be called such) from
their Active Obedience to the Laws of the Land; thereby causing them to adhere
to a Superior Power to that of King, Lords and Commons; namely, to their Light
within; to which they say, all Power in Heaven and Earth is committed, as above
noted; and by Virtue hereof, what is made Lawful to Day at Westminster, (to
speak comparativdy) they Null and make Void to Morrow at Grace-Church Street,
as not only Unlawful, but Antichristian: And h^w far this affects the
Government, I humbly submit to our Legisators.

V. At th^^ Meeting they keep their Doors Locked, Barred, or Bolted, (...) a
Guard of Men, to prevent Inspection, whereby the^ have forfeited the Benefit
assigned them by the Act of Toleration, made the 21. of May, 1689. and in the
First Ye^^ of Their Majesty's Reign, King William, and the late Que^n Mary, of
Blessed Memory, in which is this Clause, viz. Provided always, and be it
enacted by the Authority foresaid, That if any Assembly of Persons dissenting
from the Church of England, shall be had in any Place for Religious Worship,
with the Doors Locked, Barred or Bolted, during any time of such Meeting
together, all and every such Person or Persons, that shall come to, and be at
any such Meeting, shall not receive any Benefit from this Law: But be liable to
all the Pains and Penalties of all the aforesaid Laws, recited in this Act, etc.

VI. At this Meeting they hold a general Rendezvous from all Parts of the
World, where they have got footing; who being assembled in Counsel, by their
Laws they forbid their Disciples paying of Tithes, and toward the Repairing
Parish Churches, Marrying by or with a Public Minister, Carrying Guns, etc. As
Antichristian Yoaks of Bondage, giving Order to their Deputies, and by them, to
their Monthly and Quarterly Meetings throughout England and Wales; to collect,
and to send up all such Sufferings, as come upon them for Non-payment of
Tithes, etc. In order to enter into their Record for Sufferings, (thereby
rendering to future Ages all our Magistrates and Lawmakers, who either make or
execute the Laws, Persecutors) directly in Opposition to another Branch of the
recited Act of Parliament, viz. Provided always, that nothing herein contained
shall be construed to exempt any of the Persons aforesaid from paying of the
Tithes, or other Parochial Duties, or any other Duties to the Church or
Minister, etc.

VII. They also have a Fund or Common Stock; which this Meeting orders to be
raised without Authority of Parliament; which said Fund is to support their
Government, and propagate their Principles. At this Meeting they order a
Committee of Inspection to view their Accounts; they also have Treasurers,
whose Names in 1693. were W. Crouch, J. Staploe, W. Chandler, W. Beech, W.
Macket, and N. Marks; which being put together, as it shows their Design to be
laid deep, so it appears to be of a dangerous Consequence, especially when they
shall think themselves able to Capitulate; for Money answers all things, as the
Proverb is, and our English Magistrates have ever looked upon Common Bankers,
to be as bad as those that hoard up Arms and Ammunition; and how dangerous that
is in this united Confederacy, I leave others to judge.

VIII. At this Meeting, Anno 1693. when we were actually engaged in a War with
France, even then did they take Care that their People should not be Assistant;
nay, not so much as to carry Guns in their Ships: And it is worth our Notice,
that from their Yearly Meetings they yet never made any one Public Address to
His present Majesty, although it was their constant Practice, during the late
Reign: Insomuch, that as Quakerism prevail, (so long as they keep to their late
Testimony against Fighting) the Protestant Interest is so much weakened: But
whenever they shall Reassume their Fighting Principles, (as in Pensilvania
they have already done) they will be a dreadful People to England, in overturning
Kings, Princes, Governments and Laws, owning no King but Jesus, i. e. their
Light within, as above observed: Then shall we find W. Penn's Words true, who
now tell us, That where we believe they differ least, there they differ most of
all.

IX. At this Meeting they receive in, and send out their Intelligence to all
Parts, Foreign and Domestic; as also how to spread their Books; the Expense of
which, as well as Stipends for their Preaching Emissaries, attending
Parliaments, etc. are supplied by their Common Bank: And as this shows their
Communication with Foreigners, so does it afford a good Reason why this
Communication ought to be CVT off, which can be done no otherwise, but by
Cutting down this Great TREE, i. e. their Yearly Meeting, with all its Branches.

X. And as a further Demonstration of the Truth of the Ninth Head, touching
their holding a Correspondency with Foreigners, which is of a dangerous
Consequence, (being of themselves already in England, as I have seen in Print,
above 100000) and the Extent of their Dominion, to which they are united, both
in our own Plantations, as well as in other Kingdoms; as Maryland, Virginia,
Barbados, Jamaica, East and West Jersey, Pensilvania, New England,
North Carolina, Rhoad-Island, Long Island, Antegoa, Mevis, Ireland, Scotland,
Holland, Port Royal, Dantzick, Hamburgh, Brandenburgh, Saxony, Germany, etc. I
say, when this united Confederacy are moved, either by their Light within, or
by a Motion of their Inspired Prophets, to call to their Assistance Two or
Three Regiments from each of these Places, what will become of poor England?
Then, though too late, we may experience the Truth of W. Penn's Words, viz. Where
we believed the Quakers differed from us least, there they most of all differed.

XI. At these Meetings they Renew, Revive, and Maintain their Ancient Testimony
and First Principles with Vigor in all the Parts of it, both against Church and
State, viz. Whether it be against the Scripture, being the Word of God, and
Rule of Life and Practice, under the Cont^mptuous Names of Death, Dust, Beastly
Ware, Serpents Meat, etc. Whether it be against the Ordinances, which Christ
Instituted in his Church as Baptism with Water, and the Supper with Bread and
Wine, under the Names of Carnal, that arose from the Pope's Invention, and is
the Table of Devils, and Cup of Devils: Affirming from Heb. 9.10. That
Circumcision is as much in force as Water Baptism, and the Paschal Lamb as
Bread and Wine; and that they (the Quakers) testify from the same Spirit by
which Paul Renounced Circumcision, that they are to be Rejected, as not now
Required.

Whether it be to dialogue the Bishops, and call them Monsters; to censure the
Book of Common Prayer to proceed from the Pope's Loins.

Whether it be, that the Clergy, be Witches, Devils, Antichrists, Sodomites,
Bloodhounds, Gormandizing Priests, the Bane of Soul and Body of the Universe;
for whom (say the Quakers) the Theater of God's most dreadful Vengeance is
reserved to act their Eternal Tragedy upon; as they have sentenced them.

Whether it be against the Protestant Dissenters, the Presbyterians,
Independants, and Baptists, whom they call, An ill-bred Pedantick Crew, the
Bane of Religion, and P^^^ of the World; the old Incendiaries to Mischief, and
the best to be spared of Mankind. Against whom, the BOILING VENGEANCE of an
Irritated God is ready to be poured out.

In a Word, whether it was their Ancient Principles; that Kings were SPIRITUAL
EGY^TIANS; that all People, since the Days of Christ, that Loved, Honored, and
Obeyed Kings, were APOSTATES; that all Parliaments chosen by the People, and
elected by most Voices, were Enemies to God and his People; yea, any, or all,
or a Hundred times more than I here have mentioned, were HEATHEN APOSTATES,
etc. by their Ancient Principles; and because of which Principles, they were
glad of an Act of Oblivion upon the Restoration; yet at these their Yearly
Meetings, where their Doors are shut close, and where they can freely debate;
there they can so far forget themselves, as that they Renew these their old
Seditious and Bloody Principles: And to prove it so, shall be my 12th and last
Head on this Subject.

XII. At their Yearly Meeting, 1696. by way of Revival of all and singular
their Ancient Erroneous and Seditious Principles, which I have in this or other
of my Writings objected against them; they Ratify and Confirm in these Words;
We cannot but Recommend to you (say this general Council to their Deputies and
Disciples) the holding up the HOLY Testimony of TRUTH, which has made us to be
a People, and that in ALL the PARTS of it; for Truth is one, and changes not;
and what it convinced us to be Evil in the Beginning, it reproves still, etc.
Viz. Whether Kings or Parliaments, Magistrates or Ministers, Scriptures or
Ordinances, etc. Again, to Confirm what I say at their Second Day Meeting,
School. in their Book there approved, entitled, Primitive Christianity
Continued, p. 6. They assert, saying, Our Principles are now no other than what
they were when we were first a People, etc. And what their Principles were in
the beginning, I have here and elsewhere given a large Account.

And now for a Conclusion, and by way of Apology, I have this to say: That
although none can be Ignorant, (who are conversant in the Quakers Writings) how
bold they have been in all Governments to Dictate as Prophets of the most High,
and in the Name of the Great God, to prescribe Methods, both to Kings and
Parliaments, Judges and Justices, as well how to make, as execute the Laws
already made, yet I hope I shall not follow their Example therein. But when I
have discharged my Conscience, and performed my Duty, as an English Man, and a
Christian; all I have said, or what I have still to say, I shall humbly submit
to the Wisdom of my Superiors, not doubting but to make good Proof of every
thing suggested, either from Matter of Fact out of their Books, or by my own
Experience, which they shall not be able to gainsay.

But if after all, the Quakers shall say they are Misrepresented, which is the
usual Refuge for all Heretics to fly unto, yet let this be observed; that as
on the one Hand, if it were enough to Condemn a Man, merely to accuse him, then
none would be Innocent, who are in Controversy; so on the other Hand, none
would be guilty, if it were a sufficient Excuse, to say, I am misrepresented:
And therefore I shall once more accept of George VVhitehead's Offer, if he
think I wrong the Quakers, as in their Vindication, printed 1693. p. 4. col. 1.
viz. I George Whitehead freely offer, and am willing to make it plainly appear
before ANY Six, Ten, or Twelve Competent Witnesses, w^o are moderate Men of
Sense, and common Reason, That Francis Bugg has grossly and wickedly Abused and
Perverted Truth, and Wronged the People called Quakers, in Charge, Citation,
and Observation, etc.

Now, in Answer and Acceptance hereof, I do say, and freely offer to meet him
on these Terms, let him choose the one half of the Six, Ten or Twelve moderate
Men, and I will choose the other half of them out of the Ministers of any of the
four Christian Societies, whether Episcopalians, Presbyterians, Independants or
Baptists, and to them I will leave my Cause, if he will engage to do the same:
But if he shall say he cannot find so many Men of common Sense and Moderation
amongst them all, that he dare trust his Cause withal, it either shows that he
is Conscious that he has a bad Cause to defend, or so faithless, as to think he
cannot find Six such Men that will do him Justice as far as his Case will bear:
And so I conclude a Lover of my King and Country, and an earnest Contender for
the Christian Faith. Francis Bugg. Postscript. Since I wrote the foregoing, I
have seen a Scurrilo^s and Scandalous Pamphlet, subscribed (though like Ahab
disguised) by a pretended Member of the Church of England, whilst I have Reason
to believe the Author thereof to be a real Quaker, though ashamed (as well he
may) to subscribe his Name; suggesting in the said Pamphlet, that the Design of
the Petitioners is to raise Persecution; which as it is altogether False, and
without any Ground, as may be seen by the Petition, so likewise do the Quakers
not fear Persecution, since that would turn to the Account of their deceivable
Teachers, who are Men of Design, and have Ends to serve, being Originally, and
generally speaking, Men of no Fortunes: As Journeymen Carpenters, Tailors,
Shoe-makers, Combers, Weavers, etc. And Persecution would be a means for their
Implicit Followers to open their Purses wider, and so enlarge their Fund or
Common Bank, as well as thereby give them cause to glory i^ their Sufferings,
in Hopes thereby to advance themselves: No; this is not their Fear, but their
Fear and Dread is, that they should come to be Examined; their Errors
Discovered; their Followers thereby Enlightened (...) their Holy Cheats
Manifested, and their Jesuitical Cra^^ grow into Disesteem.

And further, this Pamphlet suggests, that F. Bugg is Judas, the Church of
England the Jews, and cons^quently, that the Quakers are Jesus: All which shows
this obscure Author to be a real Quaker; and from ^ence I cannot but observe a
Story I lately heard of a Project proposed, and carried on, to Acquit VV. P. of
the then general Suspicion of being a J -- t, though I think it rather increased
it: For P. E. and W. P. both jugg^d together, and P. E. was to be the
Gentleman, and ^s such, to write a Letter, thus superscribed, To the Honorable
William Penn, Esquire; Proprietor and Governor of Pens^lvania, and VV. Penn to
answer it. Well, an Answer to it was written, and both printed 1688. No matter
whether each wrote their Part, or one wrote Both, they were then both Quakers,
and it was for a Design; and to serve a Turn, they can turn their Dialect into
any Shape. In like manner I take this Subscription of the Obscure pretended
Member of the Church of England, (by his Scandalous Reflections) to be a real
Quaker.

But as this is no new thing with the Quakers, so I shall show, that there is
not a Member of the House of Commons, that keeps a Coach, and a Man to wait
upon him, that have not lain under as hard a Censure, as the being accounted a
Judas. For the Quakers in this have no Regard to Persons: Nay, I shall prove by
their Doctrine, that all the Gentlemen in England are the CHILDREN of the
DEVIL, as amply as I have already proved, that all our Kings, since the Days of
Christ, were SPIRITUAL EGYPTIANS; and that all that Loved, Honored, Feared and
Obeyed them, are and were APOSTATES: And my present proof shall be (omitting
many I might make mention of) out of a Book, wrote by one of their most
Celebrated Authors, entitled, The Trump^t of the Lord, blown by a Servant of
the Lord, etc. printed 1^^^ and in p. 10. said to be Written from the Spirit
of the Lord, and p. 13. From the Mouth of the Lord. I am the more particular
herein, because George Whitehead, in his Book, Truth defending the Quakers,
etc. says, p. 7. That which is spoken from the Spirit of Truth in any, is of as
great Authority as the Scriptures or Chapters are, and GREATER. And having thus
proved the Authority of this Book of James Parnell to be GREATER than that of
our Bible, by the several Quaker Testimonies, I now proceed to my Proof, viz.
p. 1, 2, 3. Woe unto you Lords, Ladies, Knights, Gentlemen and Gentlewomen, who
are called Master, Sir, Mistress, and Madam; you must have your Ale, (says
this Prophet Parnell) and your Wine; your dainty Dishes, Dives like, your fine
Attire, Silk and Velvet, Gold and Silver, Waiting Men, and Waiting Maids; your
Curious Buildings, Lofty Horses, Coaches to ride in, all which are the Fruits
of the Devil: And you shall be cast into Hell, and the Pit, as was Lucifer,
Dives, Haman, Pharaoh and Herod, and the rest of your Forefathers, whose
Portion is in the Lake that burns for ever and ever; you are all Heathens,
both Priests and People; away with all your Profession, ye Children of the
Devil. And further, to corroborate and strengthen my Evidence from the Joint
Testimony of the Quakers, read Geo. Whitehead and W. Penn's Serious Apology,
etc. p. 185, to 189, where this James Parnell is not only called their dear
Friend and Brother, but they have bestowed about Three Pages in Quarto, most of
it in red Letters, to Canonize him for a Saint, and to suffer Martyrdom for
their Cause, though I have been credibly informed that he starved himself, by
overlong fasting in Colchester Goal: But did not W. Penn forget himself, when
he Canonized this Monster Parnell, for a Saint, since he himself transgress his
Doctrine, and must go to Hell for Riding in his Coach? If he says that his is
no Coach, but a Leathern Convenience, yet, as I have heard, he has curious
Buildings, and good Wine, Waiting Men, and Waiting Maids, and ofttimes good and
dainty Dishes of Meat, Dives like, (to use his deceased dear Brother's Words)
and then to Pot he goes; yea, to the Pit, to the Lake, to Hell and the Devil,
by this Doctrine of his Canonized Saint: But does Will. Penn believe the
Doctrine this Fellow preached and writ, and pretended he had it, and gave it
forth from the Mouth of the Lord? I suppose not; for if he does, and thus
evidently transgress the same, he must be a self-condemned Apostate; if he does
not, but believe him to have been a Cheat, and an Impostor, and that he only
writ so, to affrighten some silly ignorant People, to drink Water, to live in
poor Cottages, like G. Whitehead's in the North, and so thereby prevail upon
them to be Quakers, that he, as well as his surviving Brother, G. Whitehead,
might get good Horses and Houses, and dainty Dishes out of them. I say, if W.
Penn believe this, as I am apt to think, the Original will bear this
Interpretation* Then Will. Penn is a gross Hypocrite, let him and his Brethren
get out of this Dilemma if they can, I know they will be angry; for nothing does
more anger these Men, than to touch them (as witty Erasmus once said to a Monk)
in their tender Part, their Belly; or in plain English, to speak Truth of them,
this they account unreasonable; but if any shall object, that this is old
Quakerism, the new Quakers have now more Wit, I answer, as before told, that at
their Yearly and Second Day Meetings they revive these their Ancient
Testimonies, and say, (to make their Followers think them Infallible) That
their Principles are now no other, than what they were in the beginning; for as
God is unchangeable, ( Mal. 3.6.) so are his People, and therefore they advise
to the holding up their Ancient Testimony in all the parts of it. And they have
inserted a long Paragraph in the Postman, Numb. 568. upon occasion of a late
Conference at West-Dereham, in Norfolk, wherein are these Words; The Quakers
not questioning but to Acquit their Ancient Friends, and their Writings, from
those black Charges, not being Conscious of Deviating in any ONE POINT of
Doctrine from what they first held. And this not the least part, I am sure; but
some may still object, that they hear nothing against Quakerism from the
Presbyterians, Independants and Baptists, save only the Church of England, etc.
To which I answer, on their Behalfs, that they are one with the Church in this
Case, and are sorrowfully affected, that they are joined with them in the Act
of Toleration, to see Christianity suffer so deeply by their Antiscriptural
Doctrine; and not only so, but I have a Testimony well Attested of their
Abhorrence of their Blasphemous Tenants, which, upon Examination before a
Committee, I shall show; an Abstract thereof is as follows, viz. That the
Quakers render the Holy Scriptures to be of no more Authority than Esop's
Fables; That the Blood of Christ is no better than the Blood of another Saint;
That the Quakers are the Spawn of the Ranters; That the Quakers owning Christ
is no other than a Mystical Romance; That the Tendency of all the Quakers
Reasoning about Instituted Religion is to debauch Mankind; That their
Principles Improved are destructive to all Humane Society; That their Teachers
are Cheats and Impostors, and Implacable Enemies to the Christian Religion, etc.

Here you have the Unanimous Consent of all Protestants, both Conformists and
Nonconformists, for the Examination of the Quakers, and for the Censuring or
Suppressing their Errors, and that for their Good too, especially for the Good
of Thousands of honest well-meaning, though miserably misled People, of their
Followers; and as this will tend to the stopping of the Gangreen of Quakerism.
So it is hoped, and earnestly prayed, that the same may be taken into your
Serious Consideration.

Francis Bugg.

The Second Edition.
LONDON: Printed for the Author, by Rich. Janeway, Jun. on Addle (...) Commons,
and Sold by J. Robinson, at the Golden-Lion, and W. Kettilby, at the Bishop's-
Head in St. Paul's Churchyard; and E. Harris, at the Harrow in (...) ^here
also may be had his other Books. 1699. Price 3 d.


