O Lord of Hosts, Almighty and Eternal God, whose high and glorious name is
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: Hear from heaven thy dwelling place the
prayers and supplicatious of us thy servants, assembled together to sight thy
Battles against the enemies of thy truth and Gospel, many in number and most
maliciously bent are they that are risen by against us: But if thou (O Lord) be
with us, we will not fear what man can do against us; As our hope of help is
in thee, so let our help and assistance be from thee, send thy blessed Angels
to keep us in all our ways, direct and prosper our Counsels, encourage our
hearts and strengthen our hands, grant us Victory in the day of Battle, and
perfect thy strength in our weakness, strike the hearts of our enemies with
thy terrors, disperse their numbers, make vain their devices, and glorify thy
power and wisdom in our safety, and their conversion or confusion, O Lord of
Hosts convert them in thy mercy, or avenge upon them their Treason and
disloyallty toward thine Anointed, Our dread Sovereign, return into their
bosoms the blood of our brethren, which they have shed with Cruelty, and upon
their heads the mischiefs which they have wrought, wash away the guilt of all
our sins by the blood of thy son Jesus Christ, which was shed as a ransom
for us all; Sanctify our hearts by the grace of thy holy spirit, that our
sins cause not the removeall of thy presence from us, Sanctify our Camp,
and dwell therein, and grant the event and success of this our present
warfare, may be the advancement and establishment of the true ancient
Catholic, Apostolic Protestant Faith, the rooting out of popery, Idolatry and
superstition, the conversion of this rebellious seduced Nation unto Loyalty
and obedience of thy Gospel, the honor and contentment of our gracious
sovereign King CHARLES, the settlement of peace in this desolate Kingdom, and
the glory of thy great and fearful name, and that for the meritt of thy only
son Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

La. Dublin.
28 of February. 1642. I require all Preachers and Chaplains of the Army to
use the above form of prayer at all times of public prayer in all
expeditions.

Ormonde




