engraving of four scenes from the English reformation: 1. Henry VIII at
Greenwich Palace standing next to a male figure in Tudor robes with the Pope's
triple diadem and two papal decrees lying on the ground; 2. Edward VI kneeling
at an altar at Westminster Abbey with a crown beside him and a crowd kneeling
in the background; 3. Mary I on a balcony with a tonsured Catholic churchman
looking down at Hugh Latimer (d.1555), Nicholas Ridley (d.1555), and Thomas
Cranmer (d.1556) tied to burning stakes below; 4. Elizabeth I standing with her
hand on a Bible held by a male figure in Protestant robes THE HISTORY of the
REFORMATION Abridged
Popes Suprem:

Popes Decrees

holy Bible

Ridley

Latimer

Cranmer

Holy Bible

London Printed for Ric: Chiswell.



THE ABRIDGMENT OF THE HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION OF THE Church of ENGLAND. By
GILBERT BURNET, D.D.

LONDON; Printed for R. C. and to be sold by John Lawrence at the Angel in
Cornhill, MDCLXXXII.

THE PREFACE.
THe Bulk and Price of the two Volumes of the History of our Reformation which
I have published, being such, that every one cannot find the Money to buy them,
or the Leisure to read them, I have been desired by many to contract what I
prosecuted more largly in that Work, and bring it into a less Compass.

I know Abridgments are generally hurtful: In them Men receive such a slight
Tincture of Knowledge, as only feeds Vanity, and furnishes Discourse, but does
not give so clear a View of things, nor so solid an Instruction as may be bad
in more copious Writings. And as it is a grievous Imposition on that time which
ought to be employed to better uses, to draw out that which might be expressed
in few words, to such a length, that it frights some from the study of Books,
which might have been of excellent use, if they had not been too Voluminous;
and oppresses the Patience of those who are resolved to acquire Knowledge in
the most labourious Methods; so it is on the other hand a great Prejudice to
the Improvement of Learning, when things are too much contracted, and such
hints are only given, as may be the Seeds of excellent Notions, perhaps in very
rich and fruitful Minds: for copious Enlargements are often necessary to make
the greatest part who are generally slow and heavy in their Apprehensions,
enter into those Notions which we set before them. It is a true Judgment of Men
and Things, that must direct us to seek and keep that Mean betwixt those
Extremes that may be of the greatest Advantage to the World.

What is said of Notions and Matters of Science, is likewise applicable to
Matters of Fact. History is of little use, if we consider it only as a Tale of
what was transacted in former times. Then it becomes most profitable, when the
Series and Reasons of Affairs, and secret Councils and Ends, together with the
true Characters of Eminent Men, are rightly presented to us, that so upon the
light which is given us of past times, we may form Prudent Judgments of the
present time, and probable Conjectures of what is to come; and may frame such a
true Idea of Men and Parties, as may both enlighten our Understandings more by
giving us a freer Prospect of Humane Affairs, and may better direct us in our
conduct.

This made me judge it necessary to open things in my History as largely as my
Materials could serve me: and because I writ upon a subject that had been much
contradicted, I was obliged not only to add a great Collection of Records for
my Justification, which makes the half of each Volume, but likewise in the
History it self, to give often an account of the grounds on which I went. I
also added an Appendix, containing the more remarkable Calumnies, by which the
Writers of the Roman Communion have endeavored to corrupt the History of that
time; together with a Confutation of them. I was likewise careful to set down
many particular Curiosities relating to the Proceedings of Parliament, of the
Importance of which, every Reader will not be aware at first. I gave also a
large account of all the Arguments that prevailed with the Divines, as well as
the Reasons that wrought on Statesmen, in the changes that were made; in which
the Reader may find an Apology for the Reformation, interwoven with its History.

In all these particulars, there was matter enough for an Abridger to cut off a
great deal, and yet to give such an account of the whole Transaction, as might
in a great measure satisfy even Inquisitive Persons. I understood that another
was about this, which made me resolve on doing it my self; for none can so
truly comprehend, and by consequence abridge any Book as the Author himself;
who, as he knows his own meaning best; so he who has fixed his Thoughts long
upon my Argument, will be best able to judge what are the things and
Circumstances that are of the greatest Importance, and are most necessary to be
rightly understood. In compiling this Abridgment, I have wholly waved every
thing that belonged to the Records, and the Proof of what I relate, or to the
Confutation of the falsehoods that run through the Popish Historians. All that
is to be found in the History at large; and therefore in this Abridgment every
thing is to be taken upon trust, and those that desire a fuller Satisfaction,
are to seek it in the Volums which I have already published. The
Particularities relating to the Proceedings of both Houses os Parliament could
not be brought within so short an Abstract. Many Digressions and the Deductions
of Arguments, are either past over, or but shortly touched. He that desires to
be particularly informed in any or all of these, must resort to the History it
self.

All that I pretend to have done in this Abridgment is, that I have given a
true and clear account of the Progress of the Reformation, in all those
Windings, and Advances, and Declinings, through which it was carried from its
first beginnings, till it was brought to a complete setlement under Queen
Elizabeth: and this is done in such a manner, that I hope the Reader shall not
find much cause to complain that the endeavoring to be short has made me
either obscure or defective. In the Prefaces to the two Volumes I endeavored
to clear the Readers mind of the Prejudices which may be apt to arise, either
from a slight and general View of this matter, or from the false Relations that
have been formerly made of it. I shall not undertake to abridge them, for I
brought them there into as narrow a compass as the weight of the matter did
admit of: Therefore I refer the Reader that Labors under the ill Effects of
such Impressions to the Prefaces themselves; and I shall add here that which is
the last part of the Preface to the second Volume, because it may be of more
general use, and is accommodated to all, that as may be supposed, will have the
curiosity to read this Abridgment, that so they may come to it with a true Idea
of the Nature of Religion in general and of the Christian Religion in
particular.

That Religion is chiefly designed for perfecting the nature of Man, for
improving his Faculties, governing his Actions, and securing the Peace of every
man's Conscience, and of the Societies of Mankind in common, is a truth so
plain, that without further arguing about it all will agree to it. Every part
of Religion is then to be judged by its Relation to the main ends of it; And
since the Christian Doctrine was revealed from Heaven, as the most perfect and
proper way that ever was, for the advancing the good of Mankind, nothing can be
a part of this holy Faith but what is proportioned to the end for which it was
designed. And all the Additions that have been made to it, since it was first
delivered to the World, are justly to be suspected; especially where it is
manifest at first View, that they were intended to serve carnal and secular
ends. What can be reasonably supposed in the Papacy, where the Popes are chosen
by such Intrigues, either of the two Crowns, the Nephews of the former Pope, or
the craft of some aspiring Men, to entitle them to Infallability or Universal
Jurisdiction? What can we think of redeeming Souls out of Purgatory, or
preserving them from it by tricks, or some mean Pageantry, but that it is a
foul piece of Merchandise? What is to be said of Implicit Obedience, the
Priestly Dominion over Consciences, the keeping the Scriptures out of the
Peoples hands, and the Worship of God in a strange Tongue? but that these are
so many Arts to hoodwink the World, and to deliver it up into the hands of the
ambitious Clergy. What can we think of Superstition and Idolatry of Images, and
all the other pomp of the Roman Worship? but that by these things the people
were to be kept up in a gross notion of Religion, as a splendid business, and
that the Priests have a trick of saving them, if they will but take care to
humor them, and leave that matter wholly in their hands. And to sum up all,
What can we think of that Constellation of Prodigies in the Sacrament of the
Altar, as they pretend to explain it, and all really to no purpose? but that it
is an Art to bring the World by whole sale to renounce their Reason and Sense,
and to have a most wonderful Veneration for a sort of Men who can with a Word
perform the most astonishing thing that ever was.

I should grow too large for a Preface, if I would pursue this Argument as far
as it will go. But if on the other hand we reflect on the true ends of this
holy Religion, we must needs be convinced that we need go no where else out of
this Church to find them; and that we are completely instructed in all parts of
it, and furnished with all the helps to advance us to that which is indeed the
End of our Faith, the Salvation of our Souls. Here we have the Rule of holy
Obedience, and the Methods of Repentance and Reconciliation for past sins
clearly set before us. We believe all that Doctrine which Christ and his
Apostles delivered, and the Primitive Church received: We have the comfort of
all those Sacraments which Christ instituted, and in the same manner that he
appointed them: All the helps to Devotion that the Gospel offers are in every
ones hand. So what can it be that should so extravagantly seduce any who have
been bred up in a Church so well constituted? unless a blind Superstition in
their temper, or a desire to get Heaven in some easier Method than Christ has
appointed, do strangely impose on their Understandings, or corrupt their minds.
Indeed the thing is so unaccountable, that it looks like a Curse from Heaven on
those who are given up to it, for their other sins; for an ordinary Measure of
Infatuation cannot carry any one fo far in Folly. And it may be laid down for a
certain Maxim, that such as leave us, have never had a true and well formed
Notion of Religion, or of Christianity in its main and chief Design; but take
things in parcels, and without examining them suffer themselves to be carried
away by some prejudices which only darken weaker Judgments.

But if it is an high and unaccountable Folly for any to forsake our Communion,
and go over to those of Rome, it is at the same time an unexcusable weakness in
others who seem full of zeal against Popery, and yet upon some inconsiderable
Objections do depart from the Unity of the Body, and form separated Assemblies
and Communions; though they cannot object any thing material either to our
Doctrine or Worship: But the most astonishing part of the wonder is, that in
such differences there should be so little mutual forbearance or gentleness to
be found: and that they should raise such heats as if the substance of Religion
were concerned in them. This is of God, and is a stroke from Heaven on both
sides, for their other sins: We of the Church Communion have trusted too much
to the supports we receive from the Law, we have done our Duties too slightly,
and have minded the Care of Souls too little; therefore God to punish and
awaken us has suffered so many of our people to be wrested out of our hands:
and those of the Separation have been too forward to Blood and War, and thereby
have drawn much guilt on themselves, and have been too compliant with the
Leaders of their several Factions, or rather apt to outrun them. It is plain,
God is offended with us all, and therefore we are punished with this fatal
blindness, not to see at this time the things that belong to our peace.

And this leads me to Reflections of another sort, with which I shall conclude
this Preface.

It is apparent the Wrath of God hangs over our Heads, and is ready to break
out upon us. The Symptoms of our ill Condition are as sad as they are visible:
and one of the worst is, that each sort and Party is very ready to throw the
guilt of it off themselves, and cast it on others, with whom they are
displeased: But no Man says, What have I done? The Clergy accuse the Laity, and
the Country complains of the City: every one finds out somewhat wherein he
thinks he is least concerned, and is willing to fix on that all the Indignation
of Heaven, which, God knows, we our selves have kindled against our selves. It
cannot be denied, since it is so visible, that universally the whole Nation is
corrupted, and that the Gospel has not had those effects among us which might
have been expected, after so long and so free a course as it has had in this
Island. Our wise and worthy Progenitors reformed our Doctrine and Worship; but
we have not reformed our Lives and Manners: what will it avail us to understand
the right Methods of worshipping God, if we are without true Devotion, and
coldly perform public Offices, without sense and affection, which is as bad as
a Bead-roll of Prayers in whatsoever Language they are pronounced. What
signifies our having the Sacraments purely administered among us, if we either
contemptuously neglect them, or irreverently handle them, more perhaps in
compliance with Law, than out of a sense of the Holy Duties incumbent on us?
for what end are the Scriptures put in our hands, if we do not read them with
great Attention, and order our lives according to them? and what does all
preaching signify, if Men go to Church merely for Form, and hear Sermons only
as set Discourses, which they will censure or commend as they think they see
cause, but are resolved never to be the better for them? If to all these sad
Considerations we add the gross Sensuality and Impurity, that is so avowedly
practiced that it is become a fashion, so far it is from being a reproach; the
Oppression, Injustice, Intemperance, and many other Immoralities among us, what
can be expected, but that these Abominations receiving the highest Aggravation
they are capable of, from the clear Light of the Gospel which we have so long
enjoyed, the just Judgments of Heaven, should fall on us so signally, as to
make us a reproach to all our Neighbors. But as if all this were not enough,
to fill up the measure of our Iniquities, many have arrived at a new pitch of
Impiety, by defying Heaven it self, with their avowed Blasphemies and Atheism:
and if they are driven out of their Atheistical Tenets, which are indeed the
most ridiculous of any in the World, they set up their rest on some general
Notions of Morality and Natural Religion, and do boldly reject all that is
revealed: and where they dare vent it, (alas! where dare they not do it?) they
reject Christianity and the Scriptures, with open and impudent scorn, and are
absolutely insensible of any Obligation of Conscience in any thing whatsoever:
and even in that Morality, which they for Decencies sake magnify so much, none
are more bare-facedly and grossly faulty. This is a direct Attempt against God
himself, and can we think that he will not visit for such things, nor be
avenged on such a Nation? And yet the Hypocrisy of those who disguise their
flagitious Lives, with a Mask of Religion, is perhaps a Degree above all,
though not so scandalous till the Mask falls off, and that they appear to be
what they truly are. When we are all so guilty, and when we are so alarmed by
the black Clouds that threaten such terrible and lasting Storms, what may be
expected but that we should be generally struck with a deep sense of our crying
Sins, and turn to God with our whole Souls? But if after all the loud
Awakenings from Heaven we will not hearken to that Voice, but will still go on
in our Sins, we may justly look for unheard of Calamities, and such Miseries as
shall be proportioned to our Offenses; and then we are sure they will be great
and wonderful.

Yet if on the other hand there were a general turning to God, or at least if
so many were rightly sensible of this, as, according to the Proportion that the
Mercies of God allow, did some way balance the Wickedness of the rest, and if
these were as zealous in the true Methods of imploring God's Favor, as others
are in procuring his Displeasure; and were not only mourning for their own
Sins, but for the Sins of others; the Prayers and Sighs of many such, might
dissipate that dismal Cloud which our sins have gathered; and we might yet hope
to see the Gospel take root among us: since that God who is the Author of it is
merciful, and full of Compassion, and ready to forgive; and this holy Religion
which by his Grace is planted among us, is still so dear to him, that if we by
our own unworthiness do not render our selves incapable of so great a Blessing,
we may reasonably hope that he will continue that which at first was by so many
happy concurring Providence brought in, and was by a continued Series of the
same indulgent care advanced die Degrees, and at last raised to that pitch of
perfection which few things atttain in this World.

THE CONTENTS.
BOOK I. Of the Beginnings of the Reformation, and of the Progress made in it
by King Henry the Eighth.
THe Union of the Houses of York and Lancaster, in King Hen. the 8th, Page 1
Empson and Dudley disgraced, Page 2 He is very Liberal, Page 3 Is successful in
his Wars, ibid He is courted both by France and Spain, Page 4 Francis the 1st
is taken Prisoner, Page 5 And afterward the Pope, Page 7 Scotland in disorder,
ibid Factions in the English Council, Page 8 Cardinal Wolsey 's Rise, ibid And
Greatness, Page 9 Charles Brandon 's Advancement, Page 10 The King is well with
his Parliament, Page 11 The King's Education, Page 12 His Learning and Vanity,
Page 13 The way of promoting Bishops, ibid A Contest for the Ecclesiastical
Immunity, Page 14 Hunn Imprisoned, Murdered, and his Body burnt, Page 16 The
King much addicted to the Papacy, Page 20 Car. Wolsey intends to reform the
Clergy, ibid The summoning of Convocations, Page 21 The State of the
Monasteries, Page 22 Wolsey suppresses many, Page 23 The Progress of Wikliff's
Doctrine, ibid The Cruelty of the Clergy, Page 24 Laws made against Heretics,
Page 25 Warham persecutes the Lollards, Page 27 The Progress of Luther 's
Doctrine, Page 29 The King writes against him, Page 30 The King's Marriage,
Page 32 Matches proposed for his Daughter, Page 33 The King has scruples about
his Marriage, Page 34
1627.
And applies to the Pope for a Divorce, Page 37 Who is very favorable, Page 38
1528.
Campegio sent as Legate to try it, Page 40 He comes into Engl. with a Decretal
Bull, Page 42 Campana sent over to deceive the King, Page 43 The Pope resolved
to join with the Emperor, Page 44
1529.
The Pope's Sickness, Page 45 Wolsey aspires to the Popedom, Page 46 The Pope
promises to confirm the Sentence that should be given by the Legates, Page 47
The Process begins in England, Page 50 The Queen appeals to the Pope, Page 51
The Pope grants an Avocation, Page 52 Cranmer 's Rise, and Wolsey 's Disgrace,
Page 54
1530.
A Parliament is called, Page 56 The King's Debts are discharged, Page 57
Universities declare against the Marriage, Page 58 It is condemned by the
Sorbon, Page 60 The Opinions of the Reformers about it, Page 61 The English
Nobility write to the Pope about it, and he answers them, Page 62 Arguments for
the Divorce, Page 63 Arguments against it, Page 66
1531.
A Session of Parliament, Page 69 The Laws formerly made against the Pope's
Bulls, ibid The Clergy sued in a Premunirc, Page 76 Poisoning made Treason,
Page 78 The King leaves the Queen, ibid A Tumult among the Clergy, ibid The
Pope joins himself to France, Page 79
1532.
Differences betwixt the King and the House of Commons, Page 81 The Pope writes
to the King, Page 82 The King answers, Page 83 The King cited to Rome, and
Cardinals corrupted, Page 84 The Bishops Oaths to the Pope and the King, Page
87 More lays down his Office, Page 88 The King of England and France meet, Page
89 The King marries Ann Boleyn, Page 90
1533.
The Parliam. condemns Appeals to Rome, Page 91 Cranmer made Archbishop of
Canterbury, Page 92 The Convocation condemns the Marriage, Page 93 Cranmer
gives Sentence, with the Censure, s of it. Page 95 The Proceedings at Rome upon
it, Page 98 Queen Elizabeth born, Page 99 The Pope promises to satisfy the
King, ibid But proceeds hastily to a Sentence, Page 102 Arguments for rejecting
the Pope's Power, Page 103 And for the Kings Supremacy, Page 106 The Clergy
submit to it, Page 108
1534.
The Pope's Power condemned in Parliam. Page 109 The Act of the Succession,
Page 110 An Act concerning Heretics, Page 111 The Submission of the
Convocation, Page 112 An Act for the Election of Bishops, Page 113 The
Attainder of the Nun of Kent, Page 114 All swear the Oath of Succession, Page
119 Fisher Bishop of Rochester is in trouble, ibid But is very obstinate, Page
121 More and Fisher refuse the Oath, ibid Another Session of Parliament
establishes the King's Supremacy, Page 123 The Progress of the Reformation in
Engl. Page 125 The Supplication of the Beggars, Page 127 Frith writes against
Purgatory, Page 128 A Persecution set on by More, Page 129 Bilney 's Martyrdom,
ibid Frith 's Sufferings, Page 133 A stop put to further Cruelties, Page 135
The Interest the Reformers had at Court, Page 136 Others oppose them much, Page
137 The Opinion of some Bishops of a General Council, Page 138 Heads of a
Speech of Cranmer's, Page 139 The state of England at that time, Page 141
1535.
A General Visitation proposed, Page 144 Instructions and Injunctions for it,
ibid The state of the Monasteries in England, Page 146 Some Houses surrendered
to the King, Page 150
1536.
Queen Katherin's Death, Page 151 The lesser Monasteries suppressed, Page 152 A
Translation of the Bible designed, Page 153 Queen Ann Boleyn 's Fall, Page 155
Her Trial, Page 159 And Execution, Page 162 Censures past upon it, Page 164
Lady Mary 's Submission to the King, Page 165 The Act of the Succession, Page
167 The Pope desires a Reconciliation with the K. Page 168 Acts against the
Pope's Power, ibid The Convocation examines some Points of Religion, Page 169
Articles of Religion agreed on, Page 172 Which are variously censured, Page 174
Other Alterations proposed, Page 175 The King protests against all Councils
called by the Pope, Page 178 Card. Pool writes against him, Page 179 The lesser
Monasteries seized on, Page 181 Which gave a general discontent, Page 182
Injunctions given by the King, Page 184 A Rebellion in Lincolnshire, Page 186
Another in Yorkshire, Page 187 They are every where quieted, Page 191 Greater
Monasteries surrendered, Page 193 Some Abbots Attainted, Page 196 The
Impostures of some Images discovered, Page 200 Becket 's Shrine broken, Page
201 The Pope thunders against the King, Page 203 The English Bishops assert the
King's Supremacy, and explain the Nature of the Power of the Church, Page 205
The Bible set out in English, and new Injunctions, Page 208 Prince Edward born,
Page 209 Lambert is condemned, and burnt for denying the Corporal Presence,
Page 210 Treaties with the German Princes, Page 213
1539.
The Act of the six Articles, Page 215 Censures past upon it, Page 219 An Act
for the suppressing the Monasteries, Page 220 An Act for new Bishoprics, Page
222 An Act for Proclamations, Page 224 Some Attainted without being heard, Page
225 The King's kindness to Cranmer, Page 226 Bishops hold their Sees at the
Kings Pleasure, Page 228 All the Monasteries suppressed, Page 229 A Treaty for a
Match with Ann of Cleve, Page 233 The King marries her, but never likes her,
Page 234 The Knights of St. John suppressed, Page 236 A new Parliament, Page
235 Cromwell 's Fall, Page 238 His Attaindor, Page 240 Censures past upon it,
Page 241 The King's Marriage annulled, Page 242 Cromwell 's Death, Page 246 A
Book of Religion set out by the Bishops, Page 247 The Explanation of Faith,
Page 248 And of the Sacraments, Page 250 The Book is publisted, Page 253 Barns
ard others fall into Trouble, Page 255 And burnt, Page 257 New Sees founded,
Page 260
1541.
The Bible set up in Churches, Page 262 The Affairs of Scotland, Page 264 A
Persecution set on foot in Scotland, Page 269 The Queen's ill Life is
discovered, Page 271
1542.
A design to suppress the Bible, Page 274 Bonner's Injunctions, ibid The way of
Preaching at that time. Page 275 A War with Scotland, Page 279
1543.
A Parliament called, Page 280 An Act about Religion, ibid Affairs in Scotland,
Page 282 Some burnt at Windsor, Page 284 Cranmer 's Ruin is designed, Page 286
1544.
The Act of the Succession, Page 288 The King makes War on France and Scotland,
Page 290 The King takes Bulloign, Page 291
1545.
Wishart burned in Scotland, Page 292 Cardinal Beaton is murdered, Page 294
Chantries given to the King, Page 296
1546.
A Peace with France, Page 297 Ann Aiscough and others burnt, Page 298 Designs
against Cranmer, Page 300 And against the Queen, Page 301 The Duke of Norfolk's
Fall, Page 303
1547.
The Earl of Surrey executed, Page 304 The Duke is Attainted in Parliament,
Page 305 The King's Sickness, Page 307 And Death, Page 308 His Severities
against Papists, Page 309 The Carthusians in particular, Page 310 Fisher 's
Sufferings, Page 311 More 's Death and Character, Page 312 Attainders after the
Rebellions, Page 314 Forest burnt for Heresy, Page 315 Cardinal Pool's Friends
Attainted, Page 316 Some Attainted without being heard, ibid The Conclusion,
Page 319

BOOK II. Of the Life and Reign of King Edward the Sixth.
KIng Edward 's Birth and Education, Page 1 King Henry's Testament. Page 2 A
Protector chosen, Page 4 Bishops take out Commissions, ibid A Creation of
Noblemen, Page 5 Laymen had Ecclesiastical Dignities, Page 7 Some take down
Images, Page 8 Arguments for, and against it, Page 9 The King's Funeral, Page
12 Soul Masses examined, ibid The Coronation, Page 14 The Chancellor turned
out, Page 15 Protectors Patent, Page 17 The Affairs of Germany, ibid The
Council of Trent, Page 19 Divisions in England, Page 20 The Visitation of all
Churches, Page 23 Censures on the Injunctions, Page 26 The War with Scotland,
Page 28 The Battle of Musselburgh, Page 31 The Success of the Visitation, Page
32 A Parliament meets, Page 35 An Act of Repeal, ibid An Act about the
Sacrament, Page 36 An Act concerning the Nomination of Bishops, Page 37 An Act
against Vagabonds, Page 39 An Act for dissolving the Chantries, Page 40 The
Convocation sits, ibid The Affairs of Germany, Page 43 Differences between the
Protector and the Admiral, Page 45
1548.
The M. of Northampton 's Divorce, Page 48 Some Ceremonies abrogated, Page 49 A
new Office for the Communion, Page 52 Auricular Confession examined, Page 54
Gardener is imprisoned, Page 56 A new Liturgy composed, Page 58 The new
Offices, Page 61 Private Communion, Page 62 Censures past on the Common Prayer
Book, Page 63 All Preaching was for some time restrained, Page 64 Affairs in
Scotland, Page 65 Affairs in Germany, Page 67
1549.
A Session of Parliament, Page 69 An Act for the Marriage of the Clergy, ibid
An Act confirming the Liturgy, Page 72 An Act for Fasting, Page 73 The Admirals
Attainder, Page 74 A new Visitation, Page 77 Disputes concerning Christ's
Presence in the Sacrament, Page 79 Arguments against the Corporal Presence,
Page 81 Anabaptists in England, Page 85 Two were burnt, Page 84 The Doctrine of
Predestination abused, Page 87 Tumults in several parts of England, ibid The
Rebellion in Devonshire, Page 89 And in Norfolk, Page 91 The French begin a
War, ibid The Rebels every where routed, Page 92 A Visitation at Cambridge,
Page 94 Bonner's Process, Page 95 And Deprivation, Page 100 Ill Success of the
English, Page 101 Several Expedients proposed, Page 105 The Emperor refuses
his Assistance, Page 106 A Faction against the Protector, Page 108 Which turns
to a Public Breach, Page 110 The Protector's Fall, Page 112 The Emperor will
not assist them, Page 114 A Session of Parliament, ibid
1550.
The Duke of Somerset fined, but restored into Favor, Page 116 A Progress of
the Roformation ibid. The Book of Ordinations put out, Page 117 Pool chosen
Pope, but lost it, Page 120 A Treaty with France, Page 122 Ridley made Bishop
of London, Page 123 Gardener 's Process, Page 124 Latimer preaches at Court,
Page 126 Hooper made Bishop of Gloucester has some Scruple concerning the
Vestments, ibid A review of the Common Prayer Book, Page 128 Bucer offers some
Advices to the King. Page 130 The King's great Knowledge, ibid Altars put down,
Page 131 Affairs of Scotland, Page 132 And Germany, Page 133
1551.
The Popish Party comply generally, Page 134 Bucer 's Death, Page 135 Gardener
's Deprivation, Page 136 The Articles of Religion agreed on, Page 138 Changes
made in the Com. Prayer Book, Page 139 Lady Mary in trouble for having Mass
said, Page 142 The Earl of Warwick's Designs, Page 147 A Treaty for a Marriage
to the King, Page 149 The Duke of Somerset 's Fall, Page 150 His Trial, Page
151 Rich gives up the Great Seal, and it was given to the Bishop of Ely, Page
154 The Duke of Somerset 's Execution, Page 156 The Affairs of Germany, Page
158
1552.
A Session of Parliament, Page 161 An Act against Usury, Page 164 A Repeal of
the Settlement of the Duke of Somerset 's Estate, Page 165 Tonstall is
imprisoned, Page 166 A Reformation of Ecclesiastical Laws, Page 167 The Heads
of it, Page 169 The Poverty of the Clergy, Page 174 Affairs in Ireland, Page
175 A Change in the Garter, Page 177 Northumberland's Severity, Page 178 Trade
flourishes much, Page 179 Cardan in England, Page 180 Affairs in Scotland,
Page 183 The Affairs in Germany, Page 185 An Account of the Council of Trent,
Page 187 The Emperors Designs are blasted, Page 189
1553.
A Bill proposed, that Laymen should not hold Church Dignities, Page 191 An Act
suppressing the Bishopric of Durham, ibid Another Visitation, Page 192 Bishops
made by the King's Patent, Page 193 Affairs in Germany, Page 194 The King's
Sickness, Page 196 The Patents for the Succes. to the Crown, Page 197 The
King's Death, and Character, Page 199

BOOK III. The Life and Reign of Queen Mary,
QVeen Mary succeeds, Page 203 But Lady Jane Gray is proclaimed, Page 205
Censures past upon that, Page 206 Many turn to Queen Mary, Page 208
Northumberland marches against her, Page 209 The Council declares for her, Page
210 She comes to London, Page 212 Her former Life, ibid The Councils then laid
down, Page 214 Northumberland 's Trial, Page 215 And Execution, Page 216 King
Edward 's Funeral, Page 217 A Tumult at St. Paul's. Page 218 Severe Proceedings
against the Men of Suffolk, and others, Page 220 Particularly against Judge
Hales, Page 221 Cranmer 's Imprisonment, Page 222 The Strangers driven out of
England, Page 224 The Popular Arts used by Gardener, Page 225 A Parliament
meets, and repeals several Laws, Page 226 The Queen's Mother's Marriage
confirmed, Page 227 King Edward 's Laws about Religion repealed, Page 229 The
Duke of Norfolk's Attainder repealed, Page 230 A Treaty for reconciling England
to the Pope, Page 232 And for a Match with the Prince of Spain, Page 233 Pool
's Advices to the Queen, Page 234 The Parliament opposes the Match, and is
dissolved, Page 236 A Convocation meets, and dispute about the Sacrament, Page
237
1554.
The Treaty of Marriage begun, Page 241 Which provokes some to rebel, Page 242
Lady Jane Gray's Execution, Page 245 Several others suffered, Page 247 The
Imposture of the Spirit in the Wall, Page 248 Iujunctions sent to the Bishops,
ibid. Many Bishops turned out, Page 249 A new Parliament, Page 251 A
Proposition to make the Queen absolute, Page 252 New Disputations at Oxford
with Cranmer, Page 254 The Prince of Spain lands, and marries the Queen, Page
258 The Bishops visit their Diocesses, Page 261 Another Parliament, Page 263
The Nation is reconciled to the Sea of Rome, Page 264 Gardener 's Policy in the
steps of this Change, Page 268 Consultations about the way of proceedings
against Heretics; Page 269
1555.
A Persecution is set on foot, Page 271 Rogers and Hooper condemned and burnt,
Page 272 The Burnings much condemned, Page 274 Arguments against them, and for
them, Page 276 The Queen restores the Church Lands, Page 279 Marcellus chosen
Pope: Paul the 4th succeeds. ibid. The English Ambassadors come to Rome, Page
280 The English grow backward to Persecution, Page 281 The Queen's Delivery in
vain looked for, Page 282 More Heretics burnt, ibid. Religious Houses set up,
Page 285 Sir Tho. More 's Works published, ibid. Ridley and Latimer burnt, Page
286 Gardener 's Death, Page 289 The Parliament ill pleased with the Queens
conduct. Page 290 Pool 's Decrees for the Reformation of the Clergy. Page 293
He refuses to bring the Jesuits into England, Page 295 More of the Reformed are
burnt, Page 296 Affairs in Germany, ibid. Charles the 5th 's Resignation, Page
297
1556.
Cranmer 's Sufferings, Page 298 He repents, and is burnt, Page 301 His
Character, Page 303 More Burnings, Page 304 The Reformed increase upon this,
Page 306 The Troubles at Frankford, ibid. Pool made Archbishop of Canterbury,
Page 307 More Religious Houses, ibid. The Pope sets on a War between France and
Spain, Page 309
1557.
A Visitation of the Universities, Page 311 A severe Inquisition of Heretics,
Page 312 More Burnings. Page 313 Lord Stourton hanged, Page 315 The Queen joins
in a War against France. Page 316 The Battle at St. Quintin, Page 317 The Pope
recals Pool, Page 318 Affairs of Germany. Page 320
1558.
Calais and other Places taken by the French, Page 322 Great Discontents in
England, Page 324 The Parliament meets, Page 325 The Carriage and Usage of L.
Eliz. all this Reign, ibid. Ill Success and strange Accidents, Page 329 The
Dauphin and the Q. of Scotland married, Page 331 A Parliament in England, Page
332 The Queens Death, Page 333 Pool 's Death and Character, ibid. The Queens
Character, Page 334

BOOK IV.
QVeen Elizabeth proclaimed, Page 337 The Queen came to London, Page 338 Philip
proposes Marriage to the Queen, but in vain, Page 339 The Counsels about
changing Religion, Page 340 A Scheme proposed, Page 341 The Impatience of some,
Page 342 Parker refuses the Sea of Canterbury, Page 343
1559.
Bacon made Lord Keeper, The Queen is crowned, Page 344, ibid. A Parliament is
called, The Peace at Cambray, Page 345, 346 Acts past in Parliament, Page 347
The Commons pray the Queen to marry, ibid. Her Title to the Crown acknowledged,
Page 348 Acts concerning Religion, Page 349 Preaching without License
forbidden, Page 351 A publik Conference about Religion, ibid. Arguments for and
against Worship in an unknown Tongue, Page 352 The English Service is again set
up, Page 355 Speeches against it by some Bishops, Page 356 Many Bishops turned
out, Page 358 The Queen inclined to keep Images in Churches, Page 360 A general
Visitation, ibid. The high Commission Court, Page 362 Parker is very
unwillingly made Archbishop of Canterbury, Page 363 The other Bishops
consecrated, Page 365 The Fable of the Nags-Head confuted, Page 366 The
Articles of the Church published, Page 367 A Translation of the Bible, Page 368
The Want of Church Discipline, Page 369 The Reformation in Scotland, Page 370
It is first set up in St. Johnstown, Page 372 The Queen-Regent is deposed, Page
375 The Queen of England assists the Scots, Page 376 The Queen-Regent dies,
ibid. A Parliment meets and settles the Reformation, Page 377 The Q of England
the Head of all the Protestants, Page 378 Both in France, and the Netherlands,
Page 379, 381 The excellent Administration of Affairs in England, ibid.
Severities against the Papists were necessary, Page 285 Sir F. walsingh.
Account of the steps in which she proceeded, ibid. The Conclusion, Page 386

ERRATA.
BOOK I. PAge 20. line 5. stop read step. Page 45, l. 17. if he said, read he
said if. P. 47. l. 6. dele any. P. 60. l. 18. after determine, dele; l. 19.
after same, d.; P. 61. l. implored, r employed. P. 64 l. 9. formerly, r.
formally. P. 81. mar. l. 4. after the, r. King and the. P. 82. l. 2. enacted,
r. exacted. P. 89. l. 23. King the, r. the King. P. 92. l. 6. or, r. of. P. 93.
l. 3.9, r. 11. P. 95. l. 8. big a, r. a big. P. 99. l. 19. new, r. now. l. 29.
after this, r. was. P. 109. l. 6. he, r. the. P. 121. l. 2. after so, r. was.
P. 130. l. 3. for, r. but. P. 131. l. 16. after and, r. he with. P. 133. l. 9.
after was, r. given. P. 135. l. 22. being, r. were. P. 139. l. 30. after were,
r. to. P. 141. l. ult. near, r. now at. P. 181. mar. l. 3. cited in, r. seized
on. P. 184. l. 2. had it, r. it had. P. 196. l. 26. del. once. P. 205. l. 12.
before the, r. as. P. 217. l. 11. before the, r. this. P. 237. l. 31. some, r.
since. P. 242. l. 25. her will, r. his will. P. 243. l. 5. after for, r. since.
P. 257. l. 14. after Abel, r., P. 260. l. 16. del. are. P. 291. l. 11.
corrupting, r. reforming.

Book 2.] P. 13. l. 15. had, r. been. P. 30. l. 34. 20th, r. 10th. P. 53. l.
22. so, r. for. P. 103. l. 25. not, r. nor. P. 111. l. 13. after all, r. his.
P. 188 l. 15. del. then. P. 199. l. 31. in, r. on.

Book 3.] P. 301. l. 20. hew, r. new. P. 321. l. 16. after most, r. part. P.
312. l. 2. Peru, r. Pern. l. some, r. the same. P. 317. l. 12. 80000, r. 8000.

Book 4.] P. 354. l. 28. and P. 356. l. 7. Ferknam, r. Fecknam.

AN A BRIDGMENT OF THE History of the Reformation OF THE Church of ENGLAND.
LIB. I. Of the Beginnings of it, and the Progress made in it, by King Henry
the Eighth.
THe Wars of the two Houses of York and Lancaster, The Union of the two Houses
of York and Lancast. in K H. VIII.
had produced such dismal Revolutions, and cast England into such frequent and
terrible Convulsions, that the Nation, with great joy received Henry the
Seventh; Book I.
who being himself descended from the House of Lancaster, by his marriage with
the Heir of the House of York, did deliver them from the fear of any more Wars
by new Pretenders. But the covetousness of his Temper, the severity of his
Ministers, his ill conduct in the Matter of Britaign, and his jealousy of the
House of York, not only gave occasion to Impostors to disturb his Reign, but to
several Insurrections that were raised in his time: By all which he was become
so generally odious to his People, that as his Son might have raised a
dangerous competition for the Crown during his Life, as devolved on him by his
Mother's death, who was indeed the Righteous Heir; so his death was little
lamented. April 22 1509. He disgraces Empson and Dudley.
And Henry the Eighth succeeded, with all the Advantages he could have desired;
and his disgracing Empson and Dudley, that had been the cruel Ministers of his
Fathers Designs for filling his Coffers, his appointing Restitution to be made
of the Sums that had been unjustly exacted of the People, and his ordering
Justice to be done on those rapacious Ministers, gave all People hopes of happy
Times, under a Reign that was begun with such an Act of Justice, that had
indeed more Mercy in it, than those Acts of Oblivion and Pardon, with which
others did usually begin. And when Ministers, by the King's Orders, were
condemned and executed for invading the Liberties of the People under the
Covert of the King's Prerogative; it made the Nation conclude, that they should
hereafter live secure, under the Protection of such a Prince, and that the
violent Remedies of Parliamentary Judgments should be no more necessary, except
as in this case, to confirm what had been done before in the ordinary Courts of
Justice.

The King also either from the Magnificence of his own Temper, He is very
liberal.
or the Observation he had made of the ill Effects of his Father's Parsimony,
did distribute his Rewards and Largesses with an unmeasured Bounty; so that he
quickly emptied his Treasure, 1800000 l
which his Father had left the fullest in Christendom: But till the ill Effects
of this appeared, it raised in his Court and Subjects the greatest Hopes
possible of a Prince, whose first Actions showed an equal mixture of Justice
and Generosity.

At his first coming to the Crown, the Successes of Lewis the Twelth, in Italy,
made him engage as a Party in the Wars with the Crown of Spain; His Success in
the Wars.
He went in Person beyond Sea, and took both Terwin and Tournay; in which,
Maximillion the Emperor, put an unusual Complement on him, for he took his pay,
and rid in his Troops. French King married his Younger Sister Mary, but he
dying soon after, Francis the first succeeded: and he renewing his Pretensions
upon Italy, Henry could not be prevailed on to engage early in the War, till
the Successes of either Party should discover which of the sides was the
weaker, and needed his Assistance most.

But tho hitherto, Spain was an unequal Match to France, yet all Spain being
now united (except Portugal) and strengthened by the Accession of the Dominions
of Burgundy, and enriched by the discovery of the Indies; and all this falling
into the hands of so great a Prince as Charles, afterward the fifth Emperor of
that Name; the balance between these Kingdoms grew as equal, as the Qualities
of the Princes themselves were, which engaged them in a Rivalry that made their
Minds as divided, as their Interests were opposite. Charles being preferred to
Francis in the Competition for the Empire, that kindled the Animosity higher,
and seemed to increase Charles's Party, tho the extent and distance of his
Dominion was such, that one Soul (tho his was one of the largest and most
active in the World) could not animate so vast a Body. He is courted both by
France and Spain.
Both these Princes saw how considerable an Ally or Enemy England might prove,
under a King so much esteemed and beloved; so they spared no Arts that might
engage him into their Interests; they gained his Ministers by their Presents,
and himself by their Complements, for it was soon found out, that Vanity was
his weak side. May 1520,
The Emperor came in Person to England, without the distrustful Precaution of
a Passport, and did so prevail with him, and his great Favorite Cardinal
Wolsey, by the promise of the Popedom, that tho an Interview followed between
Francis and him, June.
yet he found the Scale of France was then the heavier, so that upon the War,
which followed between those Princes, he joined with the Emperor.

Charles, to assure himself of Cardinal Wolsey, gave him hopes of the Popedom;
which perhaps he did the more easily, because Pope Leo being so young a Man,
there was no great appearance of a Vacancy: but the Pope dying sooner than
perhaps was expected, Adrian, December 1521,
that had been the Emperor's Tutor, was then chosen, and Cardinal Wolsey had
the promise of succeeding him: But a second Vacancy following within two Years,
the Emperor broke his word the second time; upon which, the Cardnial was so
offended, that he resolved to take his Revenge, so soon as a favorable
Conjuncture should offer it self; and tho he had laid the best Train he could
at Rome for the Chair; yet upon Clement the seventh's Advancement, he
dissembled the matter so with him, as to protest, that he was the very person
whom he had wished to see raised to that Dignity.

The Battle of Pavia, Francis the first, is taken Prisoner.
in which Francis was taken Prisoner, and his Army defeated, turned the Scale
mightily; the Pope was nearest the danger, and felt it soonest; for he
projected the Clementine League, by which both He and the Republic of Venice,
and the Princes of Italy, engaged in the Interests of France; and the King of
England was declared the Protector of it. Both public and private Interests
wrought on the King; and his own Resentments, as well as the Cardinals animated
him to it: for the Emperor was so lifted up with his Success, that he began to
form the Project of an Universal Empire, and tho he had come to England in
Person a second time, Infanta of Portugal to it, judging it to be of more
Importance to him to keep all quiet in Spain. Francis was now at liberty, but
had given his Sons as Hostages, so he was slow in his Proceedings, tho he was
the Person most concerned in the League: The Emperor was highly displeased
with the Pope, whom he looked on as his own Creature, but it was always
observed, that of what Faction soever a Cardinal might be, yet upon the
Advancement, he became the Head of his own.

The Colonesi entered Rome with three thousand Men, September.
and sacked it, the Pope retiring to the Castle of Saint Angelo, Rome, the Pope
gathered his together, and fell on their Lands, and by a Creation of fourteen
Cardinals for Money (which perhaps may be excused from Simony, because they
took no care of Souls) he was enabled to prosecute the War; but the Duke of
Bourbon, that upon a Discontent given him in France, had gone over to the
Emperor's Service, came to Rome, and took it by storm, himself being killed in
the Assault, the Pope and seventeen Cardinals, May, And afterward the Pope.
shut themselves in the Castle St. Angelo, but he was forced to render, and was
kept Prisoner some Months.

This gave great Scandal to all Europe; the Emperor himself seemed ashamed of
it, for he would suffer no rejoicing to be in Spain for his Sons Birth, but
appointed public Processions for the Pope's Liberty. Wolsey had now the best
opportunity he could wish, to declare his Zeal for the Pope's Service, and his
Aversion to the Emperor; so he went to France, and made a new League, for
setting the Pope at liberty. The Emperor prevented the Conjunction he saw like
to follow, and having brought the Pope to his own Terms, he restored him again
to his Freedom. And thus both the Pope and the King of France, that by very
unususal Accidents had been taken Prisoners, acknowledged that their Liberty
was chiefly due to the Endeavors that King Henry had used for procuring it.

When he was thus firmly united to the Interests of France, Scotland in disorder
he had less to fear from Scotland, which being a perpetual Ally to France,
gave him no Disturbance, but as it was drawn into the War by that Court: That
Kingdom was also for many Years under a King not of Age, and so was much
distracted by Faction, and those Broils at home, being the surest way to keep
them from making Inroads into England, were kept up by the Money which the King
sent the Malcontents; therefore both the Courts of France and England, by the
Pensions they gave, kept the several Parties there in pay, which Advantage that
Kingdom lost when it was joined to England. As for Domestic Affairs in the
Government of England, the King left Matters much in the hands of his Council,
in which there were two different Parties, Factions in the Council.
headed by the Bishop of Winchester, and the Lord Treasurer that was Duke of
Norfolk: The former much complained of the Consumption of the Treasure; the
other justified himself, that he only obeyed the King's Orders. But the
Treasurer's Party, under a bountiful King, must always be strongest, both in
the Court and Council. In the first Parliament, the Justice done upon Empson
and Dudly, gave so great Satisfaction, that all things went as the Court
desired. In the second Parliament, a Brief that Pope Julius writ, complaining
of Lewis the twelfth, was first read in the House of Lords, and then carried
down by the L. Chancellor, and some other Lords to the House of Commons, and
read there, upon which, Money was granted for a War with France. At this time,
Fox, to support his Party against the Lord Treasurer, endeavored to bring
Thomas Wolsey into favor; Car. Wolfey's Rise.
he was of mean Extraction, but had great Parts, and a wonderful Dexterity in
insinuating himself into Men's Favors; so he being brought into Business, did
so manage the King, that he became very quickly the Master of his Spirit, and
of all his Affairs; and for fifteen Years continued to be the most absolute
Favorite that had ever been seen in England. He saw the King was much set on
his Pleasures, and had a great Aversion to business; and the other Counselors
being unwilling to bear the load of Affairs, were uneasy to him, by pressing
him to govern by his own Counsels; but he knew the methods of Favorites
better, and so was not only easy, but assistant to the King in his Pleasures,
and undertook to free him from the Trouble of Government, and to give him
leisure to follow his Appetites.

He was Master of all the Offices at home, And Greatness.
and Treaties abroad; so that all Affairs went as he directed them. He it seems
became soon obnoxious to Parliaments, and therefore he tried but one during his
Ministry, where the Supply was granted so scantily, that afterward he chused
rather to raise Money by Loans and Benevolences, than by the free gift of the
People in Parliament. He became so scandalous for his ill Life, that he grew to
be a Disgrace to his Profession; for he not only served the King, but also
shared with him in his Pleasures, which were unhappy to him, for he was spoiled
with Venerial Distempers. He was first made Bishop of Tournay in Flanders, then
of Lincoln, after that he was promoted to the Sea of York, and had both the
Abbey of St. Albans, and the Bishopric of Bath and Wells in Commendam; the last
he afterward exchanged for Duresm, and upon Foxes death, he quitted Duresm,
that he might take Winchester; and besides all this, the King by a special
Grant, gave him power to dispose of all the Ecclesiastical Preferments in
England, so that in effect he was the Pope of this other World, as was said
anciently of an Archbishop of Canterbury, and no doubt but he copied skilfully
enough after those Patterns that were set him at Rome. Being made a Cardinal,
and setting up a Legatine Court, he found it fit for his Ambition to have the
Great Seal likewise, that there might be no clashing between those two
Jurisdictions. He had in one word all the Qualities necessary for a Great
Minister, and all the Vices ordinary in a Great Favorite.

During this whole Reign, the Duke's of Norfolk Father and Son, were
Treasurers, but that long and strange course of Favor in so ticklish a Time,
turned fatally upon the Son, near the end of the King's Life. But he that was
the longest and greatest sharer in the King's Favor, Charles Brandon's
Advancement.
was Charles Brandon, who from the degree of a private Gentleman was advanced
to the highest Honors. The strength of his Body, and the gracefulness of his
Person, contributed more to his Rise, than his Dexterity in Affairs, or the
Endowments of his Mind, for the greatest Evidence he gave of his Understanding,
was, that knowing he was not made for Business, he did not pretend to it; a
Temper seldom observed by the Creatures of Favor. The frame and strength of
his Body made him a great Master in the Diversions of that Age, Justs and
Tiltings, and a fit Match for the King, or rather a Second to him, who
delighted mightily in them. His Person was so acceptable to the Ladies, that
the King's Sister, the Queen Dowager of France liked him, and by a strange sort
of making Love, prefixed him a time for gaining her Consent to marry him; and
assured him, if that he did not prevail within that time, he might for ever
despair. She married him in France, and the King after a show of some
Displeasure, was pacified and continued his Favors to him, not only during his
Sister's Life, but to the last, and in all the Revolutions of the Court that
followed, in which every Minister fell by turns, he still enjoyed his share in
the King's Bounty and Affection: so much happier it proved to be loved, than
trusted by him.

The King denied himself none of those Pleasures, that are as much legitimated
in Courts, as they are condemned elsewhere; but yet he declared no Mistress,
but Elizabeth Blunt, and owned no Issue, but a Son he had by her, whom he
afterward made Duke of Richmond. The King's usage of his Parliaments.
He took great care never to imbroil himself with his Parliaments, and he met
with no Opposition in any, except in that one, which was during Cardinal
Woolsey's Ministry; in which 800000 l. being demanded for a War with France, to
be paid in four Years, the debate about it rose very high, and not above the
half of it was offered; so the Cardinal came into the House of Commons, and
desired to hear the Reasons of those who were against the Supply, but he was
told that it was against their Orders to speak to a Debate before any that was
not of the House: he was much disatisfied at this, and cast the blame of it
upon Sir Thomas Moor that was Speaker, and after that he found out other means
of supplying the King without Parliaments.

The King had been educated with more than ordinary Care: The King's Education.
and Learning being then in its dawning, after a night of long and gross
Ignorance, his Father had given Orders that both his elder Brother and he
should be well instructed in matters of Knowledge; not with any design to make
him Archbishop of Canterbury, for he had made small progress, when his Brother
Prince Arthur died, being then but eleven Years old: perhaps Henry the seventh
felt the Prejudices of his own Education so much, that he was more careful to
have his Son better taught; or may be he did it to amuze him, and keep him from
looking too early into matters of State. The Learning then most in credit among
the Clergy, was the Scholastical Divinity, which by a show of Subtilty, did
recommend it self to curious Persons; and being very suitable to a vain and
contentious Temper, was that which agreed best with his Disposition; and it
being likely to draw the most Flattery from Divines, became the chief Subject
of his Studies, in which he grew not only to be Eminent for a Prince, whose
Knowledge tho ever so moderate, will be admired by Flatterers as a Prodigy, but
he might really have past for a Learned Man had his Quality been ever so mean.
He delighted in the purity of the Latin Tongue, and understood Philosophy, and
was so great a Master in Music, that he composed well. He was a bountiful
Patron to all Learned Men, more particularly to Erasmus and Polidore Virgil,
and delighted much in those Returns which hungry Scholars use to make to
liberal Princes; for he loved Flattery out of measure, His Learning and Vanity.
and particularly to be extolled for his Learning and great Understanding: and
he had enough of it to have surfeited a Man of any Modesty; for all the World,
both at home and abroad, contended who should exceed most indecently in setting
out his Praises. The Clergy carried it; for as he had merited most at their
hands, both by his espousing the Interests of the Papacy, and by his entering
the Lists with Luther: so those that hoped to be advanced by those Arts, were
as little ashamed in magnifying him out of measure, as he was in receiving
their gross Commendations.

The manner of promotion to Bishoprics and Abbeys was then the same, The
manner of the promotion of Bishops.
that had taken place ever since the Investitures by the Ring and Staff were
taken out of the hands of Princes. Upon a Vacancy the King seized on all the
Temporalities, and granted a License for an Election, with a special
Recommendation of the Person; which being returned, the Royal Assent was given,
and it was sent to Rome that Bulls might be expeded, and then the Bishop Elect
was consecrated: after that he came to the King and renounced every Clause in
his Bulls that was contrary to the King's Prerogative, or to the Law, and swore
Fealty; and then were the Temporalities restored. Nor could Bulls be sued out
at Rome without a License under the Great Seal; so that the Kings of Engl. had
reserved the power to themselves, of promoting to Ecclesiastical Benefices
notwithstanding all the Invasions the Popes had made on the Temporal power of
Princes. A Contest concerning the Ecclesiastical Immunity.


The Immunity of Churchmen for crimes committed by them, till they were first
degraded by the Spirituality, occasioned the only Contest that was in the
beginning of this Reign between the Secular and Ecclesiastical Courts. King
Henry the Seventh past a Law, that Clerks convict should be burnt in the hand.
A temporary Law was also made in the beginning of this Reign, That Murderers
and Robbers, not being Bishops, Priests, nor Deacons, should be denied the
benefit of Clergy: but this was to last only till the next Parliament, and so
being not continued by it, Winchelcomb preached severely against it, as being
contrary to the Laws of God, and the Liberties of the Holy Church, and said,
that all who assented to it had fallen under the Censures of the Church. And
afterward he published a Book, to prove that all Clerks, even of the lower
Orders, were Sacred, and could not be judged by the Temporal Courts. This being
done in Parliament-time, the Temporal Lords, with the Commons, addressed to the
King, desiring him to repress the Insolence of the Clergy. So a public Hearing
was appointed before the King, and all the Judges: Dr. Standish, a Franciscan,
argued against the Immunity, and proved that the judging Clerks had been in all
times practiced in England; and that it was necessary for the peace and safety
of Mankind, that all Criminals should be punished. The Abbot argued on the
other side, and said, it was contrary to a Decree of the Church, and was a Sin
in it self. Standish answered, That all Decrees were not observed: for
notwithstanding the Decrees for Residence, Bishops did not reside at their
Cathedrals. And since no Decree did bind till it was received, this concerning
Immunity, which was never received in England, did not bind. After they had
fully argued the matter, the Laity were all of opinion that the Friar was too
hard for the Abbot, and so moved the King that the Bishops might be ordered to
make him preach a Recantation Sermon. But they refused to do it, and said they
were bound by their Oaths to maintain his Opinion. Standish was upon this, much
hated by the Clergy, but the matter was let fall, yet the Clergy carried the
point, for the Law was not continued.

Not long after this, an Accident fell out that drew great Consequences after
it. One Richard Hun, a Merchant in London, was sued by his Parish Priest for a
Mortuary in the Legates Court, so he was advised to sue the Priest in the
temporal Court for a Praemunire for bringing the King's Subjects before a
foreign and illegal Court. This incensed the Clergy so much that they
contrived his Destruction: So hearing that he had Wickclif's Bible, he was upon
that put in the Bishop's Prison for Heresy, Hunn imprisoned for Heresy.
but being examined upon sundry Articles, he confessed some things, and
submitted himself to Mercy, upon which they ought according to Law, to have
enjoined him Penance, and discharged him, this being his first Crime; but he
could not be prevailed on by the terror of this to let his Suit fall in the
Temporal Court; Murdered.
so one Night his Neck was broken with an Iron Chain, and he was wounded in
other Parts of his Body, and then knit up in his own Girdle, and it was given
out that he had hanged himself; but the Coroners Inquest by examining the Body,
and by several other Evidences, and particularly by the confession of the
Sumner, gave their Verdict, that he was murdered by the Bishop's Chancellor Dr.
Horsey, and the Sumner, and the Bel-ringer. The Spiritual Court proceeded
against the dead Body, and charged Hun with all the Heresy in Wickliff's
Preface to the Bible, And condemned, his Body burnt.
because that was found in his Possession; so he was condemned as an Heretic,
and upon that his Body was burnt. The Bishops of Duresm and Lincoln, and many
Doctors sitting with the Bishop of London when he gave Judgment; so that it was
looked upon as an Act of the whole Clergy: but this produced very ill Effects;
for the Clergy lost the Affections of the City to such a degree, that they
could never recover them; nor did any one thing dispose them more than this
did, to the entertaining the new Preachers, and to every thing that tended to
the reproach of the Churchmen, whom they esteemed no more their Pastors, but
accounted them barbarous Murderers. The Rage went so high, that the Bishop of
London complained, that he was not safe in his own House, and there were many
hearings before the Council; for the Cardinal did all he could to stop the
progress of the Matter, but in vain: for the Bishop's Chancellor and the Sumner
were indicted as Principals in the Murder. In Parliament an Act passed
restoring Hun's Children; but the Commons sent up a Bill concerning his Murder;
yet that was laid aside by the Lords, where the Clergy were the Majority. The
Clergy looked on the Opposition that Standish had made in the point of their.
Further Disputes about Immunity.
Immunities, as that which gave the rise to Hun's first Suit; so the
Convocation cited him to answer for his Carriage in that Matter; but he claimed
the King's Protection, since he had done nothing, but only pleaded in the
King's Name. The Clergy pretended they did not prosecute him for his pleading,
but for some of his Divinity Lectures, contrary to the Liberty of the Church,
which the King was bound to maintain by his Coronation Oath: but the Temporal
Lords, the Judges, and the Commons prayed the King also to maintain the Laws
according to his Coronation Oath, and to give Standish his Protection. The King
upon this being in great perplexity, required Veysy, afterward Bishop of
Exeter, to declare upon his Conscience and Allegiance the truth in that matter.
His Opinion was against the Immunity; so another public Hearing being
appointed, Standish was accused for teaching, That the Inferior Orders were
not sacred; That their Exemption was not founded on a Divine Right, but that
the Laity might punish them; That the Canons of the Church did not bind till
they were received; and that the study of the Canon Law was useless. Of these
he denied some, and justified other particulars. Veysy being required to give
his Opinion, alleged, That the Laws of the Church did only oblige where they
were received: As the Law of the Celibate of the Clergy, received in the West,
did not bind the Greek Churches, that never received it: So the exemption of
the Clerks not being received, did not bind in England. The Judges gave their
Opinion next, which was, That those who prosecuted Standish were all in a
Praemunire. So the Court broke up. But in another Hearing, in the presence of
the greatest part of both Houses of Parliament, the Cardinal said in the name
of the Clergy, That tho they intended to do nothing against the King's
Prerogative; yet the trying of Clerks seemed to be contrary to the Liberty of
the Church, which they were bound by their Oaths to maintain. So they prayed
that the matter might be referred to the Pope.

The King answered that he thought Standish had answered them fully: The Bishop
of Winchester said, he would not stand to his Opinion at his Peril. Standish
upon that said, What can one poor Friar do against all the Clergy of England?
The Archbishop of Canterbury said, Some of the Fathers of the Church had
suffered Martyrdom upon that account; but the Chief Justice replied, That many
holy Kings had maintained that Law, and many holy Bishops had obeyed it. In
conclusion the King declared, that he would maintain his Rights, and would not
submit them to the Decrees of the Church, otherwise than as his Ancestors had
done. Warham Archbishop of Canterbury desired so long time might be given,
that they might have an Answer returned from Rome; but that was not granted:
yet a Temper was found. Horsey was appointed to be brought to his Trial for
Hun's Murder, and upon his pleading not guilty, no Evidence was to be brought,
and so he was to be discharged. But upon this it was said, The Judges were more
concerned to maintain their Jurisdiction, than to do Justice upon so horrid a
Murder; so the discontent given by it was raised so much higher, and the Crime
of a few Murderers, was now transferred upon the whole Clergy, who had
concerned themselves so much in their Preservation; and this did very much
dispose the Laity to all that was done afterward, for pulling down the
Ecclesiastical Tyranny.

This was the only uneasy stop in this King's Reign, The King is much addicted
to the Papacy.
till the suit for his Divorce was commenced. In all other points he was
constantly in the Pope's Interests, who sent him the common Complements of
Roses, and such other Triffles, by which that See had treated Princes so long
as Children. The King made the Defense of the Popedom an Article in his Leagues
with other Princes, and Pope Julius having called a General Council to the
Lateran, in opposition to that which by Lewis the Twelfth's means was held at
Pisa; The King sent the Bishops of Worcester and Rochester, the Prior of St.
John's and the Abbot of Winchelcomb to represent the Church of England, thereby
to give the greater Authority to a packed meeting of Italian Bishops and
Abbots, who assumed to themselves the Title of a Holy and Ecumenical Council.
But no Complement wrought so much on the King's Vanity, as the Title of
Defender of Faith, sent him by Pope Leo upon the Book, which he writ against
Luther concerning the Sacraments.

The Cardinal drew upon himself the hatred of the Clergy, Crrdinal Wolsey
intends to reform the Clergy.
by a Bull which empowered him to visit all the Monasteries of England; and to
dispense with all the Laws of the Church for a Year. He also gave out, that he
intended to reform the Clergy, though he forgot that which ought to be the
first step of all who pretend to reform others; for none could be worse than
himself was. He lived in great Luxury, and in an insolent Affectation of the
highest Statepossible; many of his Domestics being men of the first Rank. He
intended to suppress many Monasteries, and thought the best way for doing it
with the least Scandal, was first, to visit them, and so to expose their
Corruptions: But he was afterward diverted from this; yet the design which he
laid, being communicated to Cromwell, that was then his Secretary, it was put in
Practice toward the end of this Reign, when the Monasteries were all suppressed.

The Convocations were of two sorts; The summoning of Convocations.
some were summoned by the King, when Parliaments were called, as is in use to
this Day; only the King did not then prefix a Day, but left that to the
Archbishops. Others were called by the Archbishops, and were Provincial
Synods, of which there were but few. The Cardinal pretended that the summoning
all Convocations belonged to him, as Legate; so that when Warham had called
one, he dissolved it after it was met, and summoned it of new. In that
Convocation, France and Scotland. This was much opposed by the Cardinal's
Enemies, but it was agreed to at last, a Proviso being made, that such a heavy
tax should never be made a Precedent for the future; tho the Grant they made
was more likely to become a Precedent, than this Proviso to be a Security for
the time to come.

This increased the Aversion the Clergy had for the Cardinal: the Monks were
more particularly incensed; for they saw he was resolved to suppress their
Foundations, and convert them to other uses.

In the days of King Edgar, most of the Cathedrals of England were possessed by
Secular Priests, The State of the Monasteries.
who were generally married; but Dunstan and some other Monks took advantage
from the Vices of that Prince, to persuade him to make Compensation for them;
and as he made Laws, in which he declared what Compensations were to be made
for Sins, both by the Rich and Poor; so, it seems, he thought the founding of
Monasteries was the fittest Compensation for a King; and he turned out all the
married Priests, and put Monks in their stead. From that time the Credit and
Wealth of Monastic Orders continued to increase for several Ages, till the
Begging Orders succeeded in the esteem of the World, to the place which the
Monks formerly had; for they decreased as much in true worth, as the false
appearances of it had now raised their Revenues. They were not only ignorant
themselves, but very jealous of the progress Learning was making: for Erasmus,
and the other Restorers of it, treating them with much scorn, they looked on
the increase of it, as that which would much lessen them, and so not only did
not contribute to it, but rather detracted from it, as that which would make
way for Heresy.

The Cardinal designed two noble Foundations, the one at Oxford, Cardinal Wolsy
suppresses many.
and the other at Ipswich, the place of his Birth, both for the encouragement
of the Learned, and the instruction of Youth; and for that end he procured a
Bull for suppressing diverse Monasteries, which being executed, their Lands by
Law fell to the King; and thereupon the Cardinal took out Grants of them, and
endowed his Colleges with them.

But we shall next consider the state of Religion in England. From the days of
Wickliff there were many that differed from the Doctrines commonly received.
The growth of Wickliff's Doctrine.
He writ many Books that gave great Offense to the Clergy, yet being powerfully
supported by the Duke of Lancaster, they could not have their revenge during
his Life; but he was after his Death condemned, and his Body was raised and
burnt. The Bible which he translated into English, with the Preface which he
set before it, produced the greatest Effects. In it he reflected on the ill
Lives of the Clergy, and condemned the Worship of Saints and Images, and the
corporal Presence of Christ in the Sacrament; but the most criminal part was,
the exhorting all People to read the Scriptures; where the Testimonies against
those Corruptions were such, that there was no way to deal with them but to
silence them. His Followers were not Men of Letters, but being wrought on by
the easy Conviction of plain Sense, were by them determined in their
Persuasions. They did not form themselves into Body, but were contented to hold
their Opinions secretly, and did not spread them, but to their particular
Confidents. The Clergy sought them out every where, and did deliver them after
Conviction to the Secular Arm, that is, to the Fire.

In the Primitive Church, The Cruelty of the Clergy.
all cruel Proceedings upon the account of Heresy, were condemned; so that the
Bishops who accused some Heretics, upon which they were put to death, were
excommunicated for it. Banishment and Fines, with some Incapacities, were the
highest Severities even upon the greatest Provocations. But as the Church grew
corrupted in other things, so a cruel Spirit being generally the mark of all
ill Priests, of whatsoever Religion they are, they fell under the Influences of
it; and from the days of the rise of the Albigenses, the severities of the
Inquisition, and Burnings, with many other Cruelties, were by the means of the
Dominicans set up, first in France, and then in the other parts of Europe. A
Decree was also made in the Council of the Lateran, requiring all Magistrates
under the pains of forfeiture and deposition, to extirpate Heretics. Burning
agreed best with their Cruelty, as being the most terrible sort of Death, and
bearing some resemblance to everlasting Burnings in Hell; so they damned the
Souls of the Heretics, and burnt their Bodies; but the Execution of the former
part of the Sentence was not in their power, as the latter part was. The Canons
of that Council being received in England, the Proceedings against Heretics
grew to be a part of the Common Law, and a Writ for burning them was issued out
upon their Conviction. But special Statutes were afterward made: The first
under Richard the second, Laws made in England against Heretics.
was only agreed to by the Lords; and without its being consented to by the
Commons, the King assented to it; yet all the Severity in it was no more, than
that Writs should go out to the Sheriffs to hold Heretics in Prison, till they
should be judged by the Laws of the Church. The Preamble of the Law says, They
were very numerous, that they had a peculiar Habit, that they preached in many
Churches, and other Places against the Faith, and refused to submit to the
Censures of the Church. This was sent with the other Acts according to the
custom of that Time, to all the Sheriffs of England to be proclaimed by them;
but the Year following in the next Parliament, the Commons complained that that
Act was published, to which they had never consented; so an Act passed
declaring the former null; yet this was suppressed, and the former was still
esteemed a good Law.

When Henry the fourth came to the Crown, he owing it in great measure to the
help of the Clergy, passed an Act against all that preached without the
Bishop's License, or against the Faith; and it was enacted, That all
Transgressors of that sort, should be imprisoned, and within three Months be
brought to a Trial: If upon Conviction they offered to abjure, and were not
Relapses, they were to be imprisoned and fined at pleasure; and if they refused
to abjure, or were Relapses, they were to be delivered to the secular Arm, and
the Magistrates were to burn them in some public Place. But tho by this
Statute no mention is made of sending out a Writ for Execution; yet that
continued still, to be practiced: And that same Year Sautre a Priest being
condemned as a Relapse, and degraded by Arundell, Archbishop of Canterbury, a
Writ was issued out for it, in which, Burning is called the Common Punishment,
which related to the customs of other Nations: For this was the first Instance
of that kind in England. In the beginning of Henry the fifth's Reign, there was
a Conspiracy against the King discovered, (tho others that lived not long
after, say it was only pretended and contrived by the Clergy) of Old-Castle and
some others of Wickliff's Followers then called Lollards; upon which many were
condemned both for Treason and Heresy, who were first hanged and then burnt;
and a Law followed that the Lollards should forfeit all that they held in
Fee-simple, as well as their Goods and Chattels to the King, and all Sheriffs
and Magistrates were required to take an Oath, to destroy all Heresies and
Lollardies, and to assist the Ordinaries in their proceedings against them. Yet
the Clergy making ill use of these Laws, and vexing all People that gave them
any Offense, with long Imprisonments; the Judges interposed and examined the
Grounds of their Commitments, and as they saw cause, Bailed, or Discharged the
Prisoners; and took upon them to declare, what Opinions were Heresies by Law,
and what were not. Thus the People sought for Shelter, under their Protection,
and found more Mercy at the hands of Common Lawyers, than from them who ought
to have been the Pastors of their Souls, and the Publishers of the most
merciful Religion that ever was.

In the beginnings of this Reign, The Prosecution of Lollards before Warham.
there were several Persons brought into the Bishops Courts for Heresy, before
Warham. Forty eight were accused: But of these, forty three abjured, twenty
seven Men, and sixteen Women, most of them being of Tenterden; and five of
them, four Men, and one Woman, were condemned; some as obstinate Heretics, and
others as Relapses: and against the common Ties of Nature, the Woman's Husband,
and her two Sons, were brought Witnesses against her. Upon their Conviction, a
Certificate was made by the Archbishop to the Chancery; upon which, since there
is no Pardon upon Record, the Writs for burning them must have gone out in
Course, and the Execution of them is little to be doubted; for the Clergy were
seldom guilty of much Mercy in such Cases, having divested themselves of all
Bowels, as the Dregs of unmortified Nature. The Articles objected to them were,
That they believed that in the Eucharist, there was nothing but material Bread;
That the Sacraments of Baptism, Confirmation, Confession, Matrimony, and
Extreme Unction, were neither necessary, nor profitable; That Priests had no
more Power than Laymen; That Pilgrimages were not meritorious, and that the
Money and Labor spent in them, were spent in vain; That Images ought not to be
worshipped, and that they were only Stocks and Stones; That Prayers ought not
to be made to Saints, but only to God; That there was no virtue in Holy Water,
or Holy-bread. Those who abjured, did swear to discover all that held those
Errors, or were suspected of them; and they were enjoined to carry a Faggot in
Procession, and to wear on their Clothes the Representation of one in Flames,
as a public Confession that they had deserved to be burnt. There were also
four in London that abjured almost the same Opinions; and Fox says, that six
were burnt in Smithfield, who might be perhaps those whom Warham had condemned;
for there is no mention of any that were condemned in the Registers of London.
By all this it will appear, that many in this Nation, were prepared to receive
those Doctrines, which were afterward preached by the Reformers, even before
Luther began first to oppose Indulgences.

The Rise and Progress of his Doctrine are well known; The Progress of Luthet's
Doctrine.
the Scandalous extolling of Indulgences gave the first occasion to all that
Contradiction, that followed between him and his followers, and the Church of
Rome; in which, if the Corruptions and Cruelties of the Clergy had not been so
visible and scandalous, so small a matter could not have produced such a
Revolution; but any Crisis will put ill humors in Fermentation.

The Bishops were grossly ignorant; they seldom resided in their Diocesses,
except it had been to riot it at high Festivals; and all the Effect their
Residence could have, was to corrupt others, by their ill Example. They
followed the Courts of Princes, and aspired to the greatest Offices. The Abbots
and Monks were wholly given up to Luxury and Idleness; and the unmarried State,
both of the Seculars, and Regulars, gave infinite Scandal to the World; for it
appeared, that the restraining them from having Wives of their own, made them
conclude that they had a right to all other Men's. The Inferior Clergy were no
better; and not having places of retreat to conceal their vices in, as the
Monks had, they became more public. In sum, all Ranks of Churchmen were so
universally despised, and hated, that the World was very apt to be possessed
with prejudice against their Doctrines, for the sake of the Men, whose Interest
it was to support them: and the Worship of God was so defiled with much gross
Superstition, that without great enquiries, all Men were easily convinced, that
the Church stood in great need of a Reformation. This was much increased when
the Books of the Fathers began to be read, in which the difference between the
former and latter Ages of the Church, did very evidently appear. They found
that a blind Superstition came first in the room of true Piety; and when by its
means the Wealth and Interest of the Clergy was highly advanced; the Popes had
upon that, established their Tyranny; under which, not only the meaner People,
but even the crowned Heads, had long groaned. All these things concurred to
make way for the Advancement of the Reformation: And so the Books of the
Germans being brought into England, and Translated, many were prevailed on by
them. Upon this, a hot Persecution, which is always the Foundation on which a
vicious Clergy set up their Rest, was vigorously set on foot, to such a Degree,
that six Men and Women were burnt in Coventry in Passion-week, only for
teaching their Children, the Creed, the Lord's Prayer, and the ten Commandments
in English. Great Numbers were every where brought into the Bishop's Courts; of
whom some were burnt, but the greater part abjured.

The King laid hold on this Occasion, to become the Church's Champion, and
wrote against Luther, as was formerly told. His Book besides the Title of
Defender of the Faith, drew upon him all that Flattery could invent to extol
it; yet Luther not daunted with such an Antagonist, but rather proud of it,
answered it, and treated him as much below the Respect that was due to a King,
as his Flatterers had raised him above it. Tindal's Translation of the New
Testament with some Notes added to it, drew a severe Condemnation from the
Clergy, there being nothing in which they were more concerned, then to keep the
People unacquainted with that Book. Sir Thomas More seconded the King, and
employed his Pen in the Service of the Clergy, but mixed too much Gall with his
Ink. The Cardinal's Behavior in this matter was unaccountable; for he not only
acted nothing against the new Preachers, but when some Bishops moved for a
Visitation of the Universities, upon a report of the spreading of Heresy in
them, he stopped it; yet afterward he called a Meeting of several Bishops,
Abbots and Divines, before whom, two Preachers, Bilney and Arthur, were
brought, and Articles of Heresy being objected to them, and proved by
Witnesses, they for a while seemed resolved to seal their Doctrines with their
Blood; but what through Fear, what through Persuasion, they were prevailed on
(first Arthur, and Bilney five days after) to abjure; but tho Bilney was a
Relapse, yet the Cardinal was gentle to him, and Tonstall Bishop of London
enjoined him Penance, and discharged him. So much may suffice to show the
condition of Affairs in England both in Church and State, when the Process of
the King's Divorce was first set on foot.

Henry the seventh entered into a firm Alliance with Ferdinand of Spain, The
King's Marriage.
and agreed a Match between his Son Prince Arthur, and Katherine the Infanta of
Spain. She came into England and was married in November; April after, the
Prince died. They were not only bedded in Ceremony the night of the Marriage,
but continued still to lodge together, and the Prince by some indecent Rallery
gave Occasion to believe, that the Marriage was consummated, which was so
little doubted, that some imputed his too early end to his excess in it. After
his Death his younger Brother was not created Prince of Wales, till ten Months
had past, it being then apparent that the Princess was not with Child by the
late Prince; Women were also set about her to wait on her with the Precaution
that is necessary in such a Case; so that it was generally believed that she
was no Virgin when the Prince died.

Henry the seventh being unwilling to restore so great a Portion as two hundred
thousand Ducats, proposed a second Match for her with his Younger Son Henry.
Warham did then object against the Lawfulness of it; yet Fox Bishop of
Winchester, was for it, and the Opinion of the Pope's Authority was then so
well established, that it was thought a Dispensation from Rome was sufficient
to remove all Objections; December. 1503.
so one was obtained, grounded upon a desire of the two young Persons to marry
together for preserving Peace between the Crowns of England and Spain, by which
the Pope dispensed with it notwithstanding the Princess's Marriage to Prince
Arthur, which was (as is said in the Bull) perhaps consummated.

The Pope was then in War with Lewis the twelfth of France, and so would refuse
nothing to the King of England, being perhaps not unwilling that Princes should
contract such Marriages, by which the Legitimation of their Issued epending on
the Pope's Dispensation, they would be thereby obliged in Interest to support
that Authority:

Henry the seventh at his Death, charged him to break it off entirely, being
perhaps apprehensive of such a return of Confusion upon a controverted
Succession to the Crown, as had been during the Wars of the Houses of York and
Lancaster, but upon his Death, Henry the Eighth being then eighteen Years of
Age, married her: She bore him two Sons, who died soon after they were born;
and a Daughter Mary, Matches proposed for his Daughter.
but after that the Queen contracted some Diseases that made her unacceptable
to the King; so all hope of any other Issue failing, several Matches were
proposed for his Daughter; the first was with the Dauphin; then she was
contracted with the Emperor; and after that, a Proposition was made for the
King of Scotland; and last of all a Treaty was made with Francis the first,
either for himself, he being then a Widower, or for his second Son the Duke of
Orleans to be determined at his Option; upon which the Bishop of Tarbe was sent
over Ambassador to conclude it; he made an Exception that the Marriage was
doubtful and the Lady not legitimate, which had been likewise made by the
Cortes of Spain, by whose Advice the Emperor broke the Contract upon that very
account, so that other Princes moving Scruples against a Marriage with his
Daughter, the Heir of so great a Crown, the King began to make some himself, or
rather to publish them, for he said afterward he had them some Years before.

Yet the Cardinal's hatred to the Emperor, was looked on as one of the secret
Springs of the King's Aversion to his Aunt, which the King vindicating him in
public, afterward did not remove: that being considered only as a Court
Contrivance.

The King seemed to lay the greatest Weight on the prohibition in the Levitical
Law of marrying the Brother's Wife, The King has some scruples concerning his
Marriage.
and he being conversant in Thomas Aquinas's Writings, found that he and the
other Schoolmen looked on those Laws as Moral, and for ever binding, and that
by Consequence the Pope's Dispensation was of no force since his Authority went
not so far as to dispense with the Laws of God. All the Bishops of England,
Fisher of Rochester only excepted, declared under their Hands and Seals, that
they judged the Marriage unlawful. The ill Consequences of Wars that might
follow upon a doubtful Title to the Crown, were also much considered, or at
least pretended. It is not probable that the engagement of the King's
Affections to any other gave the rise to all this; for so prying a Courtier as
Wolsey was, would have discovered it, and not have projected a Marriage with
Francis's Sister, if he had seen the King prepossessed: It is more probable
that the King conceiving himself upon the point of being discharged of his
former Marriage, gave a free scope to his Affections, which upon that came to
settle on Anne Bolleyn. The King had reason enough to expect a quick and
favorable dispatch of his business at Rome, where Dispensations or Divorces in
Favor of Princes used to pass, rather with regard to the Merits of the Prince
that desired them, than of the Cause it self. His Alliance seemed then
necessary to the Pope, who was at that time in Captivity. Nor could the
Emperor with any good color oppose his Suit, since he had broken his Contract
with his Daughter upon the account of the doubtfulness of the Marriage.

The Cardinal had also given him full Assurances of a good Answer from Rome;
whether upon the knowledge he had of that Court, and of the Pope's temper, or
upon any promise made him, is not certain. The Reasons gathered by the
Canonists for annulling the Bull of Dispensation, upon which the Divorce was to
follow in course, were grounded upon some false suggestions in the Bull, and
upon the Protestation which the King had made when he came to be of Age. In a
word, they were such, that a favorable Pope left to himself, would have
yielded to them without any scruple.

Anne Bolleyn was born in the year 1507, and went to France at seven years of
Age, and returned twelve years after to England. She was much admired in both
Courts, and continued to live without any Blemish till her unfortunate Fall
gave occasion to some malicious Writers to defame her in all the Parts of her
Life; She was more beautiful than graceful, and more cheerful than discreet.
She wanted none of the Charms of Wit or Person, and must have had extraordinary
Attractives; since she could so long manage such a King's Affection, in which
her being with Child soon after the Marriage, shows that in the whole course of
seven years she kept him at a due distance. Upon her coming to England, the
Lord Piercy being then a Domestic of the Cardinals, made love to her, and went
so far as to engage himself some way to marry her, and that being entertained
by her, shows she had then no aspirings to the Crown. But the Cardinal having
understood somewhat of the King's secret Intentions, did so threaten him, that
he made him, tho not without great difficulty, break off his addresses to her.

Knight, then Secretary of State, Rome to prepare the Pope in the matter; And
applies to the Pope.
and the Family of the Cassali having much of the Pope's Favor, they were
likewise employed to promote it. To Gregory Cassali did the Cardinal send a
large Dispatch, setting forth all the Reasons both in Conscience and Policy,
for obtaining a Commission to himself to judge the Affair. Great Promises were
made in the King's Name, both for public and private Services, and nothing was
forgot that was likely to work either on the Pope, or those Cardinals that had
the greatest Credit about him. Knight made application to the Pope in the
secretest manner he could, and had a very favorable Answer; for the Pope
promised frankly to dissolve the Marriage: but another Promise being exacted of
him in the Emperor's Name, not to proceed in that Affair, he was reduced to
great straits, not so much out of regard to his Promises, (for he had so
engaged himself, that it was unavoidable for him to break one) as to his
Interests; he was then at the Emperor's mercy, so he was in fear of offending
him, yet he both hated him, and was distrustful of him; and had no mind to lose
the King of England, therefore he studied to gain time, and promised that if
the King would have a little patience, he should not only have that which he
asked, but every thing that was in his power to grant.

The Cardinal Sanctorum quatuor made some Scruples concerning the Bull that was
demanded, Wolsey to try the Cause, Who was very favorable.
and judge in it, and also a Dispensation, and put them in Knights hands; but
with tears prayed him that there might be no proceedings upon them, till the
Emperor were put out of a capacity of executing his Revenge upon him, and when
ever that was done he would own this act of Justice which he did in the King's
favor. For tho the Pope on public occasions used to talk in the language of
one that pretended to be S. Peter's Successor; yet in private Treaties he
minded nothing but his own Security, and the Interests of his Family. And being
a very crafty Man, he proposed an Expedient, which if the King had followed, it
had put a quicker and easier end to the Process. He found his sending Bulls, or
a Legate to England, would become public, and draw the Emperor upon him, and
must admit of delays and be full of danger; therefore he proposed, if the King
was satisfied in his own Conscience, in which he believed no Doctor could
resolve him better than himself, then he might without more noise make Judgment
be given in England; and upon that marry another Wife, and send over to Rome
for a Confirmation; which would be the more easily granted, if the thing were
once done. This the Pope desired might be represented to the King as the Advice
of the Cardinals, and not as his own. But the King's Counselors thought this
more dangerous than the way of a Process; for if upon the King's second
Marriage, a Confirmation should be denied, then the Right Succession by it,
would be still very doubtful, so they would not venture on it.

The Pope was at this time distasted with Cardinal Wolsey; for he understood,
that during his Captivity, he had been in an Intrigue, to get himself chosen
Vicar of the Papacy, and was to have sat at Avignion, which might have
produced a new Schism. Staphileus, Dean of the Rota, being then in England, was
wrought on by the promise of a Bishopric, and a Recommendation to a Cardinals
Hat, to promote the King's Affair; and by him the Cardinal wrote to the Pope,
in a most earnest strain, for a dispatch of this business; and he desired, that
an indifferent and tractable Cardinal might be sent over, with a full
Commission to join with him, and to judge the matter; proposing to the King's
Ambassadors, Campegio as the fittest Man; when a Legate should be named, he
ordered Presents to be made him, and that they would hasten his dispatch, and
take care that the Commission should be full. But upon the Arrival of the
Couriers, that were sent from Rome, Gardener, the Cardinals Secretary, and Fox,
the Kings Almoner, the one a Canonist, and the other a Divine, were sent
thither with Letters, both from the King and Cardinal, to the Pope, and they
carried orders (that were like to be more effectual than any Arguments they
could offer) to make great Presents to the Cardinals. They carried with them
the draught of a Bull, containing all the Clauses could be invented, to make
the matter sure; one Clause was to declare the Issue of the Marriage good, as
being begotten bona fide, which was perhaps put in to make the Queen more easy,
since by that it appeared, that her Daughter should not suffer, which way
soever the matter went.

The Cardinal in his Letters to Cassali, offered to take the blame on his own
Soul, if the Pope would grant this Bull; and with an Earnestness, as hearty and
warm, as can be expressed in Words, he pressed the thing, and added, That he
perceived, that if the Pope continued Inexorable, the King would proceed
another way.

These Entreaties had such Effects, Campegio sent over Legate.
That Campegio was declared Legate, and ordered to go for England, and join in
Commission with Wolsey, for judging this matter. Campegio was Bishop of
Saliebury; and having a Son whom he intended to advance, was no doubt a
tractable Man; but to raise his price the higher, he moved many Scruples, and
seemed to enter upon this Employment, with great fear, and aversion. Wolsey who
knew his Temper, pressed him vehemently, to make all the have he could, and gave
him the Assurance of great Rewards from the King: For whatever was to be made
use of publicly for forms sake, these were the effectual Arguments that were
most likely to convince a Man of his Temper: In which Wolsey was so sincere,
that in a Letter he wrote to him, that of a good Conscience, being put among
other Motives to persuade him, in the first Draught, the Cardinal struck it
out, as knowing how little it would signify. Campegio set out from Rome, and
carried with him a Decretal Bull, for annulling the Marriage which was trusted
to him, and he was Authorized to show it to the King and Wolsey; but was
required not to give it out of his Hands to either of them. At this time,
Wolsey was taken with the sweating Sickness, which then raged in England; and
by a Complement which both the King and Ann Boleyn writ him, on the same piece
of Paper, it appears, he was then privy to the Kings Design of marrying her,
and intended to advance himself yet higher, by his merits, in procuring her the
Crown.

This Year he settled his two great Colleges; and finding both the King and
People much pleased with his converting some Monasteries to such uses, he
intended to suppress more, and to convert them to Bishoprics, and Cathedral
Churches, which the Pope was not willing to grant, the Religious Orders making
great Opposition to it; but Gardener told him, it was necessary, and must be
done; so a power for doing it, was added to the Legates Commission.

At this time, the Queen engaged the Emperor to espouse her Interests, which he
did, the more willingly, because the King was then in the Interests of France;
and to help her Business, a Breve was either found, or forged, (the last is
more probable) of the same date with the Bull, that dispensed with her
Marriage: But with stronger Clauses in it, Arthur, was perhaps Consummated; the
Breve did suppose it absolutely, without a perhaps. This was thought to
prejudice the Queen's Cause as much, as the Suspicion of the Forgery did
blemish her Agents.

In October, Campegio comes into England.
Campegio came into England; and after the first Complements were over, he
first advised the King to give over the Prosecution of his Suit; and then
counseled the Queen in the Pope's Name, to enter into a Religious Life, and
make Vows; but both were in vain; and he by affecting an Impartiality, almost
lost both sides. But he in great measure pacified the King, when he showed him
the Bull he had brought over for annulling the Marriage; yet he would not part
with it out of his hands, neither to the King, nor the Cardinal; upon which,
great Instances were made at Rome, that Campegio might be ordered to show it to
some of the King's Counselors, and to go on and end the business, otherwise
Wolsey would be ruined, and England lost: Yet all this did not prevail on the
crafty Pope, who knew it was intended once to have the Bull out of Campegio's
hands, and then the King would leave him to the Emperor's Indignation: But tho
he positively refused to grant that, yet he said, he left the Legates in
England, free to judge as they saw Cause, and promised that he would confirm
their Sentence.

The Imperialists at Rome pressed him hard, to inhibit the Legates, and to
recall the Cause that it might be heard before the Consistory. The Pope
declined this motion; and to mollify the King, he sent Campana, one of his
Bedchamber, Campana sent to deceive the King.
over to England, with Complements too high to gain much Credit: He assured the
King, that the Pope would do for him all he could, not only in Justice, and
Equity, but in the fullness of his Power: And that tho he had reason to be very
apprehensive, of the Emperor's Resentments, yet that did not divert him from
his Zeal for the King's Service; for if his resigning the Popedom would
advance it, it should not stick at that. He also was ordered to require the
Legates, to put a speedy end to the business; but his secret Instructions to
Campegio were of another strain; he charged him to burn the Bull, and to draw
out the matter by all the delays he could invent. Sir Francis Brian, and Peter
Vannes, were dispatched to Rome, with new Propositions, to try, whether, if
both the King and Queen took Religious Vows, so that their Marriage were upon
that annulled, the Pope would engage to dispense with the King's Vow, or grant
him a License for having two Wives. Wolsey also offered in the King's Name, to
settle a Pay for 2000 Men, that should be a Guard to the Pope, and to procure a
Restitution of some of his Towns, on which the Venetians had seized. But the
Pope did not care to have his Guards paid by other Princes; which he looked on
as a putting himself in their hands. He was in fear of every thing that might
bring a new Calamity upon him; and was now resolved to unite himself firmly
with the Emperor, by whose means only, he hoped to reestablish his Family at
Florence; The Pope resolved to unite with the Emperor.
and ever after this, all the use he made of the King's Earnestness in his
Divorce, was only, to draw in the Emperor to his Interests, on the better
Terms. The Emperor was also then pressing him hard, for a General Council; of
which, besides the aversion that the Court of Rome had to it, he had particular
reason to be afraid; for being a Bastard, he was threatened with Deposition as
incapable, by the Canons of the Church, to hold such a Dignity. The Pope
proposed a Journey incognito, to Spain, and desired Wolsey to go with him, for
obtaining a General Peace. But in secret, he was making up with the Emperor,
and gave his Agents Assurances, that tho the Legates gave Sentence, he would
not confirm it. So the King's Correspondents at Rome, wrote to him, to set on
the War more vigorously against the Emperor, for he could expect nothing at
Rome, unless the Emperor's Affairs declined.

The Pope went on cajoling those the King sent over, and gave new Assurances,

At this time, The Pope's Sickness.
the Pope was taken suddenly ill, and fell in a great Sickness; upon which, the
Imperialists began to prepare for a Conclave: But Farnese, and the Cardinal of
Mantua opposed them, and seemed to have Inclination for Wolsey. Whom, as his
Correspondents wrote to him, they reverenced as a Deity. Upon this he sent a
Courier to Gardener, Wolsey's aspiring.
then on his way to Rome, France, joining heartily with the King, of which he
seemed confident; there were only six Cardinals wanting, to make the Election
sure, and besides Sums of Money, and other Rewards, that were to be
distributed among them; he was to give them assurance, that the Cardinals
Preferments should be divided among them. These were the secret Methods of
attaining that Chair: And indeed it would pusle a Man of an ordinary degree of
Credulity, to think, That one chosen by such means, could be Christ's Vicar,
and the infallible Judge of Controversies. But the Pope's Recovery, put an end
to those Intrigues, which yet were soon after revived, by a long and dangerous
Relapse. Then great pains was taken, to gain many Cardinals to favor the
King's Cause; and many Precedents were found of Divorces, granted in Favor of
Princes, upon much slighter grounds. But the Imperialists were so strong at
Rome, that they could not hope to prevail, if the Emperor was not first
gained; so there was a secret Negotiation set on foot with him, but it had no
other Effect, save that it gave great Jealousy, both to the Pope, and the King
of France. Another dispatch was sent to Rome, to procure a Commission, with
fuller powers in it to the Legates, and a Promise under the Pope's hand to
confirm their Sentence; the latter was granted, The Pope promised to confirm
any Sentence the Legates should give.
but the former was refused, for the Pope was resolved to go no further in that
Matter, tho Wolsey wrote to Rome, that if any Justice were denied the King, not
only England, but France likewise would withdraw their Obedience from the
Apostolic See; because by that it would be inferred, that the Emperor had
such Influence at Rome, as to oblige the Pope to be partial or favorable as he
pleased. At this time the Cardinal was cheapning his Bulls for Winchester,
which were rated at 15000 Ducats, but since it was a Translation from Duresm,
so that a new Composition would come in for that Vacancy, he refused to pay
above a third of what was demanded.

The Emperor's Ambassador made a Protestation at Rome in the Queen's Name
against the Legates as partial in the King's Favor, which the Pope received.
Gardener, that was a Man of great Craft, and could penetrate well into Secrets,
wrote to the King, assuring him, that he might expect nothing more from the
Pope, that he could be brought to do nothing with Vigor: This Gardener desired
might not be shown to the Cardinal; for he was now setting up for himself, and
had a private Correspondence with Anne Boleyn, who in one of her Letters to him
as a token of special Favor, sent him some Cramp Rings that the King had
Blessed, of which the Office is extant; and Gardener in one of his Letters
says, They were much esteemed for the Virtue that was believed to be in them.
In the Promise which the Pope signed to confirm the Sentence that should be
given by the Legates, some Clauses were put, by which he could easily break
loose from it; so he endeavored to get another in fuller terms, by this
Artifice: He told the Pope, that the Courier had met with an Accident in
passing a River, by which the Promise was so spoiled with Water, that it could
not be made use of. But the Pope instead of being catched with this, to give a
new one, seemed glad that it was spoiled, and positively refused to renew it.
And a long and earnest Letter which the Legates wrote to the Pope, pressing him
to end the matter roundly by a Decretal Bull, assuring him it was only scruple
of Conscience that wrought on the King, and no desire of a new Wife, and that
the whole Nation was much offended with the delays of this Matter, in which
they were all so much concerned, wrought nothing on him; for he considered that
as done by them only in compliance with the King, who thought he had entirely
gained Campegio, and the scandals of his Life were so public, that the motives
of Interest were likely to prevail on him more than any other: but by all the
Arts that were used, they were not able to overreach the Pope, who whatever he
might be in his Decisions, seemed infallible in his Sagacity and Jealousy. The
Queen's Agents pressed hard for an Avocation, but the Pope was unwilling to
grant that, till he had finished his Treaty in all other points with the
Emperor, and he began to complain much of the cold Proceedings of the
Confederates, and that they exposed him so much not only to the Emperor's
Mercy, but to the scorn of the Florentines: by this it was visible, he was
seeking a Color for casting himself into the Emperor's Arms: great Objections
were made to the Motion for an Avocation, it was contrary to the King's
Prerogative to be cited to Rome, and it was said he would seek Justice of the
Clergy of Engl. if the Pope denied it. It was also contrary to the Promise
under the Popes hand, and his Faith often given by word of mouth, chiefly of
late by Campana, to recall the Legat's Commission: but verbal Promises did not
bind the Pope much, they vanished into Air; and Campana swore that he had not
made any, and for the written Promise, there was a Clause put in it, by which
he could escape, so that he was at liberty from all Engagements but those he
had privately given in discourse, and to these he was no Slave.

The Legates began the Process in England, after the necessary Preliminaries:
the Queen appeared, and protested against them as imcompetent Judges: The
Process begun in England.
endeavors were used to terrify her into some compliance; it was given out
that some had intended to kill the King or the Cardinal, and that she had some
hand in it, that she carried very disobligingly to the King, and used many
indecent Arts to be popular; that the King was in danger of his Life by her
means, and so could no more keep her company neither in Bed nor at Board; but
she was a Woman of so resolute a mind, that no Threatenings could daunt her.
When both the King and She were together in the Court, the Queen instead of
answering to the Legates, kneeled down before the King, and spoke in a manner
that raised Compassion in all that were present; she said, She had been his
Wife these twenty Years, had born him several Children, and had always studied
to please him, therefore she desired to know wherein she had at any time
offended him. As for their Marriage it was made by both their Parents, who were
esteemed wise Princes, and had no doubt good Counselors when their Match was
agreed on; but at present she neither had indifferent Judges, nor could she
expect that her Lawyers being his Subjects durst speak freely for her, and
therefore she could not expect Justice there; so she went out of the Court, and
would never return to it any more. Upon this the King gave her a great
Character for her extraordinary Qualities, and protested, he was acted by no
other Principle, then that of Conscience. He added, that Wolsey did not set him
on to this Suit, but had opposed it long: that he first moved the matter in
Confession to the Bishop of Lincoln, and had desired the Archbishop of
Canterbury to procure him the Resolution of the Bishops of England, in his
Case; and that they had all under their hands declared, that his Marriage was
unlawful. The Bishop of Rochester denied he had signed it; but Warham
pretended, he gave him leave to make another write his Name to it. Fisher
denied this, and it was no way probable.

The Legates went on according to the forms of Law, The Queen appeals to the
Pope.
tho the Queen appealed from them to the Pope, and excepted both to the Place,
to the Judges, and her Lawyers: Yet they pronounced her Contumax, and went on
to Examine Witnesses; chiefly, to that particular of the Consummation of her
Marriage with Prince Arthur. But now since the Process was thus going on, the
Emperors Agents pressed the Pope vehemently for an Avocation; and all possible
endeavors were used by the King's Agents to hinder it; they spared nothing
that would work on the Pope, either in the way of persuasion, or threatening: It
was told him, that there was a Treaty set on foot, between the King, and the
Lutheran Princes of Germany; and that upon the Pope's declaring himself so
partial, as to grant the Avocation, he would certainly imbark in the same
Interrests with them. But the Pope thought the King was so far engaged in
Honor in the Points of Religion, that he would not be prevailed with to unite
with Luther's Followers: So he did not imagine, that the Effects of his
granting the Avocation, would be so dismal, as the Cardinal's creatures
represented them: He thought it would probably ruin him, which might make his
Agents use such Threatenings, and he did not much consider that, for he hated
him in his heart. So in Conclusion, after the Emperor had engaged to him, to
restore his Family to the Government of Florence, he resolved to publish his
Treaty with him: But that the granting the Avocation, might not look like (what
indeed it was) a secret Article, he resolved to begin with that; and with great
signs of sorrow, he told the English Ambassadors, that he was forced to it;
both because all the Lawyers told him, it could not be denied, and that he
could not resist the Emperors Forces, which surrounded him on all hands. Their
endeavors to gain a little time by delays, were as fruitless as their other
Arts had been, for on the 15th of July, The Pope grants an Avocation.
the Pope signed it, and on the 19th, he sent it by an express Messenger to
England.

The Legates, Campegio in particular, drew out the matter, by all the delays
they could contrive, and gained much time. At last, it being brought to that,
that Sentence was to be pronounced, Campegio, instead of doing it, adjourned
the Court till October, and said, that they being a part of the Consistory,
must observe their times of Vacation. This gave the King and all his Court
great offense, when they saw what was like to be the Issue of a Process; on
which the King was so much bent; and in which he was so far engaged, both in
Honor and Interest. Campegio had nothing to lose in England, but the
Bishopric of Sailisbury, for which, the Pope or Emperor could easily
recompense him; but Wolsey was under all the Terrors, that an Insolent
Favorite is liable to, upon a change in his Fortune; None being more abject in
misfortune, than those that are lifted up with Success. When the Avocation was
brought to England, the King was willing, that the Legates should declare their
Commission void, but would not suffer the Letters Citatory to be served, for he
looked upon it as below his Dignity to be cited to appear at Rome. The King
governed himself upon this occasion, with more temper than was expected: He
dismissed Campegio civily, only his Officers searched his Coffers, when he went
beyond Sea, with design, as was thought, to see if the Decretal Bull could be
found. Wolsey was now upon the point of being disgraced, tho the King seemed to
treat him with the same Confidence he had formerly put in him; it being
ordinary for many Princes to hide their designs of disgracing their Favorites,
with higher Expressions of kindnesses than ordinary, till their Ruin breaks
out the more violently, because it is not foreseen.

At this time, Cranmer's Rise.
Dr. Cranmer, a Fellow of Jesus-Colledge in Cambridge, meeting accidentally
with Gardener, and Fox, at Waltham, and being put on the Discourse of the
King's Marriage, proposed a new Method, which was, That the King should engage
the chief Universities, and Divines of Europe, to examine the lawfulness of his
Marriage; and if they gave their Resolutions against it, then it being certain,
that the Pope's Dispensation could not derogate from the Law of God, the
Marriage must be declared null: This was new, and seemed reasonable; so they
proposed it to the King, who was much taken with it, and said, he had the Sow
by the right Ear: He saw this way was both better in it self, and would mortify
the Pope extremely; so Cranmer was sent for, and did so behave himself, that
the King conceived an high opinion, both of his Learning and Prudence, and of
his Probity and Sincerity, which took such root in the King's mind, that no
Artifices, nor Calumnies, were ever able to remove it.

But as he was thus in his Rise, Wolsey it disgraced.
so Wolsey did now decline. The Great Seal was taken from him, and given to Sir
Thomas Moor: And he was sued in a Praemunire, for having held the Legatine
Courts by a Foreign Authority, contrary the Laws of England: He confessed the
Indictment, and pleaded Ignorance, and submitted himself to the King's Mercy;
so Judgment passed on him: Then was his rich Palace (now Whitehall) and Royal
Furniture, seized on to the King's use: Yet the King received him again into
his Protection, and restored to him the Temporalities of the Sees of York and
Winchester, and above 6000 l. in Plate, and other Goods: And there appeared
still great and clear Prints in the King's mind, of that entire Confidence, to
which he had received him: of which, as his Enemies were very apprehensive, so
he himself was so much transported with the Messages he had concerning it, that
once he fell down on his knees in a Kennel before them that brought them.
Articles were put in against him, in the House of Lords; it seems, for a Bill
of Attainder, where he had but few Friends; which all insolent Favorites may
expect in their Disgrace. In the House of Commons, Cromwell, that had been his
Secretary, did so manage the matter, that it came to nothing. This failing, his
Enemies procured an order to be sent to him, to go into Yorkshire: Thither he
went in great State, with 160 Horses in his Train, and 72 Carts following him,
and there he lived some time: But the King was informed, that he was practicing
with the Pope, and the Emperor: So the Earl of Northumberland was sent to
arrest him of high Treason, and bring him up to London. On the way he sickned,
His Death.
tho the last be the truer. In Conclusion, he died at Leicester, making great
Protestations, of his constant Fidelity to the King, particularly in the matter
of his Divorce: And he wished he had served God, as faithfully as he had done
the King; for then he would not have cast him off in his gray Hairs, as the
King had done. Words that declining Favorites are apt to reflect on, but they
seldom remember them in the hight of their Fortune.

The King thought it necessary, to secure himself of the Affections, and
Confidences of his People, before he would venture on any thing that should
displease two such mighty Potentates, as the Pope, and the Emperor. A
Parliament is called.
So a Parliament was called; in it the Commons prepared several Bills, against
some of the Corruptions of the Clergy; particularly, against Plurality of
Benefices, and Non-residence: Abuses, that even Popery it self, could not but
condemn. The Clergy abhorred the Precedent of the Commons, meddling in
Ecclesiastical matters; so Fisher spoke vehemently against them, and said, all
this flowed from lack of Faith.

Upon this, the Commons complained of him to the King, for reproaching them;
the House of Peers either thought it no breach of Privilege, or were willing
to wink at it, for they did not interpose. Fisher was hated by the Court, for
adhering so firmly to the Queen's Interests;

The Bills were much opposed by the Clergy, but in the end they were passed,
The Kings Debts are discharged
and had the Royal Assent. In this long Interval of Parliament, the King had
borrowed great Sums of Money; so the Parliament, both to discourage that way of
supplying Kings for the Future; and for ruining the Cardinal's Creatures, who
had been most forward to lend, as having the greatest Advantages from the
Government, did by an Act discharge the King of all those Debts. The King
granted a general Pardon, with an exception of such as had incurred the pains
of Praemunire, by acknowledging a Foreign Jurisdiction, with design to terrify
the Pope, and keep the Clergy under the lash. The King found it necessary, to
make all sure at home, for now were the Pope and Emperor, linkt in the firmest
Friendship possible; The Pope's Nephew was made Duke of Florence, and married
the Emperor's Natural Daughter. A Peace was also made between Francis and the
Emperor; and the King found it not so easy, to make him break with the Pope,
upon his account, as he had expected. The Emperor went into Italy, and was
crowned by the Pope; who when the Emperor was kneeling down to kiss his Foot,
humbled himself so far as to draw it in, and kiss his Cheek.

But now the King intending to proceed in the Method proposed by Cranmer, The
Universities declare against the King's Marriage.
sent to Oxford, and Cambridg, to procure their Conclusions. At Oxford, it was
referred by the major part of the Convocation, to thirty three Doctors and
Batchelors of Divinity, whom that Faculty was to name; they were empowered to
determine the Question, and put the Seal of the University to their Conclusion:
And they gave their Opinions, that the Marriage of the Brother's Wife, was
contrary both to the Laws of God, and Nature. At Cambridg, the Convocation was
unwilling to refer it to a select number; yet it was after some days Practice,
obtained, but with great difficulty, that it should be referred to twenty nine;
of which number, two thirds agreeing, they were empowered to put the Seal of
the University to their Determination: These agreed in Opinion, with those of
Oxford. The jealousy that went of Dr. Cranmer's favoring Lutheranism, made,
that the fierce Popish Party, opposed every thing in which he was so far
engaged. They were also afraid of Ann Bolleyn's Advancement, who was believed
tinctured with those Opinions. Crook, a learned Man in the Greek Tongue, was
employed in Italy, to procure the Resolution of Divines there; in which, he was
so successful, that besides the great discoveries he made in searching the
Manuscripts of the Greek Fathers, concerning their Opinions in this point, he
engaged several Persons to write for the King's Cause; and also got the Jews to
give their Opinions of the Laws in Leviticus, that they were Moral and
Obligatory: Yet when a Brother died without Issue, his Brother might marry his
Widow within Judea, for preserving their Families, and Succession; but they
thought that might not be done out of Judea. The State of Venice would not
declare themselves, but said they would be Neutrals; and it was not easy to
persuade the Divines of the Republic, to give their Opinions, till a Brief was
obtained of the Pope, permitting all Divines, and Canonists, to deliver their
Opinions, according to their Consciences; which was not granted but with great
difficulty. Crook was not in a condition to corrupt any, for he complained in
all his Letters, of the great want he was in: And he was in such ill terms with
John Cassali, the King's Ambassador at Venice, that he complained much of him
to the King, and was in fear of being poisoned by him. The Pope abhorred this
way of proceeding, though he could not decently oppose it; but he said in great
scorn, that no Friar should set Limits to his Power. Crook was ordered to give
no Money, nor make Promises to any, till they had freely delivered their
Opinion; which as he writ, he had so carefully observed, that he offered to
forfeit his Head, if the contrary were found true. Fifteen, or Twenty Crowns,
was all the reward he gave, even to those that wrote for the King's Cause; and a
few Crowns he gave to some of those that subscribed: But the Emperor rewarded
those that wrote against the Divorce, with good Benesices; so little reason
there was to ascribe the Subscriptions he procured to Corruption; the contrary
of which, appears by his Original Accounts, yet extant. Besides, many Divines,
and Canonists; not only whole Houses of Religious Orders, but even the
University of Bononia, tho the Pope's Town, declared, that the Laws in
Leviticus, about the degrees of Marriage, were parts of the Law of Nature; and
that the Pope could not dispense with them. The University of Padua,
determined; the same as also that of Ferrara. In all, Crook sent over to
England, an hundred several Books, and Papers, with many Subscriptions; all
condemning the King's Marriage, as unlawful in it self. The Sorbon declares
against the Marriage.
At Paris, the Sorbon made their Determination, with great Solemnity; after a
Mass of the Holy Ghost, all the Doctors took an Oath, to study the Question,
and to give their Judgment according to their Consciences; and after three
Weeks study, the greater part agreed in this, That the King's Marriage was
unlawful, and that the Pope could not dispense with it. At Orleans, Angiers,
and Toulouse, they determined to the same purpose. Erasmus had a mind to live
in quiet, and so he would not give his Opinion, nor offend either party.
Grineus was implored to try what Bucer, Zuinglius, and Oecolampadius thought of
the Marriage. Bucer's Opinion was, The Opinion of the Reformed Divines, about
it.
that the Laws in Leviticus did not bind, and were not moral: Because God, not
only dispensed, but commanded them to marry their Brother's Wife, when he died
without Issue. Zuinglius, and Oecolampadius, were of another mind, and thought
these Laws were moral: But were of Opinion, that the Issue by a Marriage, de
facto, grounded upon a received Mistake, ought not to be Illegitimated.

Calvin thought the Marriage was null, and they all agreed, that the Pope's
Dispensation was of no force. Osiander was employed to engage the Lutheran
Divines, but they were afraid of giving the Emperor new grounds of
displeasure. Melanctthon thought the Law in Leviticus was dispensable, and that
the Marriage might be lawful; and that in those matters, States and Princes
might make what Laws they pleased; And though the Divines of Leipsick, after
much disputing about it, did agree, that these Laws were moral, yet they could
never be brought to justify the Divorce, with the subsequent Marriage that
followed upon it, even after it was done: and that the King appeared very
inclinable to receive their Doctrine; So steadily did they follow their
Consciences, even against their Interests: But the Pope was more compliant, for
he offered to Cassali, to grant the King a Dispensation for having another
Wife, with which the Imperialists seemed not disatisfied.

The King's Cause being thus fortified, Many of the Nobility write to the Pope.
by so many Resolutions in his Favors, he made many members of Parliament in a
Prorogation time, sign a Letter to the Pope, complaining, that notwithstanding
the great merits of the King, the Justice of his Cause, and the Importance of
it to the safety of the Kingdom; yet the Pope made still new Delays; they
therefore pressed him to dispatch it speedily, otherwise they would be forced
to see for other Remedies, tho they were not willing to drive things to
Extremities, till it was unavoidable: The Letter was signed by the Cardinal,
the Archbishop of Canterbury, four other Bishops, 22 Abbots, 42 Peers, and 11
Commoners. To this the Pope wrote an answer: The Pope's Answer.
He took notice of the Vehemence of their Style: He freed himself from the
Imputations of Ingratitude, and Injustice: He acknowledged the King's great
Merits; and said, he had done all he could in his Favor: He had granted a
Commission, but could not refuse to receive the Queen's Appeal; all the
Cardinals with one consent judged, that an Avocation was necessary. Since that
time, the delays lay not at his door, but at the Kings; that he was ready to
proceed, and would bring it to as speedy an Issue, as the Importance of it
would admit of; and for their Threatenings, they were neither agreeable to their
Wisdom, nor their Religion.

Things being now in such a Posture, November
the King set out a Proclamation; against any that should purchase, bring over,
or publish any Bull from Rome, contrary to his Authority: and after that he
made an Abstract of all the Reasons and Authorities of Fathers, or modern
Writers, against his Marriage to be published, both in Latin and English.

The main stress was laid on the Laws in Leviticus, The Arguments for the
Divorce.
of the forbidden Degrees of Marriage; among which, this was one, not to marry
the Brother's Wife. These Marriages are called Abominations, that defile the
Land; and for which, the Canaanites were cast out of it. The Exposition of
Scripture, was to be taken from the Tradition of the Church; and by the
Universal Consent of all Doctors, those Laws had been still looked on as Moral,
and ever binding to Christians, as well as Jews: Therefore, Gregory the Great,
advised Austin the Monk, upon the Conversion of the English; among whom, the
Marriages of the Brother's Wife were usual, to dissolve them, looking on them
as grievous Sins: Many other Popes, as Calixtus, Zacharias, and Innocent the
Third, had given their Judgments, for the perpetual Obligation of those Laws:
They had been also condemned by the Councils of Neocesarea, Agde, and the
second of Toledo. Among Wickliff's condemned Opinions, this was one, that the
Prohibitions of marrying in such degrees, were not founded on the Law of God:
For which he was condemned in some English Councils, and these were confirmed
by the General Council at Constance. Among the Greek Fathers, both Origin,
Basil, Chrysostom, and Hesychius; and among the Latins, Tertullian, Ambrose,
Jerome, and St. Austine, do formerly deliver this, as the belief of the Church
in their time, that those Laws were Moral, and still in force: Anselm, Hugo de
sancto Victore, Hildebert, and Ivo, argue very fully to the same purpose, the
last particularly, writing concerning the King of France, who had married his
Brothers Wife, says, it was inconsistent with the Law of God, with which none
can dispense; and that he could not be admitted to the Communion of the Church,
till he put her away. Aquinas, and all the Schoolmen, follow these
Authorities, and in their way of reasoning, they argue fully for this Opinion;
and all that writ against Wickliff, did also assert the Authority of those
Prohibitions; in particular, Waldensis, whose Books were approved by Pope
Martin the Fifth. All the Canonists did also agree with them, as Johannes
Andreas, Panormitan, and Ostiensis; so that Tradition being the only sure
Expounder of the Scripture, the Case seemed clear. They also proved, that a
Consent without Consummation, made the Marriage complete, which being a
Sacrament, that which followed after in the Right of Marriage, was not
necessary to make it complete, as a Priest saying Mass consummates his Orders,
which yet were complete without it. Many Testimonies were brought to confirm
this; from which it was inferred that the Queen's being married to Prince
Arthur, tho nothing had followed upon it, made her incapable of a lawful
Marriage with the King. And yet they showed what violent Presumptions there
were of Consummation, which was all that in such Cases was sought for, and this
was expressed both in the Bull and Breve, tho but dubiously in the one, yet
very positively in the other. After that they examined the Validity of the
Pope's Dispensation. It was a received Maxim, that tho the Pope had Authority
to dispense with the Laws of the Church, yet he could not dispense with the
Laws of God, which were not subject to him: And it had been judged in the Rota
at Rome, when a Dispensation was asked for a King to marry his Wives Sister,
that it could not be granted; and when Precedents were alleged for it, it was
answered, that the Church was to be governed by Laws, and not by Examples, and
if any Pope had granted such Dispensation, it was either out of Ignorance or
Corruption. This was not only the Opinion of the Schoolmen, but of the
Canonists, tho they are much set on raising the Pope's Power, as high as is
possible: And therefore Alexander the third, refused to grant a Dispensation in
a like case, tho the Parent had sworn to make his Son marry his Brother's
Widow; others went further, and said, The Pope could not dispense with the Laws
of the Church, which several ancient Popes had declared against, and it was
said, that the fullness of Power, with which the Pope was vested, did only
extend to the pastoral Care, and was not for Destruction, but for Edification;
and that as St. Paul opposed St. Peter to his Face, so had mnay Bishops
withstood Popes, when they proceeded against the Canons of the Church. So both
Laurence and Dunstan in England, had proceeded to Censures; notwithstanding the
Pope's Authority interposed to the contrary; and no Authority being able to
make what was a Sin in it self become lawful; every Man that found himself
engaged in a sinful course of Life, ought to forsake it; and therefore the King
ought to withdraw from the Queen, and the Bishops of England in case of refusal
ought to proceed to Censures. Upon the whole matter, Tradition was that upon
which all the Writers of Controversy, particularly now in the Contests with the
Lutherans, founded the Doctrine of the Church, as being the only infallible
Exposition of the doubtful parts of Scripture; and that being so clear in this
matter, there seemed to be no room for any further Debate.

On the other hand, Arguments against it.
Cajetan was the first Writer, that against the stream of former Ages thought
that the Laws of Leviticus, were only Judiciary Precepts, binding the Jews, and
were not moral: his Reasons were, that Adam's Children must have married in the
Degrees there forbidden. Jacob married two Sisters; and Judah, according to
custom, gave his two Sons, and promised a third to the same Woman. Moses also
appointed the Brother to marry the Brother's Wife when he died without Issue.
But a Moral Law is for ever, and in all Cases binding; and it was also said,
that the Pope's power reached even to the Laws of God, for he dispensed with
Oaths and Vows; and as he had the Power of determining Controversies, so he
only could declare what Laws were moral and indispensable, and what were not;
nor could any Bishops pretend to judge concerning the extent of his Power, or
the validity of his Bulls.

To all this, those that writ for the King, answered, That it was strange to
see Men who pretended such Zeal against Heretics, follow their Method, which
was to set up private reasonings from some Texts of Scripture, in opposition to
the received Tradition of the Church, which was the bottom in which all good
Catholics thought themselves safe; and if Cajetan wrote in this manner against
the received Doctrine of the Church in one Particular, why might not Luther take
the same liberty in other Points? They also made distinction in moral Laws,
between those that were so from the nature of the thing which was
indispensable, and could in no Case be lawful; and to this sort, no Degrees,
but those of Parents and Children, could be reduced; other Moral Laws were only
grounded upon public Inconveniences, and Dishonesty, such as the other
Degrees were; for the Familiarities that Persons so nearly related live in, are
such, that unless a Terror were struck in them, by a perpetual Law against
such mixtures, Families would be much defiled: But in such Laws, tho God may
grant a Dispensation in some particular Cases, yet an Inferior Authority
cannot pretend to it: and some Dispensations granted in the latter Ages, ought
not to be set up to balance the Decisions of so many Popes, and Councils
against them, and the Doctrine taught by so many Fathers and Doctors in former
times.

Both sides having thus brought forth the strength of their Cause; it did
evidently appear, That according to the Authority given to Tradition in the
Church of Rome, the King had clearly the Right on his side, and that the Pope's
Party did write with little sincerity in this matter, being guilty of that
manner of arguing from Texts of Scriptures, for which they had so loudly
charged the Lutherans.

The Queen continued firm to her Resolution, of leaving the matter in the
Pope's Hands, and therefore would hearken to no Propositions that were made to
her, for referring the matter to the Arbitration of some chosen on both sides.

A Session of Parliament followed in January, A Session of Parliament.
be first read in the House of Lords, and then they were carried down by Sir
Thomas More, and 12 Lords, both of the Spirituality, and Temporality, to the
Commons. There were twelve Seals of Universities showed, and their Decisions
were read, first in Latin, and then Translated into English. There were also an
hundred Books showed, written on the same Argument: Upon the showing these, the
Chancellor desired them to report in their Countries, that they now clearly
saw, that the King had not attempted this matter of his mere will and pleasure,
but for the discharge of his Conscience, and the security of the Succession of
the Crown. This was also brought into the Convocation, who declared themselves
satisfied, concerning the unlawfulness of the Marriage: but the Circumstances
they were then in, made that their Declaration was not much considered; for
they were then under the lash. All the Clergy of England were sued, as in the
case of a Praemunire, for having acknowledged a Foreign Jurisdiction, and taken
out Bulls, and had Suits in the Legatine Court.

The Kings of England did claim such a Power in Ecclesiastical matters, The
Laws of England against Bulls from Rome.
as the Roman Emperors had exercised before the fall of that Empire: Anciently
they had by their Authority divided Bishoprics, granted the Investitures, and
made Laws, both relating to Ecclesiastical Causes and Persons. When the Popes
began to extend their Power, beyond the Limits assigned them by the Canons,
they met with great opposition in England, both in the matter of Investitures,
Appeals, Legates, and the other Branches of their Usurpations; but they managed
all the Advantages they found, either from the Weakness, or ill Circumstances
of Princes, so steadily, that in Conclusion, they subdued the World: And if
they had not by their cruel Exactions, so oppressed the Clergy, that they were
driven to seek Shelter under the Covert of the Temporal Authority, the World
was then so over-mastered by Superstition and Credulity, that not only the
whole Spiritual Power, but even the Temporal Power of Princes, was likely to
have fallen into the Pope's hands: But the discontented Clergy supported the
Secular Power, as much as they had before advanced the Papal Tyranny. Boniface
the 8th, had raised his Pretentions to that impudent pitch, that he declared,
all Power, both Ecclesiastical, and Civil, was derived from him, and
established that, as an Article of Faith, necessary to Salvation; and he, and
his Successors, took upon them, to dispose of all Ecclesiastical Benefices, by
their Bulls and Provisions. Upon which, Laws were made in England, restraining
those Invasions on the Crown; since those Endowments were made for informing
the People of the Law of God, and for Hospitality, and Acts of Charity, which
were defeated, 25. Ed. 1
as well as the Crown was disinherited by the Provisions which the Popes
granted. Therefore they condemned them for the future, but no Punishment being
declared for the Transgressors of that Fact, the Courtiers at Rome were not
frighted at so general a Law; so these Abuses were still continued: But in
Edward the Third's time, 25. Ed. 3
a more severe Law was made, by which, all that transgressed were to be
imprisoned, to be fined at pleasure, and to forfeit all their Benefices. By an
other Act, they were put out of the King's Protection. Several other
Confirmations of this were made, both in that Reign, and under Richard the
Second; and the former Punishments were extended, not only to the Provisors
themselves, but to all that were employed by them, or took Farms of them: and
because Licenses might be granted by the King for Aliens, to hold Benefices in
England, he did bind himself to grant none: Others took both Presentations in
England, and obtained Provisions from Rome, which was likewise condemned. The
Right of Prefentations was tried, only in the King's Courts; but the Popes had
a mind to take the Cognizance of that to their own Courts; upon which, the
Parliament considering the great Prejudice the Nation was like to suffer, and
the Subjection that the Crown would fall under, resolved to provide effectual
Remedies; so all the Commons declared, they would live and die with the King,
16. Ric. 2.
and desired him to examine all the Lords, whether they would uphold the
Regality of the Crown. The Temporal Lords declared, they would do it: But the
Spiritual Lords made some difficulty; yet in Conclusion, they also promised,
they would adhere to the Crown: So a Law passed, that if any purchased,
Translations, Excommunications, or Bulls, from Rome, that were contrary to the
King, or his Crown, they, and all that brought them over, or that received, or
executed them, were declared to be out of the King's Protection, and that their
Goods and Chattels should be forfeited to the King, and their Persons
imprisoned. And because the Proceedings upon this, were by a Writ, called, from
the most material Words of it, Praemunire facias; this Statute carried the name
of the Statute of Praemunire. There was also a Law passed in Henry the Fourth's
Reign, against some Bulls, which the Cistertians had procured, and against the
high Rates set on Bulls in the Apostolic Chamber; and whereas the King had
been prevailed with, to give Licenses for some Bulls, by which the Provisors
put the Incumbents out of their Benefices, these were all declared to be of no
force, when done in prejudice of the Subjects Rights. The Invasions that both
the Popes and Kings made upon Elections, were by another Law condemned, and the
Liberty of Elections was again set up. But those Kings being more concerned to
preserve their own Prerogative, than the Rights of their People, were often
prevailed with, to grant Pardons, and Licenses, to those who obtained
Provisions at Rome; so these were all again condemned in Henry the Fifth's time.

In all this time, 4. Hen. 5.
the weakness of the Papacy, gave Princes some Advantages, which they had not
in former Ages; for a great while the Popes sat at Avignion, where they were
much eclipsed of their former Greatness: After that a Schism followed between
the Popes that sat at Rome, and those that still sat at Avignion; and the
Princes of Christendom, being then at liberty, to choose which of those they
would acknowledge; the Popes durst not thunder against those Laws, as they had
done in former times, upon much less Provocation. And indeed all the use that
the Kings made of them, was, to oblige the Provisors to come and depend on them
for their License to execute their Bulls; and the King's Authority being joined
with the Popes, it was hard for those who were oppressed to resist that double
force: Nor was there any vigorous Execution made of those Laws, otherwise than
to draw Money from the Provisors: For it fell out in this case, what is ordinary
on all such occasions, that Favorites make use of good Laws; by which, Power
is trusted to the Prince, for the Protection and Security of the Subjects, only
for their own ends. It was a strange weakness in the Princes of Christendom, to
take such pains as was done at Constance, for healing the Breach in the Papacy,
for while that continued, they reigned in peace; and the Clergy was less
oppressed than formerly: But that being once made up, the Popes were beginning
again to raise their old Pretentions: And Pope Martin the 5th, not being
willing to engage with so high spirited a King, as Henry the 5th was, he took
Advantage in the Minority of Henry the Sixth's Reign, 6. Hen. 6.
to propose a Repeal of those Laws, and first wrote very severely to Chichely,
then Archbishop of Canterbury, for not opposing the Statute of Provisors, that
had passed in the former Reign; nor standing up for the Rights of St. Peter: He
therefore exhorted him to imitate his Predecessor, Thomas Becket; and required
him to declare at the next Parliament, the unlawfulness of it; and that all who
obeyed it, were under Excommunication: He also required him to order the
Clergy, to preach every where against it. Yet Chichely did not proceed so
zealously as the Pope expected, and therefore he suspended his Legatine Power.
The Archbishop appealed upon this from the Pope, to the next General Council,
or if none met, to the Tribunal of God: But the Pope wrote also to the Clergy,
requiring them to do what in them lay, for the repeal of the Statute: And in
another Letter to the two Archbishops; in which, in spite to Chicheley, York is
first named; he annulled the Statutes made by Edward the Third, and Richard the
Second; and declared all to be excommunicated that executed them, reserving the
absolution of them to himself, unless they were at the point of death: And he
required them to publish, and affix this his Monitory Brief. The Archbishop
humbled himself to the Pope; and got the other Bishops, and the University of
Oxford, to write in his Favor to him; which they did, according to the
flattering, and vain style of that Age: In his own Letter he says, he had not
opened the Pope's Brief, and so did not know what it contained, being required
by the King to bring it to him with the Seals entire. The Pope wrote also both
to the King and Parliament, requiring them, under the pains of Excommunication,
and Damnation, to repeal those Statutes. Render unto Caesar the things that are
Caesar's, and to God the things that are Gods; And exhorted them to repeal those
Laws against the Pope's power, in granting Provisors; and with Tears laid out
the mischiefs that would follow, if the Pope should proceed to Censures. But
the Commons would not repeal those Laws; yet they were left as dead Letters
among the Records, for no care was taken to execute them. The Pope was so far
satisfied with Chichely's behavior, that he received him again to favor, and
restored to him the Legatine Power. This being hitherto mentioned by none of
our Writers, it seemed no impertinent Digression to give this account of it.

Now were those long forgotten Statutes revived, The Clergy sued in a Praemunire
to bring the Clergy into a Snare: It was designed by the terror of this, to
force them into an entire Submission; and to oblige them to redeem themselves
by the grant of a considerable Subsidy. They pretended they had erred
ignorantly; for the King by his favor to the Cardinal, seemed to consent, if
not to encourage that Authority which he then exercised: It was a public
Error, and so they ought not to be punished for it. To all this it was
answered, that the Laws which they had transgressed, were still in force, and
so no Ignorance could excuse the Violation of them. The Convocation of
Canterbury made their Submission, and in their Address to the King, he was
called the Protector, and Supreme Head of the Church of England; but some
excepting to that, it was added, in so far as it is agreeable to the Law of
Christ. This was signed by Nine Bishops, Fifty Abbots and Priors, and the
greatest part of the Lower House; and with it they offered the King a Subsidy,
to procure his Favor, of an 100000 l. and they promised for the future, not to
make nor execute, any Constitutions, without his License. The Convocation of
York did not pass this so easily; they excepted to the word Head, as agreeing
to none but Christ: Yet the King wrote them a long expostulating Letter, and
told them, with what Limitations those of Canterbury had passed that Title;
upon which they also submitted, and offered him 18840 l. which was also well
received; and so all the Clergy were again received into the King's Protection,
and pardoned. But when the King's Pardon was brought into the Parliament, the
Laity complained, that they were not included within it; for many of them were
also obnoxious on the same account, in some measure, having had Suits in the
Legatine Court; and they did apprehend, that they might be brought in trouble:
And therefore they addressed to the King, and desired to be comprehended within
it: But the King told them, his mercy was neither to be restrained, nor forced.
This put the House of Commons in great trouble; but they past the Act: And soon
after, the King sent a Pardon to all his Temporal Subjects, which was received
with great Joy; and they acknowledged, that the King had tempered his Greatness
with his Clemency, in his way of proceeding in this matter.

In this Session, one Rouse, that had poisoned a great Pot of Porridge, in the
Bishop of Rochester's Kitchen, of which two had died, and many had been brought
near Death, A Poisoner condemned of Treason.
was attainted of Treason, and condemned to be boiled to death; and that was
made the Punishment of Poisoning in time to come. By this Act the Parliament
made a Crime to be Treason that was not so before, and punished the Person
accordingly: which was founded on the Power reserved in the 25th of Edward the
3d to Parliaments, to declare in time coming what Crimes were Treason. This
severe Sentence was executed in Smithfield; Rouse accusing none as his
Accomplices, tho malicious Persons did afterward impute that Action of his to a
design of Anne Bolleyn upon Fisher's Life; but his silence under so terrible a
Condemnation, showed he could not charge others with it.

After the Sessions of Parliament, The King departs from the Queen.
new Applications were made to the Queen to persuade her to depart from her
Appeal; but she remained fixed in her Resolution, and said, she was the King's
lawful Wife, and would abide by it till the Court at Rome should declare the
contrary. Upon that the King desired her to choose any of his Houses in the
Country to live in, and resolved never to see her more.

The Clergy were now raising the Subsidy, A Tumult among the Clergy.
and the Bishops intended to make the inferior Clergy pay their share: But
upon the Bishop of London's calling some few of them together, on whom he hoped
to prevail, and make them set a good Example to the rest, all the Clergy
hearing of it, came to the Chapter House and forced their way in, tho the
Bishop's Officers did what they could by Violence to keep them out. The Bishop
made a Speech, setting forth the King's Clemency, in accepting such a Subsidy
instead of all their Benefices, which they had forfeited to him, and therefore
desired them to bear their share in it patiently. They answered that they had
not meddled with the Cardinal's Faculties, nor needed they the King's Pardon,
not having transgressed his Laws; and therefore since the Bishops and Abbots
only were in fault, it was reasonable that they only should raise the Subsidy.
Upon this the Bishop's Officers, and They came to very high Words, and it ended
in Blows: But the Bishop quieted them all he could with good Words, and
dismissed them with a Promise that none should be brought unto question for
what had been then done; yet he complained to More of it, and he put many of
them in Prison: But the thing was let fall.

This Year produced a new Breach between the Pope and the Emperor; The Pope
turns to the Interest of France.
the Pope pretended to Modeno and Regio as Fiefs of the Papacy; but the
Emperor judged against him for the Duke of Ferrara Upon this the Pope resolved
to unite himself to the Crown of France; and Francis, to gain him more
entirely, proposed a Match between his second Son Henry, and the Pope's Niece,
the famous Catherine de Medici; which as it wrought much on the Pope's
Ambition, so it was like to prove a great support to his Family. Francis also
offered to resign all his Pretentions in Italy to his Son Henry, which was like
to draw in other Princes to a League with him, who would have been much better
pleased to see a King's younger Son among them, than either the Emperor or the
King of France. The King's Matter was now in a fairer way of being adjusted;
for the Pope's Conscience being directed by his Interests, since he had now
broken with the Emperor, it was probable he would give the King content. He
saw the danger of losing England. The Interest of the Clergy was much sunk, and
they were in a great measure subjected to the Crown. Lutheranism was also
making a great Progress, and the Pope was out of any danger from the Emperor,
on whom the whole Power of the Turkish Empire was now fallen, drawn in, as was
believed, by the Practices of Francis at the Port, tho that did not well agree
with his Title of Most Christian King. The Princes of Germany took Advantage
from this, to make the Emperor consent to some further liberty in matters of
Religion, and to secure themselves; they were then also entered into a League
with Francis, for preserving the Rights of the Empire, unto which King Henry
was invited. All this raised Francis again very high; so he was the fittest
Person to mediate an Agreement between the King and the Pope, and being himself
a Lover of Pleasure, he was the more easily engaged to serve the King in the
accomplishment of his Amors.

A new Session of Parliament was held, A misunderstanding between the House of
Commons.
in which the Laity complained of the spiritual Courts, of their way of
proceeding ex Officio, and not admitting Persons accused to their Purgation.
But this was not much considered, by reason of an ill understanding that fell
in between the King and the House of Commons. There was a Custom brought in of
making such Settlements of Estates, that the Heir was not liable to Wards, and
the other Advantages to which the King or the Great Lords had otherwise a Right
by their Tenures: So a Bill for regulating that was sent down by the Lords, but
the Commons rejected it, which gave the King great Offense; upon that they
addressed to the King for a Dissolution, since they had been now obliged to a
long Attendance. The King answered them sharply, He said, they had rejected a
Bill, in which he had offered a great Abatement of that which he might claim by
Law; and therefore he would execute the Law in its utmost severity. He told
them he had Patience while his Suit was in dependence, and so they must have
likewise. For this Parliament was made up of Men very ill affected to the
Clergy, so the King kept it still in being, to terrify the Court of Rome so
much the more.

All that was remarkable that past in this Session was an Act against Annats;
An Act against Annats.
it sets forth that they were founded on no Law, they were first enacted to
defend Christendom against Infidels, and were now kept up as a Revenue to the
Papacy, and Bulls were not granted till they were compounded for: for 800000
Ducats had bin carried out of England to Rome, on that account since the
beginning of the former Reign. The King was bound by his Royal Care of his
Subjects to hinder such Oppressions; and therefore all that were provided to
great Benefices, were required not to pay First Fruits for the future, under
the pain of forfeiting all their Goods, and the profits of their Benefices; and
those that were presented to Bishoprics were appointed to be consecrated, tho
their Bulls were denied at Rome, and they were required to pay no more but 5
per Cent. of the clear Profits of their Sees. If the Pope should upon this
proceed to censures, they required all the Clergy to perform Divine Offices,
these notwithstanding. But by an extraordinary Proviso, they referred it to the
King to declare at any time between that and Easter next, whether this Act
should take place or not: and the King by his Letters Patents declared that it
should take place being provoked by the Pope.

In January the Pope, The Pope writes to the King.
upon the motion of the Imperialists wrote to the King, complaining that
notwithstanding a Suit was depending concerning his Marriage, yet he had put
away his Queen, and kept one Anne as his Wife, contrary to a Prohibition served
on him; therefore he exhorted him to live with his Queen again, and to put Anne
away. Upon this the King sent Dr. Bennet to Rome with a large Dispatch; The
King's Answer.
in it he complained that the Pope proceeded in that matter upon the Suggestion
of others, who were ignorant and rash Men: the Pope had carried himself
inconstantly and deceitfully in it, and not as became Christ's Vicar: and the
King had now for several Years expected a Remedy from him in vain. The Pope had
granted a Commission, had promised never to recall it, and had sent over a
Decretal Bull defining the Cause. Either these were unjustly granted, or
unjustly recalled. If he had Authority to grant these things, where was the
Faith which became a Friend, much more a Pope, since he had recalled them? If
he had not Authority to grant them, he did not know how far he could consider
any thing he did. It was plain that he acted more with regard to his Interests,
than according to Conscience; and that, as the Pope had often confessed his own
Ignorance in these matters, so he was not furnished with Learned Men to advise
him, otherwise he would not maintain a Marriage which almost all the Learned
Men and Universities in England, France, and Italy, had condemned as unlawful.
He desired the Pope would excuse the Freedom he used, to which his Carriage had
forced him. He would not question his Authority, unless he were compelled to
it, and would do nothing but reduce it to its first and ancient Limits, which
was much better than to let high it run on headlong, and still do amiss. This
high Letter made the Pope resolve to proceed and end this matter, either by a
Sentence, or a Treaty. The King was cited to answer to the Queen's Appeal at
Rome in Person, or by Proxy: so Sir Edward Karme was sent thither in the new
Character of the King's Excusator, to excuse the King's Appearance, upon such
grounds as could be founded on the Canon Law, The King cited to Rome, excuses
himself.
and upon the Privileges of the Crown of England. Bonner that was a forwad and
ambitious Man, and would stick at nothing that might contribute to his
Preferment, was sent over with him. The Imperialists pressed the Pope much to
give Sentence, but all the wise Cardinals, who observed by the Proceedings of
the Parliament, that the Nation would adhere to the King, if he should be
provoked to shake off the Pope's Yoke, were very apprehensive of a Breach, and
suggested milder Counsels to the Pope; and the King's Agents assured him, that
if he gave the King content, the late Act against Annats, should not be put in
Execution.

The Cardinal of Ravenna was then considered as an Oracle for Learning in the
Consistory, Some Cardinals corrupted.
so the King's Agents resolved to gain him with great Promises; but he said,
Princes were liberal of their Promises, till their turn was served, and then
forgot them; so he resolved to make sure work; therefore he made Bennet give
him a Promise in writing of the Bishopric of Ely, or the first Bishopric that
fell till that was vacant, and he also engaged that the King should procure him
Benefices in France to the value of 6000 Ducats a Year, for the Service he
should do him in his Divorce. This was an Argument of so great Efficacy with
the Cardinal, that it absolutely turned him from being a great Enemy, to be as
great a Promoter, of the King's Cause, tho very artificially. Several other
Cardinals were also prevailed with, by the same Topics. The King's Agents put
in his Plea of Excuse in 28 Articles, and it was ordered that three of them
should be discussed at a hearing before the Consistory, till they should be all
examined: But that Court sitting once a Week, the Imperialists, after some of
them were heard, procured an Order, that the rest should be heard in a
Congregation or Committee of Cardinals, before the Pope, for greater Dispatch:
but Karn refused to obey this, and so it was referred back to the Consistory.
But against this the Imperialists protested, and refused to appear any more.
News were brought to Rome from England, that a Priest that had preached up the
Pope's Power, was cast into Prison; and that one committed by the Archbishop
for Heresy, appealed to the King as supreme Head, which was received and judged
in the King's Courts. The Pope made great Complaints upon this: but the King's
Agents said, the best way to prevent the like for the future, was to do the
King Justice. At this time a Bull was granted for suppressing some Monasteries,
and erecting new Bishoprics out of them. Chester was to be one, and the
Cardinal of Revenna was so pleased with the Revenue designed for it, Ely should
happen to fall vacant. In conclusion, the Pope seemed to favor the King's Plea
Excusatory, upon which the Imperialists made great Complaints. But this
amounted to no more, save that the King was not bound to appear in Person:
Therefore the Cardinals that were gained, advised the King to send over a Proxy
for answering to the merits of the Cause, and not to lose more time in that
Dilatory Plea; and they having declared themselves against the King in that
Plea, before the bargain had been made with them, could with the better credit
serve him in the other. So the Vacation coming on, it was resolved by the
Cardinals neither to admit nor reject the Plea. But both the Pope and the
College wrote to the King to send over a Proxy for determining the matter next
Winter. Bonner was also sent to England to assure the King, that the Pope was
now so much in the French Interest, that he might confidently refer his matter
to him; but whereas the King desired a Commission to judge (in partibus) upon
the place: it was said, that the Point to be judged, being the Pope's Authority
to dispense with the King's Marriage, that could not be referred to Legates,
but must needs be judged in the Consistory.

At this time a new Session of Parliament was called in England. The Clergy
gave in an Answer to the Complaints made of them by the Commons in the former
Sessions: A Session of Parliament.
But when the King gave it to the Speaker, he complained that one Temse, a
Member of their House, had moved for an Address to the King, that the Queen
might be again brought back to the Court; The King said, it touched his
Conscience, and was not a thing that could be determined in that House. He
wished his Marriage were good, but many Divines had declared it unlawful. He
did not make his Suit out of Lust or foolish Appetite, being then past the
Heats of Youth; he assured them, his Conscience was troubled, and desired them
to report that to the House. Many of the Lords came down to the House of
Commons, and told them, the King intended to build some Forts on the Borders of
Scotland, to secure the Nation from the Inroads of the Scots; and the Lords
approving of this, sent them to propose it to the Commons, upon which a Subsidy
was voted; but upon the breaking out of the Plague, the Parliament was
prorogued, before the Act was finished. The Oaths which the Bishops swore both
to the Pope and the King.
At that time the King sent for the Speaker of the House of Commons, and told
him he found that the Prelates were but half Subjects; for they swore at their
Consecration an Oath to the Pope, that was inconsistent with their Allegiance,
and Oath to the King. By their Oath to the Pope, they swore to be in no Council
against him, nor to disclose his Secrets; but to maintain the Papacy, and the
Regalities of S. Peter against all Men; together with the Rights and
Authorities of the Church of Rome; and that they should honorably entreat the
Legates of the Apostolic See, and observe all the Decrees, Sentences,
Provisions, and Commandments of that See; and yearly, either in Person or by
Proxy, visit the Thresholds of the Apostles. In their Oath to the King, they
renounced all Clauses in their Bulls contrary to the King's Royal Dignity, and
did swear to be faithful to him, and to live and die with him against all
others, and to keep his Counsel; acknowledging that they held their Bishoprics
only of him. By these it appeared that they could not keep both those Oaths, in
case a Breach should fall out between the King and the Pope. But the Plague
broke off the Consultations of Parliament at this time. Soon after, Sir Thomas
More seeing a Rupture with Rome coming on so fast, More quits his Office.
desired leave to lay down his Office, which was upon that conferred on Sir
Tho. Audley. He was satisfied with the King's keeping up the Laws formerly made
in Opposition to the Papal Encroachments, and so had concured in the Suit of
the Praemunire; but now the matter went further, and so he not being able to
keep pace with the Counsels, returned to a private Life, with a Greatness of
Mind equal to what the ancient Greeks or Romans had expressed on such
Occasions. Endeavors were used to fasten some Imputations on him, in the
Distribution of Justice;

An Enterveiw followed between the Kings of France and England; to which, An
Interview between the King of France, and England.
Ann Bolleyn, now Marchioness of Pembrook, was carried; In which, after the
first Ceremonies, and Magnificence was over, Francis promised Henry to second
him in his Suit: He encouraged him to proceed to a second Marriage, without
more ado; and assured him, he would stand by him in it: And told him, he
intended to restrain the payment of Annats to Rome; and would ask of the Pope a
Redress of that and other Grievances; and if it was denied, he would seek other
Remedies in a Provincial Council. An Enterview was proposed between the Pope
and Him; to which he desired the King go with him; and King the was not
unwilling to it, if he could have assurance that his Business would be finally
determined. The Pope offered to the King, to send a Legate to any indifferent
place out of England, to form the Process, reserving only the giving Sentence
to himself: And proposed to him, and all Princes, a General Truce, that so he
might call a General Council. The King answered, that such was the present
State of the Affairs of Europe, that it was not seasonable to call a General
Council; that it was contrary to his Prerogative to send a Proxy to appear at
Rome; That by the Decrees of General Councils, Engiand, than any where else:
And that by his Coronation Oath, he was bound to maintain the Dignities of his
Crown, and the Rights of his Subjects; and not to appear before any foreign
Court: So Sir Thomas Elliot was sent over with Instructions, to move, that the
cause might be judged in England: Yet if the Pope had real Intentions of giving
the King full Satisfaction, he was not to insist on that: And to make the
Cardinal of Ravenna sure, he sent him the offer of the Bishopric of Coventry
and Litchfield, Nov. 14. The King marries Ann Bolleyn.
then vacant. Soon after this, the King married Ann Bolleyn; Rowland Lee
(afterward Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield) did officiate, none being
present but the Duke of Norfolk, and her Father, her Mother, and her Brother,
and Cranmer. It was thought, that the former Marriage being null of it self,
the King might proceed to another: And perhaps, they hoped, that as the Pope
had formerly proposed this Method, so he would now approve of it. But tho the
Pope had joined himself to France, yet he was still so much in fear of the
Emperor, that he resolved not to provoke him; and so was not wrought on by any
of the Expedients which Bennet proposed, which were either to judge the Cause
in England, according to the Council of Nice; or to refer it to the Arbitration
of some, France, and the Pope: for all these, he said, tended to the Diminution
of the Papal Power. A new Citation was issued out, for the King, to answer to
the Queen's Complaints; but the King's Agents protested, that he was a
Sovereign Prince, that England was a free Church, over which the Pope had no
just Authority; and that the King could expect no Justice at Rome, where the
Empeperours Power was so great.

At this time, the Parliament met again, The Parliament condemns Appeals to
Rome.
condemning all Appeals to Rome: In it they set forth, That the Crown was
Imperial, and that the Nation was a complete Body, having full Power to do
Justice in all Cases, both Spiritual, and Temporal: And that as former Kings
had maintained the Liberties of the Kingdom against the Usurpations of the Sea
of Rome; so they found the great Inconveniences of allowing Appeals in
Matrimonial Causes; That they put them to great Charges, and accasioned many
Delays: Therefore they enacted, That thereafter those should be all judged
within the Kingdom, and no regard should be had to any Appeals to Rome, or
Censures from it: But Sentences given in England, were to have their full
Effect: and all that executed any Censures from Rome, were to incur the pains
of Praemunire. Appeals were to be from the Archdeacon to the Bishop; and from
him to the Archbishop: And in the Causes that concerned the King, the Appeal
was to be to the upper House, or Convocation.

There was now a new Archbishop of Canterbury; Cranmer made Archbishop of
Canterbury.
Warham died the former Year: He was a great Patron of Learning, a good
Canonist, and wise Statesman; but was a cruel Persecutor of Heretics, and
inclined to believe Fanatical Stories. Cranmer was then in Germany, disputing
in the King's Cause with some of the Emperor's Divines. The King resolved to
advance him to that Dignity; and sent him word of it, that so he might make
haste over: But a Promotion so far above his Thoughts, had not its common
Effects on him: He had a true and primitive Sense of so great a Charge; and
instead of aspiring to it, he was afraid of it, and he both returned very
slowly to England, and used all his Endeavors, to be excused from that
Advancement: But this declining of Preferment, being a thing, of which the
Clergy of that Age were so little guilty, discovered, That he had Maxims very
far different from most Churchmen. Bulls were sent for to Rome, in order to
his Consecration, which the Pope granted, tho it could not be very grateful to
him, to send them to one who had so publicly disputed against his Power of
dispensing; all the Composition that was paid for them, was, but 900 Ducats,
which was perhaps according to the Regulation, made in the Act against Annats.
There were 9 several Bulls sent over, one, confirming the King's Nomination; a
Second, requiring him to accept it; a Third, absolving him from Censures; a
Fourth, to the Suffragan Bishops; a Fifth, to the Dean and Chapter; a Sixth, to
the Clergy; a Seventh, to the Laity; an Eighth, to the Tenants of the Sea,
requiring all these to receive him to be their Archbishop; a Ninth, requiring
some Bishops to consecrate him; the Tenth gave him the Pall; and by the
Eleventh, the Archbishop of York was required to put it on him. The putting all
this in so many different Bulls, was a good Contrivance, for raising the Rents
of the Apostolic Chamber. On the 30 of March, Cranmer was consecrated by the
Bishops of Lincoln, Exeter, and St. Asaph. The Oath to the Pope was of hard
Digestion: So he made a Protestation before he took it, that he conceived
himself not bound up by it in any thing, that was contrary to his Duty to God,
to his King, or Country; and he repeated this when he took it; so that if this
seemed too artificial for a Man of his sincerity; yet he acted in it fairly,
The Convocation condemns the King's Marriage.
and above Board.

The Convocation had then two Questions before them; the first was, Concerning
the Lawfulness of the King's Marriage, and the Validity of the Pope's
Dispensation; the other was, of Matter of Fact, Whether P. Arthur had
consummated the Marriage, or not. For the first, the Judgments of 19
Universities were read; and after a long Debate, Stokesly, Bishop of London,
and Fisher, maintained the Debate long; the one for the Affirmitive, and the
other the Negative: At last it was carried, Nemine contradicente, (the few that
were of the other side it seems withdrawing) against the Marriage, 216 being
present. For the other, that concerned matter of Fact, it was referred to the
Canonists; and they all, except five or six, reported, That the Presumptions
were violent; and these in a matter not capable of plain proof, were always
received in Law. The small number in the Lower, and the far greater number in
the upper House of Convocation, makes it probable, that then, not only Bishops,
but all Abbots, Priors, Deans, and Archdeacons, sat in the upper House, for
they were all called Prelates, and had their Writs to sit in a General Council,
as appears by the Records of the fourth Council in the Lateran, and the Council
at Vienna, and so them might well sit in the upper House: And perhaps the two
Houses of Convocation, were taken from the Pattern of the two Houses of
Parliament, and so none might sit in the lower House, but such as were chosen
to represent the Inferior Clergy. The Books of Convocation are now lost,
having perished in the Fire of London; but the Author of Antiquitaies
Britannicae, who lived in that time, is of that great credit, that we may well
depend upon his Testimony. Cranmer gives the final Sentence.


The Convocation having thus judged in the matter, the Ceremoy of pronouncing
the Divorce judicially, was now only wanting. The new Queen began to have big a
Belly, which was a great Evidence of her living chastely before that with the
King. On Easter Eve she was declared Queen of England. And soon after, Cranmer,
with Gardener (who was made upon Wolsey's death Bishop of Winchester) and the
Bishops of London, Lincoln, Bath and Wells, with many Divines and Canonists,
went to Dunstable; Queen Katherine living then near it, at Ampthil. The King
and Queen were cited; he appeared by Proxy, but the Queen refused to take any
notice of the Court: So after three Citations, she was declared Contumax, and
all the Merits of the Cause formerly mentioned, were examined. At last, on the
23 of May, Sentence was given, declaring the Marriage to have been null from
the beginning. Among the Archbishops Titles in the beginning of the Judgment,
he is called, Legate of the Apostolic See, which perhaps was added to give it
the more force in Law. Some days after this, he gave another Judgment,
confirming the King's Marriage with Queen Ann, and on the first of June she was
Crowned Queen: This was variously censured. It was said, Censures past upon it.
that in the Intervals of a General Council, the asking the Opinions of so many
Universities, and Learned Men, was the only sure way to find out the Tradition
of the Church: And a Provincial Council had sufficient Authority to judge in
this Case: Yet many thought, the Sentence dissolving the first Marriage, should
have preceded the second: And it being contracted, before the first was Legally
annulled, there was great color given to question the Validity of it. But it
was answered, That since the first was judged null of it self, there was no
need of a Sentence Declaratory, but only for form: Yet it was thought, either
there ought to have been no Sentence past at all, or it should have been before
the second Marriage. Some objected, That Cranmer having appeared so much
against the Marriage, was no competent Judge; but it was said, that as Popes
are not bound by the Opinions they held when they were private Men; so he
having changed his Character, could not be challenged on that account, but
might give Sentence, as Judges decide Causes, in which they formerly gave
Counsel: And indeed, the Convocation had judged the Cause, he only gave
Sentence in form of Law. The World wondered at the Pope's Stiffness; but he
often confessed, he understood not those matters, only he was afraid of
provoking the Emperor; or of giving the Lutherans advantage to say, that one
Pope condemned that, with which another had dispensed. All People admired Q.
Ann's conduct, who in a course of so many Years managed a King's Spirit, that
was so violent, in such a manner, as neither to surfeit him with too many
Favors, nor to provoke him with too much Rigor; and her being so soon with
Child, gave hopes of a mumerous Issue: They that loved the Reformation, looked
for better days under her Protection; but many Priests, and Friars, both in
Sermons and Discourses, condemned the King's Proceedings. The King sent
Ambassadors to all Courts, to justify what he had done: He sent also some to
Queen Katherine, to charge her to assume no other Title, but that of Princess
Dowager; and to give her hopes of putting her Daughter next in the Succession to
the Crown, after his Issue by the present Queen, if she would submit her self
to his Will, but she would not yield; she said, she would not take that Infamy
on her self; and so resolved, that none should serve about her, that did not
treat her as Queen. All her Servants adhered so to her Interest, that no
Threatenings nor Promises, could work on them: And the stir which the King kept
in this matter, was thought below his Greatness, and seemed to be set on by a
Woman's Resentments; for since she was deprived of the Majesty of a Crown, the
Pageantry of a Title was not worth the noise that was made about it. The
Emperor seemed big with Resentments. The French King was colder then the King
expected; yet he promised to intercede with the Pope, and the Cardinals, on his
account: But he was now so entirely gained by the Pope, That he resolved not to
involve himself in the King's Quarrel, as a Party: And he also gave over the
Designs he once had of setting up a Patriarch in France; for the Pope granted
him so great a Power over his own Clergy, that he could not desire more. With
this the Emperor was not a little pleased; for this was like to separate those
two Kings, whose Conjunction had been so hurtful to him.

At Rome the Cardinals of the Imperial Faction, The proceedings at Rome upon it.
complained much of the Attempt made on the Pope's Power; since a Sentence was
given in England in a Process depending at Rome; so they pressed the Pope to
proceed to Censures. But instead of putting the matter past reconciling, there
was only Sentence given, annulling all that the Archbishop of Canterbury had
done; and the King was required under the pain of Excommunication, to put
things again in the state in which they were formerly; and this was affixed at
Dunkirk. The King sent a great Embassy to Francis, who was then setting out to
Marseilles, where the Pope was to meet him: Their Errand was to dissuade him
from the Journey, unless the Pope would promise to give the King Satisfaction:
The King of France said, he was engaged in Honor to go on; but assured them,
he would mind the King's Concerns, with as much Zeal, as if they were his own.

In September the Queen brought forth a Daughter, the renowned Queen Elizabeth;
and the King having before declared Lady Mary Princess of Wales, Sept 7. Q.
Elizabeth born.
did now the same for her: Tho since a Son might put her from it, she could not
be Heir Apparent, but only the Heir Presumptive to the Crown. At Marseilles,
the Marriage was made up between the Duke of Orleans, and the Pope's Niece; to
whom the Pope gave, besides 100000 Crowns, many Principalities, which he
pretended were either Fiefs of the Papacy, or belonged to him in the Rights of
the House of Medici. The Pope's Historian with some Triumph, boasted, that the
Marriage was Consummated that very Night; tho it was thought not credible, that
P. Arthur, that was Nine Months older than the new Duke of Orleans, afterward
Henry the Second, did Consummate his.

There was a secret Agreement made between the Pope and Francis, that if King
Henry would refer his Cause to the Consistory, excepting only to the Cardinals
of the Imperial Faction, as partial, and would in all other things return to
his Obedience to the Sea of Rome, The Pore promises to satisfy K. Henry.
then Sentence should be given in his Favors; but this to be kept secret: So
Bonner not being trusted with it and sent thither with an Appeal from the Pope
to the next General Council, made it with great boldness, and threatened the
Pope upon it, with so much Vehemence, that the Pope talked of throwing him into
a Cauldron of melted Lead, or burning him alive: And he apprehending some
danger fled away privately. But when Francis came back to Paris, he sent over
the Bishop of that City, to the King, to let him know what he had obtained of
the Pope in his Favors, and the Terms on which it was promised: This wrought
so much on the King, that he presently consented to them. And upon that, the
Bishop of Paris, tho it was now in the middle of Winter, took Journey to Rome;
being sure of the Scarlet, if he could be the Instrument of regaining England,
which was then upon the point of being lost: What these Assurances were which
the Pope gave, is not certain; but the Archbishop of York, and Tenstal of
Duresm, in a Letter which they wrote on that Occasion, say, that the Pope said
at Marseilles, That if the King would send a Proxy to Rome, he would give
Sentence for him against the Queen, for he knew his Cause was good and just.
Upon the Bishop of Paris's coming to Rome, the matter seemed agreed; for it was
promised, that upon the King's sending a Promise under his hand, to put things
in their former state; and his ordering a Proxy to appear for him, Judges
should be sent to Cambray for making the Process, and then Sentence should be
given. Upon the notice given of this, and of a Day that was prefixed for the
return of the Courier, the King dispatched him with all possible have; and now
the Business seemed at an end. But the Courier had a Sea and the Alps to pass,
and in Winter it was not easy to observe a limited day so exactly: This made
that he came not to Rome on the prefixed day; upon which, the Imperialists gave
out, that the King was abusing the Pope's Easiness; so they pressed him
vehemently to proceed to a Sentence: The Bishop of Paris moved only for a delay
of six days, which was no unreasonable time in that Season, and in favors of
such a King, who had a Suit depending six Days, and since he had Patience so
many Years; the delay of a few days was no extraordinary Favor. But the design
of the Imperialists was, to hinder a Reconciliation: for if the King had been
set right with the Pope, there would have been so powerful a League formed
against the Emperor, as would have broke all his Measures: And therefore it
was necessary for his Designs to imbroil them. It was also said, That the King
was seeking Delays, and Concessions, merely to delude the Pope; and that he
had proceeded so far in his Design against that See, that it was necessary to
go on to Censures: And the angry Pope was so provoked by them, and by the News
that he heard out of England, that without consulting his ordinary Prudence, he
brought in the matter to the Consistory; and there the Imperialists being the
greater number, it was driven on with so much Precipitation, that they did in
on day that, which according to Form, should have been done in three.

They gave the final Sentence, declaring, the King's Marriage with Queen
Katherine good; and required him to live with her as his Wife, 23. March, But
proceeds hastily to a Sentence.
otherwise they would proceed to Censures. Two days after that, the Courier
came with the King's Submission, in due form: He also brought earnest Letters
from Francis, in the King's Favors. This wrought on all the indifferent
Cardinals, as well as those of the French Faction. So they prayed the Pope to
recall what was done. A new Consistory was called, but the Imperialists pressed
with greater Vehemence then ever, that they would not give such Scandal to the
World, as to recall a definitive Sentence past, of the validity of a Marriage;
and give the Heretics such Advantages by their unsteadiness in matters of that
nature: And so it was carried, that the former Sentence should take place; and
the Execution of it was committed to the Emperor. When this was known in
England, it determined the King in his Resolutions, of shaking off the Pope's
Yoke, in which he had made so great a Progress, that the Parliament had past
all the Acts concerning it, before he had the News from Rome: For he judged,
that the best way to Peace was, to let them at Rome see, with what vigor he
could make War. All the rest of the World looked on astonished, to see the Court
of Rome throw off England with so much scorn, as if they had been weary of the
Obedience and Profits of so great a Kingdom, and their Proceedings looked as if
they had been secretly directed by a Divine Providence, that designed to draw
great Consequences from this Rupture, and did so far infatuate those that were
most concerned to prevent it, that they needlessly drew it on themselves.

In England they had been now examining the Foundations on which the Papal
Authority was built, The ^rguments used for rejecting the Pope's Power.
with extraordinary Care for some Years; and several Books being then and soon
after written on that Subject, the Reader will be able to see better into the
Reasons of their Proceedings by a short Abstract of these.

All the Apostles were made equal in the Powers that Christ gave them, and he
often condemned their Contests about Superiority, but never declared in St.
Peter's Favor. St. Paul withstood him to his Face, and reckoned himself not
inferour to him. If the Dignity of a Person left any Authority with the City in
which he sat; then Antioch must carry it as well as Rome: and Jerusalem, where
Christ suffered was to be prefererd to all the World, for it was truly the
Mother Church. Christ said to Peter, Upon this Rock will I build my Church. The
Ancients understood by the Rock, either the Confession Peter had made, or,
which is all one upon the matter, Christ himself; and tho it were to be meant
of St. Peter, all the rest of the Apostles are also called Foundations; that
of, Tell the Church, was by many Doctors of the Church of Rome turned against
the Pope for a General Council. The other Privileges ascribed to St. Peter,
were either only a precedence of Order, or were occasioned by his Fall, as
that, Feed my Sheep, it being a restoring him to the Apostolical Function. St.
Peter had also a limited Province, the Circumcision, as St. Paul had the
Uncircumcision, that was of far greater extent; which showed that he was not
considered as the Universal Pastor. In the Primitive Church, St. Cyprian, and
other Bishops, wrote to the Bishops of Rome, as to their fellow Bishop,
Colleague and Brother: they were against Appeals to Rome, and did not submit to
their Definition, and in plain Terms asserted, that all Bishops were equal in
Power as the Apostles had been. It is true, the Dignity of the City made the
Bishops of Rome to be much esteemed; yet in the first Council of Nice, the
Bishops of Alexandria and Antioch, were declared to have the same Authority in
the Countries about them, that the Bishops of Rome, had over those that lay
about them. It is true, the East being overrun with Arrianism, from which the
West was better preserved, the oppressed Eastern Bishops did take shelter in
the Protection the Bishops of Rome gave them; and, as is natural to all People,
they magnified that Authority which was so useful to them. But the second
General Council indirectly condemned all Appeals to Rome: for it decreed that
every Province should be governed by its own Synod, and allowed no higher
Appeal but to the Bishops of the Diocese. Constantinople being made the
Imperial City, the second and fourth General Council gave it equal Privileges
with Rome, because it was new Rome: which shows that the Dignity of the Sees
flowed from the greatness of the Cities. The African Churches condemned all
Appeals to Rome, and the Popes, who complained of that, pretended only to a
Canon of the Council of Nice for it; and then they did not talk of a Divine
Right; but search being made into all the Copies of the Canons of the Council,
that was found to be a Forgery. When the Emperor Mauricius gave the Title,
Universal Bishop, to the Patriarch of Constantinple; Gregory the Great
complained of the Ambition of that Title, which he calls equal to the Pride of
Lucifer; and since England received the Faith by those whom he sent over, it
appeared from thence what was the Doctrine of that See at that time, and by
consequence, what where the first Impressions made on the English in that
matter. It is true Boniface the third got the same Title by Phocas's Grant, and
Boniface the eighth pretended to all Power both spiritual and temporal; but the
Progress of their Usurpations, and the Wars raised to maintain them, were very
visible in History. The Popes swore at their Consecrations to obey the Canons
of the eighth first General Councils, which are manifested against Appeals and
their Universal Jurisdiction; small regard is to be had to the Decrees of
latter Councils, being Cabals packed and managed as the Popes pleased. Several
Sees, as Ravenna, Milan, and Aquileia pretended Exemption from the Papal
Authority. Many English Bishops had asserted that the Popes had no Authority
against the Canons, and to that day no Canon the Popes made was binding till it
was received; which showed the Pope's Authority was not believed founded on a
divine Authority: and the Contests that the Kings of England had with the
Pope's concerning Investitures, Bishops doing the King Homage, Appeals to Rome,
and the Authority of Papal Bulls and Provisions, showed that the Pope's Power
was believed subject to Laws and Custom, and so not derived from Christ and St.
Peter; and as Laws had given them some Power, and Princes had bin forced in
ignorant Ages to submit to their Usurpations, so they might as they saw cause
change those Laws, and resume their Rights.

The next Point inquired into was, And for the King's Supremacy
the Authority that Kings had in matters of Religion and the Church. The King
of Israel judged in all Causes, and Samuel called Saul the Head of the Tribes.
David made many Rules about the Service at the Temple, and declaring to Solomon
what his Power was, 1 Chronicles. 28.21. 2 Chronicles. 8.14, 15.
he told him that the Priests were wholly at his Command; and it is also said,
that Solomon appointed the Priests their Charges in the Service of God, and
that they departed not from his Commandment in any matter; he turned out one
High Priest, and put another in his room. Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, and Josias,
made also Laws about Ecclesiastical Matters. In the New Testament, Christ was
himself subject to the Civil Powers, and charged his Disciples not to affect
Temporal Dominion. They also wrote to the Churches to be subject to the Higher
Powers, and call them Supreme, and charge every Soul to be subject to them: so
in Scripture the King is called Head and Supreme, and every Soul is said to be
under him, which joined together, makes up this Conclusion, that He is the
supreme Head over all Persons. In the Primitive Church the Bishops only made
Rules or Canons, but pretended to no compulsive Authority, but what came from
the Civil Magistrate. The Roman Emperors called Councils, presided in them,
and confirmed them; and made many Laws concerning Ecclesiastical Matters; so
did also Charles the Great. The Emperors did also either choose the Popes
themselves, or confirm their Elections. Churchmen taking Orders, were not
thereby discharged from the Obedience they formerly owed their Princes, but
remained still Subjects. And tho the Offices of the Church had peculiar
Functions, in which the People were subject to them, that did not deliver them
from their Obedience to the King, as a Father's Authority over his Children
cuts not off the King's Power over him. They found also that in all times the
Kings of England had assumed an Authority in Ecclesiastical Matters. Ina,
Alfred, Edgar, and Canetus, had made many Laws about them; so had also most of
the Kings since the Conquest, which appeared particularly in the Articles of
Clarendon, and the Contests that followed upon them; and from the days of King
Ina, they had granted Exemptions to Monasteries from the Episcopal
Jurisdiction, down to William the Conquerors time: besides many other Acts that
clearly imported a Supremacy over all Persons, and in all Causes. But they did
at the same time so explain and limit this Power, that it was visible they did
not intend to subject Religion wholly to the Pleasure of the King; for it was
declared that his Power was only a Coercive Authority, to defend the true
Religion, to abolish Heresies and Idolatries, to cause Bishops and Pastors to
do their Duties, and in case they were negligent, or would not amend their
Faults, to put others in their room. Upon the whole matter, they concluded that
the Pope had no Power in England, and that the King had an entire Dominion over
all his Subjects, which did extend even to the regulating of Ecclesiastical
Matters.

These things being fully opened in many Disputes, The Clergy submitted to it.
and published in several Books, all the Bishops, Abbots, and Priors of
England, Fisher only excepted, were so far satisfied with them, or so much in
love with their Preferments, that they resolved to comply with the Changes
which the King was resolved to make. Fisher was in great esteem for Piety and
strictness of Life, and so much pains was taken on him. A little before the
Parliament met, Cranmer proposed to him, that he, and any five Doctors he would
choose, and Stokesly with five on his side, should confer on that point, and
examine he Authorities that were on both sides; he accepted of it, and Stokesly
wrote to him to name time and place, but Fisher's Sickness hindered the
Progress of that motion.

The Parliament met the 15th of January, A Session of Parliament.
there were but seven Bishops and twelve Abbots present, the rest it seems were
unwilling to concur in making this change, tho they complied with it when it
was made. Every Sunday during the Session, a Bishop preached at St. Paul's, and
declared that the Pope had no Authority in England: Before this, they had only
said that a General Council was above him, and that the Exactions of that
Court, and Appeals to it, were unlawful; but now they went a strain higher, to
prepare the People for receiving the Acts then in Agitation. On the 9th of
March, The Pope's Power taken away.
the Commons began the Bill for taking away the Pope's Power, and sent it to
the Lords on the 14th, who past it on the 20th without any dissent. In it they
set forth the Exactions of the Court of Rome, grounded on the Pope's Power of
dispensing; and that as none could dispense with the Laws of God; so the King
and Parliament only had the Authority of dispensing with the Laws of the Land;
and that therefore such Licenses or Dispensations as were formerly in use,
should be for the future granted by the two Archbishops, some of these were to
be confirmed under the Great Seal; and they appointed that thereafter all
Commerce with Rome should cease. They also declared that they did not intend to
alter any Article of the Catholic Faith of Christendom, or of that which was
declared in the Scripture necessary to Salvation. They confirmed all the
Exemptions granted to Monasteries by the Popes, but subjected them to the
King's Visitation; and gave the King and his Council power to examine and
reform all Indulgences and Privileges granted by the Pope: The Offenders
against this Law were to be punished according to the Statutes of Praemunire.
This Act subjected the Monasteries entirely to the King's Authority and put
them in no small Confusion. Those that loved the Reformation, rejoiced both to
see the Pope's Power rooted out, and to find the Scripture made the Standard of
Religion.

After this Act, The Act of the Succession.
another past in both Houses in six Days time, without any Opposition, Settling
the Succession of the Crown; confirming the Sentence of Divorce, and the King's
Marriage with Queen Anne, and declaring all Marriages within the Degrees
prohibited by Moses to be unlawful: All that had married within them were
appointed to be divorced, and their Issue illegitimated; and the Succession to
the Crown was settled upon the King's Issue, by the prefent Queen, or in
default of that, to the King's right Heirs, for ever. All were required to
swear, to maintain the Contents of this Act; and if any refused to swear to it,
or should say any thing to the Slander of the King's Marriage, he was to be
judged guilty of misprision of Treason, and to be punished accordingly. The
Oath is also set down in the Journals of the House of Lords; by which, they did
not only swear Obedience to the King, and his Heirs, by his present Marriage;
but also to defend the Act of Succession, and all the Effects and Contents in
it, against all manner of Persons whatsoever; by which they were bound to
maintain the Divorce, both against the Pope's Censures, and the Emperor, if he
went about to execute them.

At this time, An Act regulating the proceedings against Heretics.
one Philips complained to the House of Commons of the Bishop of London, for
using him cruelly in Prison, upon Suspicion of Heresy; the Commons sent up this
to the Lords, but received no Answer: So they sent some of their Members to the
Bishop, desiring him to answer the Complaints put in against him: But he
acquainted the House of Lords with it; and they all with one consent voted,
that none of their House ought to appear, or answer to any Complaint at the Bar
of the House of Commons. So the Commons let this particular Case fall, and sent
up a Bill to which the Lords agreed, regulating the Proceedings against
Heretics, That whereas, by the Statute made by King Henry the Fourth, Bishops
might commit Men upon Suspicion of Heresy; and Heresy was generally defined, to
be whatever was contrary to the Scriptures, or Canonical Sanctions, which was
liable to great Ambiguity; therefore that Statute was repealed, and none were
to be committed for Heresy, but upon a Presentment made by two Witnesses: None
were to be accused for speaking against things that were grounded only upon the
Pope's Canons. Bail was to be taken for Heretics, and they were to be brought
to their Trials in open Court; and if upon Conviction, they did not abjure, or
were Relapses, they were to be burnt; the King's Writ being first obtained.
This was a great check to the Bishop's Tyrrany, and gave no small comfort to all
that favored the Reformation.

The Convocation sent in a Submission at the same time, The Submission of the
Clergy.
by which they acknowledged, That all Convocations ought to be assembled by the
King's Writ; and promised upon the Word of Priests, never to make, nor execute
any Canons, without the King's Assent. They also desired, That since many of
the received Canons were found to be contrary to the King's Prerogative, and
the Laws of the Land, there might be a Committee named by the King, of 32, the
one half out of both Houses of Parliament, and the other of the Clergy,
empowered to abrogate or regulate them, as they should see Cause. This was
confirmed in Parliament, Rome was renewed; and an Appeal was allowed from the
Archbishop to the King, upon which the Lord Chancellor was to grant a
Commission for a Court of Delegates. A Proviso was added, that till the
Committee of 32 should settle a Regulation of the Canons, those then in force
should still take place, except such as were contrary to the King's
Prerogative, or the Laws. But this last Proviso, tho it seemed reasonable, to
give the Spiritual Courts some Rules, till the 32 should finish their Work,
made, that it came to nothing; for it was thought more for the Greatness of the
King's Authority; and it subjected the Bishop's Courts more to the Prohibitions
of the Temporal Courts, to keep this whole matter in such General Terms, than
to have brought it to a Regulation that should be fixed and constant.

Another Act past, An Act for the Election of Bishops.
for regulating the Elections and Consecrations of Bishops; condemning all
Bulls from Rome; and appointing that upon a Vacancy, the King should grant a
License for an Election; and should by a missive Letter signify the Person's
Name whom he would have chosen: And within twelve Days after these were
delivered, the Dean and Chapter, or Prior and Convent, were required to return
an Election of the Person named by the King, under their Seals. The Bishop
Elect was upon that to swear Fealty; and a Writ was to be issued out for his
Consecration in the usual manner: After that, he was to do Homage to the King,
upon which, both the Temporalities, and Spiritualities, were to be restored;
and Bishops were to exercise their Jurisdiction as they had done before. All
that transgressed this Act, were made guilty of a praemunire. A private Act
past, depriving Cardinal Campegio, and Jerome de Ghinuccii of the Bishoprics
of Salisbury and Worcester; the Reasons given for it are, because they did not
reside in their Diocesses, for Preaching the Laws of God, and keeping
Hospitality, but lived at the Court of Rome, and carried 3000 l. a Year out of
the Kingdom.

The last Act of a public Nature, The Attaindor of the Nun of Kent.
tho relating only to private Persons, of which I shall give an account, was,
concerning the Nun of Kent, and her Accomplices: It was the first occasion of
shedding any Blood in this Quarrel, and it was much cherished by all the
Superstitious Clergy, that adhered to the Queen's Interests, and the Pope's.
The Nun, and many of her Accomplices, came to the Lord's Bar, and confessed the
whole matter. Among the Concealers of this Treason, Sir Thomas More, and
Fisher, were named; the former wrote upon that a long Letter to Cromwell, giving
him a particular account of all the Conversation he had at any time with the
Nun: He acknowledged he had esteemed her highly, not so much out of any regard
he had to her Prophesies, but for the Opinion he conceived of her Holiness and
Humility. But he adds, that he was then convinced, That she was the most false
dissembling Hypocrite that had been known; and guilty of most detestable
Hypocrisy, and divellish dissembled Falsehood: He also believed that she had
Communication with an evil Spirit. Concerning this Letter, a curious Discovery
has been made. In Queen Mary's time, More's Works were published; and among
them, other Letters of his to Cromwell, relating to that long one which he wrote
concerning the Nun, were printed; but that was left out, of which More kept a
Copy, and gave it to his Daughter Roper; that Copy was in the MS. out of which
the rest were published, and out of that I have transcribed it. The design of
suppressing it, seems to be this: It is probable, there might have been some
thoughts in Queen Mary's time, to Canonize the Nun, since she was called a
Martyr for her Mother's Marriage; and there was no want of Miracles to justify
it: Therefore, a Letter so plain and full against her, was thought fit to be
kept out of the way. This Justification of Mores, prevailed so far, that his
Name was struck out of the Bill. The Act contains a Narrative of that whole
Story, which is in short, this;

Elizabeth Barton of Kent, fell in some Trances, (it seems they were Hysterical
Fits) and spoke such things as made those about her think she was inspired of
God. The Parson of the Parish, Master, hoping to draw Advantages from this,
gave Archbishop Warham notice of it, who ordered him to observe her carefully,
and bring him an account of what should follow. But she had forgot all that she
said in her Fitts, when they were over: Yet the Priest would not let it go so,
but persuaded her that she was inspired, and taught her so to counterfeit those
Trances, that she became very ready at it. The matter was much noised about;
and the Priest intended to raise the credit of an Image of the B. Virgins that
was in his Church, that so Pilgrimages and Offerings might be made to it, by
her means. He associated to himself one Bocking, a Monk of Canterbury, and they
taught her to say in her Fits, that the B. Virgin appeared to her, and told
her, she could not be well till she visited that Image. She spoke many good
Words against ill Life, and spoke also against Heresy, and the King's Suit of
Divorce then depending; and by many strange motions of her Body, she seemed to
be inwardly possessed. A day was set for her cure; and before an Assembly of
2000 People, she was carried to that Image; and after she had acted her Fitts
all over, she seemed of a sudden quite recovered, which was ascribed to the
Intercession of the Virgin, and the Virtue of that Image. She entered into a
Religious Life; and Bocking was her Ghostly Father. There were wiolent
Suspicions of Incontinence between them; but the esteem she was in, bore them
down. Many thought her a Prophetess; and Warham among the rest. A Book was also
written of her Revelations, and a Letter was showed all in Letters of Gold;
pretended to be writ to her from Heaven, by Mary Magdalene. She pretended, that
when the King was last at Calais, she was carried invisibly beyond Sea, and
brought back again; and that an Angel gave her the Sacrament; and that God
revealed to her, that if the King went on in his Divorce, and married another
Wife, he should fall from his Crown, and not live a Month longer, but should
die a Villain's Death.

Many of the Monks of the Charter House, and the Observant Friars, with many
Nuns, and B. Fisher, came to give credit to this, and set a great value on her,
and grew very insolent upon it; for Friar Peyto preaching in the King's
Chapel, at Greenwich, denounced the Judgments of God upon him; and said, tho
others as lying Prophets deceived him, yet he in the name of God told him, that
Dogs should lick his Blood as they had done Ahabs. The King bore this
patiently; but ordered one Dr. Corren to preach next Sunday, and to answer all
that he had said, who railed against Peyto, as a Dog and a Traitor. Peyto had
gone to Canterbury, but Elston, a Franciscan of the same House, interrupted
him, and called him one of the lying Prophets, that went about to establish the
Succession of the Crown by Adultery; and spoke with such Vehemence, that the
King himself was forced to command him silence. And yet so unwilling was the
King to go to Extremities, that all that was done upon so high a Provocation,
was, that they were called before the Council, and rebuked for their Insolence.
But the Nun's Confederates publishing her Revelations in all the parts of the
Kingdom, she and Nine of her Accomplices were apprehended in November last Year;
and they did all without any Rack or Torture, discover the whole Conspiracy,
and upon that, were appointed to go to St. Paul's; and after a Sermon preached
upon that Occasion, by the Bishop of Bangor, they repeated their Confession, in
the Hearing of the People; and were sent to ly Prisoners in the Tower. But it
was given out, That all was extorted from them by Violence; and Messages were
sent to the Nun, desiring her, to deny all that she had confessed; which made
the King judge it necessary to proceed to further Extremities. So she, and six
of her chief Accomplices, were Attainted of Treason: And the Bishop of Rochester,
and five more, were Attainted of Misprision of Treason. But at the Intercession
of Q. Ann, (as it is expressed in the Act) all others that had been concerned
with her, were pardoned.

This was as black an Imposture as any ever was; and if it had fallen out in a
darker Age, in which the World went mad after Visions, the King might have lost
his Crown by it. The Discovery of this, disposed all to look on older Stories
of the Trances of Monastical People, as Contrivances to serve base ends, and
did make way for the ruin of that Order of Men in England; but all that was at
present done upon it, was, that the Observants were put out of their Houses,
and mixed with the other Franciscans, and the Austin Friars were put in their
rooms. When all these Acts were passed, the King gave his Assent to them on the
29th of March, and prorogued the Parliament till November.

The Members of both Houses swore to the Oath of Succession on the day of the
Prorogation. On the 20th of April, The Oath of Succession sworn.
followed the Execution of the Nun and her Accomplices at Tyburn, where she
freely acknowledged her Impostures, and the Justice of the Sentence, and laid
the blame on those that suffered with her; who because the thing was profitable
to them, praised her much, and tho they knew that all was feigned, yet gave out
that it was done by the working of the Holy Ghost; and she concluded her Life,
begging both God's and the King's Pardon. Upon the first Discovery of this
Cheat, Fisher in some Trouble.
Cromwell sent Fisher's Brother to him to reprove him for his Carriage in that
Business, and to advise him to ask the King's Pardon for the Encouragement he
had given to the Nun, which he was confident the King would grant him. But
Fisher excused himself, and said, he had done nothing but only tried whether
her Revelations were true or not? He confessed that upon the Reports he had
heard, he was induced to have a high Opinion of her; and that he had never
discovered any Falsehood in her. It is true, she had said some things to him
concerning the King's Death, which he had not revealed, but he thought it was
not necessary to do it; because he knew she had told it to the King her self;
she had named no Person, that should kill the King, but had only denounced it
as a Judgment of God on him; and he had reason to think that the King would
have been offended with him if he had spoken of it to him; and so he desired to
be no more troubled with that matter. But upon that, Cromwell wrote him a sharp
Letter; he showed him that he had proceeded rashly in that Affair; being so
partial in the matter of the King's Divorce, that he easily believed every
thing that seemed to make against it; he showed him how necessary it was to use
great Caution before extraordinary things should be received, or spread about
as Revelations; since otherwise the Peace of the World should be in the hands
of every bold or crafty Impostor; yet in conclusion, he advises him again to
ask the King's Pardon for his Rashness, and he assures him that the King was
ready to forgive that, and every thing else, by which he had offended him. But
Fisher was obstinate and would make no Submission, and so included within the
Act, yet it was not executed till a new Provocation drew him into further
Trouble. And is very obstinate.
The Secular and Regular Clergy did every where swear the Oath of Succession;
which none did more zealously promote than Gardener; who before the 6th of May
got all his Clergy to swear it: and the Religious Orders being apprehensive of
the King's Jealousies of them, took care to remove them, by sending in
Declarations under the Seals of their Houses, that in their Opinion the King's
present Marriage was lawful, and that they would always acknowledge him Head of
the Church of England; that the Bishops of Rome had no Authority out of his own
Diocese, and that they would continue obedient to the King, notwithstanding his
Censures; that they would preach the Gospel sincerely according to the
Scriptures, and the Tradition of the Catholic Doctors, and would in their
Prayers pray for the King as Supreme Head of the Church of England.

A meeting of the Council-sate at Lambeth, More and he^ refuse the Oath.
to which many were cited in order to the swearing the Oath; among whom was Sir
Thomas More and Fisher. More was first called on to take it: he answered that
he neither blamed those that made the Acts, nor those that swore the Oath, and
that he was willing to swear to maintain the Succession to the Crown, but could
not take the Oath as it was conceived. Fisher made the same Answer, but all the
rest that were cited before them, took it. More was much pressed to give his
Reasons against it; but he refused to do that, for it might be called a
disputing against Law: yet he would put them into Writing if the King would
command him to do it. Cranmer said, if he did not blame those that took it, it
seems he was not persuaded it was a Sin, and so was only doubtful of it; but he
was sure he ought to obey the Law, if it was not sinful; so there was a
Certainty on the one hand, and only a Doubt on the other; and therefore the
former ought to determine him: this he confessed did shake him a little, but he
said, he thought in his Conscience, that it would be a Sin in him, and offered
to take his Oath upon that, and that he was not led by any other Consideration.
The Abbot of Westminster told him he ought to think his Conscience was misled,
since the Parliament was of another Mind; an Argument well becoming a rich
ignorant Abbot. But More said, if the Parliament of England was against him,
yet he believed all the rest of Christendom was on his side: In conclusion,
both he and Fisher declared that they thought it was in the Power of the
Parliament to settle the Succession to the Crown, and so were ready to swear to
that, but they could not take the Oath that was tendered to them; for by it they
must swear to maintain all the Contents in the Act of Succession, and in it the
King's former Marriage was declared unlawful; to which they could not assent.
Cranmer pressed that this might be accepted: for if they once swore to maintain
the Succession, it would conduce much to the Quiet of the Nation; but sharper
Counsels were more acceptable: so they were both committed to the Tower, and
Pen, Ink, and Paper was kept from them. The old Bishop was also hardly used
both in his Clothes and Diet; he had only Rags to cover him and Fire was often
denied him, which was a Cruelty not capable of any Excuse, and was as barbarous
as it was imprudent.

In Winter another Session of Parliament was held; the first Act that passed,
Another Session of Parliament.
declared the King to be the Supreme Head on Earth of the Church of England,
and appointed that to be added to his other Titles; and it was enacted, that he
and his Successors should have full Authority to reform all Heresies and Abuses
in the Spiritual Jurisdiction. By an other Act they confirmed the Oath of
Succession, which had not been specified in the former Act, tho agreed to by
the Lords. They also gave the King the first Fruits and Tenthes of
Ecclesiastical Benefices, as being the Supreme Head of the Church; for the King
being put in the Pope's room, it was thought reasonable to give him the Annats,
which the Popes had formerly exacted. The Temporalty were now willing to
revenge themselves on the Spiritualty, and to tax them as heavily as they had
formerly tyrannized over them. Another Act past declaring some things Treason;
one of these was the denying the King any of his Titles, or the calling him
Heretic, Schismatic, or Usurper of the Crown. By another Act, Provision was
made for setting up 26 Suffragan Bishops over England, for the more speedy
Administration of the Sacraments, and the better Service of God: It is also
said, they had been formerly accustomed to be in the Kingdom: The Bishop of the
Diocese was to present two to the King, and upon the King's declaring his
choice, the Archbishop was to consecrate the Person, and then the Bishop was to
delegate such parts of his Charge to his Care as he thought fitting, which was
to last during his Pleasure. These were the same that the Ancients called the
Chorepiscopi, who were at first the Bishops of some Villages; but were
afterward put under the Jurisdiction of the Bishop of the next City. They were
set up before the Council of Nice, and continued to be in the Church for many
Ages; but the Bishops devolving their whole Spiritual Power to them, they were
put down, and a Decretal Epistle was forged in the name of P. Damasus,
condemning them. The great Extent of the Diocesses in England made it hard for
one Bishop to govern them with that Exactness that was necessary; these were
therefore appointed to assist them in the discharge of the Pastoral Care.

In this Parliament Subsidies were granted payable in three Years, with the
highest Preamble of their Happiness under the King's Government all those 24
Years, in which he had reigned, that Flattery could dictate. Fisher and More by
two special Acts were attainted of Misprision of Treason; five other Clerks
were in like manner condemned, all for refusing to swear the Oath of
Succession. The Sea of Rochester was declared void; yet it seems few were
willing to succeed such a Man, for it continued vacant two Years. This Severity
against them was censured by some as Extreme, since they were willing to swear
to the Succession in other Terms, so that it was merely a point of Conscience,
in which the common Safety was not concerned, at which they stuck, and it was
thought the prosecuting them in this manner would so raise their Credit, that
it might endanger the Government more than any Opposition which they could make.

But now that the King entered upon a new Scene, The Progress the New Doctrines
made in England.
it will be necessary to open the Progress that the new Opinions had made in
England all the time of the King's Suit of Divorce. During Wolsey's Ministry,
those Preachers were gently used; and it is probable the King ordered the
Bishops to give over their enquiring after them, when the Pope began to use him
ill; for the Progress of Heresy was always reckoned up at Rome among the
Mischiefs that would follow upon the Pope's denying the King's Desires. But
More coming into Favor, he offered new Counsels; he thought the King's
proceeding severely against Heretics would be so meritorious at Rome, that it
would work more effectually, than all his Treatnings had done: so a severe
Proclamation was issued out both against their Books and Persons, ordering all
the Laws against them to be put in Execution. Tindall and some others at
Antwerp, were every Year either translating or writing Books against some of
the received Errors, and sending them over to England. But his Translation of
the New Testament gave the greatest Wound, and was much complained of by the
Clergy, as full of Errors. Tonstall then Bp of London being a Man of great
Learning and Virtue, which is generally accompanied with much Moderation,
returning from the Treaty of Cambray, to which More and he were sent in the
King's Name, as he came through Antwerp, dealt with an English Merchant that
was secretly a Friend of Tindall's, to procure him as many of his New
Testaments as could be had for Money. Tindall was glad of this; for being about
a more correct Edition, he found he would be better enabled to set about it, if
the Copies of the Old were sold off; so he gave the Merchant all he had, and
Tonstall paying the Price of them, got them in his hands; and burnt them
publicly in Cheapside. This was called a burning of the Word of God; and it
was said the Clergy had reason to revenge themselves on it, for it had done
them more Mischief than all other Books whatsoever. But a Year after this, the
second Edition being sinished, great Numbers were sent over to England, and
Constantine one of Tindall's Partners, happened to be taken; so More believing
that some of the Merchants of London furnished them with Money, promised him his
Liberty, if he would discover who they were that encouraged and assisted them:
so he told him the Bishop of London did more than all the World besides, for he
had brought up the greatest gart of a faulty Impression. The Clergy when they
condemned Tindall's Translation, promised a new one: but a Year after in a long
Condemnation of several Books that were published by Warham, Tonstall, and
other Canonists and Divines, they added this, that it was not necessary to
publish the Scripture in English, and that the King did well not to set about
it.

There came out a Book writ by one Fish of Grayes-Inn, that took mightily, The
Supplication of the Beggars.
called, the Supplication of the Beggars, by which they complained that the
Alms of the People were intercepted by the Mendicant Friars, that were an
useless Burden to the Government; they also taxed the Pope of Cruelty, for
taking no Pity on the Poor, since none but those that could pay for it, were
delivered out of Purgatory. The King was so pleased with this, that he would
not suffer any thing to be done against the Author. More answered it by another
Supplication in behalf of the Souls in Purgatory, setting forth the Miseries
they were in, and the Relief which they received by the Masses that were said
for them, and therefore they called on their Friends to support the Religious
Orders, that had now so many Enemies. This was elegantly and wittily written,
but did not take so much as the other; for such is the ill nature of Mankind,
that Satyrs are always better received than Apologies, and no Satyrs are more
acceptable than those against Churchmen.

Frith answered More in a Book more gravely written, Frith writes against
Purgatory
in which he showed that there was no mention made of Purgatory in the
Scripture, that it was inconsistent with the Merits of Christ, by which upon
sincere Repentance, all Sins were pardoned; for if they were pardoned, they
could not be punished: And tho Temporary Judgments, either as Medicinal
Corrections, or for giving Warning to others, do sometimes fall even on true
Penitents; yet terrible Punishments in another state, cannot consist with a
free Pardon, and the remembering of our Sins no more. In expounding many
Passages of the New Testament, he appealed to More's great Friend, Erasmus; and
showed, That the Fire which was spoken of by St. Paul, as that which would
consume the Wood, Hay, and Stubble, could only be meant of the fiery Trial of
Persecution. He showed, That the Primitive Church received it not; Ambrose,
Jerome, and Austin did not believe it; the last had plainly said, that no
mention was made of it in Scripture. The Monks brought it in; and by many
wonderful Stories, possessed the World of the belief of it; More objected
Poverty, and want of Learning, to the new Preachers: But it was answered, The
same thing was made use of to disgrace Christ and his Apostles; but a plain
Simplicity of mind without Artificial Improvments, was rather thought a good
Disposition for Men that were to bear a Cross; and the Glory of God appeared
more Eminently, than the Instruments seemed Contemptible.

But the Pen proving too feeble, A Persecution set on by More.
and too gentle a Tool, the Clergy betook themselves to that, on which they
relied more: Many were vexed with Imprisonments for teaching their Children the
Lord's Prayer in English, for harboring the Preachers, and for speaking
against the Corruptions in the Worship, or the Vices of the Clergy; but these
generally abjured. One Hitton, that had been a Curate, and went over to
Tindall, was taken coming back with some Books; and was by Warham condemned and
burnt.

Bilney, Cambridge, Bilney's Martyrdom.
and fell under great Horror of mind; but overcame it, and resolved to expiate
his Apostasy by a public Acknowledgment: And that he might be able to do that
on surer Grounds, he followed his Studies close two Years; for then he left the
University, and went into Norfolk where he was born, and preached up and down
that County, against Idolatry and Superstition; exhorting the People to live
well, to give much Alms, to believe in Christ, and to offer up their Souls and
Wills to him in the Sacrament: He openly confessed his own Sin of denying the
Faith; and using no Precaution as he went about, he was taken by the Bishops
Officers, and was condemned as a Relapse, and degraded. More not only sent down
the Writ to burn him, but to make him suffer another way; he affirmed in Print
that he had abjured: But no Paper signed by him was ever showed, and little
credit was due to the Priests who gave it out, that he did it by word of Mouth:
But Parker (afterward Archbishop) was an eye Witness of his Sufferings. He
bore all the hardships he was put to, patiently; and continued very cheerful
after his Sentence; and eat up the poor Provision that was brought him,
heartily; for he said, he must keep up a ruinous Cottage till it fell. He
Isaiah.
He had those Words often in his Mouth, When thou walk through the Fire, thou
shall not be burnt: And by burning his Finger in the Candle, he prepared
himself for the Eire, and said, it would only consume the Stubble of his Body,
but would purify his Soul.

On the 10th of November he was burnt. At the Stake he repeated the Creed, to
show he was a true Christian; for the Clergy made strange Representations of
his Doctrine: Then he prayed earnestly, and with a deep sense repeated those
Words, Enter not into Judgment with thy Servant. Dr. Warner that waited on him,
embraced him, shedding many Tears, and wished that he might die in as good a
state as that in which he then was. The Friars desired him to declare to the
People, that they had not procured his Death, and he did it; so the last Act of
his Life was full of Charity to his Enemies. His Sufferings Animated others.
Byfield that had formerly abjured, was taken dispersing Tindall's Books, and
one Tewkesbury, were condemned by Stokesley, and burnt. Two Men and a Woman
were also burnt at York. Upon these Proceedings, the Parliament that sat that
Year, complained to the King; but that did not cool the Heat of the Clergy. One
Bainham a Counselor of the Temple, was taken on Suspicion of Heresy, and
whipped in More's presence, and afterward rackt in the Tower: Yet he could not
be wrought on to accuse any, but through Fear he abjured. After that, being
discharged, he was in great trouble of Mind, and could find no quiet till he
went publicly to Church, and openly confessed his Sins; and declared the
Torments he felt in his Conscience, for what he had done. Upon this, he was
again seized on, and condemned, for having said, That Thomas Becket was a
Murderer, and was damned, if he did not repent: And that in the Sacrament
Christ's Body was received by Faith, and not chewed with the Teeth. Sentence
past upon him by Stokesly, and he was burnt. Soon after this, More delivered up
the Great Seal, so the Preachers had some ease. Crome and Latimer were accused,
but abjured. Tracy, (Ancestor to the present Lord Tracy) made a Will, by which
he left his Soul to God, in hopes of Mercy through Christ, without the help of
any other Saint; and therefore he declared, that he would leave nothing for
Soul-Masses. This Will being brought to the Bishop of London's Court to be
proved, after his Death, provoked them so much, that he was condemned as an
Heretic; and an Order was sent to the Chancellor of Worcester, to raise his
Body; but he went further and burnt it, which could not be justified, since he
was not a Relapse. Tracy's Heirs sued him for it, and he was turned out of his
place, and fined in 400 l. The Clergy proclaimed an Indulgence of forty days
Pardon to any that carried a Faggot to the burning of an Heretic, that so
Cruelty might seem the more Meritorious. And an aged Man (Harding) being
condemned by Longland, Bishop of Lincoln, as he was tied to the Stake, one
flung a Faggot with such force at him, that it dashed out his Brains.

After an Intermission of two Years, Gardener represented to the King, occasion
to show his hatred of Heresy. So Frith seemed a fit Person to offer as a
Sacrifice, to demonstrate his Zeal: He was a young Man, much famed for
Learning: Frith's Sufferings.
and was the first that writ against the Corporal Presence in the Sacrament, in
England. He followed Zuinglius's Doctrine on these Grounds; Christ received in
the Sacrament, gave Eternal Life; but this was only to those that believed;
from which he inferred, that he was received only by Faith. St Paul said, that
the Fathers before Christ eat the same Spiritual Food with Christians; from
which it appears, that Christ is now no more corporally present to us then he
was to them: And he argued from the nature of Sacraments in general, and the
ends of the Lord's Supper, that it was only a Commemoration. Yet upon these
Premises, he built no other Conclusion but that Chist's presence was no Article
of Faith. Frith put these Reasons in Writing, which falling into More's hands,
was answered by him; but Frith never saw that till he was put in Prison: And
then, tho he was loaded with Irons, and had no Books allowed him, he replied.
He insisted much on that Argument, That the Israelites did eat the same Food,
and drank of the same Rock, that was Christ; and since Christ was only
mystically, and by Faith received by them; he concluded, that he was now
received only by Faith. He showed, that Christ's Words, This is my Body, were
accommodated to the Jewish Phrase of calling the Lamb the Lord's Passover; and
confirmed his Opinion with many Passages out of the Fathers; in which, the
Elements were called Signs and Figures of Christ's Body; and they said that
upon Consecration they did not cease to be Bread and Wine, but remained still
in their own proper Natures. He also showed, That the Fathers were Strangers to
all the Consequences of that Opinion, as that a Body could be in more places
than one at once, or could be in a place after the manner of a Spirit: Yet he
concluded, That if that Opinion were held only as a Speculation; so that
Adoration were not offered to the Elements, it might be well tolerated, but
that he condemned as gross Idolatry. This was intended by him to prevent such
Heats in England, as were raised in Germany, between the Lutherans and
Helvetians, by reason of their different Opinions concerning the Sacrament. He
was seized on in May 1533, and brought before Stokesly, Gardener, and Longland.
They objected to him his not believing Purgatory, nor Transubstantiation: He
gave his Reasons that determined him to look on neither of these as Articles of
Faith; but he thought that neither the affirming nor denying them ought to be
determined positively. The Bishops seemed unwilling to proceed to Sentence; but
he continuing resolute, Stokesly pronounced it; and so delivered him to the
Secular Arm, obtesting, that his Punishment might be moderated, so that the
Rigor might not be too extreme; nor yet the gentleness of it too much
mitigated. This Obtestation by the Bowels of Christ, was thought a Mockery;
when all the World knew that it was intended that he should be burnt. One
Hewet, a Prentice of London, was also condemned with him, on the same account.
When they were brought to Smithfield, Frith expressed great Joy, and hugged the
Faggots with some Transport: Cook, a Priest, that stood by, called to the
People not to pray for them more then they would do for a Dog. Frith smiled at
that, and prayed God to forgive him: The Fire was kindled, which consumed them
to ashes. This was the last Instance of the Cruelty of the Clergy at this time;
for the Act, formerly mentioned, regulating their Proceedings, followed soon
after. Philips, at whose Complaint, that Bill was begun, was committed upon
Suspicion of Heresy; a Copy of Tracy's Will was found about him, and Butter and
Cheese being also found in his Chamber in Lent: But he being required to
abjure, appealed to the King as Supreme Head, and upon that he was set at
Liberty; but whether he was tried by the King or not, is not upon Record.

The Act that was past, A stop put to further Cruelties.
gave the new Preachers and their Followers, some Respite. The King was also
empowered to reform all Heresies, and Idolatries: And his Affairs did now
oblige him to unite himself to the Princes of Germany, that by their means, he
might so imbroil the Emperor's Affairs, asnot to give him leisure to turn his
Arms against England; and this produced a slackning of all Severities against
them: For those Princes, in that first fervor of the Reformation, made it an
Article in all their Treaties, that none should be persecuted for favoring
their Doctrine. The Interests the Reformers had at Court.
The Queen did also openly protect them; she took Latimer, and Shaxton to be
her Chaplains, and promoted them to the Bishoprics of Worcester, and
Salisbury. Cranmer was fully convinced of the necessity of a Reformation, and
that he might carry it on with true Judgment, and justify it by good
Authorities, He made a great Collection of the Opininions of the Ancient
Fathers, and later Doctors, in all the Points of Religion; of which I have seen
two Volumes in Folio: But by a Letter of the Lord Burghly's, it appears, there
were then six Volumes of his Collections in his hands. He was a Man of great
Candor, and much Patience and Industry; and so was on all accounts well
prepared for that Work, to which the Providence of God did now call him: And
tho he was in some things too much subject to the King's Imperious Temper, yet
in the matter of the six Articles, he showed that he wanted not the Courage
that became a Bishop in so Critical an Affair as that was. Cromwell was his
great and constant Friend; a man of mean Birth, but of excellent Qualities, as
appeared in his adhering to his Master Wolsey, after his fall; a rare
Demonstration of Gratitude in a Court, to a disgraced Favorite: And in his
greatest height, he happening to see a Merchant of Lucca, Italy, but did not so
much as know him, or pretend to any returns for the small Favors he had
formerly showed him, and was then reduced to a low condition, treated him with
such acknowledgments, that it became the Subjects of several Pens, which strove
who should celebrate it most.

As these set themselves to carry on a Reformation, Others oppose it much.
there was another Party formed that as vigourously opposed it, headed by the
Duke of Norfolk, and Gardener; and almost all the Clergy went into it. They
persuaded the King that nothing would give the Pope or the Emperor such
Advantages, as his making any Changes in Religion; and it would reflect much on
him, if he who had writ so learnedly for the Faith, should in spite to the Pope
make any Changes in it. Nothing would encourage other Princes so much to follow
his Example, nor keep his Subjects so much in their Duty to him, as his
continuing steadfast in the Ancient Religion. These things made great
Impressions on him. But on the other hand, Cranmer represented to him that if
he rejected the Pope's Authority, it was very absurd to let such Opinions or
Practices continue in the Church, that had no other Foundation but Papal
Decrees: and therefore he desired that this might be put to the Trial, he ought
to depend on God, and hope for good Success if he proceeded in this matter,
according to the Duty of a Christian Prince. England was a complete Body within
its self; and tho in the Roman Empire, when united under one Prince, General
Councils were easily assembled, yet now that was not to be so much depended on;
but every Prince ought to reform the Church in his Dominions by a National
Synod; and if in the Ancient Church such Synods condemned Heresies, and
reformed Abuses, that might be much more done, when Europe was divided into so
many Kingdoms. It was visible that tho both the Emperor and the Princes of
Germany had for 20 Years desired a Ceneral Council, it could not be obtained of
the Pope; he had indeed offered one at Mantua, but that was only an Illusion.

Upon that the Kiug desired some of his Bishops to give their Opinion
concerning the Emperor's Power of calling Councils: The Opinion of some
Bishops of a General Council.
So Cranmer, Tonstall, Clark of Bath and Wells, and Goodrick of Ely, made
answer, That tho Ancient Councils were called by the Roman Emperors, yet that
was done by reason of the Extent of their Monarchy, that was now ceased, but
since other Princes had an entire Monarchy within their Dominions. Yet if one
or more of those Princes should agree to call a Council to a good Intent, and
desire the Concurrence of the rest, they were bound by the Rule of Charity to
agree to it: They were also of Opinion that none but Bishops and Priests had
Right to a definitive Voice in matters of Doctrine.

Cranmer also made a long Speech at that time, Heads of a Speech of Cranmers.
setting forth the necessity of a Reformation. It is probable it was in the
House of Peers, for it begins; My Lords -- He begun with the Impostures and
Deceit used by the Canonists and other Courtiers at Rome. Then he speak to the
Authority of a General Councils; he showed that it flowed not from the Number
of the Bishops, but from the matter of their Decisions, which were received
with an Universal Consent, for there were many more Bishops at the Council of
Arimini, which was condemned, than either at Nice or Constantinople, which were
received. Christ had named no Head of the whole Church, as God had named no
Head of the World; but that grew up for Orders sake, as there were Archbishops
set over Provinces; yet some Popes were condemned for Heresy as Liberius, and
others. If Faith must be showed by Works, the ill Lives of most Popes of late
showed that their Faith was to be suspected; and all the Privileges which
Princes or Synods granted to that See might be recalled. Popes ought to submit
themselves to General Councils, and were be tried by them; he showed what were
the present Corruptions of the Pope and his Court, which needed Reformation:
The Pope according to the Decree of the Council of Basil was the Churches
Vicar, and not Christ's; and so was accountable to it. The Churches of France
declared the Council to be above the Pope, which had been acknowledged by many
Popes themselves. The Power of Councils had also Bounds, nor could they judge of
the Rights of Princes, or proceed to a Sentence against a King; nor were their
Canons of any force till Princes added their Sanctions to them. Councils ought
also to proceed moderately, even against those that held Errors, and ought not
to impose things indifferent too severely. The Scriptures, and not Men's
Traditions, ought to be the Standards of their Definitions. The Divines of
Paris held, That a Council could not make a new Article of Faith that was not
in the Scriptures; and all Christ's Promises to the Church were to be
understood with this condition, if they kept the Faith: therefore there was
great reason to doubt concerning the Authority of a Council, some of them had
contradicted others, and many others were never received. The Fathers had
always appealed to the Scriptures, as Superior in Authority to Councils, by
which only all Controversies ought to be decided; yet on the other hand, it was
dangerous to be wise in ones own Conceit, and he thought when the Fathers all
agreed in the Exposition of any place of Scripture, that ought to be looked on
as flowing from the Spirit of God. He showed how little Regard was to be had to
a Council, in which the Pope presided, and that if any common Error had past
upon the World, when that came to be discovered, every one was at liberty to
shake it off, even tho they had sworn to maintain that Error: this he applied
to the Pope's Authority. In conclusion, he promised to entertain them with
another Discourse of the Authority that all Bishops had in their Sees, and that
Princes had within their Dominions. But I could never recover that, and
probably it is lost.

This was the state of the Court after King Henry had shaken off the Pope's
Power, The State of England.
and assumed a Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Affairs. The Nobility and Gentry
were generally well satisfied with the Change; but the Body of the People was
more under the Power of the Priests; and they studied to infuse in them great
Fears of a Change in Religion. It was said the King was now joining himself to
Heretics, that both the Queen, Cranmer, and Cromwell favored them. It was
left free to dispute what were Articles of Faith, and what were only the
Decrees of Popes; and Changes would be made under this Pretense, that they only
rejected those Opinions which were supported by the Papal Authority. The Monks
and Friars saw themselves left at the King's Mercy. Their Bulls could be no
longer useful to them. The trade of new Saints, or Indulgences, was near an
end; they had also some Intimations that Cromwell was forming a Project for
suppressing them; so they thought it necessary for their own Preservation to
imbroil the King's Affairs, as much as was possible; therefore both in
Confessions and Discourses, they were infusing into the People a dislike of the
King's Proceedings, and this did so far work on them, that if the Emperor's
Affairs had been in such a condition, that he could have made War on the King,
he might have done it with great Advantage; and found a strong Party in England
on his side. But the Practices of the Clergy at home, and of Cardinal Pool
abroad, the Libels that were published, and the Rebellions that were afterward
raised in England, wrought so much on the King's Temper, that was naturally
imperious and boisterous, that he became too apt to commit Acts of the highest
Severity, and to bring his Subjects into Trouble upon the slightest Grounds;
and his new Title of Head of the Church, seemed to have increased his former
Vanity, and made him fancy that all his Subjects were bound to regulate their
Belief by the measures he set them. He had now reigned 25 Years, in all which
time none had suffered for Crimes against the State, but Pool Earl of Suffolk,
and Stafford Duke of Buckingham; (the former was executed in Obedience to his
Father's last Commands; the latter fell by Cardinal Wolsey's Malice; he had
also been inveigled by a Priest to imagine he had a Right to the Crown) but in
the last ten Years of his Life, Instances of Severity returned more frequently.
The Bishops and Abbots did what they could to free the King of any Jealousies
that might be raised in him concerning them; and of their own accord, before
any Law was made about it, they swore to maintain the King's Supremacy. The
first Act of it was the making Cromwell Vicar General, and Visitor of all the
Monasteries and Churches of England, with a Delegation of the King's Supremacy
to him; he was also empowered to give Commissions subaltern to himself; and all
Wills, where the Estate was in value above 200 l. were to be proved in his
Court. This was afterward enlarged, and he was made the King's Vicegerent in
Ecclesiastical Matters, and had the Precedence of all next the Royal Family;
and his Authority was in all Points the same, that the Legates had in time of
Popery: for as the King's came in the Popes room; so the Vicegerent was what
the Legates had been. Pains was taken to engage all the Clergy to declare for
the Supreamacy. At Oxford a public Determination was made, to which every
Member assented, that the Pope had no more Authority in England, than any other
Foreign Bishop. The Franciscans at Richmond made some more Opposition; they
said, by the Rule of St. Francis, they were bound to obey the Holy See. The
Bishop of Litchfield told them that all the Bishops in England, all the Heads
of Houses, Francis made his Rule in Italy, where the Bishop of Rome was
Metropolitan, but that ought not to extend to England: and it was showed that
the Chapter cited by them, was not written by him, but added since; yet they
continued positive in their refusal to sign it.

It was well known that all the Monks and Friars, A general Visitation proposed.
tho they complied with the Time, yet they hated this new Power of the King's;
the People were also startled at it; so one Dr. Leighton, that had been in the
Cardinal's Service with Cromwell, proposed a General Visitation of all the
Religious Houses in England: and thought that nothing would reconcile the
Nation so much to the King's Supremacy, as to see some good Effect flow from
it. Others thought this was too hardy a Step, and that it would provoke the
Religious Orders too much. Yet it was known that they were guilty of such
Disorders, that nothing could so effectually keep them in awe as the enquiring
into these. Cranmer led the way to this by a Metropolitical Visitation, for
which he obtained the King's License; he took care to see that the Pope's Name
was struck out of all the Offices of the Church, and that the King's Supremacy
was generally acknowledged.

In October the General Visitation of the Monasteries was begun; Instructions
and Injunctions for it.
which was cast into several Precincts: Instructions were given them, directing
them what things to enquire after, as whether the Houses had the full number
according to their Foundation, and if they performed Divine Worship in the
appointed Hours; what Exemptions they had, what were their Statutes? how their
Heads were chosen? and how their Vows were observed? Whether they lived
according to the Severities of their Orders? how the Master and other Officers
did their Duties? how their Lands and their Revenues were managed? what
Hospitality was kept? and what care was taken of the Novices? what Benefices
were in their Gift, and how they disposed of them? how the Enclosures of the
Nunneries were kept? whether the Nuns went abroad, or if Men were admitted to
come to them? how they employed their time, and what Priests they had for their
Confessors? They were also ordered to give them some Injunctions in the King's
Name, That they should acknowledge his Supremacy, and maintain the Act of
Succession, and declare all to be absolved from any Rules or Oaths that bound
them to obey the Pope; and that all their Statutes tending to that, should be
razed out of their Books. That the Abbots should not have choice Dishes, but
plain Tables for Hospitality; and that the Scriptures shoul be read at Meals;
that they should have daily Lectures of Divinity; and maintain some of every
House at the University. The Abbot was required to instruct the Monks in true
Religion, and to show them that it did not consist in outward Ceremonies, but
in Cleanness of Heart, and Purity of Life, and the worshipping of God in Spirit
and Truth. Rules were given about their Revenues, and against admitting any
under 20 Years of Age. The Visitors were empowered to punish Offenders, or to
bring them to answer before the Visitor General.

What the Ancient British Monks were is not well known; The State of the
Monasteries in England.
whether they were governed according to the Rules of the Monks of Egypt or
France, is matter of Conjecture. They were in all things obedient to their
Bishops, as all the Monks of the Primitive Times were. But upon the Confusions
which the Gothic Wars brought upon Italy, Benedict set up a new Order with
more Artificial Rules for its Government. Not long after, Gregory the Great
raised the Credit of that Order much, by his Books of Dialogues: and Austin the
Monk being sent by him to convert England, did found a Monastery at Canterbury,
that carried his Name, which both the King and Austin exempted from the
Archbishop's Jurisdiction. But there is great reason to suspect that most of
those Ancient Charters were forged. After that many other Abbeys were founded
and exempted by the Kings of England, if Credit is due to the Leiger Books or
Chartularies of the Monasteries. In the end of the eighth Century, the Danes
made Descents upon England, and finding the most Wealth and the least
Resistance in the Monasteries, they generally plundered them, in so much that
the Monks were forced to quit their Seats, and they left them to the Secular
Clergy; so that in King Edgar's time there was scarce a Monk left in all
England. He was a lewd and cruel Prince; and Dunstan and other Monks taking
Advantage from some horrors of Conscience that he fell under, persuaded him
that the restoring the Monastic State, would be matter of great Merit; so he
converted many of the Chapters into Monasteries: and by the Foundation of the
Priory of Worcester, it appears he had then founded 47, and intended to raise
them to 50, the number of Pardon; tho the Invention of Jubilees being so much
later, gives occasion to believe this was also a Forgery. He only exempted his
Monasteries from all Payments to the Bishops; but others were exempted from
Episcopal Jurisdiction. In some only the Precinct was exempted, in others, the
Exemption was extended to all the Lands or Churches belonging to them. The
latest Exemption from Episcopal Jurisdiction granted by any King, is that of
Battle founded by William the Conqueror: After this the Exemptions were
granted by the Popes, who pretending to an Universal Jurisdiction, assumed this
among other Usurpations. Some Abbeys had also the Privilege of being
Sanctuaries to all that fled to them. The Foundation of all their Wealth, was
the belief of Purgatory, and of the Virtue that was in Masses to redeem Souls
out of it; and that these eased the Torments of departed Souls, and at last
delivered them out of them; so it past among all for a piece of Piety to
Parents, and of care for their own Souls and Families, to endow those Houses
with some Lands, upon condition that they should have Masses said for them, as
it was agreed on more or less, frequently according to the measure of the Gift.
This was like to have drawn in the whole Wealth of the Nation into those
Houses, if the Statute of Mortmain had not put some restraint to that
Superstition. They also persuaded the World, that the Saints interceded for
them, and would take it kindly at their hands, if they made great Offerings to
their Shrines, and would thereupon intercede the more earnestly for them: The
credulous Vulgar measuring the Court of Heaven by those on Earth, believed
Presents might be of great Efficacy there, and thought the new Favorites would
have the most Weight in their Intercessions: So upon every new. Canonization
there was a new Fit of Devotion toward the last Saint, which made the elder to
grow almost out of request. Some Images were believed to have an extraordinary
Virtue in them, and Pilgrimages to these were much extolled. There was also
great Rivalry among the several Orders, and different Houses of the same
Orders, every one magnifying their own Saints, their Images and Relics most.
The Wealth of these Houses brought them under great Corruptions. They were
generally very dissolute, and grossly ignorant. Their Privileges were become a
public Grievance, and their Lives gave great Scandal to the World; So that, as
they had found it easy to bear down the Secular Clergy, when their own Vices
were more secret; the begging Friars found it as easy to carry the Esteem of
the World from them. These under the Appearance of Poverty, and course Diet,
and Clothing, gained much Esteem, and became almost the only Preachers and
Confessors then in the World. They had a General at Rome, from whom they
received such Directions, as the Popes sent them; so that they were more useful
to the Papacy then the Monks had been. They had also the School-Learning in
their hands, so that they were generally much cherished. But they living much
in the World, could not conceal their Vices so artificially as the Monks had
done; and tho several Reformations had been made of their Orders, yet they had
all fallen under great Scandal, and a general Disesteem. The King intended to
erect new Bishoprics; and in order to that, it was necessary to make use of
some of their Revenues. He also apprehended a War from the Emperor, and for
that end, he intended to fortify his Harbors, and to encourage Shipping, and
Trade, upon which, the Balance of the World began then to turn: And in order
to that, he resolved to make use of the Wealth of those Houses, and thought,
the best way to bring that into his hands, would be to expose their Vices, that
so they might quite lose the Esteem they might yet be in with some, and so it
might be less dangerous to suppress them. Cranmer promoted this much, both
because these Houses were founded on gross Abuses, and subsisted by them; and
these were necessary to be removed, if a Reformation went on. The Extent of
many Diocesses was also such, that one man could not oversee them; so he
intended to have more Bishoprics founded, and to have Houses at every
Cathedral for the Education of those who should be employed in the Pastoral
Charge. The Visitors went over England, and found in many places, monstrous
Disorders. The Sin of Sodom was found in many Houses; great Factions, and
Barbarous Cruelties, were in others; and in some, they found Tools for Coining.
The Report contained many abominable things, that are not fit to be mentioned:
Some of these were printed, but the greatest part is lost; only a Report of 144
Houses is yet extant.

The first House that was surrendered to the King, Some Houses surrendered.
was Langden, in Kent; the Abbot was found a Bed with a Whore, who went in the
Habit of a Lay Brother: This perhaps made him more willing to give an Example
to the rest; so he and ten of his Monks, signed a Resignation of their House to
the King. Two other Houses in the same County, Folkeston, and Dover, followed
their Example. And in the following Year, four other Houses made the like
Surrenders: and these were all that I find before the Act of Parliament past,
for suppressing the lesser Monasteries.

Q. Katherine was put to much trouble, Queen Katherin's Death.
but bore it resolutely, and said, That since the Pope had judged that her
Marriage was good, she would die rather than do any thing in prejudice of it.
Her Sufferings begot Compassion in the People; and all the Superstitious Clergy
supported her Interests zealously. But now her Troubles ended with her Life.
She desired to be buried among the Observant Friars, for they had suffered most
for her. She ordered 500 Masses to be said for her Soul; and that one of her
Women should go a Pilgrimage to our Lady of Walsingham, and give 200 Nobles on
her way to the Poor. When she found Death coming on her, as she writ to the
Emperor, recommending her Daughter to his care: So she writ to the King, with
this Inscription, My dear Lord, King, and Husband. She forgave him all the
Injuries he had done her; and wished him to have regard to his Soul. She
recommended her Daughter to his Care, and desired him to be kind to her three
Maids, and to pay her Servants a Years Wages; and ended thus, mine Eyes desire
you above all things. She died on the Eighth of January, at Kimbolt on, in the
50th Year of her Age, 33 years after she came to England. She shas a Devout and
Exemplary Woman: She used to work with her own hands, and kept her Women at
work with her. The Severities and Devotions that were known to her Priests, and
her Alms-Deeds, joined to the Troubles she fell in, begat a high Esteem of her
in all sorts of People. The King complained often of her Peevishness; but that
was perhaps, to be imputed, as much to the Provocations he gave her, as to the
Sowrness of her Temper. He ordered her to be buried in the Abbey of
Peterborough, and was somewhat touched with her Death. But Q. Ann did not carry
this so decently as became a happy Rival.

In February a Parliament met, In Parliament, the lesser Monasteries suppressed,
after a Prorogation of 14 Months. The Act impowering 32 to revise the
Ecclesiastical Laws, was confirmed; but no time was limited for finishing it,
so it had no effect. The chief business of this Session, was the suppressing of
the Monasteries, under 200 l. a Year. The Report the Visitors made was read in
the two Houses, and disposed them to great easiness in this matter. The Act
sets forth the great disorders of those Houses, and the many unsuccessful
Attempts that had been made to reform them; so the Religious that were in them,
were ordered to be put in the greater Houses, where Religion was better
observed, and the Revenues of them were given to the King. Those Houses were
much richer than they seemed to be; for an abuse that had run over Europe, of
keeping the Rents of the Church at their first Rates; and instead of raising
them, the exacting great Fines for the Incumbent, when the Leases were renewed,
was so gross in those Houses, that some rated but at 200 l. were in real value
worth many Thousands. By another Act, a new Court was erected, with the Title
of the Court of the Augmentations of the King's Revenue, consisting of a
Chancellor, a Treasurer, 10 Auditors, 17 Receivers, besides ofther Officers.
The King was also empowered to make new Foundations, of such of those Houses
now suppressed, as he pleased, which were in all 370, and so this Parliament,
after six Years Continuance, was now dissolved.

A Convocation sat at this time, A Translation of the Bille designed.
in which, a motion was made for Translating the Bible into English, which had
been promised when Tindal's Translation was condemned, but was afterward laid
aside by the Clergy, as neither necessary nor expedient: So it was said, that
those, whose Office it was to teach People the Word of God, did all they could
to suppress it. Moses, the Prophets, and the Apostles, wrote in the Vulgar
Tongue: Christ directed the People to search the Scriptures; and as soon as any
Nation was converted to the Christian Religion, the Bible was translated into
their Language; nor was it ever taken out of the hands of the People, till the
Christian Religion was so corrupted, that it was not safe to trust them with
such a Book, which would have so manifestly discovered those Errors; and the
Legends, as agreeing better with those Abuses, were read instead of the Word of
God. So Cranmer looked on the putting the Bible in the People's hands, as the
most effectual means for promoting the Reformation; and therefore moved, that
the King might be prayed to give order for it. But Gardener, and all the other
Party, opposed this vehemently. They said, All the extravagant Opinions then in
Germanny, rose from the indiscreet use of the Scriptures. Some of those
Opinions were at this time disseminated in England, both against the Divinity,
and Incarnation of Christ, and the usefulness of the Sacraments, for which 19
Hollanders had been burnt in England the former Year. It was therefore said,
That during these Distractions, the use of the Scriptures would prove a great
Snare: So it was proposed, that instead of them, their might be some short
Exposition of the Christian Religion put in the Peoples hands, which might keep
them in a certain Subjection to the King and the Church: But it was carried in
the Convocation for the Affirmative. At Court, Men were much divided in this
Point; some said, if the King gave way to it, he would never be able after that
to govern his People, and that they would break into many Divisions. But on the
other hand, it was said, That nothing would make the Difference between the
Pope's Power, and the King's Supremacy, appear more eminently, than if the one
gave the People the free use of the Word of God; whereas the other had kept
them in Darkness, and ruled them by a blind Obedience. It would be also a great
mean to extinguish the Interest that either the Pope or the Monks had in
England, to put the Bible in the People's hands, in which it would appear, that
the World had been long deceived by their Impostures, which had no Foundation
in the Scriptures. These Reasons joined with the Interest that the Queen had in
the King, prevailed so far with him, that he gave order for setting about this
with all possible have; and within three Years the Impression of it was
finished. At this time, the King was in some Treaty with the German Princes,
not only for a League in Temporal Concerns, but likewise in matters of
Religion. The King thought the Germans should have in all things submitted to
him; and the Opinion he had of his own Learning, which was perhaps heightened a
little with his new Title of Head of the Church, made him expect, that they
should in all points comply with him. Gardener was then his Ambassador in
France, and diswaded him much from any Religious League with them, as that
which would alienate the World abroad, and his People at home from him.

The Popish Party saw the interest the Queen had in him, Q. Ann's Fall.
was the great Obstacle of their Designs: She grew not only in the Kings
Esteem, but in the Love of the Nation. The last Nine Months of her Life, She
gave above 14000 l. in Alms to the Poor, and was much set on doing good. Soon
after Queen Katherin's Death, she bore a dead Son, which was believed to have
made some Impression on the King's mind. It was also considered, that now Queen
Katherine being dead, the King might marry another, and be set right again with
the Pope and the Emperor: And the Issue by any other Marriage would never be
questioned; whereas, while Queen Ann lived, the ground of the Controversy still
remained, and her Issue would be Illegitimated, her Marriage being null from
the beginning, as they thought. With these Reasons of State, the King's
Affectiosn joined, for he was now in Love with Jane Seymour, whose humor was
tempered in a mean, between the Gravity of Queen Katherine, and the
Pleasantness of Queen Ann. The poor Queen used all possible Arts to reinflame a
dying Affection; but the King was changed, and instead of being wrought on by
her Caresses, he came to look on them as Artifices to cover some other Criminal
Affection. Her cheerfulness was not always governed with Decency and
Discretion: And her Brother's Wife being jealous of her Husband and Her,
possessed the King with her own Apprehensions, and filled his Head with many
Stories. Norris, Weston, and Brereton the King's Servants, and Smeton a
Musician, were observed to be particularly officious about her. Somewhat was
pretended to have been sworn by the Lady Wyngfield at her Death, that
determined the King; but there is little light left to judge of that Matter. The
King was at Justs at Greenwich, May 1,
where it was reported, that he was displeased with the Queen, for letting her
Handkerchief fall to one for wiping his Face; but this seems to be a Fiction;
for a Parliament was summoned the day before that, and then it was resolved to
destroy her. The King left her, upon which she was confined to her Chamber, and
the five before mentioned were seized on, and sent to the Tower, and the next
day she was carried thither. On the River, some Privy Counselors came to
examine her; but she made deep Protestations of her Innocence; and as she
landed at the Tower, she fell down on her Knees, and prayed God so to asist
her, as she was free of the Crimes laid to her charge: After this she fell into
fits of the Mother, sometimes she laughed, and at other times she wept
excessively: She was also devout and light by turns; and sometimes she stood
upon her Vindication, and at other times she confessed some Indiscretions,
which she afterward denied. All the People about her made the most of every
Word that fell from her, and sent it immediately to Court. The others that were
imprisoned on her account, denied every thing, only Smeton confessed Leudness
with her. The Duke of Norfolk, and others that came to examine her, made her
believe that both Norris and Smeton had accused her; but tho that was false,
yet it had this Effect on her, that it made her confess that which did totally
alienate the King from her. She acknowledged that she had rallied Norris, that
he waited for the King's Death, and then thought to have her, which tho he
denied, yet upon that she fell out with him. She denied that Smeton was ever in
her Chamber, but once when he came to play on the Virginals. She insinuated as
if he had made Love to her; for seeing him one day pensive, she told him he
must not expect that she should talk to him, since he was so mean a Person, and
he answered, A Look would serve him. She also said, Weston had seemed jealous
of Norris, for being often in her Chamber, and had declared Love to her, upon
which she defied him. Whether these Confessions were real Truths, or the
Effects of Imagination and Vapors, cannot be certainly determined at this
distance. It is probable there had been some Levities in her Carriage that were
not becoming.

All the Court was now turned against her, and she had no Friend about the King
but Cranmer; and therefore her Enemies procured an Order for him not to come to
Court; yet he put all to hazard, and wrote the King a long Letter upon this
Critical Juncture; He acknowledged that if the Things reported of the Queen
were true, it was the greatest Affliction that ever befell the King, and
therefore exhorted him to bear it with Patience and Submission to the Will of
God: he confessed he never had a better Opinion of any Woman than of her; and
that next the King, he was more bound to her, than to all Persons living; and
therefore he begged the King's leave to pray that she might be found Innocent;
he loved her not a little, because of the Love which she seemed to bear to God,
and his Gospel; but if she was guilty, all that loved the Gospel must hate her,
as having given the greatest Slander possible to the Gospel: but he prayed the
King not to entertain any Prejudice to the Gospel on her account, nor give the
World reason to say, That his Love to it was founded on the Power that she had
with him. The King's Jealousy was now too deeply rooted to admit of any Cure,
but an extreme one: May 12.
The Indictments were laid in the Counties of Kent and Middlesex, the former
relating to what was done in Greenwich. Smeton pleaded Guilty, and confessed he
had known the Queen catnally three times; the rest pleaded not guilty; but they
were all condemned.

Three days after that, May 15. Her Trial.
the Queen and her Brother (who was then a Peer) were tried before the Duke of
Norfolk, as High Steward and a Court of 27 Peers. It has been often given out to
defame her the more, that her own Father sat and condemned her: but the Record
of the Attainder shows that is false, for he was not of the Number. The Crime
charged on her was, That she had procured her Brother and four others to lie
with her; and had often said to them, That the King never had her Heart; and
this was to the Slander of the Issue begotten between the King and her, which
was Treason by the Act that confirmed her Marriage: so that Act that was made
for the Marriage, was now turned on her to ruin her. They would not now
acknowledge her the King's lawful Wife, and therefore they did not found the
Treason on the known Statute 25th Edw. 3. It does not appear what Evidence was
brought against her: for Smeton being already condemned, could not be made use
of; and his never being brought face to face against her, gave great suspicion
that he was persuaded to confess by base Practices. The Evidence, as appears by
Spelman's Account of it, that was then a Judge, was only the Declaration of a
dead Woman: but whether that was forged or real, can never be known till the
great Day discovers it. The Judgment in case of Treason for a Woman, is
Burning; but it was given either for that, or beheading at the King's Pleasure.
The Judges complained of this as contrary to Law, but there was a secret Reason
for it, into which they did not penetrate. The Earl of Northumberland was one
of the Judges, he had been once in love with the Queen, and either some return
of that, or some other Accident made that he fell suddenly so ill, that he
could not stay out the Trial; for after the Queen was judged, he went out of
the Gourt before her Brother was tried, who was condemned upon the same
Evidence. Yet all this did not satisfy the enraged King; he resolved to
illegitimate his Daughter, and in order to that to annul his Marriage with the
Queen. It was remembered that the Earl of Northumberland, had said to Cardinal
Wolsey, that he had engaged himself so far with her, that he could not go back,
which was perhaps done by some Promise conceived in Words of the Future Tense;
but no Promise, unless in the Words of the Present Tense, could annul the
Subsequent Marriage. Perhaps the Queen did not understand that Difference, or
probably the fear of so terrible a Death as Burning, wrought so much on her,
that she confessed a Contract; but the Earl denied it positively, and took the
Sacrament upon it, wishing that it might turn to his Damnation, if there was
ever either Contract or Promise of Marriage between them. She was secretly
carried to Lambeth, and confessed a Precontract, upon which her Marriage with
the King was judged null from the beginning; yet this was so little known at
that time, that Spelman writes of it as a thing only talked of, but it was
published in the next Parliament. These two Sentences contradicted one another;
for if she was never the King's Wife, she could not be guilty of Adultery, for
there could be no breach of the Faith of Wedlock, if they were never truly
married. But the King was resolved both to be rid of her, and to declare his
Daughter by her a Bastard.

When she had Intimations given her to prepare for Death; Her Execution.
among other things she reflected on her Carriage to Lady Mary, to whom she had
been too severe a Stepmother: So she made one of her Women sit down, and she
fell on her Knees before her and charged her to go to Lady Mary, and in that
Posture, and in her Name, to ask her Forgiveness for all she had done against
her. This Tenderness of Conscience seemed to give much Credit to the continual
Protestations of her Innocence, which she made to the last. The day before her
Death, she sent her last Message to the King, asserting her Innocence,
recommending her Daughter to his Care, and thanking him for his advancing her,
first to be a Marchioness, then to be a Queen, and now, when he could raise her
no higher on Earth, for sending her to be a Saint in Heaven. The day she died
the Lieutenant of the Tower writ to Cromwell, that it was not fit to publish
the time of her Execution, for the fewer that were present it would be the
better; since he believed she would declare her Innocence at the hour of her
Death; for that morning she had made great Protestations of it, when she
received the Sacrament, and seemed to long for Death, and had great Joy and
Pleasure in it; she was glad to hear the Executioner was good, for she said she
had a very short Neck, at which she laughed heartily. A little before Noon, she
was brought to the place of Execution; there were present some of the Chief
Officers and Great Men of the Court; she was, it seems prevailed on out of
regard to her Daughter, to make no Reflections on the hard measure she met
with, nor to say any thing, touching the Grounds, on which Sentence past
against her, only she desired that all would judge the best: she commended the
King highly, and so took her leave of the World: She was for some time in her
private Devotions, and concluded, To Christ I commend my Soul; upon which the
Executioner, who was brought from Calis on that occasion, cut off her Head, and
so little regard was had to her Body, that it was put in a Chest of Elm-tree,
made to send Arrows into Ireland, and was buried in the Chapel in the Tower.
Norris was much dealt with to accuse her, and his Life was promised him if he
would do it; but he said he knew she was Innocent, and would die a thousand
times rather than defame her: so he and the other three were beheaded, and all
of them continued to the last to vindicate her. Smeton was hanged, and it was
said, that he retracted all before he died; but of that, there is no certainty.

When this was done, it was very variously censured. The Popish Party observed,
that she who had supplanted Queen Katherine, Censures past upon it.
did now meet with harder measure; her faint way of speaking concerning her
Innocence at last, was judged too high a Complement to the King in a dying
Woman, and showed more regard to her Daughter than to her own Honor; yet she
writ a Letter to the King in so high a strain both of Wit and Natural Eloquence
in her own Justification, that it may be reckoned one of the best composed
pieces of that time. In her Carriage it seems there were some Freedoms that
became not her Quality, and had encouraged those unfortunate Persons to make
some Addresses to her, which is never done when there is such difference of
Conditions, without some Encouragement is first given. It was said on the other
hand, that the King of all Men, had the least reason to suspect her, since
after six Years Courtship, he gained nothing from her, before he married her;
but the Particulars she confessed, gave much matter for Jealousy, especially in
so violent a Man, to work upon; and so it was no wonder if it transported him
out of measure. Others condemned Cranmer as too obsequious for passing the
Sentence annulling the Marriage: yet when she came and confessed a Precontract
in Court, he could not avoid the giving Sentence upon it. All that hated the
Reformation infulted, and said, it now appeared how bad that Cause was, which
was supported by such a Patron. But it was answered, that her Faults could not
reflect on those, who being ignorant of them, had desired her Protection.
Gregory the Great had courted and magnified Phocas and Brunichild, after he
knew their Villainies; and Irene after her barbarous Cruelties, was rot a little
extolled for her Zeal in the matter of Images. It has seemed strange to some,
that during her Daughter's long and glorious Reign, none writ in Vindication of
her Mother, which officious Courtiers are apt to do often without any good
Grounds, so that Silence was made an Argument of her Guilt, and that she could
not be defended. But perhaps that was an effect of the Wisdom of the Ministers
of that time, who would not suffer so nice a Point, upon which the Queen's
Legitimation depended, to be brought into dispute. The day after Anne Boleyn's
Death, the King married Jane Scimour, who gained more upon him, than all his
Wives ever did: But she was happy that she did not outlive his Love to her.

Lady Mary was advised upon this turn of Affairs, Lady Mary 's Submission oo
the King.
to make her Submission to the King: she offered to confess the Fault of her
former Obstinacy, and in General, to give up her Understanding entirely to the
King; but that would not satisfy, unless she would be more particular; so at
last she was prevailed with, to do it in the fullest Terms that could be
desired; She acknowledged the King to be the Supreme Head on Earth under Christ
of the Church of England, and did renounce the Bishop of Rome's Authority; and
promised in all things to be obedient to the Laws that were made; which she
said flowed from her inward Belief, and Judgment, and in which she would for
ever continue; and she did also acknowledge that the King's Marriage with her
Mother, was by God's Law and Man's Law unlawful and incestuous! all this she
writ with her own Hand, and subscribed it, upon which she was again received
into Favor; and an Establishment was made for a Family about her, in which 40
l. a quarter was all the Allowance for her Privy Purse, so great was the
Frugality of that time. Lady Elizabeth continued to be educated with great
Care, and was so forward, that before she was four Years old, she both wrote a
good Hand, and understood Italian; for there are Letters extant written by her
in that Language to Queen Jane, when she was with child, in which she
subscribed Daughter.

On the 8th of June the Parliament met, A Farliament meets.
which shows that it was summoned before the Justs at Greenwich. The
Chancellor told them, that the King had called them to settle the Succession
of the Crown, in case he should dye without Children lawfully begotten, and to
repeal the Act made concerning his Marriage with Queen Anne. It seems the
Parliament was not at first easily brought to comply with these things; and
that it was necessary to take some pains to prepare them to it. For the Bill of
Succession, was not put in till the 30th of June, but then it was quickly
dispatched without any Opposition: by it the Attainder of Queen Anne and her
Accomplices is confirmed; both the Sentences of Divorces passed upon the King's
two former Marriages were also confirmed; and the Issue by both was
illegitimated and for ever excluded from claiming the Crown by Lineal Descent:
And the Succession was established on the King's Issue by his present Queen, or
any whom he might afterward marry. But it not being fit to declare who should
succeed in default of that, lest the Person so named might be thereby enabled
to raise Commotions, in Confidence of the King's Wisdom, and Affection to his
People, they left it to him nominate his Successors, either by Letters Patents,
or by his last Will signed by his Hand, and promised to obey the Persons so
nominated by him. It was declared Treason to maintain the Lawfulness of his
former Marriages, or of his Issue by them, and it was made not only Treason,
but a forfeiture of the Right of Succession, if any of those whom the King
should name in default of others, should endeavor to get before them. The
Scots complained of this Act, and said, their Queen Dowager, being King Henry's
Eldest Sister, could not be put by her Right, after the King's lawful Issue.
But by this the King was now made Master indeed, and had the Crown put entirely
in his Hands, to be disposed of at his Pleasure; and his Daughters were now to
depend wholly on him. He had it also in his Power in a great measure to pacify
the Emperor by providing, that his Kinswoman might succeed to the Crown.

Pope Clement the 7th, Pope Paul the 3d, proposes a Recoaciliation with the
King.
was now dead, and Farnese succeeded by the Name of Paul the 3d, who, after an
unsuccesful Attempt, which he made for reconciling himself with the King, when
that was rejected, and Fisher was beheaded, thundered out a most terrible
Sentence of Deposition against him: Yet now, since both Queen Katherine and
Queen Anne, upon whose account the Breach was made, were out of the way, he
thought it a fit time to try what might be done; and ordered Cassali to let the
King know that he had always favored his Cause when he was a Cardinal, that he
was driven very much against his Mind to pass Sentence against him; and that
now it would be easy for him to recover the Favor of the Apostolic See.

But the King instead of hearkening to the Proposition, Acts against the Pope's
Power.
got two Acts to be passed; The one was for the utter extinguishing the Pope's
Authority; and it was made a Praemunire for any to acknowledge it, or to persuade
others to it: And a strict Charge was given to all Magistrates under severe
Penalties to enquire after all Offenders. By another all Bulls and all
Privileges flowing from them, were declared null and void, only Marriages or
Consecrations made by virtue of them, were excepted. All who enjoyed
Privileges by these Bulls were required to bring them into the Chancery; upon
which the Archbishop was to make them a new Grant of them, and that, being
confirmed under the Great Seal, was to be of full force in Law.

Another Act passed explaining an Exception, that was in the Act for the
Residence of all Incumbents, by which those who were at the Universities were
dispensed with, upon which many went and lived idly there. It was therefore
now declared that none above the Age of forty, except Heads and public
Readers, should have the Benefit of that Proviso, and that none under that Age
should be comprehended in it, except they performed their Exercises. Another
Act passed in Favor of the King's Heirs, if they should Reign before they were
of full Age, that they might any time before they were 24, repeal by Letters
Patents all Acts made during their Minority. All these things being concluded,
the Parliament after it had sat six Weeks, was dissolved. The Convocation
examines some points of Religion.


The Convocation sat at the same time, and was much employed: for the House of
Lords was often adjourned, because the Spiritual Lords were busy in the
Convocation. Latimer preached the Latin Sermon; he was the most celebrated
Preacher of that time; the Simplicity of his matter, and his Zeal in expressing
it, being preferred to more elaborate Composures. They first confirmed the
Sentence of the Divorce of the King's Marriage with Queen Anne. Then the lower
House made an Address to the upper House, complaining of 67 Opinions that they
found were much spread in the Kingdom: they were either the Tenets of the old
Lollards, or the new Reformers, or of the Anabaptists; and many of them were
only unsavory and indiscreet Expressions, which might have flowed from the
Heat and Folly of some rash Zealots, who by petulant Jeers, and an Affectation
of Wit, had endeavored to disgrace both the received Doctrines and Rites. They
also complained of some Bishops who were wanting in their Duty to suppress such
Abuses; which was understood as a Reflection on Cranmer, Shaxton, and Latimer.
It was hoped that Cranmer was now declining by Queen Ann's Fall; and the other
two who were raised by her, would not have stood long, if he had been once
disgraced; yet they premised to this a Protestation, that they intended to do
nothing that might displease the King, whom they acknowledged to be their
Supreme Head; and they were resolved to obey his Laws, and they renounced the
Pope's Authority with all his Laws. All these Projects failed, for Cranmer was
now fully established in the King's Favor; and Cromwell was sent to them with
a Message from the King, That they should reform the Rites and Ceremonies of
the Church, according to the Rules set down in Scripture, which ought to be
preferred to all Glosses or Decrees of Popes. There was one Alesse a
Scotch-man, whom Cromwell entertained in his House, and he being appointed to
deliver his Opinion, largely showed that there was no Sacraments instituted by
Christ, but Baptism and the Lord's Supper: Stokesly answered him in a long
Discourse upon the Principles of the School Divinity; upon which Cranmer took
occasion to show the Vanity of that sort of Learning, and the Uncertainty of
Tradition: and that Religion had been so corrupted in the latter Ages, that
there was no finding out the Truth, but by resting in the Authority of the
Scriptures. Fox Bishop of Hereford seconded him, and told them the World was
now awake, and would be no longer imposed on by the Niceties and dark Terms of
the Schools; for the Laity now did not only read the Scriptures in the vulgar
Tongues, but searched the Originals themselves; therefore they must not think
to govern them as they had been in the Times of Ignorance: Among the Bishops,
Cranmer, Goodrick, Shaxton, Latimer, Fox, Hilsey, and Barlow, pressed a
Reformation; but Lee Archbishop of York, Stokesly, Tonstall, Gardener,
Longland, and several others opposed it as much: But the Contest had been
sharper, if the King had not sent some Articles to them to be considered of by
them; so they whose chief Design it was to recommend themselves to Preferment,
by the easiness of their Compliance with him in all Points, did agree on the
following Particulars.

1. Articles of Religion agreed on.
That the Bishops and Preachers ought to instruct the People according to the
Scripture, the three Creeds, and the four first General Councils.

2. That Baptism was necessary to Salvation, and that Children ought to be
baptized for the pardon of Original Sin, and obtaining the Holy Ghost.

3. That Penance was necessary to Salvation and that it consisted in
Confession, Contrition, and Amendment of Life, with the External Works of
Charity, to which a lively Faith ought to be joined; and that Confession to a
Priest was necessary where it might be had.

4. That in the Eucharist under the forms of Bread and Wine, the very Flesh and
Blood of Christ, was received.

5. That Justification was the Remission of Sins, and a perfect Renovation in
Christ, and that not only outward good Works, but inward Holiness was
absolutely necessary: As for the outward Ceremonies the People were to be
taught, that it was meet to have Images in Churches, but they ought to avoid
all such Superstition as had been usual in time past, and not to worship the
Image, but only God. 2. That they were to honor the Saints, but not to expect
those things from them which God only gives. 3. That they might pray to them
for their Intercession; but all Superstitious Abuses were to cease; and if the
King should lessen the number of Saints Days, they ought to obey him. 4. That
the use of the Ceremonies was good, and that they contained many Mystical
Significations that tended to raise the mind toward God, such were Vestments
in Divine Worship, Holy Water, Holy Bread, the carrying of Candles, and Palms
and Ashes, and creeping to the Cross, and the Hallowing the Font, with other
Exorcisms. 5. That it was good to pray for departed Souls, and to have Masses
and Exequies said for them; but the Scriptures having neither declared in what
Place they were, nor what Torments they suffered, that was uncertain, and to be
left to God: therefore all the Abuses of the Pope's Pardons, or saying Masses
in such or such Places, or before such Images were to be put away. These
Articles were signed by Cromwell, the two Archbishops, sixteen Bishops, forty
Abbots, and Priors, and fifty of the lower House; to them the King added a
Preface, declaring the Pains that he and the Clergy had been at, for the
removing the Differences in Religion that were in the Nation, and that he
approved of these Articles, and required all his Subjects to accept them with
the like Unanimity with which they were consented to; and he would be thereby
encouraged to take further Pains in the like Matters for the future.

When these things were published, They are variously censured.
those that desired a Reformation, tho they did not approve of every
Particular, yet were well pleased to see things brought under Examination; and
since some things were at this time changed, they did not doubt but more
Changes would follow; they were glad that the Scriptures and the Ancient Creeds
were made the Standards of the Faith, without adding Tradition, and that the
nature of Justification and the Gospel Covenant were rightly stated; that the
immediate Worship of Images and Saints was condemned, and that Purgatory was
left uncertain; but the necessity of Auricular Confession, and the Corporal
Presence, the doing Reverence to Images, and praying to Saints, were of hard
Digestion to them: yet they were glad to see some grosser Abuses removed, and a
Reformation once set on foot. The Popish Party were sorry to see four
Sacraments past over in silence; and the Trade about Purgatory put down; and
were very apprehensive of the Precedent of bringing matters of Religion under
debate, which would bring on other Alterations. When these things were known
beyond Sea, the Court of Rome made great use of them, to let all Princes see
the necessity of adhering to the Holy See; for no sooner did England depart
from that, than it began to change the Doctrine likewise. The Germans on the
other hand, said, This was a Political Daubing, for satisfying all Parties; and
that it savoured not of the Sincerity that became the Professors of True
Religion, to allow of so many Errors. To this it was answered, That our
Savior did not deliver all things to his Disciples, till they were able to
bear them. And the Apostles did not abolish all the Rites of Judaism at once,
but by a gentle Progress intended to wean those that were converted to the
Christian Religion from them. The Clergy were to be drawn by slow and easy
Steps out of their Ignorance and Superstition; whereas the driving on things
with precipitated have, might spoil the whole Design, and alienate those who by
slower Methods might be gained; and it might also much endanger the Peace of
the Nation.

At the same time other things were in Consultation, tho not finished. Other
Alterations proposed.
Cranmer offered some Queries to show the Cheats that had been put on the
World: as that Priestly Absolution without Contrition was of more efficacy than
Contrition was without it: and that the People trusted wholly to outward
Ceremonies; in which the Priests encouraged them because of the gain they made
by them: That the exemption of Clergymen was without good ground; that Bishops
did ordain without due care and previous trial; and that the dignified Clergy
misapplied their Revenues, and did not reside on their Benefices; he also
desired that the other four Sacraments might be enquired into: but these things
were not at this time taken under any further consideration. It is true,
Confirmation seems to have been examined: The Method in which they made their
Enquiries, was this; the Point to be examined was brought under so many Heads,
in the form of Queries; and to these every one gave his Answer with his
Reasons: so I find two Papers, the one of Cranmer's, the other of Stokesly's,
on this Head; the former runs wholly upon Scripture-Authority, and he thinks it
was not instituted by Christ, but was done by the Apostles, by that
extraordinary Effusion of the Holy Ghost, that rested on them: The other founds
his Opinion for its being a Sacrament, on the Tradition of the Church; but
nothing was determined in this point. Cranmer did at this time, offer another
Paper to the King, exhorting him to proceed to a further Reformation, and that
nothing should be determined without clear Proofs from Scripture; for the
departing from that Rule, had been the Occasion of all the Errors that had
been in the Church. Many things were now acknowledged to be Errors, for which,
some not long before, had suffered Death. He therefore proposed several points
to be discussed; as whether there was a Purgatory? Whether departed Saints
ought to be invocated, or Tradition be believed? Whether Images ought to be
considered only as Representations of History? And whether it was lawful for
the Clergy to marry? He prayed the King not to give Judgment in these points,
till he heard them well examined: And for the last he offered, that if those
who would defend the lawfulness of it, should not in the Opinion of indifferent
Judges, prove their Opinion to be true, they should be willing to suffer Death;
but if they proved it, all that they desired was, that the King would leave
them to the Liberty which God had allowed them in that matter: But all this was
carried no further at this time.

The Pope had issued out a Summons for a General Council at Mantua, and had
cited the King to it: From this, the King did appeal to a General Council,
rightly constituted. So a motion being made by Fox, that the Convocation should
deliver their Sense in this Particular; They drew up a Paper, in which they set
forth the great Good that might follow in a General Council rightly called; but
that nothing could be more mischievous, than one called on private malice,
according to what Nazianzen observed of the Councils in his time; And they
thought neither the Pope, nor any one Prince, had sufficient Authority to call
one; but that all Princes who had an entire and supreme Government over all
their Subjects, ought to concur to it. This was signed by them all, on the 20th
of July; and so was the Convocation dismissed. Two days before it brake up,
Cromwell was made the King's Vicegerent in Ecclesiastical Matters, of which,
some Account was formerly given.

Soon after this, The King protests against a Council called by the Pope.
the King published a long and sharp Protestation, against the Council summoned
by the Pope; he denied that he had any Authority to summon any of his Subjects:
He showed that the place was neither proper nor safe; and that no good could be
expected from any Council in which the Pope presided, since the regulating his
Power was one of the chief occasions that the World had for a Council: And
while Christendom was in such Distractions, and the Emperor and the King of
France were engaged in War, it was not a fit time for one to be called. The
Pope had refused it long; and this Conjuncture was chosen, in which the Bishops
could not come to it, that so a packt meeting of Italian Bishops might do what
they pleased, under the name of a General Council: But the World would be no
longer cozened. No credit was due to a Pope's safe Conduct, for they had often
broken their Oaths, as to himself in particular: And notwithstanding his former
kindness to that See, they had been for three Years, stirring up all the
Princes in Christendom against him. He protested against all Councils called by
the Pope; but declared, He would be ready to concur with other Christian
Princes for calling one, when it should be convenient: And in the mean while,
he would maintain all the Articles of the Faith; and lose his Life and Crown
sooner than suffer any of them to be put down. Three Years after this, the King
made a new Protestation to the same effect, when the Council was summoned to
meet at Vincenza.

Reginald Pool began at this same time to raise that Opposition to the King,
Cardinal Pool writes against the King.
which proved so fatal to all his Family. He was by his Mother descended from
the Duke of Clarence, Brother to Edward the Fourth; and was by his Father
likewise, the King's near Kinsman. To this high Quality, there was joined a
great Sweetness of Temper, and a Disposition for Letters, which the King
cherished much, and gave him the Deanery of Exeter, and some other Preferments,
in order to the carrying on of his Studies, being resolved to advance him to
the highest Dignities in the Church. He lived many Years, both at Paris and
Padua. In the latter of these, he joined himself to a Society of Learned Men,
that gave themselves much to the Study of Eloquence, and of the Roman Authors,
among whom were Contareno, Bembo, Caraffa, and Sadoletti, all afterward
honored with the Scarlet; but Pool was esteemed the most Eloquent of of them
all. When he was at Paris, he first incurred the King's Displeasure, for he
refused to join with those whom he employed, in order to the procuring the
Determinations of the French Universities for the Divorce. Yet after that, he
came to England, and was present when the Convocation declared the King to be
their Supreme Head: And it is probable, that he joined in it, for he kept his
Deanery some Years after this, which it is not likely would have been granted
him, if he had not done that. The King suffered him after that to go beyond
Sea, but could never draw him over again. Some time afterward, he wrote
plainly to the King, that he condemned both his Divorce, and his Separation
from the Apostolic See. The King upon that, sent him a Book writ by Sampson,
Bishop of Chichester, in defense of these things, and that set him on writing
his Book, de Union Ecclesiastica, which was printed this Year. It was full of
sharp Reflections on the King, whom he compared to Nebuchadnezzar: It tended
much to depress the Regal, and to exalt the Papal Authority. And in Conclusion,
he addressed himself to the Emperor, praying him, rather to turn his Arms
against the King, than the Turk. It was very Eloquently wrote; but there was
little Learning or Reasoning in it; and it was full of Indecencies in the
Language, that he bestowed not only on Sampson, but on the King. The King
required him to come over, but that was not to be expected, after he had made
such a step. So he divested him of all his Dignities; but that recommended him
to a Cardinal's Hat. Stokesly, and Tonstal, wrote him a long and learned
Letter, in the King's Vindication. Gary diner wrote also his Book, de vera
Obedientia; to which, Bonner prefixed a vehement Preface against the Pope's
Power, and for justifying the King's Supremacy. The King's anger at Pool could
not reach him, but it fell Heavy on his Kindred.

Visitors were appointed to survey all the lesser Monasteries: The lesser
Monasteries cited in
They were required to carry along with them the Concurrence of the Gentry near
them, and to examine the estate of their Revenues and Goods, and take
Inventories of them; and to take their Seals into their keeping: They were to
try how many of the Religious would take Capacities, and return to a Secular
Course of Life; and these were to be sent to the Archbishop of Canterbury, or
the Lord Chancellor for them; and an Allowance was to be given them for their
Journey: But those who intended to continue in that state, were to be sent to
some of the great Monasteries that lay next. A Pension was also to be assigned
to the Abbot, or Prior, during Life: And of all this, they were to make their
report by Michaelmass: And they were particularly to examine what Leases had
been made all the last Year. The Abbots hearing of what was coming on them, had
been raising all the Money they could; and so it was intended to recover what
was made away by ill Bargains. There were great Complaints made of the
Proceedings of the Visitors, of their Violencies and Briberies; and perhaps not
without reason. Ten Thousand of the Religious were set to seek for their
Livings, with Forty Shillings and a Gown a Man. Their Goods and Plate were
estimated at an 100000 l. And the valued Rents of their Houses was 32000 l. but
was really above ten times so much. The Churches and Cloisters were in most
places pulled down, and the Materials sold.

This gave a general Discontent; Which gave a general Discontent
and the Monks were now as much pitied, as they were formerly hated. It was
thought strange to see the King devour what his Ancestors had dedicated to the
Honor of God, and his Saints. The Nobility and Gentry, who provided for their
younger Children, or Friends, by putting them in those Sanctuaries, were
sensible of their Loss. The People who had been fed at the Abbot's Tables, and
as they traveled over the Country, found the Abbeys to be places of Reception
to Strangers, saw what they were to lose. But the more Superstitious, who
thought their Friends must now ly still in Purgatory, without that Relief which
the Masses procured them, were out of measure offended at these Proceedings.
The Books that were published of the Disorders in these Houses, had no great
effect on the People: For it was said, There was no reason to destroy whole
Houses for the sake of some vicious Persons, who ought to have been driven out
of them, and punished. But to remove this general discontent, Cromwell advised
the King to sell these Lands at very easy Rates, to the Nobility and Gentry,
and to oblige them to keep up the wonted Hospitality. This would both be
grateful to them, and would engage them to assist the Crown in the Maintenance
of the changes that had been made; since their own Interests would be
Interwoven with the Rights of Crown; and the commoner sort, whose grudges lay
chiefly in their Stomachs, for the want of the good Dinners they used to find,
would be easily pacified if these were still kept up. And upon a Clause in the
Act empowering the King to found anew, such Houses as he should think fit;
there were 15 Monasteries, and 16 Nunneries, new founded. It seems these had
been more regular than the rest; so that for a while they were reprived, till
the General Suppression came, that they fell with the rest. They were bound to
obey such Rules as the King should send them; and to pay him Tenths, and first
Fruits. But all this did not so pacify the People, but there was still a great
outcry. The Clergy studied much to inflame the Nation; and built much on this,
That an Heretical Prince deposed by the Pope, was no more to be acknowledged,
which had been for 500 Years received as an Article of Faith, and was decreed
in the same Council, that Established Transubstantiation; and had been received
and carried down from Gregory the Seventh's time, who pretended, that it was a
part of the Papal Power to depose Kings, and give away their Dominions, and had
it been often put in Practice in almost all the Parts of Europe, and some that
had been raisers of great Sedititions had been Canonized for it. The Pope had
summoned the King to appear at Rome, and answer for putting away his Queen and
taking another Wife, for the Laws he had made against the Church, and for
putting the Bishop of Rochester and others to death for their not obeying them;
if he did not appear nor reform these things, he excommunicated and deprived
him, absolved his Subjects from their Obedience, dissolved his Leagues with
Foreign Princes, and put the Kingdom under an Interdict. But tho the force of
these Thunders was in this Age much abated, yet they had not quite lost their
Strength; and the Clergy resolved to make the most of them that could be.

Some Injunctions which were given by Cromwell, Injunctions given by the King.
increased this ill Disposition. They were to this Effect: All Churchmen were
required every Sunday for a quarter of a Year, and twice every Quarter after
that, to preach against the Pope's Power, and assert the King's Supremacy, and
to explain the Articles lately set forth by the Convocation; and to publish the
Abrogation of some Holy Days in Harvest time: They were no more to extol
Images, Relics, or Pilgrimages; but to exhort the People to do Works of
Charity instead of them: And they were required to teach the People the Lord's
Prayer, the Creed, and the Ten Commandments in English, and to explain these
carefully, and instruct the Children well in them. They were to perform the
Divine Offices reverently, and to have good Curats to supply their rooms when
they were absent. They were charged not to go to Alehouses, or sit too long at
Games; but to study the Scriptures much, and be exemplary in their Lives: Those
that did not reside, were to give the fortieth part of their Income to the
Poor, and for every 100 l. a year that any had, they were to maintain a Scholar
at some Gramar-School, or the University: and if the Parsonage-house was in
decay, they were ordered to apply a fifth part of their Benefice for repairing
it. Such as did not obey these Injunctions, were to be suspended, and their
mean Profits were to be sequestered. The Clergy detested this Precedent of the
King's giving Injunctions without the Concurrence of a Convocation, and by
which, they said, they would be made Slaves to his Vicegerent: they also
complained of those heavy Taxes that were laid on them, and that Images,
Relics, and Pilgrimages would be now brought under great Contempt. Both the
Secular and Regular Clergy were so sensibly concerned in these things, that
they inflamed the People all they could. The great Abbots were not wanting for
their share to set that on, they were now oppressed with the Crowds of those who
were sent to them from the suppressed Houses, and they expected to fall next; nor
were their Fears removed by a Letter that was sent about in the King's Name for
silencing all Reports that were given out of his Intentions to suppress them;
this rather increased than lessened their Jealousy.

The People continued quiet till they had reaped their Harvest, A Rebellion in
Lincolnshire.
but in the beginning of October 20000 rose in Lincolnshire, led by a Priest,
disguised into a Cobbler. They took an Oath to be true to God, the King, and the
Commonwealth, and sent a Paper of their Grievances to the King. They
complained of some Acts of Parliament, of the suppressing of many Religious
Houses, of mean and ill Counselors, and bad Bishops; and prayed the King to
address their Grievances by the Advice of the Nobility: but yet they
acknowledged him to be their Supreme Head, and that the Tenths and first Fruits
of Livings belonged to him of right. The King sent the Duke of Suffolk to raise
Forces against them, and gave an Answer to their Petition. He said it belonged
not to the Rabble to direct Princes what Counselors they should choose. The
Religious Houses were suppressed by Law, and the Heads of them had under their
Hands confessed such horrid Scandals, that they were a Reproach to the Nation;
and since in many of them there were not above four, and that they wasted their
Rents in riotous living, it was much better to apply them to the common good of
the Nation, than leave them in such hands; he required them to submit to his
Mercy, and to put two hundred of their Leaders into the hands of his
Lieutenants. The Clergy having brought so many together, did all they could to
put Heat and Spirit in them, they persuaded them that if they did not maintain
their Faith and their Liberties, both would be lost. Some of the Gentry were
forced to join with them for their own Preservation; and they sent Advices to
the Duke of Suffolk, to procure from the King, the offer of a General Pardon,
which would effectually dissipate them.

At the same time there was a more formidable rising in Yorkshire, Another in
Yorkshire.
which being in the Neighborhood of Scotland, was like to draw Assistance from
that Kingdom: tho their King was then gone into France, to marry Francis's
Daughter; this inclined the King to make more haste to settle matters in
Lincolnshire; he sent them secret Assurances of Mercy, which wrought on the
greatest part, so they dispersed themselves, and the most obstinate went to
over them in Yorkshire. The Cobbler, and some others, were taken and executed.
The distance that those in the North, were at from the Court gave them time to
rise, and form themselves into some Method: One Ask commanded in chief, and
performed his part with great Dexterity: their March was called The Pilgrimage
of Grace; they had in their Banners and on their Sleeves, the five Wounds of
Christ: they took an Oath that they would restore the Church, suppress
Heretics, preserve the King and his Issue, and drive base-born Men and ill
Counselors from him. They became 40000 strong in a few days, and met with no
Opposition, they forced the Archbishop of York, and the Lord Darcy to swear
their Covenant, and to go along with them. They besieged Skipton, but the Earl
of Cumberland, made it good against them: Sir Ralph Evers held out Scarborough
Castle, tho for twenty days he and his Men had no Provisions but Bread and
Water. There was also a rising in all the other Northern Counties, against whom
the Earl of Shrewsbury made Head; and the King sent several of the Nobility to
his Assistance, and within a few days the Duke of Norfolk marched with some
Troops, and joined him. They possessed themselves of Doncaster, and resolved to
keep that pass till the rest of the Forces that the King had ordered to be
summoned, should come up to them; for they were not in a Condition to engage
with such numbers of desperate Men; and it was very likely that if they met
with any ill Accident, the People might have risen about them every where; so
the Duke of Norfolk, resolved to keep close at Doncaster, and let the
Provisions and Rage of the Rebels spend, and then with the help of a little
time, they might probably fall into Factions, and melt away. They had now
fallen to 30000, but the King's Army was not above 5000. The Duke of Norfolk
proposed a Treaty, and made some go among them as Desertors, and spread Reports
that their Leaders were making Terms for themselves. They were persuaded to
send their Petitions to the Court, and the King to make them more secure,
discharged a Rendezvous that he had appointed at Northampton, and sent them a
general Pardon, excepting six by name, and reserving four to be afterward
named; but this put them all in such Apprehensions, that it made them more
resolved and desperate: Yet the King to give his People some Content, put out
Injunctions, requiring the Clergy to continue the use of all the Ceremonies of
the Church: 300 were employed to carry the Rebels Demands to the King; Which
were a General Pardon, a Parliament to be held at York; and that Courts of
Justice should be set up there; they desired that some Acts of Parliament might
be repealed, that the Princess Mary might be restored to her Right of
Succession, and the Pope to his wonted Jurisdiction; that the Monasteries might
be again set up; that Audley and Cromwell might be put from the King, and that
some of the Visitors might be imprisoned for their Bribery and Extortion. But
these being rejected, the Rebels took heart again, upon which the Duke of
Norfolk advised the King to gentle Methods; he in his Heart wished that all
their Demands might be granted; and the Ld Darcy did accuse him afterward as
if he had encouraged them to make them. The King sent him a general Pardon
without any Exceptions, to be made use of as he saw Cause. The Rebels finding
that with the loss of time, they lost Heart, resolved to fall upon him and beat
him from Doncaster: but at two several times, in which they had resolved to
pass the River, such Rains fell out as made it unpassable, which was magnified
as next to a Miracle, and made great Impressions on the Rebels Minds. The King
sent a long Answer to their Demands, he assured them he would live and dye in
the Defense of the Christian Faith: but the Rabble ought not to prescribe to
him, and to the Convocation in that matter; he answered that which concerned
the Monasteries, as he had done to the Men of Lincolnshire. For the Laws, a
Multitude must not pretend to alter what was established; he had governed them
now 28 Years, his Subjects had enjoyed great Safety, and been very gently used
by him in all that time. It was given out that when he began to reign, he had
many of the Nobility in his Council, and that he had then none but Men meanly
born; this was false, for he found but two Noblemen of his Council, and at
present there were 7 Temporal Lords, and 4 Bishops in it. It was necessary to
have some that knew the Law of England, and Treaties with Foreign Princes,
which made him call Audley and Cromwell to the Board. If they had any
Complaints to make of any about him, On the 9th of December, he signed a
Proclamation of Pardon without any Restrictions.

When this was known, They are everywhere quieted.
and the Rage of the People cooled, they were willing to lay hold on it, and
all the Artifices that some of the Clergy and their Leaders could use, had no
other Effect but to draw as many together as brought them under new Guilt, and
made them forfeit the benefit of the King's Pardon. Many came in and renewed
their Oaths of Allegiance, and promising all Obedience for the future. Ask was
invited to the Court and well used by the King, on design to learn from him all
the secret Correspondencies they had in the other parts of the Kingdom, for the
Disposition to Rebel was general, only they were not all alike forward in it.
It was in particular believed that the great Abbots cherished it, for which
some of them were afterward attained. Darcy pleaded his great Age, being then
fourscore, and the Eminent Service he had done the Crown for fifty Years
together, and that he was forced for his own Preservation to go along with the
Rebels; but yet he was put in Prison. This gave the Clergy Advantages to infuse
it in the People, that the Pardon would not be well kept: So 8000 run together
again, and thought to have surprised Carlisle, but the Duke of Norfolk fell on
them and routed them, and by Martial Law hanged their Captains, and 70 other
Persons. Others thought to have surprised Hull, but were likewise routed, and
many of them were hanged. Many other little Risings were quickly dispersed; and
such was the Duke of Norfolk's Vigilance, that he was every where upon them
before they could grow to any Number: and before the end of January, the
Country was absolutely quieted. Ask left the Court without leave, but was soon
retaken and hanged at York. The Lord Darcy and Hussy were arraigned at
Westminster, and condemned by their Peers, the one for the Yorkshire, and the
other for the Lincolnshire Insurrections. Darcy was beheaded on Tower Hill: his
old Age and former Services made him to be much lamented. Hussy was beheaded at
Lincoln. Darcy accused the Duke of Norfolk, but he desired a Trial by Combat
upon it, yet the Services he had lately done were such, that the King would not
seem to have any Jealousy of him. After these and several other Executions were
over, the King proclaimed a General Oblivion in July, by which the Nation was
again put in a quiet Condition, and this threatening Storm was now quite
dissipated.

As soon as it was over, the King went on more resolutely in his Design of
suppressing the Monasteries: for he was now less apprehensive of any new
Commotions, after so many had been so happily quasht and that the chief
Incendiaries had suffered.

A new Visitation was appointed to enquire into the Conversation of the Monks,
The greater Monasteries resigned to the King.
to examine how they stood affected to the Pope, and how they promoted the
King's Supremacy. They were likewise ordered to examine what Impostures might
be among them, either in Images or Relics, by which the Superstition of the
credulous People was wrought on. Some few Houses of greater value, were
prevailed with the former Year to surrender to the King. Many of the Houses
that had not bin dissolved, tho they were within the former Act, were now
suppressed, and many of the greater Abbots were wrought on to surrender by
several Motives: Some had been faulty during the Rebellion, and so to prevent a
Storm, offered a Resignation. Others liked the Reformation, and did it on that
account: some were found guilty of great Disorders in their Lives, and to
prevent a shameful Discovery, offered their Houses to the King; and others had
made such Wastes and Dilapidations, that having taken Care of themselves, they
were less concerned for others. At St. Albans, the Rents were let so low, that
the Abbot could not maintain the Charge of the Abbey. At Battle, the whole
Furniture of the House and Chapel was not above an 100 l. in value, and their
Plate was not 300 l. In some Houses there was scarce any Plate or Furniture
left. Many Abbots and Monks were glad to accept of a Pension for Life, and that
was proportioned to the value of their House, and to their Innocence. The
Abbots of St. Albans and Tewkesbury, had 400 Marks a Year: The Abbots of St.
Edmondsbury was more innocent and more resolute: The Visitors wrote that they
found no Scandals in that House: but at last he was prevailed with by a Pension
of 500 Marks to resign. The Inferior Governors had some 30, 20, or 10 l.
Pensions, and the Monks had generally 6 l. or 8 Marks a piece. If any Abbot
died, the new Abbot (they being chosen as the Bishops were upon a Conge delire,
and a Missive Letter) was named for that purpose, only to resign the House.
And all were made to hope for Advancement, that should give good Example to
others by a quick and cheerful Surrender: by these means 121 of those Houses
were this Year resigned to the King. In most Houses the Visitor made the Monks
sign a Confession of their former Vices and Disorders, of which there is only
one Original Extant, that escaped a general Rasure of all such Papers in Queen
Mary's time; in which they acknowledged in a long Narrative, their former
Idleness, Gluttony, and Sensuaality, for which the pit of Hell was ready to
swallow them up. Others acknowledged that they were sensible that the manner of
their former pretended Religion consisted in some dumb Ceremonies, by which
they were blindly led, having no true Knowledge of God's Laws, but that they had
procured Exemption from their Diocesans, and had subjected themselves wholly to
a Foreign Power, that took no care to reform their Abuses; and therefore since
the most perfect way of Life was revealed by Christ and his Apostles, and that
it was fit they should be governed by the King, their Supreme Head, they
resigned to him. Of this sort I have seen six. Some resigned in hopes that the
King would found them of new; these favored the Reformation, and intended to
convert their Houses to better Uses, for preaching, study, and Prayer; and
Latimer pressed Cromwell earnestly, that two or three Houses might be reserved
for such purposes in every County. But it was resolved to suppress all, and
therefore neither could the Intercessions of the Gentry of Oxfordshire, nor of
the Visitors, preserve the Nunnery at Godstow, tho they found great Strictness
of Life in it, and it was the common place of the Education of young Women of
Quality in that County. The common Preamble to most Surrenders was, That upon
full Deliberation and of their own proper Motion, for just and reasonable
Causes, moving their Consciences; they did freely give up their Houses to the
King. Some surrendered without any Preamble, to the Visitors as Feofees in trust
for the King. In short, they went on at such a rate, that 159 Resignations were
obtained before the Parliament met, and of these the Originals of 154 are yet
extant. Some thought that these Resignations could not be valid, since the
Incumbents had not the Property, but only the Trust for life of those Houses.
But the Parliament did afterward declare them good in Law. It was also said,
that they being of the Nature of Corporations, all Deeds under their Seals were
valid; and that at least by their Resignation and quitting their Houses, they
forfeited them to the King. But this was thought to subsist rather on a Nicety
in Law, than natural Equity.

Others were more roughly handled. Some Abbots attainted.
The Prior of Wooburn was suspected of a Correspondence with the Rebels, and of
favoring the Pope; he was dealt with to submit to the King, and he was
prevailed on to do it, but was not easy in it once, nor fixed to it; He
complained that the new Preachers detracted from the Honor due to the Virgin
and Saints; he thought the Religion was changed, and wondered that the
Judgments of God on Q. Anne, had not terrified others from going on to subvert
the Faith. When the Rebellion broke out, he joined in it, as did also the
Abbots of Whaley, Garvaux, and Sawley, and the Prior of Burlington, all these
were all taken, and attainted of Treason, and executed. The Abbots of
Glassenbury and Reading, had also sent a great deal of their Plate to the
Rebels, the former to disguise it the better, had made one break into the House
where the Plate was kept: So he was convicted both of Burglary and Treason, and
at his Execution he confessed his Crime, and begged both God's and the King's
Pardon for it. The Abbot of Colchester was also attainted, and executed; but
the Grounds of it are not known: for the Records of their Attaindors are lost.
These had over and over again taken the Oaths, in which they acknowledged the
King to be Supreme Head of the Church, and were present in those Parliaments in
which the several Acts about it were passed, and did not dissent to them; and
since they made no Opposition, when they might safely and legally do it, there
is no Reason to think they would have done it afterward, when it was more
dangerous and criminal: So that all those who have represented them as having
suffered for denying the King's Supremacy, have therein showed their
Unacquaintedness with the Journals of Parliament. The Abbot of Reading had
complied so far, that he was grown into Favor with Cromwell; so that in some
Contests between Shaxton Bishop of Salisbury and him, the Bishop, who was a
proud ill-natured Man, complained that Cromwell supported the Abbot against
him, and writ upon that a very Insolent, Expostulatory Letter to him; which
Cromwell answered with great strength of Reason and Decency of Style; by which
it appears that height of his Condition, had no other Effect on him, but to
make him know himself and others better. Upon the Attainders of those Abbots,
their Abbeys were seized on; and this was thought a great stretch both in Law
and Equity: for it seemed not reasonable, if an Incumbent was faulty, for that
to seize on his Benefice, which upon his Attainder ought to continue entire,
and pass to the next Successor, as if he were really dead. But a Clause was put
in the Act of Treason, 26 Hen. 8, That whatsoever Lands of Estate of
Inheritance, any that should be convicted of Treason, had in Use or Possession
by any Right or manner, should be forfeited to the King. By which, as intailed
Estates were certainly comprehended, so it seems they applied it likewise to
Church-Benefices: yet when the Bishop of Rochester was attainted, this was not
thought on. The words, Estate of Inheritance, seemed to exclude Church Lands,
but the mention that was made of Traitors Successors, that were cut off as well
as their Heirs, seemed on the other hand to include Estates, to which
Successors might come in a Traitor's room, as well as those which descended by
Inheritance. The Words were ambiguous, and were stretched to justify those
Seizures; and therefore in an Act of Treasons made in the next Reign, this was
more cautiously worded: for it was provided that Traitors should forfeit the
Estates which they possessed in their own Right. But whatsoever Illegality
there might be in these Proceedings, they were confirmed by the following
Parliament, in a special Proviso made concerning those Abbeys that were seized
on by any Attainders of Treason. Many of the Carthusians were executed for
denying the King's Supremacy: Others were also suspected of favoring them, and
of receiving Books sent from beyond Sea, against the King's Proceedings, and
were shut up in their Cells, in which most of them died. The Prior was a Man of
extraordinary Charity and Good-Works, as the Visitor reported: But he was made
resign with this Preamble, That many of the House had offended the King, and
deserved that their Lives should be taken, and their Goods confiscated; and
therefore to avoid that, they surrendered their Houses. Great Complaints were
made of the Visitors, as if they had used undue Practices to make the Abbots
and Monks surrender: and it was said, that they had in many Places embezell'd
much of the Plate to their own Uses; and in particular, it was complained that
Dr. London had corrupted many Nuns. They on the other hand, published many of
the vile Practices that they found in those Houses, so that several Books very
indecently writ, were printed upon this Occasion; but on so foul a Subject it
is not fit to stand long. No Story became so public as that of the Prior of
the crossed Friars in London, who was found in bed with a Whore at Noonday: He
fell down on his Knees, and begged, that they who surprised him, would not
discover his shame: They made him give them 30 l. which he protested was all he
had; and he promised them as much more: But he not keeping his word to them, a
Suit followed upon it. Yet all these personal Blemishes did not work much on
the People. It seemed unreasonable to extinguish Noble Foundations, for the
fault of some Individuals: Therefore another way was taken, which had a better
effect.

They discovered many Impostures about Relics, The Impostures of Images
discovered.
and wonderful Images, to which, Pilgrimages had been wont to be made. At
Reading they had an Angel's Wing, which brought over the Spear's Point that
pierced our Savior's Side: As many pieces of the Cross were found, as joined
together, would have made a big Cross. The Rood of Grace at Boxley in Kent, had
been much esteemed, and drawn many Pilgrims to it: It was observed to bow, and
roll its Eyes; and look at times well pleased, or angry; which the credulous
Multitude imputed to a Divine Power: But all this was discovered to be a Cheat,
and it was brought up to St. Paul's Cross; and all the Springs were openly
showed, that governed its several Motions. At Hales in Glocestershire the Blood
of Christ was showed in a Vial; and it was believed, that none could see it who
were in mortal Sin: And so after good Presents were made, the deluded Pilgrims
went way well satisfied if they had seen it. This was the Blood of a Duck
renewed every Week, put in a Vial very thick of one side, as thin on the other;
and either side turned toward the Pilgrim, as the Priests were satisfied with
their Oblations: Several other such like Impostures were discovered, which
contributed much to the undeceiving the People.

The richest Shrine in England was Thomac Beckets at Canterbury, Becket's
Shrine broken.
whose Story is well known. After he had long imbroiled England, and showed
that he had a Spirit so turned to Faction, that he could not be at quiet; some
of Henry the Second's Officious Servants killed him in the Church of
Canterbury: He was presently Canonized, and held in greater esteem than any
other Saint whatsoever; so much more was a Martyr for the Papacy valued, than
any that suffered for the Christian Religion: And his Altar drew far greater
Oblations, than those that were dedicated to Christ, or the blessed Virgin; as
appears by the accounts of two of their Years. In one, 3 l. 2 s. 6 d. And in
another, not a Penny was offered at Christ's Altar. There was in the one, 63 l.
5 s. 6 d. and in the other, 4 l. 1 s. 8 d. offered at the Blessed Virgin's
Altar. But in these very Years there was, 832 l. 12 s. 3 d. and 964 l. 6 s. 3
d. offered at St. Thomas's Altar. The Shrine grew to be of inestimable Value.
Lewis the Seventh of France came over in Pilgrimage to visit it, and offered a
Stone, valued to be the richest in Europe. He had not only one Holy Day, the
29th of December, called his Martyrdom; but also the Day of his Translation,
the 7th of July, was also a Holy Day; and every 50th Year there was a Jubily,
and an Indulgence, granted to all that came and visited his Tomb: And sometimes
there were believed to be 100000 Pilgrims there on that Occasion. It is hard to
tell whether the Hatred to his seditious Practices, or the Love of his Shrine,
set on King Henry more to Unsaint him. His Shrine was broken, and the Gold of
it was so heavy, that it filled two Chests, which took Eight men a piece to
carry them out of the Church; and his Skull, which had been so much worshipped,
was proved to be an Imposture; for the true Skull was with the rest of his
Bones in his Coffin; his Bones were either burnt, as it was given out at Rome;
or so mixed with other Bones, as our Writers say; that it had been a Miracle
indeed to have distinguished them afterward. The King called at this time, a
Meeting of the Clergy, of 10 Bishops, 8 Archdeacons, and 17 Divines and
Canonists; and made them finish an Explanation of the Christian Religion. But
this was afterward digested into a better form, as shall be told in its proper
place.

When all these things were known at Rome, all the Eloquent Pens there were
employed to represent King Henry as the most Sacrilegious Tyrant that ever was;
The Pope thunders against the King,
that made War with Christ's Vicar on Earth, and his Saints in Heaven; and he
was compared to the worst Princes that ever reigned; to Pharaoh,
Nebuchadnezzar, Belshazzar, Nero, and Diocletian; but the Parallel with Julian,
the Apostate, was most insisted on. It was said, He copied after him in all
things, save only, that his Manners were worse. In many of these, Cardinal
Pool's Style was pretended to be known; and they were all at least much
encouraged by him, which provoked the King to hate him most Implacably. The
Pope went further; for now he published all those Thunders, with which he had
threatened him three Years before. He pretended, That as God's Vicar, he had
power to root out, and to destroy; and had Authority over all the Kings in the
World: And therefore, after he had enumerated all the King's Crimes, he
required himself to appear within 90 days, at Rome, either in Person, or by
Proxy, and all his Accomplices within 60 Days; and if he and they did not appear,
he declared him to have fallen from his Crown; and them from their Estates. He
put the Kingdom under an Interdict; and absolved his Subjects from their Oaths
of Allegiance: He declared him and his Accomplices, Infamous; and put their
Children under Incapacities. He required all the Clergy to go out of England,
within 5 Days after the time prefixed should expire; leaving only so many as
might serve for Baptizing Children, or giving the Sacrament to such as died in
Penitence. He charged all his Subjects to rise in Arms against him, and that
none should assist him. He absolved all other Princes from their Confederacies
with him, and obtested them to have no more Commerce with him. He required all
Christians to make War on him; and to seize on the Persons and Goods of all his
Subjects; and make Slaves of them. He charged all Bishops to publish the
Sentence with due Solemnities; and ordained it to be affixed at Rome, Tournay
and Dunkirk. This was first given out the 30 of August 1535; but it had been
all this while suspended, till the Suppression of the Monasteries, and the
burning of Becket's Bones, did so inflame the Pope, that he resolved to forbear
going to Extremities no longer. So on the 17 of December this Year, the Pope
published the Bull, which he said he had so long suspended at the Intercession
of some Princes; who hoped that King Henry might have been reclaimed by gentler
Methods; and therefore since it appeared that he grew still worse and worse, he
was forced to proceed to his Fulminations. By this Sentence it is certain, That
either the Popes Infallibility, must be confessed to be a Cheat put upon the
World, or if any believe it, they must acknowledge, that the Power of deposing
Princes, is really lodged in that Chair: For this was not a sudden fit of
Passion, but was done ex Cathedra, with all the Deliberation they ever admit
of. The Sentence was in some particulars without a Precedent; but as to the
main Points of deposing the King, and absolving his Subjects from their
Obedience, there was abundance of Instances to be brought in these last 500
Years, to show that this had been all along asserted the Right of the Papacy.
The Pope writ also to the Kings of France, and Scotland, with design to inflame
them against King Henry: And if this had been an Age of Croissades, no doubt
there had been one undertaken against him; for it was held to be as
meritorious, if not more, to make War on him, than on the Turk. But now the
Thunders of the Vatican had lost their force.

The King got all the Bishops, The Bishops of England assert the King's Power,
and the Nature of Ecclesiastical Offices.
and Eminent Divines of England, to sign a Declaration against all Churchmen,
who pretended to the Power of the Sword, or to Authority over Kings; and that
all that assumed such Powers, were Subverters of the Kingdom of Christ. Many of
the Bishops did also sign another Paper, declaring the Limits of the Regal and
Ecclesiastical Power, that both had their Authority from God, for several Ends,
and different Natures; and that Princes were subject to the Word of God, as
well as Bishops ought to be obedient to their Laws. There was also another
Declaration made, signed by Cromwell, the 2 Archbishops, 11 Bishops, and 20
Divines; asserting the Distinction between the Power of the Keys, and the Power
of the Sword. The former was not absolute, but limited by the Scripture. Orders
were declared to be a Sacrament instituted by Christ, which were conferred by
Prayer, and Imposition of Hands. And that in the New Testament, no mention was
made of any other Ranks, but of Deacons, or Ministers; and of Priests, or
Bishops. After this, the use of all the Inferior Degrees of Lectures,
Acolyths, etc. was laid down. These were set up about the beginning of the 3d
Century; for in the middle of that Age, mention is made of them, both by
Cornelius, and Cyprian; and they were intended to be degrees of Probation,
through which Men were to ascend to the higher Functions. But the Canonists had
found out so many Distinctions of Benefices; and that a simple Tonsure,
qualified a Man for several of them; that these Institutions became either a
matter of Form only, or were made a Color for Laymen to possess Ecclesiastical
Benefices. In this, and several other Books of that time, Bishops and Priests
are spoken of, as being both one Office. In the Ancient Church there were
different Ordinations, and different Functions belonging to these Offices, tho
the Superior was believed to include the Inferior. But in the latter Ages,
both the Schoolmen and Canonists seemed on different grounds to have designed
to make them appear to be the same Office; and that the one was only a higher
degree in the same Order. The Schoolmen, to magnify Transubstantiation,
extolled the Office, by which that was performed so high, and the Canonists, to
exalt the Pope's Universal Authority, deprest the Office of Bishops so low, to
make them seem only the Pope's Delegates; and that their Jurisdiction was not
from Christ, that by these means, these two Offices were thought so near one
another, that they differed only in degree: And this was so well observed at
Trent, that the Establishing the Episcopal Jurisdiction, as founded on a Divine
Right, was apprehended as one of the fatallest Blows that could have been given
to the Papacy. This being at this time so commonly received, it is no wonder,
if before that matter came to be more exactly inquired into, some of the
Reformers writ more carelessly in the Explanations they made of these Offices,
which is so far from being an Argument, that they were upon due enquiry of
another mind; that it is to be looked on as a part of the Dregs of Popery,
flowing from the belief of Transubstantiation, and the Pope's Supremacy, of
which all the Consequences were not so early observed.

This Year the English Bible was finished. The Bible in English, and new
Injunctions.
The Translation was sent over to Paris to be printed there, for the Workmen in
England were not thought able to go about it. Bonner was then Ambassador in
France; and he obtained a License of Francis for printing it; but upon a
Complaint made by the French Clergy, the Press was stopped, and many of the
Copies were seized on, and burnt. So it was brought over to England, and was
undertaken, and now finished, by Grafton. Cromwell procured a General Warrant
from the King, allowing all his Subjects to read it; for which, Cranmer wrote
his thanks to Cromwell; and rejoiced to see the day of Reformation now risen in
England, since the Word of God did shine over it all, without a Cloud. Not long
after this, Cromwell gave out Injunctions, requiring the Clergy to set up Bibles
in their Churches, and to encourage all to read them. He also exhorted the
People not to dispute about the sense of difficult places, but to leave that to
Men of better Judgments. Incumbents were required to instruct the People, and
teach them the Creed, the Lord's Prayer, and the Ten Commandments, in English:
And that once every Quarter there should be a Sermon, to declare the true
Gospel of Christ; and to exhort the People to Works of Charity; and not to
trust to other Men's Works, to Pilgrimages, or Relicts, or the saying their
Beads, which tended to Superstition. Images, abused by Pilgrimages made to
them, were to ordered be taken away. No Candle was to be before any Image, but
the Crucifix: These struck at some of the main Points of the former
Superstition, both about Images, Pilgrimages, and the Invocation of Saints: But
the free Use of the Scriptures gave the deadliest Blow of all. Yet all the
Clergy submitted to them without any Murmuring.

Prince Edward was this Year born; Prince Edward born.
and this very much blasted the Hopes of the Popish Party, which were chiefly
built on the probability of Lady Mary's succeeding to the Crown, which was now
set at a greater distance. So both Lee, Gardener, and Stokesly, seemed to vie
with the Bishops of the other Party, which of them should most zealously
execute the Injunctions, and thereby insinuate themselves most into the King's
Esteem and Favor. Gardener was some Years Ambassador in France, but Cromwell
got Bonner to be sent in his room, who seemed then to be the most zealous
Promoter of the Reformation, that was then in England. After that, Gardener was
sent to the Emperor's Court, with Sir Henry Knevet, and there he gave some
occasion to suspect that he was treating a Reconciliation with the Pope's
Legate. But the Italian that managed it, being sent with a Message to the
Ambassadour's Secretary, he mistook Knevet's Secretary for Gardiner's, and told
his Business to him. Knevet tried what could be made of it, but could not carry
it far: For the Italian was disowned, and put in Prison upon it: And Gardener
complained of it, as a Trepan laid to ruin him. The King continued still to
employ him; but rather made use of him, than trusted him: yet Gardiner's
Artifices and Flatteries were such, that he was still preserved in some Degrees
of Favor, as long as the King lived; but he knew him so well, that he neither
named him one of his Executors, nor one of his Son's Council, when he made his
Will. Gardener used one Topic which prevailed much with the King, that his
Zeal against Heresy was the greatest Advantage that his Cause could have over
all Europe: And therefore he pressed him to begin with the Sacramentaries (so
were those of the Helvetian Confession called) and those being condemned by the
German Princes, he had the less reason to be afraid of imbroiling his Affairs
by his Severities against them. Lombert is condemned and burnt for denying the
Corporal Fresence.


This meeting so well with the King's own Persuasions about the Corporal
Presence, had a great effect on him; and an occasion did quickly offer it self
to him, to declare his Zeal in that matter. Lambert was at that time accused
before the Archbishop of Canterbury: He had been Chaplain to the Factory of
Antwerp, and there he associated himself to Tindall: Afterward he was seized
on coming over to England; but upon the changes that followed, he was set at
Liberty. Dr. Tailor had preached on the Corporal Presence in his hearing: This
offended him, and he drew up his Reasons against it, and gave them to Tailor.
He communicated it to Barns, who was a hot man, and a fierce Lutheran: And they
thought that the venting that Opinion would stop the Progress of the
Reformation, give Prejudice to the People, and divide them among themselves:
And therefore they brought this matter before Cranmer, who was at that time
likewise a Lutheran; he dealt with Lambert to retract his Paper; but he took a
fatal Resolution, and appealed to the King. Upon which, the King resolved to
judge him in Person, and to manage the Trial with great Solemnity; and for that
end, many of the Nobility and Bishops were sent for. When the day came, there
was a vast Appearance. The King's Guards and Cloth of State, were all in
White, to make it look the liker a Divine Service. Lambert begun with a
Complement, acknowledging the King's great Learning, and his Goodness in
hearing the Causes of his Subjects. The King stopped him, and bad him forbear
Flatteries, and speak to the matter: And he argued against him from Christ's
Words, that the Sacrament must be his Body. Lambert answered in St. Austin's
Words, That it was his Body in a certain manner, but that a Body could not be
in two places at once. To this the King commanded Cranmer to speak; and he
argued, That since Christ is still in Heaven, and yet he appeared to St. Paul,
that therefore he may be in different places at once. Lambert said, That was
but a Vision, and was not the very Body of Christ. Tonstall argued, That the
Divine Omnipotence was not to be measured by our Notions, of what was
impossible. Stokesly argued, That one Substance may be changed into another,
and yet the Accidents remain: So Water when it boiled, did evaporate in Air,
and yet its Moisture remained. This was received with great Applause; tho it
was an ill Inference, that because there was an accidental Conversion,
therefore there might be a Substantial one, in which one Substance was
annihilated, and another produced in its place. Ten, one after another,
disputed, and their Arguments, with the stern Words and Looks that the King
interposed, together with the length of the Action, in so public an Assembly,
put Lambert in some Confusion; and upon his Silence, a great Shout of Applause
followed. In Conclusion, the King asked him if he was not convinced, and
whether he would live or die? But he continued firm to his Opinion: So Cromwell
was commanded to read the Sentence of his Condemnation; and not many days
after, it was executed in a most barbarous manner, in Smithfield: For there was
not Fire enough put under him to consume him suddenly; so that his Legs and
Thighs were burnt away while he was yet alive. He bore it patiently, and
continued to cry out, None but Christ, none but Christ. He was a Man of
considerable Learning, and of a very good Judgment. The Popish Party improved
this, and persuaded the King of the good effects it would have on his People,
who would in this see his Zeal for the Faith; and they forgot not to magnify
all that he had said, as if it had been uttered by an Oracle; which proved him
to be both Defender of the Faith, and Supreme Head of the Church. All this
wrought so much on the King, that he resolved to call a Parliament, both for
the suppressing the Monasteries, and the new Opinions.

Fox, Bishop of Hereford, Treaties with the German Princes.
died at this time: He had been much employed in Germany, and had settled a
League between the King and the German Princes. The King was acknowledged the
Patron of their League, and he sent them over 100000 Crowns a Year, for the
support of it. There was a Religious League also proposed; but upon the turn
that followed in the Court upon Queen Ann's Death, that fell to the ground; and
all that was in put their League relating to Religion, was, That they should
join against the Pope as the common Enemy, and set up the true Religion
according to the Gospel. But the Treaty about other Points was afterward set
on foot. The King desired Melanchthon to come over; and several Letters passed
between them, but he could not be spared out of Germany; tho he was then
invited both to France and England. The Germans sent over some to treat with
the King; the Points they insisted most on were, the granting the Chalice to
the People, and the putting down private Masses, in which the Institution
seemed express; the having the Worship in a known Tongue, which both common
sense, and the Authority of St. Paul's Epistle to the Corinthians, seemed to
justify much. The third was, The Marriage of the Clergy; for they being extreme
sensible of the Honor of their Families, reckoned, that could not be secured,
unless the Priests might marry. Concerning these things, their Ambassadors
gave a long and learned Memorial to the King; to which an Answer was made,
penned by Tonstall; in which the things they complained of, were justified by
the ordinary Arguments. Upon Fox's Death, Bonner was promoted to Hereford; and
Stokesly dying not long after, he was translated to London. Cromwell thought
that he had raised a Man that would be a faithful Second to Cranmer in his
Designs of Reformation, who indeed needed help; not only to balance the
Opposition made him by other Bishops, but to lessen the Prejudices he suffered
by the Weakness and Indiscretion of his own Party, who were generally rather
Clogs than Helps to him. Great Complaints were brought to the Court of the
rashness of the new Preachers, who were flying at many things not yet
abolished. Upon this, Letters were writ to the Bishops, to take care that as
the People should be rightly instructed; so they should not be offended with
too many Novelties. Thus was Cranmer's Interest so low, that he had none to
depend on, but Cromwell. There was not a Queen now in the King's Bosom to
support them; and therefore Cromwell set himself to contrive how the King
should be engaged in such an Alliance with the Princes of Germany, as might
prevail with him, both in Affection and Interest, to carry on what he had thus
begun. And the Beauty of Anne of Cleve was so represented to him, that he set
himself to bring about that Match.

A Parliament was summoned to the 28th of April, The Act of the six Articles.
in which twenty of the Abbots sat in Person. On the 5th of May, a Motion was
made, that some might be appointed to draw a Bill, against Diversity of
Opinions in matters of Religion; these were Cromwell, Cranmer, the Bishops of
Duresme, Ely, Bath and Wells, Bangor, Carlisle, and Worcester; they were divided
in their Minds; and tho the Popish Party were sive to four, yet the Authority
that Cromwell and Cranmer were in, turned the Balance a little; but after they
had met eleven days, they ended in nothing. Upon that the Duke of Norfolk
proposed the six Articles; The first was for the Corporal Presence. 2. For
Communion in one kind. 3. For observing the Vows of Chastity. 4. For private
Masses. 5. For the Celibate of the Clergy. And the sixth, was for Auricular
Confession: Against most of these Cranmer argued several days. It is not like
he opposed the first, both because of that which he had declared in Lambert's
Case so lately, and in his own Opinion, he was then for it; but he had the
Words of the Institution, and the constant Practice of the Church for twelve
Ages to object to the second: and for the third, since the Monks were set at
Liberty to live in the World, it seemed hard to restrain them from Marriage,
and nothing did so effectually cut off their Pretensions to their former
Houses, as their being married would do. For the fourth, if private Masses were
useful, then the King had done very ill to suppress so many Houses, that were
chiefly founded for that end: the Sacrament was also by its first Institution,
and the Practice of the Primitive Church, to be a Communion; and all those
private Masses were invented to cheat the World. For the fifth, it touched
Cranmer in the quick, for it was believed that he was married, but the
Arguments used for that will be found in the next Book. For Auricular
Confession, Lee Gardener and Tonstal, pressed much to have it declared
necessary by the Law of God Cranmer argued against this, and said it was only a
good and profitable thing. The King came often to the House in Person, and
disputed in these Points: for the greatest part he was against Cranmer; but in
this particular he joined with him. Tonstall drew up all the Quotations,
brought from Ancient Authors for it, in a Paper which he delivered to the King;
the King answered in a long Letter, written with his own Hand, in which he
showed, that the Fathers did only advise Confession, but did not impose it as
necessary: and so it was concluded in general, only that it was necessary and
expedient. On the 24th of May, the Parliament was prorogued a few days, but by
a Vote it was provided that the Bills should continue in the state they were
then in. At their next meeting, two Committees were appointed to draw the Bill
of Religion; Cranmer was the chief of the one, and Lee of the other; both their
Draughts were carried to the King, and were in many places corrected with his
own Hand; in some Parts he writ whole Periods a new. That which Lee drew was
more agreeable to the King's Opinion; so it was brought into the House. Cranmer
argued three days against it, and when it came to the Vote, the King who was
much set on having it past, desired him to go out, but he excused himself; for
he thought he was bound in Conscience to vote against it: But the rest that
opposed it, were more compliant, and it also passed without any considerable
Opposition in the House of Commons, and was assented to by the King.

The Substance of it was, That the King being sensible of the good of Union,
and of the mischief of Discord, in points of Religion, had come to the
Parliament in Person, and opened many things of high Learning there; and that
with the assent of both Houses, he set forth these Articles.

1. That in the Sacrament there was no Substance of Bread and Wine, but only
the Natural Body and Blood of Christ.

2. That Christ was entirely in each kind, and so Communion in both was not
necessary.

3. That Priests by the Law of God, ought not to marry.

4. That Vows of Chastity taken after the Age of 21, ought to be kept.

5. That Private Masses were lawful and useful.

6. That Auricular Confession was necessary, and ought to be retained. Such as
did speak or write against the first of these, were to be burned without the
benefit of Abjuration; and it was made Felony to dispute against the other
five: and such as did speak against them were to be in a Praemunire for the
first Offense; the second was made Felony. Married Priests that did not put
away their Wives, were to be condemned of Felony, in those that lived
incontinently, the first Offense was a Praemunire, and the second Felony. Women
that offended were to be punished as the Priests were. Those that contemned
Confession and the Sacrament, and abstained from it at the accustomed times,
were for the first Offense in a Praemunire, the second was Felony. Proceedings
were to be made in the Forms of Common Law, by Presentiments, and a Jury, and
all Churchmen were charged to read the Act in their Churches once a Quarter.

This Act was received with great Joy by all the Popish Party; Censures past
upon it.
they reckoned that now Heresy would be extirpated, and that the King was as
much engaged against it, as he was when he writ against Luther: this made the
Suppression of the Monasteries pass much the easier. The poor Reformers were
now exposed to the Rage of their Enemies, and had no Comfort from any part of
it, but one, that they were not delivered up to the Cruelty of the
Ecclesiastical Courts, or the Trials ex Officio, but were to be tried by
Juries: yet the denying the benefit of Abjuration, was a Severity without a
Precedent, and was a forcing Martyrdom on them, since they were not to be the
better for their Apostasy. It was some Satisfaction to the married Clergy, that
the incontinent Priests were to be so severely punished; which Cromwell put in,
and the Clergy knew not how they could decently oppose it. Upon the passing the
Act, the German Ambassadors being set on to it by those that favored their
Doctrine in England, desired an Audience of the King, and told him of the Grief
with which their Masters would receive the News of this Act; and therefore
earnestly pressed him to stop the Execution of it. The King answered that he
found it necessary to have the Act made, for repressing the Insolence of some
People, but assured them it should not be put in Execution, except upon great
Provocation. When the Princes heard of the Act, they writ to the King to the
same purpose: they warned him of many Bishops that were about him, who in their
Hearts loved Popery, and all the old Abuses; and took this method to force the
King to return back to the former Yoke, hoping that if they once made him cruel
to all those they called Heretics, it would be easy to bring him back to
submit to that Tyranny, which he had shaken off; and therefore they proposed a
Conference between some Divines of both sides in order to an Agreement of
Doctrine. The King was only concerned upon State Maxims, to keep up their
League in Opposition to the Emperor; but they still pressed a Religious as
well as a Civil League.

After the Act of the six Articles, An Act for suppressing the Monasteries.
the Act for suppressing the Monasteries was brought in; and tho there were so
many Abbots sitting in the House, none of them protested against it; By it no
Monastery was suppressed, but only the Resignations made or to be made, were
confirmed; and the King's Right, founded either on their Surrenders,
Forfeitures, or Attainders of Treason, was declared good in Law. Houses
surrendered were to be managed by the Court of Augmentations; but those seized
on by Attainders were to come to the Exchequer. All Persons except the Founders
and Donors were to have the same Rights to the Lands, belonging to these
Houses, that they had before this Act was made. All Deeds and Leases made for a
Year before this, to the prejudice of these Houses were annulled; and all the
Churches belonging to them, and formerly exempted, were put under the
Jurisdiction of the Bishop, or of such as should be appointed by the King. This
last Proviso has produced a great Mischief in this Church; for many that
purchased Abby-Lands, had this Clause put in their Grants, that they should be
the Visitors of the Churches, and by this they continue still exempted from the
Episcopal Jurisdiction; and this has emboldened many to break out into great
Scandals, which have been made use of by prejudiced Men to cast an Obloquy on
the Church; tho this Disorder proceeds only from the want of Authority in the
Bishops to censure them. A Question was raised upon this Suppression, whether
the Lands should have reverted to the Donors, or been escheated to the Crown.
By a Judgment of the Roman Senate in Theodosius's time, all the Endowments of
the Heathenish Temples were given to the Fisc, and tho the Heirs of the Donors
pretended to them, yet it was said, that by the Gifts that their Ancestors
made, they were totally alienated from them and their Heirs. When the Order of
the Templers was suppressed, their Lands went to the Lord by an Escheat. This
might seem reasonable in Endowments that were simple Gifts, without any
Conditions: But the Grants to Religious Houses were of the nature of Covenants,
given in consideration of the Masses, that were to be said for them and their
Families; and therefore it was inferred, that when the Cheat of redeeming Souls
out of Purgatory was discovered, and these Houses were suppressed, then the
Lands ought to revert to the Heirs of the Donors; and upon that account it was
thought necessary to exclude them by a special Proviso.

Another Bill was brought in, An Act for new Bishoprics.
empowering the King to erect new Bishoprics by his Letters Patents; it was
read three times in one day in the House of Lords. The Preamble set forth that
the ill Lives of those that were called Religious, made it necessary to change
their Houses to better Uses, for teaching the Word of God, instructing of
Children, educating of Clerks, relieving of old infirm People, the endowing of
Readers for Greek, Latin, and Hebrew, mending of Highways, and the bettering
the Condition of the Parish Priests; and for this end the King was empowered to
erect new Sees, and to assign what Limits and Divisions, and appoint them what
Statutes he pleased. I have seen the first Draught of this Preamble all written
with the King's own Hand; and indeed he used extraordinary Care in corecting
both Acts of Parliament and Proclamations with his own Hand: All Papers in
matters of Religion, that were set out by public Authority in this Reign, were
revised by him, and in many places large Corrections are to be seen, made with
his own Hand, which show both his great Judgment in those Matters, and his
extraordinary Application to Business; but as he was fond of his two accquired
Titles, of Defender of the Faith, and Supreme Head of the Church; and loved to
show that he did not carry them in vain; so there was nothing which he affected
more, then to discover his Learning and Understanding in matters of Religion.
He writ also a List of all the new Sees which he intended to found, which were
Waltham, for Essex, St. Albans, for Hartford, another for Bedfordshire and
Buckinghamshire out of the Monasteries of Dunstable, Newenham, and Clowstown;
another for Oxfordshire, and Berkshire, out of the Rents of Osney, and Tame,
one for Northampton and Huntington, out of Peterborough, one for Midlesex out
of Westminster; one for Leicester and Rutland, out of Leicester; one for
Glocestershire out of St. Peter's in Gloucester; one for Lancashire out of
Fountain, and the Arch-Deaconry of Richmond; one for Suffolk out of
Edmundsbury; one for Stafford and Salop out of Shrewsbury; one for Nottingham
and Darby out of Welbeck, Wersop, and Thurgarton; and one for Cornwall out of
the Rents of Lanceston, Bodmyn, and Wardreth: Over these he writ Bishoprics to
be made; and in another part of the same Paper he writ Places to be altered,
which have Sees in them, and names Christ-Church in Canterbury, St. Swithins
and several others; a little under that, he writ, Places to be altered into
Colleges and Schools, but mentions only Burton upon Trent. Neither Chester nor
Bristol are named here, tho Episcopal Sees were afterward erected in them. The
King had formed a great Design of endowing many Sees, and making many other
noble Foundations; yet the great Change that was made in the Councils and
Ministry before this took Effect, made that only a small part of that, which he
now intended, was accomplished. An Act for Proclamations.
Another Act was brought in, concerning the Obedience due to the King's
Proclamations, which set forth, That great Exceptions had been made to the
Legality of the King's Proclamations, by some who did not consider what a King
might do by his Royal Power; which the King took very ill; and since many
Occasions called for speedy Remedies, and could not admit of Delays till a
Parliament might be called; therefore it was enacted, that such Proclamations
as the King set out by Advice of his Council, with Pains upon Offenders, should
be obeyed as if they were Acts of Parliaments; yet it was provided that no Laws
nor Customs might be taken away by them, and that the Subjects should not
suffer in their Estates, Liberties, or Persons, by them. If any offended
against them, and fled out of the Kingdom, that was made Treason. It was also
provided that if the King's Heirs should reign before they were of Age, the
Proclamations set out by the Privy Council, should have the like force in Law.
By this the Injunctions that had been given, or should be thereafter given,
were now legally authorized. The Statute of Precedence past in this Parliament.
The King's Vicegerent was to take place of all after the Royal Family, and next
him among the Clergy, came the two Archbishops, then the Bishops of London and
Duresme, after them the Bishop of Winchester, as Prelate of the Garter, and all
the other Bishops were to take place according to the Date of their
Consecrations.

A Bill of Attainder past, Some attainted without being heard.
not only confirming the Sentences that had been given against the Marquess of
Exeter, the Lord Mounticute, and others, that had been condemned at common Law;
but of some that were of new attainted without a Trial: of these some were
absent, and others were in Prison; but it was not thought fit to bring them to
make their Answers: The chief of these were the Marchionses of Exeter, and the
Countess of Sarum (Mother to Cardinal Pool:) It was questioned whether this
could be done in Law or not. The Judges delivered their Opinion, that it was
against natural Justice to condemn any without hearing them; and that when the
Parliament proceeded as a Court, they were obliged to follow the common Rules
of Equity; but if they did otherwise, yet since they were the Supreme Court of
the Nation, whatsoever they did, could not be reversed. The latter part of this
was laid hold on, and the former was neglected, so that Act past. This Council
was ascribed to Cromwell, and he being the first that was executed upon such a
Sentence, gave occasion to many to observe the Justice of God, in making ill
Councils turn upon those that gave them.

When the Parliament was prorogued, The King's Kindnesss to Cranmer.
the King ordered Cranmer to put in writing all the Arguments he had used
against the six Articles, and bring them to him. He sent also both Cromwell and
the Duke of Norfolk to dine with him, and to assure him of the Constancy of his
Kindness to him. At Table they expressed great Esteem for him, and acknowledged
that he had opposed the six Articles with so much Learning and Gravity, that
those who differed most from him, could not but value him highly for it; and
that he needed not to fear any thing from the King: Cromwell said the King made
that difference between him and the rest of his Council, that he would not so
much as hearken to any Complaints that were made of him; and made a Parallel
between him and Cardinal Wolsey; the one lost his Friends by his Pride, and the
other gained on his Enemies, by his Humility and Mildness: the Duke of Norfolk
said he could speak best of the Cardinal, having been his Man so long: this
heated Cromwell, who answered, that he never liked his Manners, and tho Wolsey
had intended if he had been chosen Pope, to have carried him with him to Italy;
yet he was resolved not to have gone, tho he knew the Duke intended to have
gone with him. Upon this the Duke of Norfolk swore he lied, and gave him foul
Language. This put all the Company in great Disorder: They were in some sort
reconciled, but were never hearty Friends after this. Cranmer put his Reasons
against the six Articles together, and gave them to his Secretary to be written
out in a fair Hand for the King's use: but he crossing the Thames with the Book
in his Bosom, met with such an Adventure on the Water as might have at another
time sent the Author to the Fire. There was a Bear baited near the River, which
breaking loose, run into it, and happened to overturn the Boat in which
Cranmer's Secretary was, and he being in danger of his Life, took no care of
the Book, which falling from him floated on the River, and was taken up by the
Bear-Ward, and put in the hand of a Priest that stood by, to see what it might
contain; he presently found it was a Confutation of the six Articles, and so
told the Bear-ward that the Author of it would certainly be hanged. So when the
Secretary came to ask for it, and said it was the Archbishop's Book; the other
that was an obstinate Papist, refused to give it, and reckoned that now Cranmer
would be certainly ruined: but the Secretary acquainting Cromwell with it, he
called for him next day, and chid him severely for presuming to keep a
Privy-Counsellours Book, and so he took it out of his Hands: thus Cranmer was
delivered out of this Danger. Shaxton and Latimer not only resigned their
Bishoprics, but being presented for some Words spoken against the six
Articles, they were put in Prison, where they lay till a recantation discharged
the one, and the King's Death set the other at liberty. There were about 500
others presented on the same account, but upon the Intercessions of Cranmer,
Cromwell, and others, they were set at liberty, and there was a stop put to the
further Execution of the Act till Cromwell fell.

The Bishops of the Popish Party took strange Methods to insinuate themselves
into the King's Confidence, Bishops hold their Sees at the King's Pleasure.
for they took out Commissions by which they acknowledged, That all
Jurisdiction, Civil and Ecclesiastical, flowed from the King, and that they
exercised it only at the King's Courtesy: and as they had of his Bounty, so
they would be ready to deliver it up when he should be pleased to call for it;
and therefore the King did empower them in his stead, to ordain, give
Institution, and do all the other parts of the Episcopal Function, which was to
last during his Pleasure: and a mighty charge was given them to ordain none but
Persons of great Integrity, good Life, and well learned; for since the
Corruption of Religion flowed from ill Pastors, so the Reformation of it was to
be expected chiefly from good Pastors. By this they were made indeed the King's
Bishops: in this Bonner set an Example to the rest, but it does not appear that
Cranmer took out any such Commission all this Reign.

Now came on the total Dissolution of the Abbeys, All the Monasteries suppressed.
57 surrenders were made this Year, of which 30 are yet extant; of these, 37
were Monasteries, and 20 were Nunneries; and among them 12 were Parliamentary
Abbeys; which were in all 28, Abington, St. Albans, St. Austin's Canterbury,
Battle, St. Bennets in the Holm, Bardeny, Cirencester, Colchester, Coventry,
Croyland, St. Edmundsbury, Evesham, Glassenbury, Gloceste, Hide, Malmsbury, St.
Mary's in York, Peterborough, Ramsey, Reading, Selby, Shrewsbury, Tavestock,
Tewkesbury, Thorney, Waltham, Westminster, and Winchelcomb. When all had thus
resigned, Commissioners were appointed by the Court of Augmentations to seize
on the Revenues and Goods belonging to these Houses, to establish the Pensions
that were to be given to every one that had been in them, and to pull down the
Churches, or such other parts of the Fabric, as they thought superfluous, and
to sell the Materials of them. When this was done, others began to get
Hospitals to be surrendered to the King; Thirleby being Master of St. Thomas
Hospital in Southwark, was the first that set an Example to the rest; he was
soon after made a Bishop, and turned with every Change that followed, till
Queen Elizabeth came to the Crown, and then he refused to comply tho he had
gone along with all the Changes that were made in King Edward's time. The
valued Rents of the Abby-Lands as they were then let, was 132607 l. 6 s. 4 d.
but they were worth above ten times so much in true value. The King had now in
his hand the greatest Advantage that ever King of England had, both for
enriching the Crown, and making Royal Foundations. But such was his Easiness to
his Courtiers, and his Lavishness, that all this melted away in a few Years,
and his Designs were never accomplished; he intended to have founded 18 new
Bishoprics, but he founded only six: Other great Projects did also become
abortive. In particular one that was designed by Sir Nicholas Bacon, which was
a Seminary for Statesmen: he proposed the crecting a House for Persons of
Quality, or of extraordinary Endowments, for the study of the Civil Law, and of
the Latin and French Tongues; of whom, some were to be sent with every
Ambassador beyond Sea, to be improved in the Knowledge of Foreign Assairs, in
which they should be employed as they grew capable of them: And others were to
be set to work to write the History of the Trasactions abroad, and of Assairs
at home. This was to supply one Loss that was like to follow on the Fall of
Abbeys; for in most of them there was kept a Chronicle of the Times. These were
written by Men that were more credulous than judicious; and so they are often
more particular in the recital of Trifles, than of important Affairs, and an
invincible Humor of lying, when it might raise the Credit of their Order or
House, runs through all their Manuscripts. All the Ground that Cranmer gained
this Year, in which there was so much lost, was a Liberty that all private
Persons might have Bibles in their House, the managing of which was put in
Cromwell's Hands, by a special Patent: Gardener opposed it vehemently, and
built much on this, that without Tradition it was impossible to understand the
meaning of the Scriptures; and one day before the King, he challenged Cranmer
to show any Difference between the Scriptures and the Apostles Canons. It is
not known how Cranmer managed the Debate, but the Issue of it was this, The
King judged in his Favors, and said, He was an old experienced Captain, and
ought not to be troubled by fresh Men and Novices. The King was now resolved to
marry again, and both the Emperor and the King of France proposed Matches to
him, but they came to no Effect. The Emperor endeavored by all means possible
to separate the King from the Princes of the Smalcaldick League; and the Act of
the six Articles had done that already in a great measure; for they complained
much of the King's Severity in those Points, which were the principal Parts of
their Doctrine; such as Communion in both kinds, Private Masses, and the
Marriage of the Clergy. Gardener studied to animate the King much against them;
he often told him, it was below his Dignity to suffer dull G^rr^ans to dictate
to him: and he suggested that they who would not acknowledge the Emperors
Supremacy in the matters of Religion, could not be hearty Friends to the
Authority which the King had assumed in them. But the Germans did not look on
the Emperor as their Sovereign, but only as the Head of the Empire; and they
did believe that every Prinee in his Dominions, and the Diet for the whole
Empire, had sufficient Authority for making Laws in Ecclesiastical Affairs; but
what other Considerations could not induce the King to, was like to be more
powerfully carried on by the Match with Anne of Cleve, which was now set on
foot.

There had been a Treaty between her Father and the Duke of Lorrain, for the
Prince of Lorrain and her; but it had gone no farther then a Contract between
the Fathers. Hans Holbin, A Treaty for a Match with Ann of Cleve.
the Famous Painter of that Age, took her Picture very much to her Advantage;
for the King never liked the Original so well as he had done the Picture. The
Duke of Saxe diswaded the Match, because the King was going backward in the
matter of the Reformation: but Cromwell set it on vigorously. It was said, the
Lady had great Charms in her Person; but she could speak no Language but Dutch,
which the King understood not; nor was she bred to Music: And she had a
stifness in her Breeding, which was not at all accommodated to the King's
Inclinations. The Match was at last agreed on; and in the end of December she
was brought over. The King was impatient, and so went incognito to Rochester,
but was struck when he saw her. There was a Rudeness in her, which did not at
all please him: He swore they had brought over a Flanders Mare to him; and took
up an incurable Aversion to her. He resolved to break the Match if it were
possible; but his Affairs made the Friendship of the German Princes, to be then
very necessary to him; so that he did not think it advisable to put any Affront
on the Dukes of Saxe and Cleve, her Brother, and her Brother in Law. The
Emperor had at this time made a hasty Journey through France; and Francis and
he had an Interview, where as the King was informed a Project was laid down
against him, Francis was thinking how to take Calais, and the other places the
King had in France, from him; it had been also easy for him to have engaged the
King of Scotland against him: And the People in the North were thought to
retain their former Disposition, to rise still; so that a War made on the King
in such Circumstances, was like to find him at a great Disadvantage. This made
the King more tender of offending the Germans. But he tried if that Precontract
with the Duke of Lorrains's Son, could furnish him with a fair Excuse to break
the Match. The King expressed the great Trouble he was in, both to Cromwell, and
many of his other Servants; and one of them pleasantly told him, that Subjects
had this Advantage over Princes, that they chose Wives for themselves, whereas
Princes were obliged to take such as were brought them. But nothing could be
built on that Precontract, which was only an Agreement between the Fathers,
their Children being under Age; and that was afterward annulled and broken by
the Parents. So Cranmer, and Tonstall beiug required to give their Opinions as
Divines, said, there was nothing in it to hinder the King's Marrying the Lady.
The King marries her, but never liked her.


On the the 6th of January the King Married her; but expressed his dislike of
her so visibly, that all about him took notice of it: And the day after that he
told Cromwell that he had not consummated his Marriage, Cromwell did what he
could to overcome these Inclinations; but that was not to be done: And tho the
King lived five Months with her, and lay often in the Bed with her, yet his
Aversion to her rather increased than abated. She seemed little concerned at
it, and expressed a great readiness to concur in every thing, that might
disengage him from a Marriage that was so unacceptable to him. Instruments were
brought over, to show that the Contract between her and the Prince of Lorrain,
was void: But they took some Advantage, because it was not declared whether the
Contract was in the Words of the Present, or of the Future Tense.

In April there was a Session of Parliament, A New Parliament.
and at the opening of it, as the Lord Chancellor declared the matters
relating to the State, for which the King had called them: So the Vicegerent
spoke to them concerning the matters of Religion: He told them there was
nothing which the King desired so much as an entire Union among all his
Subjects; but some Incendiaries opposed it as much as he promoted it; and
between the rashness on the one hand, and Inveterare Superstition on the other,
Papist and Heretic: And tho they had now the Word of God in all their hands,
yet they studied rather to justify their Passions out of it, than to govern
their Lives by it. In order to the removing this, the King resolved to set
forth an Exposition of the Doctrine of Christ, without any corrupt Mixtures;
and to retain such Ceremonies as might be of good use; and that being done, he
was resolved to punish all Transgressors, of what side soever they might be:
For that end, he had appointed the two Archbishops and the Bishops of London,
Duresm, Winchester, Rochester, Hereford, and St. David's; and 11 Divines,
Thirleby, Robertson, Cox, Day, Oglethorp, Redmayn, Edgeworth, Crayford, Symons,
Robins, and Tresham, for settling the Doctrine. And the Bishops of Bath and
Walls, Ely, Sarum, Chichester, Worcester, and Landaff, for the Ceremonies.
These Committees for Religion, sat as often as the Affairs of the Parliament
could allow of. Two days after the Parliament met, Cromwell was made Earl of
Essex, which shows it was not the King's Dislike of the Queen that wrought his
Ruin, otherwise he had not now raised his Title. The Knights of St. John
suppressed.


A Bill was brought in to the Parliament for suppressing the Knights of St.
John of Jerusalem. These were at first only an Hospital, for entertaining the
Pilgrims that went to visit the Holy Grave: And after that, they became an
Order of Knights; and they and the Knights-Templars conducted and guarded the
Pilgrims. It was thought for some Ages, one of the highest Expression of
Devotion to Christ, to go and visit the places where he was crucified, buried,
and ascended to Heaven: And it was looked on as highly Meritorious, to go and
fight for recovering the Holy Land, out of the hands of Infidels; so that
almost every one that died, either vowed to go to the Holy War, or left
somewhat to such as should go. If they recovered, they bought off their Vow, by
giving some Lands for the Entertainment of those Knights. There were great
Complaints made of the Templars; but whether it was their Wealth that made them
a desirable Prey, or their Guilt that drew Ruin on them, is not certain. They
were condemned in a Council, and all of them that could be found, were cruelly
put to Death. But the other Order was still continued; and being beaten out of
Judea, they settled at Rhodes, out of which they were lately driven; and were
now settled in Malta. They were under a great Master, who depended on the Pope
and the Emperor. But some they could not be brought to surrender of their own
accord, as others had done; it was necessary to suppress them by Act of
Parliament. Another House which they had in Ireland was also suppressed, and
Pensions were reserved for the Priors and Knights. On the 14th of May, the
Parliament was Prorogued to the 25th; a Vote having past, that the Bills should
continue in the State they were in.

On the 12th of June, Cromwell's Fall.
there was a sudden turn at Court, for the Duke of Norfolk arrested Cromwell of
High Treason, and sent him Prisoner to the Tower. He had many Enemies: The
meanness of his Birth made the Nobility take it ill, to see the Son of a
Blacksmith made an Earl, and have the Garter given him; besides his being Lord
Privy Seal, Lord Chamberlain of England, Lord Vicegerent; and a little while
before, he had also the Mastership of the Rolls. All the Popish Clergy hated
him violently: They imputed the Suppression of Monasteries, and the Injunctions
that were laid on them, chiefly to his Counsels: And it was thought that it was
mainly by his means that the King and the Emperor continued to be in such ill
Terms. The King did now understand, that there was no agreement like to be made
between the Emperor and Francis, for it stuck at the matter of the Duchy of
Milan; in which neither of them would yield to the other; and the King was
sure, they would both court his Friendship in case of a War; and this made him
less concerned for the Favor of the German Princes. So, now Cromwell's Counsels
became unacceptable: With this a secret Reason concurred. The King did not only
hate the Queen, but was now come to be in Love with Katherine Howard, Niece to
the Duke of Norfolk; which both raised his Interest, and deprest Cromwell, who
had made the former Match. The King was also willing to cast upon him all the
Errors that had been committed of late, and by making him a Sacrifice, he
hoped he should regain the Affections of his People. The King had also
Informations brought him, That he secretly encouraged those that opposed the
six Articles, and discouraged those who went about the Execution of it. His
Fall came so suddenly, that he had not the least Apprehension of it before the
Storm brake on him. He had the common Fate of all disgraced Ministers; his
Friends forsook him, and his Enemies insulted over him; only Cranmer stuck to
him; and wrote earnestly to the King in his Favors. He said he found that he
had always loved the King above all things; and had served him with such
Fidelity and Success, that he believed no King of England had ever a
faithfuller Servant: And he wished the King might find such a Counselor, who
both could, and would, serve him as he had done. So great and generous a Soul
had Cranmer, that was not turned by changes in his Friends Fortunes; and would
venture on the displeasure of so Imperious a Prince, rather than fail in the
Duties of Friendship. But the King was now resolved to ruin Crom, well, and
that unjust Practice of Attainting, without hearing the Parties Answer for
themselves, which he had promoted too much before, was now turned upon himself.
He had such Enemies in the House of Lords, that the Bill of Attainder was
dispatched in two days, being read twice in one day. Cranmer was absent, and no
other would venture to speak for him. But he met with more Justice in the House
of Commons; for it stuck ten days there. And in Conclusion, a new Bill was
drawn against him, and sent up to the Lords, to which they consented; and it
had the Royal Assent.

In it they set forth, His Attainder.
That tho the King had raised him from a base State, to great Dignities; Yet it
appeared by many Witnesses, that were Persons of Honor, that he had been the
most Corrupt Traitor that ever was known: That he had set many at Liberty that
were condemned, or suspected of Misprision of Treason: That he had given
Licenses for transporting out of the Kingdom things prohibited by Proclamation:
And had granted many Passports without search made: That he had said, he was
sure of the King, That he had dispersed many Erroneous Books, contrary to the
Belief of the Sacrament: And had said, That every Man might Administer it as
well as a Priest: That he had licensed many Preachers suspected of Heresy: And
had ordered many to be discharged that were committed on that account; and had
discharged all Informers: That he had many Heretics about him: That above a
Year before, he had said, The preaching of Barns and others, was good: And that
he would not turn, tho the King did turn; but if the King turned, he would
fight in Person against him, and all that turned: And drawing out his Dagger,
he wished that might pierce him to the Heart, if he should not do it; he had
also said, If he lived a year or two longer, it should not be in the King's
Power to hinder it. He had likewise been found guilty of great Oppression and
Bribery: And when he heard, that some Lords were taking Counsel against him, he
had threatened, that he would raise great stirrs in England: For these things,
he was Attainted both of High Treason and Heresy. A Proviso was added, for
securing the Church of Wells, of which he had been Dean.

This was looked on as very hard Measure. It was believed, Censures past upon it.
That he had at least Verbal Orders from the King, for the Licenses and Orders
that were complained of; and perhaps he could have showed some in Writing, if
he had been heard to make his Answers. Bribery seemed to be cast on him, only
to render him odious; but no Particulars were mentioned. Nor was it credible,
That he could have spoken such Words of the King, as were alleged, especially
when he was in the height of his Favor; and if he had spoken them above a Year
before, it is not to be imagined that they could have been so long kept secret;
and what was said of his drawing out a Dagger, looked like a design to affix an
overt Act to them.

This being done, The King's Marriage annulled.
The King went on to move for a Divorce. An Address was moved to be made to him
by the Lords, that he would suffer his Marriage to be examined. Cranmer and
others were sent down to desire the Concurrence of the Commons; and they
ordered 20 of their number to go along with the Lords, who went all in a body
to the King. He granted their desire, the matter being concerted before. So a
Commission was sent to the Convocation, to discuss it: Gardener opened it to
them; and they appointed a Committee for the Examination of Witnesses. The
Substance of the whole Evidence amounted to these Particulars; That the matter
of the Precontract with the Prince of Lorrain, was not fully cleared; and it
did not appear, if it was made by the Queen; or whether it was in the Words of
the present time, or not. That the King had married her against her Will; and
had not given an inward and complete Consent; and that he had never consummated
the Marriage; so that they saw he could have no Issue by the Queen. Upon these
grounds the whole Convocation with one consent annulled the Marriage, and
declared both Parties free. This was the grossest piece of Compliance that the
King had from his Clergy in his whole Reign: For as they knew that there was
nothing in the pretended Precontract; so by voiding the Marriage, because the
Consent was not internal and free, they made a most pernicious Precedent for
breaking all public Treaties; for none can know Men's Hearts; it would be easy
for every one to pretend that he had not given a perfect Consent; and that
being allowed, there could be no Confidence nor safety among Men any more. And
in the Process for the King's first Divorce, they had laid it down as a
Principle, that a Marriage was complete, tho it were never consummated. But in
a Word, the King was resolved to be rid of the Queen; and the Clergy were
resolved not to offend him: And they rather sought out Reasons to give a color
to their Sentence, then past it on the force of those Reasons. Cromwell was
required to send a Declaration of all he knew concerning the Marriage, which he
did; but ended in these most abject Words, Written with the heavy Heart, and
trembling Hand, of your Highness's most heavy, and most miserable Prisoner, and
poor Slave, Tho. Cromwell: and under his Subscription he wrote, Most Sacred
Prince, I cry for, Mercy, Mercy, Mercy. The Judgment of the Convocation was
reported to the House of Lords by Cranmer, and the Reasons were opened by
Gardener. They were sent down to the Commons to give them the same account; and
both Houses were satisfied with it. Next day, some Lords were sent to the
Queen, who had retired to Richmond: They told her, The King was resolved to
declare her his adopted Sister, and to setle 4000 l. a Year on her, if she
would consent to it; which she cheerfully embraced; and it being left to her
choice, either to live in England, or to return to her Brother; She preferred
the former. They pressed her to write to her Brother, that all this matter was
done with her good Will; that the King used her, as a Father; and that
therefore he, and the other Allies, should not take this ill at his hands. She
was a little averse to this, but was prevailed on to do it. When things were
thus prepared, the Act confirming the Judgment of the Convocation, past,
without any Opposition. An Act past, mitigating one Clause in the Act of the
six Articles; by which, the pains of Death for the Marriage or Incontinence of
the Clergy, were changed into a Forfeiture of their Goods and Benefices.
Another Act past, Authorizing those Committees of Bishops and Divines that had
been named by the King, both for the Doctrine and Ceremonies, to go on in it;
and appointing, that what should be agreed on by them, and Published with the
King's Approbation, should bind the Subjects as much as if every Particular in
it had been ennumerated in that Act, any Law or Custom to the contrary
notwithstanding: But a Proviso was added, That nothing might be done by them
contrary to the Laws then in force: Which Contradiction in the Provisos, seems
to have been put in on design, to keep all Ecclesiastical Proceedings under the
Inspection of the Secular Courts, since they are the only Expounders of Acts of
Parliament. Another Act past, That no Pretense of a Precontract should be made
use of to annul a Marriage duly Solemnized and Consummated: And that no Degrees
of Kindred, but those ennumerated in the Law of Moses, might hinder a Marriage.
This last was added, To enable the King to marry Katherine Howard, that was
Cousin German to Ann Boleyn, which was one of the Degrees prohibited by the
Canon Law; but the reason of the former part is not known. It directly condemns
the King's Divorce of Ann Boleyn, grounded on a pretended Precontract.

The Province of Canterbury gave the King a Subsidy of 4 s. in the Pound, to be
paid in two Years, with a Preamble of high Acknowledgments of their Happiness
under his Protection. A Subsidy was also asked of the Laity, but in the House
of Commons it was much opposed: Many said they had given the King the
Abbey-Lands, in hopes that no Subsidies should have been any more demanded; and
it showed a strange Profuseness, that now within a Year after that, a Subsidy
was demanded. But it was answered, That the King had been at great charge in
fortifying his Coasts; and in keeping up such Leagues beyond Sea, as preserved
the Nation in safety; a Tenth and four 15ths were granted. Several Bills of
Attainder were past. And in Conclusion, the King sent a General Pardon, out of
which, Cromwell, and diverse others were excepted; and then the Parliament was
dissolved. Cromwell's mean Addresses could not preserve him: So he was executed
on the 28 of July: Cromwels Death.
He thanked God for bringing him to die in that manner, which was just, on the
account of his Sins against God, and his Offenses against his Prince. He
declared that he doubted of no Article of the Catholic Faith, nor of any
Sacrament of the Church. He said, He had been seduced, but now he died in the
Catholic Faith; and denied he had supported the Preachers of ill Opinions. He
desired all their Prayers; and prayed very fervently for himself; and thus did
he end his days.

He rose merely by the strength of his Natural Parts; for his Education was
suitable to his mean Extraction: Only he had all the New Testament in Latin, by
Heart. He carried his Greatness with Extraordinary Moderation; and fell rather
under the weight of Popular Odium, than Guilt. At his Death he mixed none of
the Superstitions of the Church of Rome with his Devotions: So it was said,
that he used the Word, Catholic Faith, in its true sense, and in Opposition to
the Novelties of the Church of Rome: Yet his Ambiguous way of expressing
himself, made the Papists say, that he died repenting of his Heresy: But the
Protestants said that he died in the same Persuasions in which he lived. With
him fell the Office of the King's Vicegerent, and none after him have aspired
to that Character, that proved so fatal to him who first carried it. It was
believed that the King lamented his Death when it was too late; and the
Miseries that fell on the new Queen, and on the Duke of Norfolk, and his
Family, were looked on as Strokes from Heaven on them, for their cruel
prosecuting this unfortunate Minister. With his Fall, the Progress of the
Reformation stopped; for Cranmer could never gain much Ground after this, and
indeed many hoped that he should be quickly sent after Cromwell; some
complained of him in the House of Commons, and Informations were brought the
King, that the chief Encouragement that the Heretics had, came from him.

The Ecclesiastical Committees employed by the King, A Book of Religion set out
by Bishops.
were now at work, and gave the last finishing to a Book formerly prepared, but
at this time corrected and explained in many Particulars. They began with the
Explanation of Faith, which according to the Doctrine of the Church of Rome,
was thought an implicit believing whatever the Church proposed: But the
Reformers made it the chief Subject of their Books and Sermons, to persuade
People to believe in Christ, and not in the Church; and made great use of those
Places in which it was said, That Christians are justified by Faith only: tho
some explained this in such a manner, that it gave their Adversaries Advantages
to charge them that they denied the necessity of Good Works; but they all
taught that tho they were not necessary to Justification, yet they were
necessary to Salvation. They differed also in their Notion of Good Works: The
Church of Rome taught, that the Honor done to God in his Images, or to the
Saints in their Shrines and Relics, or to the Priests, were the best sort of
Good Works: Whereas the Reformers pressed Justice and Mercy most, and discovered
the Superstition of the other. The Opinion of the Merit of Good Works, was also
so highly raised, that many thought they purchased Heaven by them. This the
Reformers did also correct, and taught the People to depend merely upon the
Death and Intercession of Christ. Others moved subtiller Questions, As whether
Obedience was an essential part of Faith, or only a Consequent of it? This was
a Nicety scarce becoming Divines, that built only on the Simplicity of the
Scriptures, and condemned the Subtilties of the Schools; and it was said, that
Men of ill Lives abused this Doctrine, and thought that if they could but
assure themselves that Christ died for them, they were safe enough.

So now when they settled the Notion of Faith, The Explanation of Faith.
they divided it into two sorts: The one was a Persuasion of the Truth of the
Gospel; but the other carried with it a Submission to the Will of God; and both
Hope, Love, and Obedience belonged to it; which was the Faith professed in
Baptism, and so much extolled by St. Paul. It was not to be so understood as if
it were a Certainty of our being predestined, which may be only a
Presumption; since all God's Promises are made to us on Conditions; but it was
an entire receiving the whole Gospel according to our Baptismal Vows. Cranmer
took great Pains to state this matter right; and made a large Collection of
many places, all written with his own Hand, both out of Ancient and Modern
Authors, concerning Faith, Justification and the Merit of Good Works; and
concluded with this, That our Justification was to be ascribed only to the
Merits of Christ; and that those who are justified must have Charity as well as
Faith, but that neither of these was the meritorious Cause of Justification.
After this was stated, they made next a large and full Explanation of the
Apostles Creed with great Judgment, and many excellent practical Inferences;
the Definition they gave of the Catholic Church runs thus: It comprehended all
Assemblies of Men in the whole World that received the Faith of Christ, who
ought to hold an Unity of Love and Brotherly Agreement together, by which they
became Members of the Catholic Church: After this they explained the seven
Sacraments.

In opening these there were great Debates; for, as was formerly mentioned, the
method used, was to open the Point enquired into by proposing many Queries, And
of the Sacramenss.
and every one was to give in his Answer to these, with the Reasons of it; and
then others were appointed to make an Abstract of those things, in which they
all either agreed or differed. The Original Papers relating to these Points are
yet preserved, which show with how great Consideration they proceeded in the
Changes that were then made. Cranmer had at this time some particular Opinions
concerning Ecclesiastical Offices; That they were delivered from the King, as
other Civil Offices were, and that Ordination was not indispensibly necessary,
and was only a Ceremony, that might be used or laid aside; but that the
Authority was conveyed to Churchmen only by the King's Commission; yet he
delivered his Opinion in this matter with great Modesty, and he not only
subscribed the Book in which the contrary Doctrine was established, but
afterward published it in a Book which he writ in King Edward's days, from
whence it appears that he changed his Mind in this Particular. Baptism was
explained as had been done formerly; Penance was made to consist in the
Absolution of the Priests which had been formerly declared only to be
desirable, where it could be had. In the Communion, both Transubstantiation,
Private Masses, and Communion in one kind, were asserted: They asserted the
Obligation of the Levitical Law about the Degrees of Marriage, and the
Indissolubleness of that Bond. They set out the Divine Institution of Priests
and Deacons; and that no Bishop had Authority over another: they made a long
Excursion against the Pope's Pretensions, and for justifying the King's
Supremacy. They said, Confirmation was instituted by the Apostles, and was
profitable, but not necessary to Salvation: and they asserted extreme Unction
to have been commanded by the Apostles, for the Health both of Soul and Body.
Then were the Ten Commandments explained, the second was added to the first,
but the Words, For I am the Lord thy God, etc. were left out. It was declared,
that no Godly Honor was to be done unto Images, and that they ought only to be
reverenced, for their sakes whom they represented: therefore the preferring of
one Image to another, and the making Pilgrimages and Offerings to them, was
condemned; but the censing them or kneeling before them was permitted; yet the
People were to be taught that these things were done only to the Honor of God.
Invocation of Saints, as Intercessors, was allowed, but immediate Addresses to
them for the Blessings that were prayed for, was condemned. The strict rest
from Labor on the seventh day, was declared to be Ceremonial; but it was
necessary to rest from Sin, and Carnal Pleasure, and to follow Holy Duties. The
other Commandments were explained in a very plain and practical way. Then was
the Lord's Prayer explained, and it was asserted that the People ought only to
pray in their Vulgar Tongues, for exciting their Devotion the more: The Angels
Salutation to the Virgin was also paraphrased, They handled Free Will and
defined it to be a Power by which the Will guided by Reason, did without
constraint discern and choose Good and Evil, the former by the help of God's
Spirit, and the latter of it self. Grace was said to be offered to all Men, but
was made effectual by the Application of the Free Will to it: and Grace and
Free Will did consist well together, the one being added for the help of the
other; and therefore Preachers were warned not to depress either of them too
much, in order to the Exaltation of the other. Men were justified freely by the
Grace of God, but that was applied by Faith, in which both the Fear of God,
Repentance, and Amendment of Life were included. All curious reasonings about
Predestination were condemned; for Men could not be assured of their Election,
but by feeling the Motions of God's Holy Spirit appearing in a good and a
virtuous Life, and persevering in that to the end. Good Works were necessary,
which were not the Superstitious Inventions of Monks and Friars, nor only moral
Good Works done by the Power of Nature, but were the Works of Charity flowing
from a pure Heart and Faith unfeigned: Fasting and the other Fruits of Penance
were also Good Works; but of an Inferior Nature to Justice and the other
Virtues: Good Works were meritorious, yet since they were wrought in Men by
God's Spirit; all boasting was excluded. They ended with an account of Prayer
for Souls departed, almost the same that was in the Articles published before.

The Book was writ in a plain and Masculine Style, fit for weak Capacities, The
Book is published.
and yet strong and weighty: and the parts of it that related to Practice were
admirable. To this they added a Preface, declaring the Care they had used in
examining the Scriptures and Ancient Doctors, out of whom they compiled this
Book. The King added another Preface, in which he condemned the Hypocrisy and
Superstition of one sort, and the Presumption of another sort; to correct both,
he had ordered this Book to be made, and published: and he required his People
to read and print it in their Hearts, and to pray to God to grant them the
Spirit of Humility for receiving it aright: And he charged the Inferior People
to remember that their Office was not to teach, but to be taught, and to
practice what they heard, rather than dispute about it. But this Preface was
not added till two Years after the Book was put out; for it mentions the
Approbation that was given to it in Parliament, and the Restraint that was put
on reading the Scriptures, of which an account shall be given afterward.

The Reformers were dissatisfied with many things in the Book, yet were glad to
find the Morals of Religion so well opened; for the Purity of Soul, which that
might effect, would dispose People to sound Opinions; many Superstitious
Practices were also condemned, and the Gospel Covenant was rightly stated. One
Article was also asserted in it, which opened the way to a further Reformation;
for every National Church was declared to be a complete Body, with Power to
reform Heresies, and do every thing that was necessary for preserving its own
Purity, or governing its Members. The Popish Party thought they had recovered
much Ground, that seemed lost formerly: They knew the Reformers would never
submit to all things in this Book, which would alienate the King from them; but
they were safe, being resolved to comply with him in every thing, and without
doing that, it was like to be somewhat uneasy to live in England; for the
King's Peevishness grew upon him with his Age. Now the Correspondence between
the King and the German Princes fell upon the Change that was made in the
Ministry, and a secret Treaty was set on foot between the King and the
Emperor. All the Changes that the Committee appointed for the Ceremonies made,
was only the Rasure of some Offices and Collects, and the setting out of a new
Primer, with the Vulgar Devotions for the Common People: But the Changes were
not so great, as that it was necessary to reprint the Missals or Breviaries;
for the old Books were still made use of. Yet these Rasures were such, that in
Queen Mary's time the old Books were all called in, and the Nation was put to
the Charge of buying new ones, which was considerable, so great was the Number
of the Books of Offices.

The Popish Party studied now to engage the King into new Severities against
the Reformers; Barnes and others fall into Trouble.
the first Instances of these fell on three Preachers, Barnes, Gerrard, and
Jerome, who had been early wrought on by Luther's Books. Barnes had during
Wolsey's Greatness, reflected much on him in a Sermon which he preached at
Cambridg; but Gardener was then his Friend, and brought him off; he having
abjured some Articles that were objected to him: yet upon new Complaints he was
again put in Prison, but he made his Escape and fled to Germany; and became so
considerable, that he was sent over to England by the King of Denmark, as
Chaplain to his Ambassadors; but he went back again. The Bishop of Hereford
meeting him at Smalcald, sent him over to England, with a special
Recommendation to Cromwell: he was after that, much employed in the
Negotiations which the King had with the Germans; and had the misfortune to be
the first that was sent with the Proposition for Anne of Cleve. In Lent this
Year Bonner appointed those three to have their turns at St. Paul's Cross;
Gardener preached also there, and fell on Justification, which he handled
according to the Notions of the Schools: But Barnes and the other two did
directly refute his Sermon, when it came to their turns to preach, not without
indecent Reflections on his Person. This was represented to the King as a great
Insolence, he being both a Bishop and a Privy Counselor; so the King
commanded them to go and give him Satisfaction: he seemed to carry the matter
with much Moderation, and readily forgave all that was personal, tho it was
believed that it stuck deep in him. In Conclusion, they confessed their
Indiscretion, and promised for the future to be more cautious, and renounced
some Articles of which it was thought their Sermons savoured; as that God was
the Author of Sin, that Good Works were not necessary to Salvation, and that
Princes ought not to be obeyed in all their just Laws. Some other Niceties were
in dispute concerning Justification; but the King thought these were not of
such Consequence, that it was necessary to make them abjure them. Barnes and
his Friends were required to preach a Recantation Sermon at the Spittle, and to
ask Gardiner's Pardon; but tho they obeyed this, yet it was said that in one
place, they justified what they recanted in another; at which the King was so
much provoked, that without hearing them, he sent them to the Tower. At that
time Cromwell either could not protect them, or would not interpose in a matter
which gave the King so great Offense. When the Parliament came, they were
attainted of Heresy, without being brought to make their Answers: no particular
Errors were objected to them, only they were condemned to be burnt as
detestable Heretics in general Words. In the same Act by which they were
condemned: four other were attainted of Treason, for being confederated with
Reginald Pool, and for intending to surprise Calais, and as there was a strange
mixture in their Condemnation, so the like was in their Executions: for Abel
Featherston, and Powell, that were attainted in the same Parliament for owning
the Pope's Supremacy, were executed with them, and were coupled together in the
Hurdles in which they were carried to Smithfield; the King in this affecting an
extravagant Appearance of Impartiality in his Justice.

Barnes being tied to the Stake, And burnt
went over the Articles of the Creed, and declared his Belief of them all; and
that he abhorred the impious Opinions of some German Anabaptists. He asserted
the necessity of Good Works, but ascribed Justification wholly to the Merits of
Christ; he professed all due Reverence to the Saints; but said he saw no
Warrant to pray for them; he asked the Sheriff and the People, if they knew for
what they were condemned, and what Heresies they were accused of: but none made
Answer; he prayed God to forgive all that sought their Death, and in
particular, Gardener, if he had done it: then prayed for the King and the
Prince, and expressed his Loyalty to the King; that he believed all his just
Laws were to be obeyed for Conscience sake, and that in no Case it was lawful
to resist him: he sent some Desires to the King, as that he would apply the
Abby-Lands to good Uses, and the Relief of his poor Subjects; that he would
punish the Contempt of Marriage that was so common, and would put a stop to the
Liberty many took of casting off their Wives, and living in Whoredom; that
Swearers might be punished, and that since the King had begun to set forth the
Christian Religion, that he would go on with it; for a great deal remained yet
to be done: he asked the Forgiveness of all People whom he might have at any
time offended, and so turned and prepared himself for Death: then the other two
spoke to the same purpose; they declared their Faith, and exhorted the People
to a good Life, and mutual Love; and they all prayed and embraced one another;
after that, the Fire was set to. The Constancy they expressed, together with
the Gentleness of their Deportment toward their Enemies, made great
Impressions on the Spectators, and cast a heavy Imputation on Gardener, as the
Procurer of their Deaths, tho he justified himself in an Apology which he
printed; in which he denied any other Accession to it, but giving his Vote to
the Bill of Attainder. Bonner began now to show himself in his own Colors: He
had courted Cromwell more than any Person whatsoever; yet the very day after
his Disgrace, he showed his Ingratitude; for Grafton that had printed the
Bible, and was much in Cromwell's Favor upon that account, meeting Bonner,
expressed his Sorrow for Cromwell's being sent to the Tower; but the other
answered, that it had been good he had been there much sooner: Grafton saw his
Error in speaking so freely, and went from him: but some Verses being printed
in Cromwell's Praise; Bonner informed the Council what Grafton had said to him,
and so thought it was probable he had printed them, yet he had so many Friends
that he was let go. He procured many to be indicted upon the Act of the six
Articles; but an Order came from the King to stop further Proceedings; yet he
picked out one Instance which did equally discover his brutal Cruelty, and his
want of Judgment. One Mekins not above fifteen Years old, had said somewhat
against the Corporal Presence, and in Commendation of Dr. Barnes: The Witnesses
differed in their Evidence, one swore he had said the Sacrament was only a
Ceremony; the other swore he had said it was only a Signification: so two Grand
Juries returned an Ignoramus on the Bill; upon which he fell into a fit of
Cursing and violent Rage, and he made the second Grand Jury go aside and
consider better of it, they being terrified, found the Bill, and he was
condemned to be burnt; but hoping to be preserved by what he should say at the
Stake; he railed at Barnes, and praised Bonner much: yet that did not save him.
Two were burnt at Salisbury, and two at Lincoln, upon the same Statute; besides
great Numbers that were put in Prison.

In the end of this Year, New Sees founded.
the King began to endow the new Bishoprics: Westminster was the first, in
which he endowed a Bishopric, a Deanery, 12 Prebendaries, a Quire, and other
Officers. The Year after this, he endowed Chester, Gloucester, and Peterborough;
but in these Cathedrals he only endowed six Prebendaries; two Years after he
likewise endowed Oxford and Bristol. The Foundations had Preambles are almost
the same with that of the Act of Parliament that empowred him to erect them; he
promoted the Bishops to those Sees by a special Writ; tho that was to go
thereafter in the way of Election, as it was in the other Sees: he also
converted the Priories of Canterbury, Winchester, Duresme, Worcester, Ely,
Rochester, and Carlisle, into Collegiate Churches, consisting of Deans and
Prebendaries. But as all this came much far short of what the King had at first
intended; so the Channel in which those Foundations run, differed much from
what Cranmer had projected, whose Interest was so low at Court, that his
Opinion was not now regarded as it had been formerly. He intended to have
restored the Cathedrals to what they had been at first, to be Colleges and
Nurseries for the Diocese, and to have set up Readers of the Learned Tongues,
and of Divinity, in them, that so a considerable number of young Clerks might
have been trained up under the Bishop's Eye, both in their Studies, and in a
Course of Devotion; to be by him, put afterward in Livings, according to their
Merit and Improvements. The want of such Houses for the strict Education of
those who are to serve in the Church, has been the occasion of many fatal
Consequences since that time, by the Scandals which Men initiated to the Sacred
Functions, before they were well prepared for them, have given the World. The
Popish Party beyond Sea censured these Endowments, both as being a very
defective Restitution of the Lands that had been invaded, and as an Invasion on
the Spiritual Authority, when the King divided Diocesses, and removed Churches
from one Jurisdiction and put them under another. To which it was answered,
That as their Practices against the King had put him to such a charge, that he
could not execute what he at first intended; so both the Roman Emperors, and
other Christian Kings, had regulated and divided the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, and made Primates and Patriarchs as they pleased. Ely in England,
was taken out of Lincoln, only by the King and his Parliament; tho P. Nicolaus
did officiously send a Confirmation of it, that being an Art of the Papacy to
offer Confirmations unsought; and afterward to found a Right on such a
Precedent: So that the receiving a Confirmation, was made to pass, for an
acknowledgment of an Authority in that See to grant it; upon which the Popes
afterward pretended, that such things could not be done without their consent.
Here the Series of the King's Advances toward a Reformation, ends; what he did
after this, was by Starts, backwards or forwards, as the humor took him: Nor
was he steady in his Councils in State Affairs: He had no Minister about him,
that had an Ascendent over him. Sickness and Years increased his Imperious
Temper; so that his Counselors had a hard task to please him, and many Errors
were committed by him.

A new Impression of the Bible was at this time finished: The Bible set up in
Churches.
And the King required all Parishes to provide one of them by the next
All-hallowtide, under the pain of 40 s. a Month after that, till they had got
one. The People were also charged not to dispute about it, nor to disturb
Divine Service by reading it during the Mass; but to read it humbly and
reverently for their Instruction and Edification. Six of these were set up in
diverse Places of St. Paul's: But Bonner being afraid of the Mischief they might
do, posted up near them an Admonition to the People, That none should read them
with vain Glory, and corrupt Affections, or draw Multitudes about them when
they read them. But great numbers gathered about those that read; and such as
had good Voices, used to be reading them aloud a great part of the Day. Many
set their Children to School, and when they had learned to read, they carried
them to Church to read the Bibles; some began likewise to argue from them,
particularly against taking away the Chalice in the Communion, and the Worship
in an unknown Tongue. Upon which, Bonner set up a new Advertisement, and
threatened to remove them, if these abuses were not corrected: And upon the
Complaints made of those things, the free use of the Scriptures was afterward
much restrained. This Year the King added to his former Foundations, two
Collegiat Churches at Burton upon Trent, and Thornton, consisting of a Dean and
four Prebendaries apiece. Cranmer observing the Excesses in Bishops Tables, by
which, under the name of Hospitality, so much was consumed in great
Entertainments, that they were disabled from more necessary and profitable Acts
of Charity, made a Regulation, that an Archbishop should not have above six
Dishes of Meat, and four of Banquet; a Bishop not above five, of Meat, and four
of Banquet; a Dean or Arth-deacon, not above four, and two of the one, and the
other; and Inferior Churchmen might not have above two Dishes. But this did
not take effect; and Sumptuous Tables still continued; tho the Revenues were
much impaired; and thus besides the other ill Effects of these, a great part of
the Church-rents goes for Entertaining the Rich, which should be applied to the
Poor.

This Summer the King went to York, to meet his Nephew the King of Scotland,
who promised him an Enterview there. He was an Extraordinary Prince, The
Affairs of Scotland.
a great Patron, both of Learning and Justice; but out of measure addicted to
his Pleasures. The Clergy of Scotland were very Apprehensive of his seeing his
Uncle, lest King Henry might have persuaded him to follow the Copy he had set
to his Neighbors: and they used such persuasions, that these seconded by a
Message from France, diverted the King from his purpose. Here I shall digress a
little, to give an account of the State of Scotland, at this time. The long
Alliance between Scotland and France, made that Paris was the place where the
Learned of that Nation had their Education: Yet after the Year 1412, Learning
came to have more footing there, and Universities were set up in several
Episcopal Sees. At the same time, some of Wickliff's Followers began to creep
into Scotland; and one Resby, an Englishman, was burnt (1407) for teaching some
Opinions contrary to the Pope's Authority. Some Years after that, Paul Craw, an
Hussite and Bohemian, was burnt, for infusing the Opinions of that Party, into
some at St. Andrews. About the end of that Century, Lollardy, as it was then
called, was spread into many parts of the Diocese in Glasgow: For which,
several Persons of Quality were accused: But they answered the Archbishop of
that See, with such Assurance, that he dismissed them; having admonished them,
to content themselves with the Faith of the Church, and to beware of new
Doctrines. The same Spirit of Ignorance, Immorality, and Superstition, had
overrun the Clergy there, that was so much complained of in the other parts of
Europe: only it may be supposed, that in Nations less Polite and Learned, it
was in Proportion greater then it was elsewhere. The total neglect of the
Pastoral Care, and the gross Scandals of the Clergy, possessed the People with
such Prejudices against them, that they were easily disposed to hearken to new
Preachers. Patrick Hamilton, nobly born, Nephew by his Father to the Earl of
Aran, and to the Duke of Albany by his Mother, was bred up on design to be
highly preferred; and had an Abbey given him for prosecuting his Studies. He
went to travel, and in Germany grew acquainted with Luther and Melancthon, and
being possessed with their Opinions, he returned to Scotland, and laid open the
Errors and Corruptions then received in the Church. He was invited to St.
Andrews, to confer concerning these Points, upon which he was condemned, and
put in Prison. Articles were objected to him; and upon his refusing to abjure
them, Beaton, Archbishop of St Andrews, with the Archbishop of Glasgow, 3
Bishops, and 5 Abbots, condemned him, as an obstinate Heretic, and delivered
him to the Secular Power, and ordered the Execution to be that Afternoon; for
the King had gone in Pilgrimage to Ross; and they were afraid, lest upon his
Return, Hamilton's Friends might have interceeded effectually for him. He was
tied to the Stake, and expressed great Joys in his Sufferings, since by these
he was to enter into Everlasting Life. A Train of Powder being fired, it did
not kindle the Fuel, but only burnt his Face: So a stop was made till more
Powder was brought; and in that time the Friars called often to him to recant,
and pray to the Virgin, and to say the Salve Regina: One Friar Campbel, was
very officious among the rest, who had been often with him in Prison. He answered
him, That he knew he was not an Heretic, and had confessed it to him in
private; and he charged him to answer for that to God. By this time the
Gunpowder was brought, and the Fire was kindled, and he died, often repeating
these Words, Lord Jesus receive my Soul. Campbel became soon after, Frantic,
and died within a Year. Both these laid together, made great Impressions on the
People: And now that these Points began to be inquired into, many received the
new Opinions. Seaton, a Dominican, the King's Confessor, preaching in Lent, set
out the Nature of true Repentance, and the Method to it, without mixing the
Directions which the Friars commonly gave on that Subject; and when another
Friar showed the defectiveness of what he had taught, he defended himself in
another Sermon, and reflected on those Bishops that did not preach, and called
them dumb Dogs. But the Clergy would not meddle with him, till they found him
in ill Terms with the King; and the freedom he used in reproving him for his
Vices, quickly alienated the King from him, upon which they resolved to fall on
him; but he withdrew into England, and wrote to the King, taxing the Clergy for
their Cruelty, and praying him to restrain it. One Forest, an ignorant
Benedictine, was accused for having spoken Honorably of Patrick Hamilton, and
was put in Prison. In Confession to a Friar, he acknowledged, he thought he was
a good Man, and that the Articles for which he was condemned, might be
defended. The Friar discovered this, and it was received as Evidence, and upon
it he was condemned and burnt. Diverse others were brought into the Bishop's
Courts, of whom, the greatest part abjured; but two were more resolute: one
Gourley denied Purgatory, and the Pope's Authority; another was David Smiton,
who being a Fisherman, had refused to pay the Tithe of his Fish; and when the
Vicar came to take them, he said, the Tithe was taken where the Stock grew, and
therefore he threw the tenth Fish into the Sea: For this and other Opinions, he
was condemned, and they were both burnt at one Stake. Several others were
accused; of whom some fled to England, and others went over to Germany. The
Changes made in England, raised in all the People a curiosity of searching into
matters of Religion, and that was always fatal to Superstition. Pope Clement
the 7th, wrote earnestly to the King of Scotland, to continue firm to the
Catholic Faith: Upon which he called a Parliament, and made new Laws, for
maintaining the Pope's Authority, and proceeding against Heretics; yet the
Pope could not engage him to make War on England. King Henry sent Barlow,
Bishop of St. David's, to him, with some Books that were written in Defense of
his Proceedings, and desired him to examine them Impartially. He also proposed
the Enterview at York, and a Match between him and Lady Mary, the King's eldest
Daughter; and promised that he should be made Duke of York, and Lord Lieutenant
of the whole Kingdom. Yet the Clergy diverted him from this, and persuaded him
to go in Person to France, and court the Daughter of that King, Magdalene. He
married her in January 1537; but she died in May. She had been bred in the
Queen of Navarre's Court, and so was well disposed toward the Reformation.
Upon her Death, the King married Mary of Guise; she was a Branch of the Family
of all Europe, that was most zealously addicted to the old Superstition; and
her Interest joined with the Clergy's, engaged the King to become a violent
Persecuter of all that were of another mind.

The King was very expensive, both in his Pleasures, and Buildings; and had a
numerous Race of Bastards; A Persecution set on foot in Scotland.
so that he came to want Money much. The Nobility proposed to him, the seizing
on the Abbey-Lands, as his Uncle had done. The Clergy on the other hand advised
him, to proceed severely against all suspected of Heresy: By which means,
according to the Lists they showed him, he might raise 100000 Crowns a Year:
They also advised him to provide his Children to Abbeys, and Priories; and
represented to him, That if he continued steadfast in the old Religion, he would
still have a great Party in England; and might be made the Head of a League,
which was then in Project against King Henry. This so far prevailed with him,
that as he made four of his Sons, Abbots and Priors, so he gave way to the
persecuting Spirit of the Clergy: Upon which, many were cited to answer for
Heresy; of these many abjured; and some were banished. A Canon Regular, a
Secular Priest, two Friars, and a Gentleman, were burnt. Forest, the Canon
Regular, had been reproved by his Ordinary, the Bishop of Dunkell, for meddling
with the Scriptures too much. He told him, he had lived long, and had never
known what was in the Old or New Testament; but contented himself with his
Portoise and Pontifical, and that he might come to repent it, if he troubled
himself with such Fancsies. The Archbishop of Glasgow, was a very moderate Man,
and disliked cruel Proceedings. Russel, a Friar, and Kennedy, a young Man, of
18 Years of Age, were brought before him; they expressed wonderful Joy, and a
steady Resolution in their Sufferings. And after a long dispute between Russel
and the Bishop's Divines, Russel concluded, This is your Hour, and the Power of
Darkness; go on, and fill up the Measures of your Iniquities. The Archbishop
was unwilling to give Sentence; he said, he thought these Executions did the
Church more Hurt than Good. But those about him, told him, He must not take a
Way different from the rest of the Bishops; and threatened him so, that he
pronounced Sentence. They were burned; but they gave such Demonstrations of
Patience and Joy, as made no small Impression on all that saw it, or heard of
it. Among those that were in trouble, George Buchanan was one, who at the
King's Instigations, had writ a very sharp Poem against the Franciscans, but
was now abandoned by him. He made his Escape, and lived 20 Years in Foreign
Parts, and at last returned to do his Country Honor; and what by his Immortal
Poems, what by his History of Scotland, he showed both how great a Master he
was in the Roman Tongue; and how true a Judge he was, both in Wit, and in the
Knowledge of Human Affairs, (if Passion had not corrupted him toward the end
of his History) that he is justly to be reckoned the greatest and best of the
Modern Writers. So much of the Affairs of Scotland, the Author's Native Country.

King Henry stayed not long at York, The Queen's ill Life is discovered.
since his Nephew came not to him. He set out a Proclamation there, inviting
all that had been of late oppressed, to come in and make their Complaints, and
he promised to repair them. This was done to cast the Load of all past Errors
upon Cromwell. The King was mightily wrought on by the Charms of his Wife; so
that on the First of November, he gave public thanks to God for the happy
Choice he had made: But this did not last long; for the next day Cranmer came,
and gave him an account of the Queen's ill Life, which one Lassells had
revealed to him, as having learnt it from his Sister. She had been very lewd
before her Marriage, both with one Deirham, and one Mannock. Cranmer, by the
Advice of the other Privy Counselors, put this in Writing, and delivered it to
the King, not knowing how to open it in Discourse. The King was struck with it,
and at first inclined to believe it was a Forgery; yet he ordered a strict
enquiry to be made into it, but he quickly found Proof enough; for the Queen
had so far cast off both Modesty, and the Fear of a Discovery, that several
Women had been Witnesses to her Lewdness. It also appeared, that she had
intended to continue in that ill Course, for she had brought Deirham into her
Service; and at Lincoln, by the Lady Rochford's means, one Culpeper was brought
to her in the Night, and stayed many Hours with her in a Cellar, and at his
going away, she gave him a Gold Chain. The Queen, after a slight denial which
she made at first, did at last confess all. Deirham, and Culpeper, were
executed, and a Parliament was called upon it. When it met, a Committee was
sent to examine the Queen: Their Report is recorded only in General, That she
confessed, but no Particulars are mentioned. Upon that they passed an Act, in
the Form of a Petition. In it they prayed the King, that the Queen and her
Accomplices, with her Bawd the Lady Rochford, might be attainted of Treason: And
that all those who knew of the Queen's Vicious Course before her Marriage,
might be attainted of Misprision of Treason, for not revealing it to the King,
before he married her. Among those were, her Father, and Mother, and her
Grandmother, the Duchess of Norfolk. It was also declared Treason, to know
any thing of the Incontinence of any Queen for the future, and not to reveal
it. And it was made Treason, in any whom the King intended to marry, judging
they were Maids, not to reveal it, if they were not such. The Queen and the
Lady Rochford were beheaded on the 14th of February. She confessed her
Incontinence before her Marriage, but denied to the last that she had broken
her Wed-lock, tho the Lasciviousness of her former Life, made the World easy to
believe the worst things of her. Rochford, who had been so instrumental in the
Ruin of Ann Bolleyn, and of her Husband: And when she, to whose Artifices
their Fall was in a great Measure ascribed, was found to be so vile a Woman, it
tended much to raise their Reputation again. The attainting her Kindred and
Parents, for not discovering her former Lewdness, was thought extreme Severity:
for it had been a hard piece of Duty to the King, in them, to have discovered
such a Secret: Yet tho they lay some time in Prison, the King pardoned them all
afterward, when his Rage was a little qualified. That other Proviso, obliging
a young Woman to discover her own Faultiness, if the King should make Love to
her, was thought a Piece of grievous Tyranny: And upon this, those that rallied
that Sex, took occasion to say, that after this, none who was reputed a Maid,
could be induced to marry the King: So that it was not so much choice, as
necessity, that made him marry a Widow, two Years after. Some Hospitals were
this Year resigned to the King; but there was good ground to question the
Validity of those Deeds, because by their Statutes it was provided, that the
Consent of all the Fellows, was necessary to make their Deeds good in Law. So
those Statutes were now by a special Act annulled, and this made way for the
Dissolution of many Hospitals.

The Bishops sitting in Convocation, A Design to suppress the Bible.
took great pains to suppress the English Bible; but the King could not be
prevailed on directly to call it in. So they complained much of the Translation
then set out; and intended to procure a Condemnation of that, and then to set
about a new one, in which it would be easy to put such Delays, that it should
not be finished in many Years. Gardener did also propose a singular Conceit,
that many of the Latin Words should be still retained in the English; for he
thought they had either such a Majesty, or so peculiar a Signification, that
they could not be fitly rendered. He proposed an hundred of those, and it seems
hoped, that if this could be carried, the Translation would be so full of
Latin Words, that the People should not understand it for all its being in
English. Cranmer, perceiving that the Bible was the great Eyesore of that
Party; and that they were resolved to suppress it by all the means they could
think of, procured an Order from the King, referring the Correction of the
Translation to the two Universities. The Bishops took this very ill; and all of
them, except the Bishops of Ely, and St. David's, protested against it. Bonner
's Injunctions.


At this time Bonner, gave some Injunctions to his Clergy, which had a strain
in them, so far different from the other parts of his Life, that it is
probable, he drew them not himself. He required his Clergy to read every day a
Chapter in the Bible, with some Gloss upon it; and to study the Book set out by
the Bishops: That they should employ no Curats, but such as he approved of:
That they should take care to instruct young Children well, in the Principles
of the Christian Religion: That they should not go to Taverns; nor use unlawful
Games, chiefly on Sundays or Holy Days: That they should perform all the Duties
of their Function, decently, and seriously: That they should suffer no Plays,
nor Enterludes in Churches: And that in their Sermons, they should explain the
Gospel and Epistle for the Day; and study to stir up the People to Good Works,
and to Prayer; and should explain all the Ceremonies of the Church, but should
forbear all railing or the reciting of fabulous Stories, and should chiefly set
forth the Excellencies of Virtue, and the Vileness of Sin: and that none under
the degree of a Bishop should preach without a License.

In the former times there had been few or no Sermons, except in Lent; The way
of preaching in that time.
for on Holy Days the Sermons were Panegyricks on the Saints, and on the virtue
of their Relics. But in Lent there was a more solemn way of preaching; and the
Friars maintained their Credit much by the pathetick Sermons they preached in
that time, by which they wrought much on the Affections of the People; yet
these for the most part tended most to extol some of the Laws of the Church, as
Fasting, Confession, and other Austerities, with the making Pilgrimages; but
they were careful to acquaint the People as little as was possible, with the
true Simplicity of Christianity, or the Scriptures; and they seemed to design
rather to raise a sudden Heat, than to work a real Change in their Auditors.
They had also mixed so much out of Legends with their Sermons, that the People
came to disbelieve all that they said for the sake of those Fabulous things,
with which their Sermons were embased. The Reformers took great care to
instruct their Hearers in the Fundamentals of Religion, of which they had known
little formerly: This made the Nation run after these Teachers with a wonderful
Zeal; but they mixed too much Sharpness against the Friars in their Sermons,
which was judged indecent in them to do; tho their Hypocrisy and Cheats did in
a great measure excuse those Heats: and it was observed that our Savior had
exposed the Pharisees in so plain a manner, that it did very much justify the
treating them with some Roughness; yet it is not to be denied but Resentments
for the Cruelties they or their Friends had suffered by their means, might have
too much Influence on them. This made it seem necessary to suffer none to
preach, at least out of their own Parishes, without License, and many were
licensed to preach as Itinerants. There was also a Book of Homilies on all the
Epistles and Gospels in the Year, put out, which contained a plain Paraphrase
of those Parcels of Scripture; together with some practical Exhortations
founded on them. Many Complaints were made of those that were licensed to
preach, and that they might be able to justify themselves, they began generally
to write and read their Sermons: and thus did this Custom begin, in which, what
is wanting in the heat and force of Delivery, is much made up by the strength
and solidity of the Matter; and has produced many Volumes of as excellent
Sermons, as have been preached in any Age. Plays and Enterludes were a great
Abuse in that time; in them Mock-Representations were made both of the Clergy
and of the Pageantry of their Worship. The Clergy complained much of these as
an Introduction to Atheism, when things Sacred were thus laughed at; and said,
They that begun to laugh at Abuses, would not cease till they had represented
all the Mysteries of Religion as ridiculous: The graver sort of Reformers did
not approve of it, but political Men encouraged it; and thought nothing would
more effectually pull down the Abuses, that yet remained, than the exposing
them to the scorn of the Nation.

A War did now break out between England and Scotland at the Instigation of the
King of France. A War with Scotland.
King Henry set out a Declaration, pretending that the Crown of Scotland owed
Homage to him: and cited many Precedents to show that Homage was done not only
by their Kings, but by consent of the States; for which Original Records were
appealed to. The Scots on the other hand, asserted that they were a free and
independent Kingdom; that the Homages anciently made by their Kings, were only
for Lands which they had in England; and that those more lately made, were
either offered by Pretenders in the case of a doubtful Title, or were extorted
by Force: And they said, their Kings could not give up the Rights of a free
Crown and People. The Duke of Norfolk made an In-road into Scotland, with 20000
Men in October: but after he had burnt some small Towns, and wasted Teviotdale,
he returned back to England. In the end of November an Army of 15000 Scots with
a good Train of Artillery, was brought together: They intended to march into
England by the Western Road. The King went to it in Person; but he was at this
time, much disturbed in his Fancy, and thought the Ghost of one whom he had
unjustly put to death, followed him continually; he not only left the Army, but
sent a Commission to Oliver Sinclare, then called his Minion, to command in
chief. This disgusted the Nobility very much, who were become weary of the
Insolence of that Favorite: so they refused to march, and were beginning to
separate. While they were in this Disorder, 500 English appeared, and they
apprehending it was a fore Party of the Duke of Norfolk's Army, refused to
fight; so the English fell upon them and dispersed them: they took all their
Ordinance and Baggage, and 1000 Prisoners, of whom 200 were Gentlemen. The
chief of these were the Earls of Glencarn and Cassilis: The News of this so
overcharged the Melancholy King, that he died soon after; leaving only an
Infant Daughter newly born to succeed him. The Lords that were taken, were
brought up to London, and lodged in the Houses of the English Nobility:
Cassilis was sent to Lambeth, where he received those Seeds of Knowledge, which
produced afterward a great Harvest in Scotland. The other Prisoners were also
instructed to such a degree, that they came to have very different Thoughts of
the Changes that had been made in England, from what the Scottish Clergy had
possessed them with; who had encouraged their King to engage in the War, both
by the assurance of Victory, since he fought against an Heretical Prince, and
the Contribution of 50000 Crowns a Year. The King's Death, and the Crowns
falling to his Daughter, made the English Council lay hold on this as a proper
Conjuncture for uniting the whole Island in one: therefore they sent for the
Scottish Lords, and proposed to them, the marrying the Prince of Wales to their
young Queen; this the Scots liked very well, and promised to promote it all
they could: And so upon their giving Hostages for the performing their Promises
faithfully, England.

A Parliament was called, A Parliament called.
in which the King had great Subsidies given him, of six Shillings in the
Pound, to be paid in three Years. A Bill was proposed for the advancement of
true Religion, by Cranmer, and some other Bishops; for the Spirits of the
Popish Party were much fallen ever since the last Queen's Death; yet at this
time a Treaty was set on foot between the King and the Emperor, which raised
them a little: for since the King was like to engage in a War with France, it
was necessary for him to make the Emperor his Friend. Cranmer's Motion was
much opposed, and the timorous Bishops forsook him; yet he put it as far as it
would go, An Act about Religion.
tho in most Points things went against him; By it Tindall's Translation of the
Bible was condemned as crafty and false, and also all other Books contrary to
the Doctrine set forth by the Bishops. But Bibles of another Translation, were
still allowed to be kept, only all Prefaces or Annotations that might be in
them, were to be dashed or cut out: All the King's Injunctions were confirmed:
No Books of Religion might be printed without License; there was to be no
Exposition of Scripture in Plays or Enterludes; none of the Laity might read
the Scripture, or explain it in any public Assembly: But a Proviso was made
for public Speeches, which then began generally with a Text of Scripture, and
were like Sermons. Noblemen, Gentlemen and their Wives, or Merchants might have
Bibles, but no ordinary Woman, Tradesman, Apprentice, or Husbandman, might have
any. Every Person might have the Book set out by the Bishops, and the Psalter,
and other Rudiments of Religion in English. All Churchmen that preached
contrary to that Book, for the first Offense, were only required to recant; for
the second, to abjure and carry a Faggot; but were to be burnt for the third:
the Laity for the third Offense were only to forfeit their Goods and Chattels,
and to be liable to perpetual Imprisonment; but they were to be proceeded
against within a Year: The Parties accused, were not allowed Witnesses for
their Purgation. The Act of the six Articles was confirmed, and it was left
free to the King, to change this Act, or any Proviso in it. There was also a
new Act past, giving Authority to the King's Proclamations, and any nine Privy
Counselors were empowered to proceed against Offenders: To this the Lord
Mountjoy dissented, and it is the only Instance of any Protestation against any
of the public Acts that past in this whole Reign. By the Act about Religion,
as the Laity were delivered from the fear of Burning; so the Clergy might not
be burnt but upon the third Conviction. The Act being also put entirely in the
King's Power, he had now the Reformers all at mercy; for he could bind up the
Act, or execute it as he pleased: and he affected this much to have his People
depend entirely upon him. The League offensive and defensive for England and
Calais, and for the Netherlands, was sworn by the King and the Emperor: and
Assurances were given, that tho the King would not declare Lady Mary
legitimate, upon which the Emperor insisted much, yet she should be put in the
Succession to the Crown next Prince Edward. The Emperor was glad thus to
engage the Kings of England and France in a War, by which the Germans were left
without Support, and so he resolved to carry on his great design of making
himself Master of Germany.

In Scotland the Earl of Arran, Affairs in Scotland.
Hamilton, next in Blood to the young Queen, was established in the Government
during the Queen's Minority: he was a Man of great Virtue, and much inclined to
the Reformation; but was soft and easy to be wrought on. King Henry sent Sir
Ralph Sadler to him, to induce him to set forward the Match; and to offer him
Lady Elizabeth to his Son. It was agreed and confirmed in Parliament, that the
Young Queen should be bred in Scotland till she was ten Years old; the King of
England sending a Nobleman and his Lady with others not exceeding twenty, to
wait on her: and after that Age, she was to be sent to England; and in the mean
while six Hostages were to be given: but all the Clergy headed by Cardinal
Beaton, set themselves much against this. The Queen Mother opposed it much, and
it was also said, a Match with the French, would be more for the Interest of
the Nation, who being at so great a distance, could not oppress them so easily
as the English might: for if the French oppressed them, the English would be
ready to protect them, but if they came under the Yoke of England, they could
expect no Protection from any other Prince. This meeting with that Antipathy
that was then formed between the two Nations, and being inflamed by the Clergy,
turned the People generally to prefer a Match with France, to that which was
proposed for the Prince of Wales. The French sent over the Earl of Lennox to
make a Party against the Governor; they sent also over the Governor's
Base-Brother, afterward made Archbishop of St. Andrews, to take him out of
the hands of the English: and he made him apprehend great danger if he went on
in his Opposition to the Interests of Rome, that he would be declared
illegitimate, as being begotten in a second Marriage, while the first that was
annulled because of a Precontract, did subsist; for if the annulling the first
should be reversed, then the second could be of no force; and if that were once
done, the Earl of Lennox, who was next to him in blood, would be preferred to
him: These threatenings joined with his Brother's Artifices, had their full
Effect on him: for he turned off wholly from the Interests of England, and gave
himself up to the French Councils. When it was thus resolved to break the Match
with England; the Lords that had left Hostages for their faithful performing
the Promises they made to King Henry, were little concerned either in their own
Honor, or in the safety of their Hostages: only the Earl of Cassilis, thought
it was unworthy of him, to break his Faith in such a manner; so he came into
England, and put himself in King Henry's Hands, who upon that called him
another Regulus, but used him better; for he gave him his Liberty and a Noble
Present, and sent him back with his Hostages, but resolved to take a severe
Reparation of those who had failed him in that Kingdom. At the same time he
began the War with France; one of the Reasons he gave for it was, that Francis
had failed in the matter of shaking off the Pope's Authority, and advancing a
Reformation, in which he had promised to second him.

The King married Katherine Parre, Some burnt at Windsor.
Widow to Nevill, Lord Latimer: She secretly favored the Reformation, but
could not divert a Storm which fell then on a Society at Windsor. Person a
Priest, Testwood and Marbeck, two Singing-men, and Filmer, one of the Town,
were informed against by Dr. London, who had insinuated himself much into
Cromwell's Favor, and was eminently zealous in the Suppression of the
Monasteries: But now he made his Court no less dexterously to the Popish Party.
Gardener moved in Council, That a Commission might be granted for searching all
suspected Houses, for Books written against the six Articles: So the four
before mentioned, were found to have some of them; and upon that account were
seized on. Sir Philip Hobbey, and Dr. Hains, Dean of Exeter, were also put in
Prison. There was a Concordance of the Bible, and some Notes upon it, in
English, found written by Marbeck, which was looked on as the Work of some
learned Man, for it was known that he was illiterate. Marbeck said, the Notes
were his own, gathered by him, out of such Books as he fell on. And for the
Concordance, he said, he compiled it by the help of a Latin Concordance, and an
English Bible, tho he understood little Latin. He had brought it to the Letter
L. This seemed so incredible, that it was looked on only as a Pretense to
conceal the true Author; so to try him, they gave him some Words of the Letter
M, and shut him up, with a Latin Concordance, and an English Bible; and by his
Performance in that, they clearly saw, that the whole Work was his own, and
were not a little astonished at the Ingeniousness and Diligence of so poor a
Man. When the King heard of it, he said, Marbeck was better employed than they
were that examined him: So he was preserved, tho the other three were
condemned, for some Words which they had spoken against the Mass, and upon that
were burnt. Dr. London, and Simonds an Attorney, had taken some Informations
against several Persons of Quality at Court, and intended to have carried the
Design very high. But a great Packet, in which all their Project was disclosed
by them, being intercepted, they were sent for, and examined about it; but they
denied it upon Oath, not knowing that their Letters were taken; and were not a
little confounded when their own Handwriting was showed them. So they were
convicted of Perjury, and were set on a Pillory, and made ride about with their
Faces to the Horses Tails, and Papers on their Breasts, in three several
Places, which did so affect Dr. London, that he died soon after. Cranmer 's
Ruin is designed.


The chief thing aimed at by the whole Popish Party was Cranmer's Ruin;
Gardener employed many to infuse it into the King, that he gave the chief
Encouragement to Heresy of any in England, and that it was in vain to lop off
the Branches, and leave the Root still growing. The King till then would never
hear the Complaints that were made of him: But now to penetrate into the depth
of this Design, he was willing to draw out all that was to be said against him.
Gardener reckoned, that this Point being gained, all the rest would follow: And
judged, that the King was now alienated from him; and so more Instruments and
Artifices than ever were now made use of. A long Paper, of many Particulars,
both against Cranmer, and his Chaplains, was put in the King's hands. So upon
this the King sent for him; and after he had complained much of the Heresy in
England, he said, He resolved to find out the chief Promoter of it, and to make
him an Example. Cranmer wished him first to consider well what Heresy was, that
so he might not condemn those as Heretics, who stood for the Word of God
against Humane Inventions. Then the King told him franckly, That he was the Man
complained of, as most guilty; and showed him all the Informations that he had
received against him. Cranmer confessed, he was still of the same mind that he
was of when he opposed the six Articles, and submitted himself to a Trial: He
confessed many things to the King; in particular, that he had a Wife, but he
said he had sent her out of England, when the Act of the six Articles past; and
expressed so great a Sincerity, and put so entire a Confidence in the King,
that instead of being ruined, he was now better established with him than
formerly. The King commanded him to appoint some to examine the Contrivance
that was laid to destroy him. He answered, That it was not decent for him to
nominate any to judge in a Cause, in which himself was concerned: Yet the King
was positive; so so he named some to go about it, and the whole secret was
found out. It appeared, that Gardener, and Dr. London, had been the chief
Sticklers, and had encouraged Informers to appear against him. Cranmer did not
press the King to give him any Reparation; for he was so noted for his
readiness to forgive Injuries, and to do Good for Evil, that it was commonly
said, that the best way to obtain his Favor, was to do him an Injury; of this
he gave signal Instances at this time, both in Relation to some of the Clergy
and Laity; by which it appeared that he was acted by that meek and lowly
Spirit, that became all the Followers of Christ; but more particularly one,
that was so great an Instrument in reforming the Christian Religion; and did in
such eminent Acts of Charity, show that he himself practiced that, which he
taught others to do.

A Parliament was now called, The Act of the Succession.
in which the great Act of Succession to the Crown past: By it the Crown was
first provided to Prince Edward and his Heirs, or the Heirs by the King's
present Marriage; after them to Lady Mary and Lady Elizabeth, and in case they
had no Issue, or did not observe such Limitations or Conditions as the King
should appoint, then it was to fall to any other whom the King should name,
either by his Letters Patents, or by his last Will signed with his Hand. An
Oath was appointed both against the Pope's Supremacy, and for the maintaining
Succession according to this Act, which all were required to take, under the
pains of Treason: It was made Treason to say or write any thing contrary to
this Act, or to the Slander of any of the King's Heirs named in it. By this,
tho the King did not Legitimate his Daughters, yet it was made Criminal for any
to object Bastardy to them. Another Act past, qualifying the Severity of the
Act of the six Articles; none were to be imprisoned but upon a Legal
Presentment, except upon the King's Warrant. None was to be challenged for
Words, but within a Year; nor for a Sermon, but within 40 Days. This was made
to prevent such Conspiracies as had been discovered the former Year. Another
Act past, renewng the Authority given to 32 to reform the Ecclesiastical Law,
which Cranmer promoted much; and to set it forward, he drew out of the Canon
Law, a Collection of many things against the Regal, and for the Papal
Authority, with several other very Extravagant Propositions, to show how
Indecent a thing it was, to let a Book, in which such things were, continue
still in any credit in England: But he could not bring this to any good Issue,
during this Reign. Another Act past, discharging all the King's Debts; and they
also required such as had received payment to bring back the Money into the
Exchequer. This was taxed as a piece of gross Injustice; and it was thought
strange, that since the King had done this once before, he could have the
credit to raise more Money, and be tempted to do it a second time. A General
Pardon was granted, out of which, Heresy was excepted.

The King was now engaged in a War, The King makes War on France and Scotland.
both with France and Scotland; and to make his Treasure hold out the longer,
he embased the Coin in a very Extraordinary manner. The Earl of Hartford was
sent with an Army by Sea to Scotland; he landed at Grantham, a little above
Leith. He burnt both Leith and Edinburgh; but he neither stayed to take the
Castle of Edinburgh, nor did he Fortify Leith, but only wasted the Country, all
the Way from that to Berwick. He did too much if it was intended to gain the
Hearts of that Nation; and too little if it was intended to subdue them; for
this did only inflame their Spirits more, by which, they were so united in
their Aversion to England, that the Earl of Lennox, who had been cast off by
France, and was gone over to the English Interest, could make no Party in the
West, but was forced for his own Preservation to fly into England. Audley the
Chancellor, dying at this time, Wriothesly, that was of the Popish Party, was
put in his place: And Dr. Petre, that was hitherto Cranmer's Friend, was made
Secretary of State: So equally did the King keep the Balance between both
Parties, and being to cross the Seas, he left a Commission for the
Administration of Affairs, during his Absence, to the Queen, the Archbishop,
the Chancellor, the Earl of Hartford, and Secretary Petre: And if they should
have any occasion to raise any Force, he appointed the Earl of Hartford, his
Lieutenant. He gave order also to Translate the Prayers, and Processions, and
Litanies, into the English Tongue, which gave the Reformers some hopes again,
that he had not quite cast off his Designs of corrupting such Abuses, as had
crept into the Worship of God. And they hoped, That the Reasons which prevailed
with the King for this, would also induce him to order a Translation, of all
the other Offices into the English Tongue.

The King crossed the Sea with great Pomp, The King takes Bulloign.
the Sails of his Ship being of Cloth of Gold. He sat down before Bulloign, and
took it after a Siege of two Months. It was soon after very near being retaken
by a Surprise, but the Garrison being quickly put in order, beat out the French.
Thus the King returned Victorious; and was as much flattered for taking this
single Town, as if he had conquered a Kingdom. The Inroads that were made into
Scotland this Winter, were Insuccessful.

The King of France set out a Fleet of above 300 Ships; England, but was beat
back with loss. The English made a Descent in Normandy, and burnt some Towns.
The Princes of Germany saw their Danger, if this War went on; for the Pope and
Emperor had made a League for procuring Obedience to the Council, that was now
opened at Trent. The Emperor was raising an Army, tho he had made Peace both
with the King of France, and the Turk; and was resolved to make good use of
this Opportunity, the two Crowns being now in War. So the Germans sent to
mediate a Peace between them: but it stuck long at the business of Bulloign.

Lee, Archbishop of York, died this Year. Holgate was removed from Landaffe
thither, who in his Heart favored the Reformation. Kitchen was put in
Landaffe, who turned with every Change that was made. Heath was removed from
Rochester to Worcester; and Holbeach was put in Rochester. Day was made Bishop
of Chichester. All those were moderate Men, and well disposed to a Reformation,
at least to comply with it.

This Year Wishart was burnt in Scotland: Wishart burnt in Scotland.
He was Educated at Cambridge, and went home the former Year. In many places he
preached against Idolatry, and the other Abuses in Religion. He stayed long at
Dundee; but by the means that Cardinal Beaton used, he was driven out of that
Town; and at his Departure, he denounced heavy Judgments on them, for rejecting
the Gospel. He went and preached in many other places, and Entrance to the
Churchs being denied him, he preached in the Fields. He would not suffer the
People to open the Church Doors by Violence, for that, he said, became not the
Gospel of Peace which he preached to them. He heard the Plague had broke out in
Dundee, within four Days after he was banished; so he returned thither, and
took care of the Sick, and did all the Offices of a faithful Pastor among them.
He showed his Gentleness toward his Enemies, by rescuing a Priest that was
coming to kill him, but was discovered, and was like to have been torn in
pieces by the People. He foretold several extraordinary things; particularly
his own Sufferings, and the spreading the Reformation over the Land. He
preached last in Lothian, and there the Earl of Bothwel took him, but promised
upon his Honor, that no harm should be done him; yet he delivered him to the
Cardinal, who brought him to St. Andrews, and called a Meeting of Bishops
thither, to destroy him with the more Solemnity. The Governor being much pressed
to it, by a Worthy Gentleman of his Name, Hamilton of Preston, sent the
Cardinal word not to proceed against him, till he should come and hear the
Matter examined himself. But the Cardinal went on, and in a public Court
condemned him as an Heretic, upon several Articles that were objected to him,
which he confessed, and offered to justify. The Night after that he spent in
Prayer; next Morning he desired he might have the Sacrament according to
Christ's Institution in both kinds; but that being denied him, he consecrated
the Elements himself, and some about him were willing to communicate with him.
He was carried out to the Stake near the Cardinal's Palace; who was set in
State in a great Window, and looked on this sad Spectacle. Wishart declared
that he felt much Joy within himself, in offering up his Life for the Name of
Christ, and exhorted the People not to be offended at the Word of God, for the
sake of the Cross. After the Fire was set to and was burning him, he said, This
Flame has scorched my Body, but has not daunted my Spirits; and he foretold
that the Cardinal should in a few days be ignominiously laid out in that very
place where he now sat in so much State; but as he speak that, the Executioner
drew the Cord that was about his Neck so strait, that these were the last Words.

The Clergy rejoiced much at his Death, Cardinal Beason is murdered.
and extolled the Cardinal's Courage, for proceeding in it against the
Governors Orders. But the People looked on him as both a Prophet and a Martyr.
It was also said that his Death was no less than Murder, since no Writ was
obtained for it; and the Clergy could burn none without a Warrant from the
Secular Power: so it was inferred that the Cardinal deserved to die for it; and
if his Greatness set him above the Law, then Private Persons might execute that
which the Governor could not do: Such Practices had been formerly too common
in that Kingdom; and now upon this occasion some Gentlemen of quality came to
think it would be an Heroical Action to conspire his Death. His Insolence had
rendered him generally very hateful: so private and public Resentments
concurring, twelve Persons entered into a fatal Engagement of killing him
privately in his House. On the 30th of May, they first surprised the Gate early
in the Morning, and tho there were an hundred lodged in the Castle, yet they
being asleep, they came to them apart, and either turned them out, or shut them
up in their Chambers: Having made all sure, they came to the Cardinal's
Chamber Door; he was fast asleep, but by their Rudeness, he was both awakened,
and perceived they had a design on his Life: Upon the assurance of Life, he
opened his Door, but they did cruelly and treacherously murder him, and laid
out his Body in the same Window, from which he had looked on Wisharts
Execution. Some few justified this Fact, as the killing of a Robber and
Murderer; but it was more generally condemned by all sorts of People, even by
those who hated him most; yet the Accomplishment of Wishart's Prediction made
great Impressions on many. On the other hand, it was afterward observed that
scarce any of the Conspirators died an ordinary Death. They kept out the
Castle, and about 140 came in to them, and they held it near two Years, being
assisted both by Money and Provisions that were sent from England. They had also
the Govenour at their Mercy, for they kept his eldest Son, whom the Cardinal
had taken into his Care for his Education. An Absolution was brought from Rome,
and a Pardon was offered them; and at last, being straightened both at Sea and
Land, they rendered the Place upon Assurance of Life. This Infamous Action was a
great Blemish upon the Reformers, who, tho they did not directly justify it,
yet extenuated it, and gave it some Countenance; for two of them went in and
preached to the Garrison in the Castle.

In England a Parliament met, Chantries given to the King.
in which as the Spiritualty gave a Subsidy of six Shillings in the Pound,
payable in two Years; so the Temporalty not only gave a Subsidy for the War,
but confirmed all the Surrenders that had been made of Chantries, Chapels,
Colleges, Hospitals, and other Foundations, for saying Masses for departed
Souls: and they empowered the King during his Life to grant Commissions for
seizing on the rest of them. Yet the King found this was like to give new
Discontent to the Gentry, to whom these belonged, so he made but a small
Progress in it, and many were reserved to his Sons Courtiers to feed on. The
King dismissed the Parliament with a long Speech, In which after he had thanked
them for their Bills, he exhorted them to Charity and Concord in matters of
Religion; and to forbear all Terms of Reproach, Papist and Heretic: he
complained much of the Stifness of some Churchmen, and of the Indiscretion of
others, who both gave ill Example, and sowed the Seeds of Discord among the
Laity. He, as God's Vicar, thought himself bound to see these things corrected:
he reproved the Temporalty for the ill use they made of the Scripture; for
instead of being taught out of it to live better, and to be more charitable to
one another, they only railed at one another, and made Songs out of it, to
disgrace those that differed from them; so he exhorted them to serve God, and
love one another, which he would esteem the best Expression of their Duty and
Obedience to him. The King had appointed a Distribution of 550 l. a year in
several Cathedrals, for the Poor, and about 400 l. for Highways; so this Year
some Bishops were appointed to see whether those Payments were made as he had
ordered or not. The Universities were now in danger of having their Colleges
suppressed, but upon their Applications to the King, they were delivered from
their Fears.

Now came on the last Year of this Reign, A Peace with France.
the War with France was this Year unsuccesful, but upon the Earl of Surrey's
being recalled, and the Earl of Hartford's being sent in his room, things
turned a little. This raised such Animosity between those two Lords, that they
became fatal to the former. The two Kings were at last brought to consent to a
Peace; the main Article of it was, that within eight Years Bulloigne should be
delivered up, the taking and keeping of which, cost England 1300000 l. Upon
this Peace Annebault the French Admiral, was sent over Ambassador. The Council
of Trent was now sitting, Pool was made a Legate to do the King the more Spite:
the Emperor and the Pope governed it as they pleased: so the two Crowns
resolved to unite more firmly; particularly it was proposed, that the Mass
should be turned to a Communion; and Cranmer was ordered to prepare the Office
for it. But this was too great a Design for two old Kings to accomplish.

There was at this time a new Prosecution of those that denied the Corporal
Presence in the Sacrament, Anne Aiscough and others burnt.
Shaxton was accused of some Words about it, but he abjured, and complied so
entirely, that soon after he preached the Sermon at the burning of Anne
Aiscough; he made no noise all King Edward's time, yet in Queen Mary's Reign,
he was a Persecutor of Protestants, but was so little esteemed, that tho he had
been Bishop of Salisbury, he was raised no higher than to be Bishop Suffragan
of Ely. Several other Persons were at this time endicted upon the same Statute,
but most of them recanted; Anne Aiscough stood firm, she was descended from a
good Family, and had been well educated, but was unhappily married; for her
Husband being a violent Papist, drove her out of his House, when he discovered
her Inclinations to the Reformation; she was put in Prison on the account of
the Sacrament, but signed a Recantation, and so was set at Liberty; yet not
long after she was committed again upon a new Complaint, and was examined
before the Privy Council, but answered with extraordinary Resolution; yet it
was thought by some that she was too forward in her manner of speaking: she had
been much at Court, and it was believed she was supported by some Ladies there:
so in order to the Discovery of this, she was carried to the Tower and racked;
yet she confessed nothing. Wriothesly was present, and commanded the Lieutenant
of the Tower to draw the Rack a little more, but he refused to do it; upon
which the Chancellor laid aside his Gown and drew it himself with so much
Force, as if he had intended to rend her Body asunder; and the Effects of this
were so violent, that she was not able to go to Smithfield, but was carried
thither in a Chair when she was burnt: Two others were also condemned on the
same account, and Shaxton to complete his Apostasy, after he had in vain
endeavored to persuade them to abjure, preached the Sermon at their Burning,
in which he inveighed severely against their Errors. The Lord Chancellor came
to Smithfield, and offered them their Pardons if they would recant, but they
chose rather to glorify God by their Deaths, than to dishonor him by so foul
an Apostasy. There were two burnt in Suffolk, and one in Norfolk, on the same
account, this Year.

But the Popish Party hoped to have greater Sacrifices offered up to their
Revenge: Designs against Cranmer
They had laid a Train last Year for Cranmer, and they had laid one now for the
Queen. They persuaded the King, that Cranmer was the Source of all the Heresy
that was in England; but the King's Partiality to him was such, that none would
come in against him: So they desired, that he might be once put in the Tower,
and then it would appear how many would inform against him. The King seemed to
consent to this; and they resolved to execute it the next day: but in the Night
the King sent for Cranmer, and told him, what was resolved concerning him.
Cranmer thanked the King for giving him notice of it, and not leaving him to be
surprised. He submitted to it, only he desired he might be heard answer for
himself; and that he might have indifferent Judges who understood those
matters. The King wondered to see him so little concerned in his own
Preservation; but told him, he must take care of him, since he took so little
care of himself. The King therefore gave him Instructions to appear before the
Council, and to desire to see his Accusers before he should be sent to the
Tower; and that he might be used by them, as they would desire to be used in
the like Case: And if he could not prevail by the force of Reason, then he was
to appeal to the King in Person, and was to show the King's Seal-Ring, which he
took from his Finger and gave him; and they knew it all so well, that they
would do nothing after they once saw that; so he being summoned next Morning,
came over to White Hall: He was kept long in the Lobbey before he was called
in: But when that was done, and he had observed the Method the King had ordered
him to use, and had at last showed the Ring, they rose all in great Confusion,
and went to the King. He chid them severely for what they had done, and
expressed his Esteem and Kindness to Cranmer, in such Terms, that his Enemies
were glad to get off, by pretending, that they had no other Design, but to have
his Innocence declared in a public Trial; and were now so convinced of the
King's unalterable Favor to him, that they never made any more Attempts upon
him.

But what they durst not do in Relation to Cranmer, And against the Queen.
they thought might be more safely tried against the Queen, who was known to
love the New Learning, which was the common Phrase for the Reformation. She
used to have Sermons in her Privy Chamber, which could not be so secretly
carried, but that it came to the King's Knowledge. Yet her Conduct in all other
things was so exact, and she expressed such a tender care of the King's Person,
that it was observed, she had gained much upon him; but his Peevishness,
growing with his Distempers, made him sometimes uneasy, even to her. They used
often to talk of Matters of Religion; and sometimes she held up the Argument
for the Reformers so stiffly, that he was offended at it; yet as soon as that
appeared, she let it fall; but once the Debate continuing long, the King
expressed his Displeasure at it to Gardener, when she went away. He took hold
of this Opportunity, to persuade the King, that she was a great Cherisher of
Heretics. Wriothesly joined with him in the same Artifice, and filled the
angry King's Head with many Stories; in so much, that he signed the Articles
upon which she was to be Impeached. But Wriothesly let that Paper fall from him
carelessly, and it happened to be taken up by one of the Queen's Friends, who
carried it to her: Upon which she went to the King, and brought on a Discourse
of Religion; and after a little Opposition, she yielded, and seemed convinced
by the King's Reasons, and told him, That she only held up that Argument to be
instructed by him, and sometimes to engage him in Discourse, and so to make him
forget his pains; and this she seconded with such Flattery, that he was
perfectly satisfied, and reconciled to her. Next day, as he was walking with
her in the Garden, Wriothesly came thither on design to have carried her to the
Tower; but the King chid him severely for it, and was heard to call him Knave
and Fool. The good natured Queen interposed to mitigate his Displeasure, but
the King told her, She had no reason to be concerned for him: Thus the Design
against her, vanished; and Gardener that had set it on, lost the King's Favor
entirely by it.

But now the Fall of the Duke of Norfolk, and his Son the Earl of Surry, The
Duke of Norfolk's Fall.
came on. The Father had been long Treasurer, and had served the King with
great Fidelity and Success: His Son was a Man of rare Qualities; he had a great
Wit, and was more than ordinary learned. He particularly hated the Earl of
Hartford, and scorned an Alliance with him, which his Father had projected. The
Duke of Norfolk had intended to unite his Family to the Seimours, by marrying
his Son to the Earl of Hartford's Daughter; and his Daughter the Duchess of
Richmond, to Sir Thomas Seimour: But both his Children refused to comply with
him in it. The Seimours were apprehensive of the Opposition they might meet
with, if the King should die, from the Earl of Surry, who was a high spirited
Man, had a vast Fortune, and was the Head of the Popish Party. It was likewise
suspected, that he kept himself unmarried in hopes of marrying the Lady Mary.
The Duke's Family was also fatally divided: His Duchess had been separated
from him, about four Years, and now turned Informer against him. His Daughter
did also hate her Brother, and was a Spy upon him. One Holland, a Whore of the
Duke's, did also betray him, and discovered all she could; yet all amounted to
no more than some Complaints of the Fathers, who thought the Services he had
done the Crown were little regarded; and some Threatenings of the Sons. It was
also said, that the Father gave the Coat of Arms that belonged to the Prince of
Wales, and the Son gave Edward the Confessors Coat; but that was only a
Pretense to make a noise among the People, and to cover the want of more
important matter against them. One Southwel objected things of a higher Nature
to the Earl of Surry. He denied them, and desired, that according to the
Martial Law, they might have a Trial by Combat, and fight in their Shirts: But
that was not granted; yet both Father and Son were put in the Tower.

The Earl of Surry was tried by a Jury of Commoners, The Earl of Surry executed.
and was found guilty of Treason, and executed on the 19th of January. He was
much lamented; and the Blame of his Death being cast on the Seimours, raised a
General Odium against them. The old Duke saw a Parliament called to destroy him
by an Act of Attainder, for there was not matter enough to ruin him at Common
Law; so to prevent that he made such humble Submission to the King, as would
have mollified any that had not Bowels of Brass. He wrote to him, That he had
spent his whole Life in his Service, without having so much as a Thought to his
Prejudice. He had obeyed all the King's Laws, and was resolved to obey all that
ever he should make. He begged that he might be heard, with his Accusers face
to face. He prayed that the King would take all his Lands, and Goods, and only
restore him to his Favor, and grant him such an Allowance to live on, as he
thought fit. He went further, and set his Hand to a Confession of several
Crimes; as 1. His revealing the Secrets of the King's Council. 2. His
concealing his Son's Treason, in giving the Arms of Edward the Confessor. 3.
His own giving the Arms of England, with the Labels of Silver which belonged
only to the Prince, which he acknowledged was High Treason, and therefore he
begged the King's Mercy. But all this had no effect on the King, tho his
drawing so near his end, ought to have begot in him a greater regard to the
shedding of Innocent Blood.

When the Parliament met, And the Duke attainted by Act of Parliament.
the King was not able to come to Westminster, but he sent his Pleasure to them
by a Commission. He intended to have Prince Edward Crowned Prince of Wales; and
therefore desired they would make all possible have in the Attainder of the
Duke of Norfolk, that so the Places which he held by Patent, might be disposed
of to others, who should assist at the Coronation; which, tho it was a very
slight Excuse, for so high a piece of Injustice, yet it had that effect, that
in seven Days, both Houses past the Bill. On the 27th of January, the Royal
Assent was given by those Commissioned by the King; and the Execution was
ordered to be next Morning. There was no special Matter in the Act, but that of
the Coat of Arms, which he and his Ancestors were used to give, according to
Records in the Herauld's Office; so that this was condemned by all Persons, as
a most Inexcusable Act of Tyranny. But the Night after this, the King died, and
it was thought contrary to the Decencies of Government, to begin a new Reign
with so Unjustifiable an Act, as the beheading of the old Duke, and so he was
preserved: Yet both Sides made Inferences from this Calamity that fell on him.
The Papists said, It was God's just Judgment on him, for his Obsequiousness to
King Henry. But the Protestants said, It was a just return on him, for what he
had done against Cromwell, and many others, on the account of the six Articles.
Cranmer would not meddle in this Matter, but that he might be out of the way,
he retired to Croydon, whereas Gardener that had been his Friend all along,
continued still about the Court.

The King's Distemper had been growing long upon him. He was become so
Corpulent, that he could not go up and down Stairs, but made use of an Ingine,
The King's Sickness.
when he intended to walk in his Garden, by which he was let down and drawn up.
He had an old Sore in his Leg, that pained him much, the Humors of his Body
discharging themselves that way, till at last all settled in a Dropsy. Those
about him were afraid to let him know that his Death seemed near, lest that
might have been brought within the Statute of foretelling his Death, which was
made Treason. His Will was made ready, and as it was given out, was signed by
him on the 30th of December. He had made one at his last going over to France.
All the Change that he made at this time was, that he ordered Gardiner's Name
to be struck out, for in that formerly made, he was named one of the Executors.
When Sir Anthony Brown endeavored to persuade him not to put that Disgrace on
an old Servant, he continued positive in it; for he said, he knew his Temper,
and could govern him; but it would not be in the Power of others to do it, if
he were put in so high a Trust. The most material thing in the Will, was, the
preferring the Children of his second Sister, by Charles Brandon, to the
Children of his eldest Sister the Queen of Scotland, in the Succession to the
Crown. Some Objections were made to the Validity and Truth of the Will. It was
not signed by the King's Hand, as it was directed by the Act of Parliament, but
only stamped with his Name; and it was said, this was done when he was dying,
without any Order given for it by himself; for proof of which, the Scots that
were most concerned, appealed to many Witnesses; and chiefly, to a Deposition
which the Lord Paget had made, who was then Secretary of State. On his
Deathbed he finished the Foundation of Trinity-Colledge in Cambridge, and of
Christ's-Church Hospital near Newgate; yet this last was not so fully settled as
was needful, till his Son completed what he had begun.

On the 27th of January, And Death.
his Spirits sunk so, that it was visible he had not long to live. Sir Anthony
Denny took the courage to tell him, that Death was approaching, and desired him
to call on God for his Mercy. The King expressed in general his Sorrow for his
past Sins, and his Trust in the Mercies of God in Christ Jesus. He ordered
Cranmer to be sent for, but he was speechless before he could be brought from
Croidon; yet he gave a Sign that he understood what he said to him, and soon
after, he died, in the 57th Year of his Age, after he had reigned 37 Years, and
nine Months. His Death was concealed three days, for the Parliament which was
dissolved with his last Breath, continued to do business till the 31st, and
then his Death was published. It is probable the Seimours concealed it so long,
till they made a Party for the putting the Government into their own Hands.

The Severities he used against many of his Subjects in matters of Religion, An
account of his Severities against the Priests.
made both sides write with great Sharpness of him: His Temper was Imperious
and Cruel: He was both sudden and violent in his Revenges, and stuck at nothing
by which he could either gratify his Lust, or his Passion. This was much
provoked, by the Sentence the Pope thundered against him, by the virulent Books
Cardinal Pool and others published, by the Rebellions that were raised in
England, and the Apprehensions he was in of the Emperor's Greatness, and of
the Inclinations his People had to have joined with him, together with what he
had read in History of the Fates of those Princes, against whom Popes had
thundered in former times; all which, made him think it necessary to keep his
People under the Terror of a severe Government; and by some public Examples to
secure the Peace of the Nation; and thereby to prevent a more profuse Effusion
of Blood, which might have otherwise followed if he had been more gentle. And
it was no wonder if after the Pope deposed him, he proceeded to great
Severities against all that which supported that Authority.

The first Instance of Capital Proceedings upon that account, was in
Easter-Term, 1535, in which, three Priors and a Monk of the Carthusian Order,
The Carthusians in particular.
were condemned of Treason, for saying, that the King was not Supreme Head of
the Church of England. It was then only a Praemunire, not to swear to the
Supremacy, but it was made Treason to deny it, or speak against it. Hall, a
Secular Priest, was at the same time condemned of Treason, for calling the King
a Tyrant, an Heretic, a Robber, and an Adulterer; and saying, that he would
die as King John, or Richard the Third died; and that it would never be well
with the Church till the King was brought to Pot: And that they looked when
Ireland and Wales would rise; and were assured that three parts of four in
England would join with them. All these pleaded not Guilty; but being
condemned, they justified what they had said. The Carthusians were hanged in
their Habits. Soon after that, three Carthusians were condemned, and executed
at London, and two more at York, upon the same account, for opposing the King's
Supremacy. Ten other Monks were shut up in their Cells, of whom nine died
there, and one was condemned, and hanged. These had been all Accomplices in the
Business of the Maid of Kent; and tho that was pardoned, yet it gave the
Government ground to have a watchful Eye over them, and to proceed more severly
against them upon the first Provocation,

After these, Fisher's Sufferings.
Fisher and More were brought to their Trials; Pope Clements officious Kindness
to Fisher in declaring him a Cardinal, did hasten his Ruin, tho he was little
concerned at that Honor that was done him. He was tried by a Jury of
Commoners, and was found guilty of Treason, for having spoken against the
King's Supremacy: but instead of the Common Death in Cases of Treason, the King
ordered him to be beheaded. On the 22th of June he suffered. He dressed himself
with more then ordinary Care that day; for he said it was to be his
Wedding Day. As he was led out, he opened the New Testament at a Venture, and
prayed, that such a place might turn up as might comfort him in his last
Moments. The Words on which he cast his Eyes were, This is Life Eternal to know
thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. So he shut the
Book, and continued meditating on these Words to the last. On the Scaffold he
repeated the Te Deum, and so laid his Head on the Block, which was severed from
his Body. He was a learned and devout Man, but much addicted to Superstition,
and too cruel in his Temper against Heretics. He had been Confessor to the
King's Grandmother, and persuaded her to found two Colleges in Cambridge,
Christ's and St John's; in Acknowledgment of which, Henry the Seventh made him
Bishop of Rochester: He would never exchange that for any other: He said his
Church was his Wife, and he would not part with his Wife because she was Poor.
He was much esteemed by this King, till the Suit of the Divorce was set on
foot; and then he adhered stiffly to the Marriage, and the Popes Supremacy; and
that made him too favorable to the Nun of Kent. But the Severities of his long
Imprisonment, together with this bloody Conclusion of it, were universally
condemned all the World over; only Gardener employed his Servile Pen to write a
Vindication of the King's Proceedings against him. It was writ in Elegant
Latin, but the Style was thought too Vehement. More's Death.


It was harder to find matter against Sir Thomas More, for he was very
cautious, and satisfied his own Conscience by not swearing the Supremacy, but
would not not speak against it. He said the Act had two Edges, if he consented
to it, it would damn his Soul; and if he spoke against it, it would condemn
his Body. This was all the Message he sent to Fisher, when he desired to know
his Opinion about it; he had also said the same to the Duke of Norfolk and some
Counselors that came to examine him. And Rich, then the King's Solicitor,
coming as a private Friend, to persuade him to swear the Oath, urged him with
the Act of Parliament, and asked him, if he should be made King by Act of
Parliament, would not he Acknowledge him: He answered, he would; because a King
might be made, or deprived by a Parliament. But the Matter of the Supremacy was
a point of Religion, to which the Parliament's Authority did not extend it
self. All this Rich witnessed against him; so these Particulars were laid
together, as amounting to a Denial of the King's Supremacy, and upon this he
was judged guilty of Treason. He received his Sentence with that equal Temper
of Mind which he had showed in both Conditions of Life. He expressed great
Contempt of the World, and much Weariness in living in it. His ordinary
Facetiousness remained with him to his last Moment on the Scaffold. Some
censured that as affected and indecent, and as having more of the Stoic than
the Christian in it. But others said, that way of Railery had been so Customary
to him, that Death did not discompose him, nor put him out of his ordinary
Humor. He was beheaded on the 6th of July, in the 52d or 53d Year of his Age.
He had great Capacities, and eminent Virtues. In his Youth he had freer
thoughts, but he was afterward much corrupted by Superstition, and became
fierce for all the Interests of the Clergy. He wrote much in Defense of all the
old Abuses. His Learning in Divinity was but ordinary; for he had read little
more than some of St. Austin's Treatises, and the Canon Law, and the Master of
the Sentences, beyond whom, his Quotations do seldom go. His Style was Natural
and Pleasant; and he could turn things very dexterously to make them look well
or ill as it served his Purpose. But tho he suffered for denying the Kings
Supremacy, yet he was at first no Zealot for the Pope: For he says of himself,
That when the King showed him his Book in Manuscript, which he wrote against
Luther, he advised him to leave out that which he had put in it concerning the
Pope's Power, for he did not know what Quarrels he might have afterward with
the Pope's, and then that would be turned against him. But the King was perhaps
fond of what he had written, and so he would not follow that wise Advice which
he gave him.

There were no Executions after this, Lincolnshire and Yorkshire gave new
Occasions to Severity; Attainders after the Rebellion.
and then not only the Lords of Darcy and Hussy, but six Abbots, and many
Gentlemen; the chief of whom was, Sir Thomas Piercy, Brother to the Earl of
Northumberland, were attainted. They had not only been in the Rebellion, but
had forfeited the General Pardon, by their new Attempts, after it was
proclaimed: Yet some said, the King took Advantage on very slight Grounds to
break his Indemnity. But on the other hand, it was no Wonder if he proceeded
with the utmost Rigor against those who had raised such a Storm in the
Kingdom, and in particular against those Abbots and Monks who had sworn to
maintain his Supremacy, and yet were the chief Incendiaries that had set the
Kingdom on Fire.

One Forest, an Observant Friar, Forest was burnt.
had been Queen Katherin's Confessor, but forsook her Interests; and not only
swore to the King's Supremacy, but used such Insinuations, that he had a large
share of the King's Favor and Confidence. He was looked on as a Reproach to
his Order, and used great Cruelties in their House at Greenwich. He shut up one
that he believed gave Intelligence of all they did to the Court; and used him
so ill, that he died in their hands. It was also found, that in secret
Confession, he had alienated many from the King's Supremacy; and being
questioned for it, he said, he had taken the Oath for it only with his outward
Man, but his inward Man had never consented to it. But he offered to recant and
abjure this Opinion; yet being afterward diverted from that, he was condemned
as an Heretic, and was burnt in Smithfield. A Pardon was offered him at the
Stake, if he would recant; but he refused it. A great Image that was brought
out of Wales, was hewed in pieces, and served for Fuel to burn him. The
Writers of that time say, he denied the Gospel, and that he had little
Knowledge of God in his Life, and showed less Trust in him at his Death.

The Winter after this, Pool, The Attainders of Cardinal Pool's Friends.
and Courtney, Marquess of Exeter, and Pool's Brother, the Lord Mountacute, and
several others. It was believed, that Sir Geoffrey Pool, another of the
Brothers, betrayed the rest. They had expressed some Kindness for the Cardinal
and his Proceedings; and had said, that they looked to see a Change in England;
and that they hoped the King would die ere long, and then all would go well;
with several other Words to that purpose, for which they were Attainted, and
Executed. Others were also condemned for calling the King a Beast, and worse
than a Beast; and that he would be certainly damned for plucking down the
Abbeys. Cardinal Pool, and several others, that had fled out of the Kingdom,
and had Confederated themselves with the Pope against the King, were also
Attainted. Sir Nicholas Carew, Master of the Horse, and Knight of the Garter,
was likewise condemned, for having said, that the Attainder of the Marquis of
Exeter was cruel and unjust. He renounced the Superstitions of Popery,
Attainders in Parliament without hearing the Parties,


After these Judgments and Executions were over, a new and unheard of Precedent
was made, of Attainting some without bringing them to make their Answers, which
is a Blemish on this Reign, that can never be washed off, and was a Breach of
the most sacred and unalterable Rules of Justice. The first that were so
condemned were, the Marchioness of Exeter, and the Countess of Sarum, Mother to
Card. Pool. The special Matter charged on the former, was, her Confederating
her self with Sir Nicholas Carew; and that against the other was, the
Confederating with her Son, Cardinal Pool. No Witnesses were examined to prove
these things against them; perhaps some Depositions might have been read in
Parliament. Cromwell showed a Coat which was found among the Countess of
Sarum's Clothes, on which the Standard used by the Yorkshire Rebels was
wrought; from which it was inferred, that she approved of them. Fourteen others
were Attainted by the same Act: six of them were Priests, one was a Knight
Hospitaller, four were Gentlemen, one was a Merchant, and two were Yeomen; all
were condemned for Confederating with the Pope or Cardinal Pool; or asserting
the Pope's Supremacy; or endeavoring to raise Rebellion: But against four of
them, there is nothing but Treason in General Words alleged. This Bill was
past in two days by the Lords, and in five by the Commons: But of all these,
only three were executed, these were the Countess of Sarum; tho not till two
Years after this; and Sir Adrian Fortescue, and Dingley, the Knight of St. John
of Jerusalem. In the Countess of Sarum did the Name of Plantagenet end: She was
about 70 Years old, but showed that in that Age she had a Vigorous and
Masculine Mind.

In the Parliament that sat in the Year 1540, several others were Attainted in
the same manner, without being heard, and for the same Crimes. Fetherston,
Abel, and Powel, and six more, were so condemned; but those three only
suffered. By another Act of the same Parliament, the Lord Hungerford, and his
Chaplain, Bird, were Attainted: His Chaplain had often Persuaded him to rebel;
and had said, that the King was the greatest Heretic in the World. Hungerford
had also ordered some of his other Chaplains to use Conjuring, that they might
know how long the King would live, and whether he would be Victorious over his
Enemies. He was also charged for having lived in Sodomy with several of his
Servants, three Years together. He was soon after executed, and died in great
disorder.

In the Year 1541, Five Priests, and ten Laymen, were stirring up the People in
the North to a new Rebellion; but it was prevented, and they suffered for it.
In the Year 1543, Gardener that was the Bishop of Winchester's Secretary, and
three other Priests, were condemned, and executed, for denying the King's
Supremacy: and this was the last Occasion that was given to the King to show
his Severity on that account. In all these Executions it cannot be denied but
the Laws were excessively severe, and the Proceedings upon them were never
tempered with that Mildness which ought to be often applied for the mitigating
the rigor of Penal Laws: But tho they are much aggravated by Popish Writers;
they were far short of the Cruelties used in Queen Mary's Reign.

To conclude, We have now gone through the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, who
is rather to be reckoned among the Great, than the Good Princes. He exercised
so much Severity on Men of both Persuasions, that the Writers of both sides
have laid open his Faults, and taxed his Cruelty. But as neither of them were
much obliged to him; so none have taken so much care to set forth his good
Qualities, as his Enemies have done to enlarge on his Vices. I do not deny that
he is to be numbered among the ill Princes, yet I cannot rank him with the
worst.

BOOK II. Book II.
Of the Life and Reign of King EDWARD the VI.
EDWARD was the only Son of King Henry, K. Edwards Birth and education.
by his best beloved Wife Jane Seimour; born the 12th. of October 1537. His
Mother died the day after he was born, of a Distemper incident to Women in her
condition, and was not ripped up by Surgeons, as some Writers have reported,
on design to represent King Henry as barbarous and cruel to all his Wives. At
six years of Age he was put into the hands of Dr. Cox and Mr. Cheek, the one
was to form his mind, and to teach him Philosophy and Divinity, the other was
to teach him the Tongues and Mathematics: other Masters were also appointed
for the other parts of his Education. He discovered very early a good
disposition to Religion and Virtue, and a particular Reverence for the
Scriptures: for he took it very ill when one about him laid a great Bible on
the Floor, to step up on it to somewhat which was out of his reach, without
such an advantage. He profited well in Letters, and wrote at eight Years old
Latin Letters frequently both to the King, to Q. Katherine Parre, to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and his Uncle the Earl of Hartford, who had been
first made Viscount Beauchamp, being the Heir by his Mother of that Family, and
was after that advanced to be an Earl.

In the end of his Fathers life, it had been designed to create him Prince of
Wales: for that was one of the reasons given to hasten the attainder of the D.
of Norfolk, because he held some places during life, which the King intended to
put in other hands, in order to that Ceremony. Upon his Fathers death the E. of
Hartford and Sir Anth. Brown were sent to bring him up to the Tower of London:
and when King Henry's death was published, he was proclaimed King.

At his coming to the Tower his Fathers Will was opened, K. Hen. testament.
by which it was found that he had named 16. to be the Governors of the
Kingdom, and of his Sons person till he should be eighteen Years of Age. These
were the Archbishops of Canterbury, the Lord Wriothesly Lord Chancellor, Lord
St. John Great Master, Lord Russel Lord Privy Seal, Earl Hartford Lord Great
Chamberlain, Vis. Lisle Lord Admiral, Tonstall B. of Duresme, Sir Anth. Brown
Master of the Horse, Sr Will. Paget Secretary of State, Sr Ed. North
Chancellor of the Augmentations, Sir Ed. Mountague Ld Chief Just. of the
Common Pleas, Judge Bromley, Sir Anth. Denny and Sir Will. Herbert Chief
Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber, Sr Ed. Wotton Treasurer of Callis, and Doctor
Wotton Dean of Canterbury and York. They were also to give the Kings Sisters in
Marriage, and if they married without their consent, they were to forfeit their
right of succession: for the King was Empowered by Act of Parliament to leave
the Crown to them with what limitations he should think fit to appoint. There
was also a Privy Council named to be their Assistants in the Government; if any
of the 16. died, the Survivers were to continue in the Administration, without
a power to substitute others in their rooms who should die. It was now proposed
that one should be chosen out of the 16. to whom Ambassadors should address
themselves, and who should have the chief direction of affairs; but should be
restrained to do nothing but by the consent of the greater part of the other
Coexecutors. The Chancellor, who thought the Precedence fell to him by his
Office, since the Archbishop did not meddle much in secular Affairs, opposed
this much, and said it was a change of the Kings will; who had made them all
equal in power and dignity; and if any were raised above the rest in Title, it
would not be possible to keep him within due bounds, since great Titles make
way for High Power: but the Earl of Hartford had so prepared his Friends, that
it was carried that he should be declared the Governor of the Kings Person,
and the Protector of the Kingdom, A Protector chosen.
with this restriction, that he should do nothing but by the advice and consent
of the rest. Upon this advancement, and the opposition made to it, two Parties
were formed, the one headed by the Protector, and the other by the Chancellor:
the favorers of the Reformation were of the former, and those that opposed it
were of the latter. The Chancellor was ordered to renew the Commissions of the
Judges and Justices of Peace, and King Henry's great Seal was to be made use
of, till a new one should be made. The day after this all the Executors took
their Oaths to execute their trust faithfully, the Privy Counselors were also
brought into the Kings presence, who did all express their satisfaction in the
choice that was made of the Protector: and it was ordered that all dispatches
to foreign Princes should be signed only by him. All that held Offices were
required to come and renew their Commissions, Bishops take out Commissions.
and to swear Allegiance to the King: among the rest, the Bishops came and took
out such Commissions as were granted in the former Reign, only by those they
were subaltern to the Kings Vicegerent, but there being none now in that
Office, they were immediately subaltern to the King; and by them they were to
hold their Bishoprics only during the Kings pleasure, and were empowered in
the Kings name, as his Delegates, to perform all the parts of the Episcopal
function. Cranmer set an Example to the rest in taking out one of those. It was
thought fit thus to keep the Bishops under the terror of such an Arbitrary
power lodged in the King, that so it might be more easy to turn them out, if
they should much oppose what might be done in points of Religion: but the ill
consequences of such an unlimited power being well foreseen, the Bishops that
were afterward promoted were not so fettered, but were provided to hold their
Bishoprics during life.

The late King had in his Will required his Executors to perform all the
promises he had made; A Creation of Noblemen.
so Paget was required to give an account of the Promises the late King had
made; and he declared upon Oath, that upon the prospect of the attainder of the
D. of Norfolk, the King intended a Creation of Peers, and to divide his Lands
among them; the Persons to be raised, were Hartford to be a Duke, Essex a
Marquess, Lisle, Russel, St. John, and Wriothesly to be Earls, Sir Tho.
Seimour, Cheyney, Rich, Willoughby, Arundell, Sheffield, St. Ledger, Wymbish,
Vernon, and Danby to be Barons, and a division was to be made of the Duke of
Norfolks Estate among them: some shares were also set off for others, who were
not to be advanced in Title, as Denny and Herbert: and they finding Paget had
been mindful of them, but had not mentioned himself, had moved the King for a
share to him. The King appointed Paget to give notice of this to the Persons
named: but many excused themselves, and desired no addition of honor, since the
Lands which the King intended to give them were not sufficient to support that
dignity. The Duke of Norfolk prevented all this, for being apprehensive of the
ruin of his Family, if his Estate were once divided, he sent a message to the
King, desiring him to convert it all to be a Revenue to the Prince of Wales.
This wrought so much on the King, that he resolved to reward those he intended
to raise another way, and he appointed that Estate to be kept entire, and the
Kings distemper increasing on him, he at last came to a resolution, that the E.
of Hartford should be made a Duke, and be made both Earl Marshal and Lord
Treasurer, the Earl of Essex a Marquess, Lisle and Wriothesly Earls, and
Seimour, Rich, Sheffield, St. Ledger, Willoughby and Danby Barons, with Revenues
in Lands to every one of them: and the Earl of Hartford was to have the first
good Deanery and Treasurership, and the four best Prebends that should fall in
any Cathedral. But though the King had resolved on this, and had ordered Paget
to propose it to the Persons concerned, yet his Disease increased so fast on
him, that he never finished it: and therefore he ordered his Executors to
perform all that should appear to have been promised by him. The greatest part
of this was also confirmed by Denny and Herbert, to whom the King had talked of
it, and had showed the design of it in writing, as it had been agreed between
Paget and him. So the Executors being concerned in this themselves, it may be
easily supposed that they determined to execute this part of their trust very
faithfully. Yet the King being then like to be engaged in Wars, they resolved
neither to lessen his Treasure nor Revenue, but to find another way for giving
the Rewards intended by the King, which was afterward done by the sale and
distribution of the Chantry Lands.

The Castle of St. Andrews was then much pressed; so they sent down by
Balnaves, the Agent of that party, 1180 l. for the pay of the Garrison; they
gave also pensions to the chief supporters of their Interest in Scotland, to
some 250, to others 200 l. or less, according to their interest in the
Country. The King received the Ceremony of Knighthood from the Protector, and
Knighted the Mayor of London the same day.

The grant of so many Ecclesiastical Dignities to the Earl of Hartford, Laymen
had Ecclesiastical Dignities.
was no extraordinary thing at that time, for as Cromwell had been Dean of
Wells, so diverse other Laymen were provided to them; which was thus excused,
because there was no cure of Souls belonging to them; and during vacancies,
even in times of Popery, the Kings had by their own Authority, by the Right of
the Regale, given Institution to them, so that they seemed to be no Spiritual
employments, and the Ecclesiastics that had enjoyed them, had been a lazy and
sensual sort of men, so that their abusing those Revenues, either to luxury, or
to the enriching their kindred by the spoils of the Church, Magna Charta, and
all Natural Equity, to take them out of the hands of Churchmen, and give them
to those of the Laity. But it was no wonder to see men yet under the influence
of the Canon Law, commit such errors.

At the same time an accident fell out, Some take down Images.
that made way for great changes; the Curate and Churchwardens of St. Martins,
in London, were brought before the Council for removing the Crucifix, and other
Images, and putting some Texts of Scripture on the Walls of their Church, in
the places where they stood: They Answered, That they going to repair their
Church, removed the Images, and they being rotten, they did not renew them, but
put places of Scripture in their room: They had also removed others, which they
found had been abused to Idolatry. Great pains was taken by the Popish party to
punish them severely, for striking terror into others; but Cranmer was for the
removing of all Images which were set up in Churches, expressly contrary both
to the Second Commandment, and to the practice of the Christians for diverse
ages: Arguments for and against it.
And though in compliance with the gross abuses of Paganism there was very
early much of the Pomp of their worship brought into the Christian Church, yet
it was long before this crept in. At first all Images were condemned by the
Fathers: then they allowed the use of them, but condemned the worshipping of
them, and afterward in the Eighth and Ninth Centuries the worshipping of them
was, after a long contest, both in the East and West, in which there were, by
turns, General Councils, that both approved and condemned them, at last
generally received, and then the reverence for them, and for some in
particular, that were believed to be more wonderfully enchanted, was much
improved by the cheats of the Monks, who had enriched themselves by such means:
And it was grown to such a height, that Heathenism it self had been guilty of
nothing more absurd toward its Idols; and the singular virtues in some Images,
showed they were not worshipped only as Representations, for then all should
have equal degrees of veneration paid to them. And since all these abuses had
risen merely out of the bare use of them, and the setting them up being
contrary to the command of God, and the nature of the Christian Religion, which
is simple and Spiritual; it seemed most reasonable to cure the disease in its
root, and to clear the Churches of Images, that so the people might be
preserved from Idolatry. These Reasons prevailed so far, that the Curate and
Wardens were dismissed with a Reprimand; they were required to beware of such
rashness for the future, and to provide a Crucifix, and till that could be had,
they were ordered to cause one to be painted on the Wall. Upon this, Dr. Ridley
being to preach before the King, inveighed against the superstition toward
Images and Holy Water, and there was a general disposition over all the Nation
to pull them down; which was soon after effected in Portsmouth. Upon that,
Gardener made great complaints, he said the Lutherans themselves went not so
far, for he had seen Images in their Churches; he argued from the Kings face on
the Coin and Great Seal for the use of Images, and that the Law of Moses did no
more bind in this particular, than in that of abstaining from Blood: He
distinguished between Image and Idol, as if the one, which he said was only
condemned, was the representation of a False God, and the other of the True;
and he thought, that as words conveyed by the Ear begat devotion, so Images, by
the conveyance of the Eye, might have the same effect on the mind: He also
thought, a virtue might be both in them and in Holy Water, as well as there was
in Christ's Garments, Peter's Shadow, or Elisha's Staff: And there might be a
Virtue in Holy Water, as well as in the Water of Baptism. He also mentioned the
Virtue that was in the Cramp-Rings, blessed by the late King, which he had
known to be much esteemed and sought after, and he hoped their young King would
not neglect that gift. But to these things which Gardener wrote in several
Letters, the Protector, perhaps by Cranmer's direction, wrote answer, that the
Bishops had formerly argued much in another strain, that because the Scriptures
were abused by the vulgar Readers, therefore they were not to be trusted to
them; and so made a pretended abuse, the ground of taking away that, which by
Gods special appointment was to be delivered to all Christians: This did hold
much stronger against Images that were forbidden by God. The Brazen Serpent set
up by Moses, by Gods own direction, was broken when abused to Idolatry; for
that was the greatest corruption of Religion possible: And the Civil respect
paid to the Kings Image on a Seal, or on the Coin, did not justify the dotage
upon Images. But yet the Protector acknowledged he had reason to complain of
the forwardness of the people, that broke down Images without authority. This
was the first step that was made in this Reign, toward a Reformation, of which
the sequel shall appear afterward. Orders were sent to the Justices of the
Peace, to look well to the Peace and Government of the Nation, to meet often,
and every six weeks to advertise the Protector of the state of the County to
which they belonged.

The Funerals of the deceased King were performed with the ordinary Ceremonies
at Windsor: The Kings Funeral.
One thing gave those that hated him some advantages; his Body was carried the
first day to Sheen, which had been a Nunnery, and there some of the moisture
and fat dropped through the Coffin; and to make it a complete accomplishment of
Peyto's denunciation, that Dogs should lick his Blood, it was said the Dogs
next day licked it. This in a Corpulent man was so far from a wonder, that it
had been a wonder if it had been otherwise, and was a certain sign of nothing
but the Plummers carelessness, and their weakness and malice that made such
Inferences from it. The King left six hundred pounds a year to the Church of
Windsor, for Priests to say Mass for his Soul every day, and for four Obits a
year, and Sermons, and distribution of Alms at every one of them, and for a
Sermon every Sunday, and a maintenance for thirteen poor Knights, which was
settled upon that Church by his Executors in due form of Law.

The Pomp of this Endowment now in a more Inquisitive Age led people to examine
the usefulness of Soul Masses and Obits. Soul Masses examined.
Christ appointed the Sacrament for a commemoration of his Death among the
living, but it was not easy to conceive how that was to be applied to departed
Souls. For all the good that they could receive, seemed only applicable to the
prayers for them; but bare Prayers would not have wrought so much on the
people, nor would they have paid so dear for them. It was a clear project for
drawing in the wealth of the World into their hands. In the Primitive Church
there was a Commemoration of the Dead, or an Honorable Remembrance of them
made in the daily Offices, and for some very small faults their names were not
mentioned, which would not have had done if they had looked upon that as a
thing that was really a relief to them in another state. But even this custom
grew to be abused, and some inferred from it, that departed Souls, unless they
were signally pure, passed through a Purgation in the next life, before they
were admitted to Heaven: Of which St. Austin, in whose time the opinion was
beginning to be received, says, that it was taken up without any sure ground in
Scripture. But what was wanting in Scripture proof was supplied by Visions,
Dreams and Tales, till it was generally received. King Henry had acted like one
that did not much believe it, for he was to expect no good usage in Purgatory,
from those Souls whom he had deprived of the Masses that were said for them in
Monasteries, by destroying those Foundations. Yet it seems he intended to make
sure work for himself, so that if Masses could avail the departed Souls, he
resolved to have his share of it; and as he gratified the Priests by this part
of his Endowment, so he pleased the people by appointing Sermons and Alms to be
given on such days. Thus he died as he had lived, swimming between both
persuasions. And it occasioned no small debate, when men sought to find out
what his opinions were in the controverted points of Religion: For the esteem
he was in made both sides study to justify themselves, by seeming to follow
his sentiments; the one party said he was resolved never to alter Religion, but
only to cut off some abuses, and intended to go no further than he had gone:
They did therefore vehemently press the others to innovate nothing, but to keep
things in the state in which he left them, till his Son should come of Age: But
the opposite party said, that he had resolved to go a great way further, and
particularly to turn the Mass to a Communion; and therefore Religion being of
such consequence to the Salvation of Souls, it was necessary to make all the
haste in Reformation that was fitting and decent. The Coronation.
But now the diversions of the Coronation took them off from more serious
thoughts: The Protector was made Duke of Somerset, the Earl of Essex Marquess
of Northampton, the Lords Lisle and Wriothesley Earls of Warwick and
Southampton, Seimour, Rich, Willoughby and Sheffield, were made Barons. In
order to the Kings Coronation, the Office for that Ceremony was reviewed, and
much shortened: One remarkable alteration was, that formerly the King used to be
presented to the people at the corners of the Scaffold, and they were asked, If
they would have him to be their King? Which looked like a rite of an Election,
rather than a Ceremony of Investing one that was already King. This was now
changed, and the people were desired only to give their assents and good will
to his Coronation, as by the duty of Allegiance they were bound to do. On the
twentieth of February he was Crowned, and a General Pardon was proclaimed, out
of which the Duke of Norfolk, Cardinal Pool, and some others were excepted.

The Chancellor, The Chancellor turned out.
who was looked on as the head of the Popish party, gave now an advantage
against himself, which was very readily laid hold on. He granted a Commission
to the Master of the Rolls and three Masters of Chancery, of whom two were
Civilians, to execute his Office in the Court of Chancery, as if he were
present, only their Decrees were to be brought to him to be Signed, before they
should be Enrolled. This being done without any authority from the Protector,
and the other Executors, was thought a high Presumption, since he did hereby
devolve on others that trust which was deposited in his hands. Upon this, some
Lawyers complained to the Protector, and they seemed also apprehensive of a
design to change the Common Laws, which was occasioned by the Decrees made by
the Civilians, that were more suited to the Imperial, than to the English Laws.
The Judges being desired to give their opinions, made report, That what the
Chancellor had done was against Law, and that he had forfeited his place, and
might be imprisoned for it during pleasure. But he carried it high, he
threatened both the Judges and Lawyers; and when it was urged that he had
forfeited his place, he said he had it from the late King, who had likewise
named him one of the Executors, during his Sons minority. But it was answered,
That the major part had power over any of the rest, otherwise one of them might
rebel, and pretend he could not be punished by the rest. He being driven out of
that, was more humble, and acknowledged he had no Warrant for granting the
Commission, he thought by his Office he might lawfully do it, he asked Pardon
for his offense, and desired he might lose his place with as little disgrace as
was possible; and then it was resolved on by the rest to take the Seal from
him, and to Fine him as they should afterward think fit. So he being suffered
to go home with the Seal, the Lord Seimour, and some others were sent to demand
it of him: He was also confined to his house, and kept under the terror of an
Arbitrary Fine. But upon giving a Bond of 4000 l. to be paid upon demand, he
was freed from his confinement: Yet he was not put out of the trust of the King
and the Government, for it seems the Council did not look on that as a thing
that was in their power to do.

Soon after this, the Protector took a Patent for his Office under the Great
Seal, March. Protectors Patent.
then in the keeping of the Lord St. John; by which he was confirmed in his
Authority, till the King should be eighteen years of Age; he was also
authorized to bring in new Councillors, besides those enumerated in the
Patent, who are both the Executors and the Councillors nominated by the late
King: The Protector, with so many of the Council as he thought meet, were
empowered to administer the affairs of the Kingdom; but the Council was limited
to do nothing without his Advice and Consent. And thus was he now as well
established in his Authority as Law could make him. He had a Negative on the
Council, but they had none on him; and he could either bring his own creatures
into it, or select a Cabinet Council out of it as he pleased: And the other
Executors having now delivered up their Authority to him, were only Privy
Counselors as the rest were, without retaining any singular authority peculiar
to them, as was provided by King Henry's Will.

The first business of consequence that required great consideration, The
affairs of Germany.
was the Smalcaldick. War, then begun between the Emperor and the Princes of
that League; the effects of which, if the Emperor prevailed, were like to be,
not only the extirpating of Lutheranism, but his being the absolute Master of
Germany; which the Emperor chiefly designed, in order to an Universal Monarchy,
but disguised it to other Princes: to the Pope, he pretended that his design
was only to extirpate Heresy; to other Princes, he pretended it was only to
repress some Rebels, and denied all design of suppressing their new Doctrines;
which he managed so artificially, that he divided Germany it self, and got some
Lutheran Princes to declare for him, and others to be Neutrals: and having
obtained a very liberal supply for his Wars with France and the Turk, for which
he granted an Edict for liberty of Religion, he made Peace with both those
Princes, and resolved to employ that Treasure which the Germans had given him,
against themselves. That he might deprive them of their chief Allies, he used
means to engage King Henry, and Francis the First in a War, but that was,
chiefly by their Interposition, composed. And now when the War was like to be
carried on with great Vigor, they lost both those Princes; for as Henry died
in January, so Francis followed him into another World, in March following.
Many of their Confederates began to capitulate and forsake them; and the
divided command of the Duke of Saxe, and the Landgrave of Hesse lost them great
advantages, the former year; in which it had been easy to have driven the
Emperor out of Germany: but it fell often out, that when the one was for
engaging, the other was against it, which made many very doubtful of their
success. The Pope had a mind to engage the Emperor in a War in Germany, that so
Italy might be at quiet: and in order to that, and to Imbroil the Emperor with
all the Lutherans, he published his Treaty with him, that so it might appear
that the design of the War was to extirpate Heresy; though the Emperor was
making great protestations to the contrary in Germany. He also opened the
Council of Trent, which the Emperor had long desired in vain; but it was now
brought upon him, when he least wished for it: for the Protestants did all
declare, that they could not look upon it as a free General Council, The
Council of Trent.
since it was so entirely at the Popes devotion, that not so much as a
Reformation of some of the grossest abuses that could not be justified, was
like to be obtained, unless clogged with such Clauses as made it ineffectual.
Nor could the Emperor prevail with the Council, not to proceed to establish the
doctrine, and condemn Heresy; but the more he obstructed that by delays, the
more did the Pope drive it on, to open the eyes of the Germans, and engage them
all vigorously against the Emperor: yet he gave them such secret assurances of
tollerating the Ausburg Confession, that the Marquess of Brandenburg declared
for him, and that, joined with the hopes of the Electorate, drew in Maurice of
Saxe. The Count Palatine was old and feeble, the Archbishop of Colen would not
make resistance, but retired, being condemned both by Pope and Emperor, and
many of the Cities submitted. And Maurice by falling into Saxe, forced the
Elector to separate from the Landgrave, and return to the defense of his own
Dominions. This was the state of the affairs in Germany: so it was a hard point
to resolve on, what answer the Protector should give to the Duke of Saxe's
Chancellor, whom he sent over to obtain an Aid in Money, for carrying on the
War. It was on the one hand of great importance to the safety of England to
preserve the German Princes, and yet it was very dangerous to begin a War of
such Consequence under an Infant King. At present they promised, within three
Months, to send by the Merchants of the Still-yard 50000 Crowns to Hamburgh,
and resolved to do no more till new Emergents should lead them to new Councels.

The Nation was in an ill condition for a War, Divisions in England.
with such a mighty Prince, laboring under great distractions at home, the
People generally cried out for a Reformation, they despised the Clergy, and
loved the new Preachers. The Priests were for the most part both very ignorant
and scandalous in their lives: many of them had been Monks, and those that were
to pay them the pensions, that were reserved to them at the destruction of the
Monasteries, till they should be provided, took care to get them into some
small Benefice. The greatest part of the Parsonages were Impropriated, for they
belonged to the Monasteries, and the Abbots had only granted the Incumbents,
either the Vicarage, or some small Donative, and left them the Perquisites
raised by Masses and other Offices. At the suppression of those Houses there
was no care taken to provide the Incumbents better; so they chiefly subsisted
by Trentals and other Devices, that brought them in some small relief, though
the Price of them was scandalously low, for Masses went often at 2 d. a Groat
was a great bounty. Now these saw that a Reformation of those abuses, took the
Bread out of their mouths; so their Interests prevailing more with them than
any thing else, they were zealously engaged against all changes: but that same
Principle made them comply with every change that was made, rather than lose
their Benefices: Their poverty made them run into another abuse of holding more
Benefices at the same time, a Corruption of so crying and scandalous a nature,
that where ever it is practiced, it is sufficient to possess the People with
great prejudices against the Church that is guilty of it: there being nothing
more contrary to the plainest impressions of reason, than that every Man who
undertakes a Cure of Souls, whom at his Ordination he has vowed, that he would
instruct, feed, govern, ought to discharge that trust himself, which is the
greatest and most important of all others. The Clergy were encouraged in their
Opposition to all changes, by the protection they expected from Gardener,
Bonner, and Tonstall, who were Men of great reputation, as well as set in high
places: and above all, Lady Mary did openly declare against all Changes, till
the King should be of Age. But on the other hand, Cranmer, whose greatest
weakness was his over-obsequiousness to King Henry, being now at liberty,
resolved to proceed more vigorously: The Protector was firmly united to him, so
were the young Kings Tutors, and he was as much engaged, as could be expected
from so young a Person: for both his knowledge and zeal for true Religion were
above his Age. Several of the Bishops did also declare for a Reformation, but
Dr. Ridley now made Bishop of Rochester, was the Person on whom he depended
most. Latimer was kept by him at Lambeth, and did great service by his Sermons,
which were very popular, but he would not return to his Bishopric, choosing
rather to serve the Church in a more disengaged manner. Many of the Bishops
were very ignorant, and poor spirited Men, raised merely by Court-favour, who
we little concerned for any thing but their Revenues. Cranmer resolved to
proceed by degrees, and to open the reasons of every advance, that was made so
fully, that he hoped by the blessing of God to possess the Nation of the
fitness of what they should do, and thereby to prevent any dangerous
opposition, that might otherwise be apprehended.

The power of the Privy Council had been much exalted in King Henry's time, by
Act of Parliament; and one Proviso in it was, that the King's Council should
have the same Authority when he was under Age, that he himself had at full Age:
A Visitation of all the Churches.
so it was resolved to begin with a General Visitation of all England, which
was divided into six Precincts: and two Gentlemen, a Civilian, a Divine, and a
Register were appointed for every one of these. But before they were sent out,
May.
there was a Letter written to all the Bishops, giving them notice of it,
suspending their Jurisdiction while it lasted, and requiring them to preach no
where but in their Cathedrals, and that the other Clergy should not preach but
in their own Churches, without License: by which it was intended to restrain
such as were not acceptable, to their own Parishes, and to grant the others
Licenses to Preach in any Church of England. The greatest difficulty that the
Reformers found, was in the want of able and prudent Men, the most zealous were
too hot and indiscreet, and the few they had that were Eminent, were to be
employed in London, and the Universities. Therefore they intended to make those
as common as was possible, and appointed them to preach as Itinerants and
Visitors. The only thing by which the People could be universally instructed,
was a Book of Homilies; so the twelve first Homilies in the Book, still known
by that name, were compiled, in framing which the chief design was to acquaint
the People aright with the nature of the Gospel Covenant, in which there were
two extremes equally dangerous: the one was of those who thought the Priests
had an infallible secret of saving their souls, if they would in all things
follow their directions; the other was of those who thought that if they
magnified Christ much, and depended on his Merits, they could not perish, which
way soever they led their lives. So the mean between these was observed, and
the People were taught both to depend on the sufferings of Christ, and also to
lead their lives according to the rules of the Gospel, without which they could
receive no benefit by his death. Order was also given, that a Bible should be
in every Church, which though it was commanded by King Henry, yet had not been
generally obeyed: and for understanding the New Testament, Erasmus's Paraphrase
was put out in English, and appointed to be set up in every Church. His great
reputation and learning, and his dying in the Communion of the Roman Church,
made this Book to be preferred to any other, since there lay no prejudice to
Erasmus, which would have been objected to any other Author. They renewed also
all the Injunctions made by Cromwell in the former Reign, which after his fall
were but little looked after, as those for instructing the people, for removing
Images, and putting down all other customs abused to superstition; perstition;
for reading the Scriptures, and saying the Litany in English, for frequent
Sermons and Catechizing, for the Exemplary lives of the Clergy, and their
labors in visiting the sick, and the other parts of their function, such as
reconciling differences, and exhorting their people to Charities: and all who
gave Livings by Simoniacal bargains, were declared to have forfeited their
right of Patronage to the King. A great charge was also given for the strict
observation of the Lords Day, which was appointed to be spent wholly in the
service of GOD; it not being enough to hear Mass or Mattins in the Morning, and
spend the rest of the Day in drunkenness and quarrelling, as was commonly
practiced; but it ought to be all employed either in the duties of Religion, or
in acts of Charity, only in time of Harvest they were allowed to work on that
and other Festival days. Direction was also given, for the bidding of Prayers,
in which the King, as Supreme head, the Queen, and the Kings Sisters, the
Protector and Council, and all the Orders of the Kingdom were to be mentioned;
they were also to pray for departed souls, that at the last day, we with them
might rest both body and soul. There were also Injunctions given for the
Bishops, that they should preach four times a year in their Diocesses, once in
their Cathedral, and thrice in any other Church, unless they had a good excuse
to the contrary: that their Chaplains should preach often: and that they should
give Orders to none, but those that were duly qualified.

These were variously censured: The Clergy were only empowered to remove the
abused Images, Censures on ths Injunctions.
and the People were restrained from doing it, but this authority being put in
their hands, it was thought they would be slow and backward in it. It had been
happy for this Church, if all had agreed since that time, to press the
Religious observation of the Lords Day, without starting needless questions
about the Morality of it, and the obligation of the fourth Commandment; which
has occasioned much dispute and heat: and when one Party raised the obligation
of that duty to a pitch that was not practicable, it provoked others to slacken
it too much: and this produced many sharp reflections on both sides, and has
concluded in too common a neglect of that day, which instead of being so great
a bond and instrument of Religion, as it ought to be, is become generally a day
of idleness and looseness. The Corruptions of Lay Patrons and Simoniacal Priests
have been often complained of, but no Laws nor Provisions have ever been able
to preserve the Church from this great mischief; which can never be removed
till Patrons look on their right to nominate one to the charge of Souls, as a
trust for which they are to render a severe account to God, and till Priests
are cured of their aspiring to that charge, and look on it with dread and great
caution. The bidding of Prayers had been the custom in time of Popery; for the
Preacher after he had named his Text, and showed what was to be the method of
his Sermon, desired the People to join with him in a Prayer, for a blessing
upon it; and told them likewise, whom they were to pray for, and then all the
People said their Beads in silence, and he kneeling down said his, and from
that this was called the bidding of the Beads. In this new direction for them,
Order was given to repeat always the Kings Title of Supreme Head, that so the
People hearing it often mentioned, might grow better accustomed to it: but when
instead of a bidding Prayer, an immediate one is come generally to be used,
that enumeration of Titles seems not so decent a thing, nor is it now so
necessary as it then was. The prayer for departed souls was now moderated, to
be a prayer only for the consummation of their happiness at the last day;
whereas in King Henry's time, they prayed that God would grant them the
fruition of his presence, which implied a Purgatory. The Injunctions to the
Bishops, directing them to give Orders with great caution, pointed out that by
which only a Church can be preserved from Errors and Corruptions: for when
Bishops do easily upon recommendations or emendicated Titles, confer Orders, as
a sort of favor that is at their disposal, the ill effects of that must be
fatal to the Church; either by the Corruptions that those vicious Priests will
be guilty of, or by the Scandals which are given to some good minds by their
means, who are thereby disgusted at the Church for their sakes, and so are
disposed to be easily drawn into those Societies that separate from it.

The War with Scotland was now in consultation; The War with Scotland.
but the Protector being apprehensive that France would engage in the quarrel,
sent over Sir Fr. Brian to congratulate with the new King, to desire a
confirmation of the last Peace, and to complain of the Scots, who had broken
their Faith with the King, in the matter of the Marriage of their Queen. The
French King refused to confirm the Treaty, till some Articles should be first
explained, and so he disowned his Fathers Ambassador; and for the Scots, he
said he could not forsake them, if they were in distress. The English alleged
that Scotland was subject to England; but the French had no regard to that, and
would not so much as look on the Records that were offered to prove it; and
said they would take things as they found them, and not look back to a dispute
of two hundred years old. This made the English Council more fearful of
engaging in a War, which by all appearance, would bring a War on them from
France. The Castle of St. Andrews was surrendered, and all their Pensioners in
Scotland were not able to do them great fervice: The Scots were now much lifted
up; for as England was under an Infant King, so the Court of France was
governed by their Queen Dowagers Brothers. The Scots began to make Inroads on
England, and Descents on Ireland. Commissioners were sent to the Borders to
treat on both sides; and the Protector raised a great Army, which he resolved
to command in person. But the meeting on the Borders was soon broke up, for the
Scots had no Instructions to treat concerning the Marriage, and the English
were ordered to treat of nothing else, till that should be first agreed to. And
the Records that were showed of the Homage done by the Scottish Kings to the
English had no great effect; for the Scots either said they were forged, or
forced from some weak Princes, or were only Homages for their Lands in England,
as the Kings of England did Homage to the Crown of France for their Lands
there. They also showed their Records by which their Ancestors had asserted
that they were free and independent of England. The Protector left Commissions
of Lieutenancy to some of the Nobility, August.
and devolved his own power, during his absence, on the Privy Council, and came
to the Borders by the end of August. The Scots had abandoned the Passes, so
that he found no difficulty in his March, and the small Forts that were in his
way, were surrendered upon Summons. When the English advanced to Falsid, the
Scots engaged with them in Parties, but lost 1300 men. The two Armies came in
view; the English consisted of fifteen thousand Foot and three thousand Horse,
and a Fleet under the Command of the Lord Clinton, sailed along by them, as
they marched near the Coast; the Scottish Army consisted of thirty thousand,
and a good train of Artillery.

The Protector sent a Message to the Scots, inviting them by all the Arguments
that could be invented, to consent to the Marriage; and if that would not be
granted, he desired engagements from them, that their Queen should be
contracted to no other person, at least till she came of age, and by the advice
of the Estates, should choose a Husband for herself. This the Protector offered
to get out of the War upon Honorable terms, but the Scottish Lords thought
this great Condescension was an effect of fear, and believed the Protector was
straightened for want of Provisions; so instead of publishing this offer, they
resolved to fall upon him next day: And so all the return that was made, was,
That if the Protector would march back without any act of Hostility, they would
not fall upon him. One went officiously with the Trumpeter, and challenged the
Protector, in the Earl of Huntley's name, to decide the matter by their Valor;
but the Protector said he was to fight no way but at the head of his Army, yet
the Earl of Warwick accepted the challenge, but Huntley had given no order for
it. On the twentieth of September the Armies engaged. In the beginning of the
action, a shot from the Ships killed a whole lane of men, and disordered the
High-landers, so that they could not be made to keep their Ranks. The Battle of
Musselburgh.
The Earl of Angus charged bravely, but was repulsed, and the English broke in
with such fury on the Scots, that they threw down their Arms and fled. Fourteen
thousand were killed, fifteen hundred taken Prisoners, among whom was the Earl
of Huntley, and five hundred Gentlemen. Upon this, the Protector went on and
took Leith, and some Islands in the Frith, in which he put Garrisons, and left
Ships to wait on them; he sent some Ships to the mouth of Tay and took a Castle
(Broughty) that commanded that River. If he had followed this blow, and gone
forward to Striveling, to which the Governor, with the small remainders of his
Army, had retired, and where the Queen was, it is probable, in the
consternation in which they were, he might have taken that place, and so have
made an end of the War. But the party his Brother was making at Court, gave him
such an Alarm, that he returned before he had ended his business: And the Scots
having sent a Message desiring a Treaty, which they did only to gain time, he
ordered them to send their Commissioners to Berwick, and so marched back: He
took in all the Castles in Merch and Teviotdale, and left Garrisons in them,
and made the Gentry swear to be true to the King, and to promote the Marriage.
He entered into Scotch ground the second of September, and returned to England
on the twenty ninth, with the loss only of sixty men, and brought with him a
great deal of Artillery, and many Prisoners: This success did raise his
reputation very high, and if he had now made an end of the War, it had, no
doubt, established him in his authority. The Scots sent no Commissioners to
Berwick, but instead of that, they sent some to France, to offer their Queen to
the Dauphin, and to cast themselves on the protection of that Crown; and so the
Earl of Warwick, whom the Protector left to treat with them, returned back. The
Protector, upon this great success, summoned a Parliament, to get himself
established in his power.

The Visitors had now ended the Visitation, The success of the Visitation.
and all had submitted to them, and great Inferences were made from this, that
on the same day on which the Images were burnt in London, their Army obtained
that great Victory in Scotland. But all sides are apt to build much on
Providence, when it is favorable to them, and yet they will not allow the
Argument when it turns against them. Bonner at first protested that he would
obey the Injunctions, if they were not contrary to the Laws of God, and the
Ordinances of the Church; but being called before the Council, he retracted
that, and asked Pardon; yet for giving terror to others, he was for some time
put in Prison upon it. Gardener wrote to one of the Visitors, before they came
to Winchester, that he could not receive the Homilies; and if he must either
quit his Bishopric, or sin against his Conscience, he resolved to choose the
former: Upon this, he was called before the Council, and required to receive
the Book of Homilies; but he excepted to one of them, that taught that Charity
did not justify, contrary to the Book set out by the late King, confirmed in
Parliament: He also complained of many things in Erasmus's Paraphrase: And
being pressed to declare whether he would obey the Injunctions or not, he
refused to promise it, and so was sent to the Fleet. Cranmer treated in private
with him, and they argued much about Justification. Gardener thought the
Sacraments justified, and that Charity justified as well as Eaith. Cranmer
thought that only the merits of Christ justified, as they were applied by
Faith, which could not be without Charity; so the question turned much on a
different way of explaining the same thing. Gardener objected many things to
Erasmus's Book, particularly to some passages contrary to the power of Princes;
it was answered, That Book was not chosen, as having no faults, but as the best
they knew for clearing the difficulties in Scripture. Cranmer offered to him,
that if he would concur with them, he should be brought to be one of the Privy
Council; but he did not comply in this so readily as he ordinarily did to such
offers. Upon the Protectors return, he wrote to him, complaining of the
Councils proceedings in his absence; and after he had given his objections to
the Injunctions, he excepted to this, that they were contrary to Law, and
argued from many precedents, that the Kings authority could not be raised so
high; and that though Cromwell and others endeavored to persuade the late King,
that he might govern as the Roman Emperors did, and that his Will ought to be
his Law; yet he was of another opinion, and thought that it was much better to
make the Law the Kings Will. He complained also that he was hardly used, that
he had neither Servants, Physicians nor Chaplains, allowed to wait on him; and
that though he had a Writ of Summons, he was not suffered to come to the
Parliament, which he said, might bring a Nullity on all their Proceedings. But
he lay in Prison till the Act of General Pardon past in Parliament, set him at
liberty. Many blamed the severity of these proceedings as contrary both to Law
and Equity, and said that all people, even those who complained most of
arbitrary power, were apt to usurp it when they were in authority: And some
thought the delivering the doctrine of Justification in such nice terms was not
suitable to the plain simplicity of the Christian Religion. Lady Mary was so
alarmed at these proceedings, that she wrote to the Protector, that such
changes were contrary to the honor due to her Fathers Memory, and it was
against their duty to the King to enter upon such points, and endanger the
public Peace before he was of Age. To which he wrote answer, That her Father
had died before he could finish the good things he had intended concerning
Religion; and had expressed his regret both before himself and many others,
that he left things in so unsettled a state; and assured her that nothing should
be done but what would turn to the Glory of God, and the Kings Honor: He
imputed her Writing to the importunity of others rather than to her self, and
desired her to consider the matter better with an humble Spirit and the
assistance of the Grace of God.

The Parliament was opened the fourth of November, A Parliament meets.
and the Protector was by Patent authorized to sit under the Cloth of State,
on the Right hand of the Throne; and to have all the Honors and Privileges
that any Uncle of the Crown, either by Father or Mothers side, ever had. Rich
was made Lord Chancellor. The first Act that past, five Bishops only
dissenting, An Act of Repeal.
was, A Repeal of all Statutes that had made any thing Treason or Felony in the
late Reign, which was not so before, and of the six Articles, and the authority
given to the Kings Proclamations, as also of the Acts against Lollards. All who
denied the Kings Supremacy, or asserted the Popes, for the first offense were
to forfeit their goods, for the second were to be in a Pramunire, and were to
be attainted of Treason for the third. But if any intended to deprive the King
of his Estate or Title, that was made Treason: none were to be accused of Words
but within a month after they were spoken; they also repealed the power that
the King had of annulling all Laws made, till he was twenty four years of age,
and restrained it only to an annulling them for the time to come, but that it
should not be of force for the declaring them null from the beginning.

Another Act past with the same dissent, An Act about the Sacrament.
for the Communion in both kinds, and that the people should always communicate
with the Priest, and by it irreverence to the Sacrament was condemned under
severe penalties. Christ had instituted the Sacrament in both kinds, and S.
Paul mentions both. In the Primitive Church that custom was universally
observed, but upon the belief of Transubstantiation, the reserving and carrying
about the Sacrament were brought in; this made them first endeavor to persuade
the World that the Cup was not necessary, for Wine could neither keep, nor be
carried about conveniently; but it was done by degrees, the Bread was for some
time given dipped, as it is yet in the Greek Church: but it being believed that
Christ was entirely under either kind, and in every crumb, the Council of
Constance took the Cup from the Laity; yet the Bohemians could not be brought
to submit to it, so every where the use of the Cup was one of the first things
that was insisted on by those who demanded a Reformation. At first all that
were present did communicate; and censures past on such as did it not: And none
were denied the Sacrament but Penitents, who were made to withdraw during the
Action. But as the devotion of the World slackned, the people were still
exhorted to continue their Oblations, and come to the Sacrament, though they
did not receive it; and were made believe, that the Priest received it in their
stead: The name Sacrifice given to it, as being a holy Oblation, was so far
improved, that the World came to look on the Priests officiating, as a
Sacrifice for the dead and living: From hence followed an infinite variety of
Masses for all the accidents of humane life; and that was the chief part of the
Priests trade, but it occasioned many unseemly jests concerning it, which were
restrained by the same Act that put these down.

Another Act past without any dissent, An Act concerning the nomination of
Bishops.
That the Conge d'elire, and the Election pursuant to it, being but a shadow,
since the person was named by the King, should cease for the future, and that
Bishops should be named by the Kings Letters Patents, and thereupon be
consecrated; and should hold their Courts in the Kings name, and not in their
own, excepting only the Archbishop of Canterbury's Court: And they were to use
the Kings Seal in all their Writings, except in Presentations, Collations, and
Letters of Orders, in which they might use their own Seals. The Apostles chose
Bishops and Pastors by an extraordinary gift of discerning Spirits, and
proposed them to the approbation of the people; yet they left no rules to make
that necessary: In the times of Persecution, the Clergy being maintained by the
Oblations of the people, they were chosen by them. But when the Emperors
became Christians, the Town Councils and eminent men took the Elections out of
the hands of the Rabble: And the Tumults in popular Elections were such, that
it was necessary to regulate them. In some places the Clergy, and in others the
Bishops of the Province made the choice. The Emperors reserved the
Confirmation of the Elections in the great Sees to themselves. But when Charles
the Great annexed great Territories and Regalities to Bishoprics, a great
change followed thereupon: Churchmen were corrupted by this undue greatness,
and came to depend on the humors of those Princes to whom they owed this great
increase of their wealth. Princes named them, and invested them in their Sees:
But the Popes intended to separate the Ecclesiastical State from all subjection
to Secular Princes, and to make themselves the heads of that State, at first
they pretended to restore the freedom of Elections; but these were now
engrossed in a few hands, for only the Chapters chose; The Popes had granted
thirty years before this to the King of France, the nomination to all the
Bishoprics in that Kingdom; so the King of Englands assuming it was no new
thing, and the way of Elections, as King Henry had settled it, seemed to be but
a Mockery: so this change was not much condemned. The Ecclesiastical Courts
were the Concessions of Princes, in which, Trials concerning Marriages, Wills
and Tithes, depended, so the holding those Courts in the Kings name, was no
Invasion on the Spiritual Function; since all that concerned Orders, was to be
done still in the Bishops name, only Excommunication was still left as the
Censure of those Courts, which being a Spiritual Censure, ought to have been
reserved to the Bishop, to be proceeded in by him only with the assistance of
his Clergy: and this fatal error then committed, has not yet met with an
effectual regulation.

Another Act was made against idle Vagabonds, An Act against Vagabonds.
that they should be made slaves for two years, by any that should seize on
them: This was chiefly designed against some Vagrant Monks, as appears by the
Proviso's in the Act, for they went about the Country, infusing in the People
a dislike of the Government. The severity of this Act made that the English
Nation which naturally abhors slavery, did not care to execute it: and this
made that the other Proviso's, for supplying those that were truly indigent,
and were willing to be employed, had no effect. But as no Nation has better,
and more merciful Laws, for the supply of the Poor, so the fond pity that many
show to the common Beggars, which no Laws have been able to restrain, makes
that a sort of dissolute and idle Beggars intercept much of that Charity, which
should go to the relief of those, that are indeed the only proper objects of
it. An Act for dissolving the Changries.
After this came the Act for giving the King all those Chantries, which the
late King had not seized on by Virtue of the Grant made to him of them. Cranmer
opposed this much: for the poverty of the Clergy was such that the State of
Learning and Religion was like to suffer much, if it should not be relieved:
and yet he saw no probable Fond for that, but the preserving these, till the
King should come to be at Age; and allow the selling them, for buying in, of at
least such a share of the Impropriations, as might afford some more comfortable
subsistence to the Clergy: yet though he, and seven other Bishops dissented, it
was past: After all other Acts, a General Pardon, but clogged with some
Exceptions, came last: some Acts were proposed, but not past; one was for the
free use of the Scriptures, others were for a Court of Chancery in
Ecclesiastical Causes, for Residence, and for a Reformation of the Courts of
Common Law. The Convocation fits.
The Convocation sat at the same time; and moved that a Commission begun in the
late Reign of thirty two Persons for reforming the Ecclesiastical Laws might be
revived, and that the inferior Clergy might be admitted to sit in the House of
Commons, for which they alleged a Clause in the Bishops Writ and Ancient
Custom; and since some Prelates had under the former Reign begun to alter the
form of the Service of the Church, they desired it might be brought to
perfection: and that some care might be had of supplying the poor Clergy, and
relieving them from the Taxes that lay on them. This concerning the inferior
Clergy's sitting in the House of Commons, was the subject of some debate, and
was again set on foot both under Queen Elizabeth and King James, but to no
effect. Some pretended that they always sat in the House of Commons, till the
submission made in the former Reign, upon the suit of the Praemunire: but that
cannot be true, since in this Convocation, 17. years after that, in which many
that had been in the former were present, no such thing was alleged. It is not
clear who those Proctors of the Clergy that sat in Parliament, were: if they
were the Bishops assistants, it is more proper to think they sat in the House
of Lords. No mention is made of them, as having a share in the Legislative
Authority, in our Records, except in the 21. of Richard the 2d. In which,
mention is made, both of the Commons, the Lords Spiritual, and Temporal, and
the Proctors of the Clergy concurring to the Acts then made: which makes it
seem most probable that they were the Clerks of the lower House of Convocation.
When the Parliament met anciently all in one Body, the inferior Clergy had
their Writs, and came to it with the other Freeholders, but when the two Houses
were separated, the Clergy became also a distinct body, and gave their own
Subsidies, and meddled in all the concerns, and represented all the grievances
of the Church. But now by the Act made upon the submission of the Clergy in the
last Reign, their power was reduced almost to nothing: so they thought it
reasonable to desire, that either they might have their Representatives in the
House of Commons, or at least, that matters of Religion should not pass without
the assent of the Clergy. But the raising the Ecclesiastical authority too high
in former times, made this turn, that it was now depressed as much below its
just limits, as it was before exalted above them: as commonly one extreme
produces another.

It was resolved that some Bishops and Divines should be sent to Windsor, to
finish some Reformations in the public Offices; for the whole lower House of
Convocation, without a contradictory Vote, agreed to the Bill about the
Sacrament. But it is not known what opposition it met with in the Upper House.
A Proposition being also set on foot concerning the lawfulness of the Marriage
of the Clergy, thirty five subscribed to the affirmative, and only fourteen
held the Negative.

And thus ended this Session, both of Parliament and Convocation. And the
Protector being now established in his power, and received by a Parliament,
without contradiction, took out a new Commission, in which, besides his former
authority, he was empowered to substitute one in his room, during his absence.

In Germany the Princes of the Smalcaldick League were quite ruined; The
affairs of Germany.
the Duke of Saxe was defeated, and taken Prisoner; and used with great
severity and scorn, which he bare with an invincible greatness of mind. The
Landgrave was persuaded to submit, and had assurances of liberty given him; but
by a trick unbecoming the greatness of the Emperor, he was seized on and kept
Prisoner, contrary to faith given: upon this all the Princes and Towns, except
Magdeburg and Brom, submitted and purchased their pardon, at what terms the
Conqueror was pleased to impose. The Bishop and Elector of Colen, withdrew
peaceably to a retirement, in which, after four years, he died: and now all
Germany was at the Emperors mercy. Some Cathedrals, as that at Ausburg, were
again restored to the Bishops, and Mass was said in them. A Diet was also held,
in which the Emperor obtained a Decree to pass, by which matters of Religion
were referred wholly to his care. The Pope, instead of rejoicing at this blow
given the Lutherans, was much troubled at it: for the Emperor had now in one
Year made an end of a War, which he hoped would have Imbroiled him his whole
life; so that Italy was now more at his mercy than ever: and it seemed the
Emperor intended to enlarge his Conquests there, for the Pope's Natural Son
being killed by a Conspiracy, the Governor of Milan seized on Placentia, which
gave the Pope some jealousy, as if the Emperor had been privy to the design
against his Son. The Emperor's Ambassadors were also very uneasy to the
Legates at Trent, and pressed a Reformation of abuses, and endeavored to
restrain them from proceeding in points of doctrine: so they took hold of the
first pretense they had by the death of one that seemed to have some symptoms
of the Plague, and removed it to Bologna. By this all the advantages the
Emperor had from the Promises which the Protestants made, to submit to a free
General Council assembled in Germany, were defeated: and it was thought a
strange turn of Divine Providence, that when the extirpation of Lutheranism was
so near being effected, a stop was put to it by that which of all things was
least to be apprehended: since it might have been expected that the perfecting
such a design would have made the Pope and the Emperor friends, though there
had been ever so many other grounds of difference between them. So unusual a
thing made the favorers of the Reformation ascribe it to the immediate care
that Heaven had of that work, now when all the humane supports of it were gone.
Upon this fatal revolution of affairs there, many Germans, and Italians that
had retired to Germany, came over to England: Peter Martyr and Bernardinus
Ochinus came over first, Bucer and Fagius followed. They were invited over by
Cranmer, who entertained them at Lambeth, till they were provided. Martyr was
sent to Oxford, and Bucer and Fagius to Cambridge; but the latter dyed soon
after. There were some differences between the French and English, concerning
some new Forts, which were made about Bulloigne, on both sides, yet a Truce was
agreed on, for the Protector had no mind to engage in a War with France.

He had a new trouble raised up in his own Family, Differences between the
Protector and the Admiral.
by the Ambition of his Brother, who thought that being the Kings Uncle, as
well as his Brother was, he ought to have a larger share of the Government. He
had made addresses to Lady Elizabeth the Kings sister, but finding no hopes of
success, he made applications to the Queen Dowager, who married him a little
undecently, for it was afterward objected to him, that he married her so soon
after the Kings death, that if she had conceived with Child immediately after
the marriage, it might have been doubtful whether it was by the late King, or
not: yet the marriage was for some time concealed, and the Admiral moved the
King and his Sisters, to write to the Queen, to accept him for her Husband: The
Kings Sisters excused themselves, that it was not decent for them to interpose
in such a matter, but the young King was more easy: so upon his Letter, the
Queen published her marriage. The Admiral being now possessed of much Wealth,
and the King coming often to the Queens Lodgings, he endeavored to gain him,
and all that were about him, and furnished the King often with Money. His
design was, that whereas in former times, when Infant-Kings had two Uncles, one
was Governor of his Person, and another was Protector of the Realm; so now
these two Trusts might be divided, and that he might be made Governor of the
Kings Person. This is the true account of the breach between those Brothers,
for the story of the quarrel between their Wives about precedence, seems to be
an ill-grounded fiction: for there was no pretense of a competition between the
Queen Dowager and the Duchess of Somerset; but the latter being a high Woman,
might have perhaps inflamed her Husbands resentments, over whom she had an
absolute power, which gave the rise to that story. The Protector was at first
very easy to be reconciled to his Brother, but after the many provocations he
received from him, he threw off nature too much. When he was in Scotland, the
Admiral began to take advantage upon that to make a party: And the good advices
that were given him by Paget, to look on those as the common Enemies of their
Family, who were making this breach between them, had no effect to cure a mind
hurried on by Ambition. It was the advertisement that was sent him of this,
that made the Protector leave Scotland before he had finished his business
there. During the Session of Parliament, the Admiral prevailed with the King to
write with his own hand a Message to the House of Commons, to make him the
Governor of his person. When the Admiral was making Friends in order to this,
it came to his Brothers ears, before he had made any public use of it: So he
employed some to divert him from it, but with no success. Upon that, he was
sent for to appear before the Council, but he refused to come; yet they having
threatened to turn him out of all his places, and to send him to the Tower, he
submitted, and the Brothers were reconciled: But the Admiral continued his
secret practices still with those about the King.

Gardener being included in the Act of Pardon, was set at liberty: conformed.
The Second Marriage of the M. of Northampton was tried at this time, for his
first Wife being convict of Adultery, he and she were separated. The M. of
Northamptons Divorce.
And he moved in the end of the former Reign, that he might be suffered to
marry again; so a Commission was then granted, and was renewed in this Reign to
some Delegates to examine what relief might be given to the innocent person in
such a case. But this being new, and Cranmer proceeding in it with his usual
exactness, which is often accompanied with slowness, the Marquess became
impatient, and married a second Wife: Upon this, the Council ordered them to be
parted till the Delegates should give sentence. The Arguments for the second
Marriage were these, Christ had condemned Divorces for other cases, but
excepted that of Adultery. A Separation from Bed and Board, and the Marriage
bond standing, was contrary to many places of Scripture, that mention the end
of Marriage. S. Paul discharges the married person, if the other wilfully
deserted him, much more will it follow in the case of Adultery. And though St.
Paul says the Wife is tied to her Husband as long as he lives, that is only to
be understood of a Husband that continued to be one; but that relation ceased
by Adultery. The Fathers differed in their opinions in this matter, some
allowed Marriage upon Divorce to the Husband, but denied it to the Wife; others
allowed it to both. So Tertullian, Epiphanius and Basil; Jerome also justified
Fabiolae that had done it. Chrysostom and Chromatius allowed a second
Marriage. St. Austin was doubtful about it. The Roman Emperors allowed by
their Laws, even after they became Christians, Divorce, and a second Marriage,
both to Husbands and Wives, upon many other Reasons besides Adultery; as for
procuring Abortions, treating for another Marriage, being guilty of Treason, or
a Wifes going to Plays without her Husbands leave. Nor did the Fathers in those
times complain of those Laws: This was also allowed by the Canons upon several
occasions; but after the State of Coelibate came to be magnified out of
measure, second Marriages were more generally condemned: And this was heightened
when Marriage was looked on as a Sacrament. Yet though no Divorces were allowed
in the Church, the Canonists found out many shifts for annulling Marriages from
the beginning, to those that could pay well for them. All these things being
considered, the Delegates gave sentence, confirming the second Marriage, and
dissolving the first.

Candlemass and Lent were now approaching, Some Ceremonies abrogated
so the Clergy and People were much divided with relation to the Ceremonies
usual at those times. By some Injunctions in K. Henry's Reign it had been
declared, that Fasting in Lent was only binding by a positive Law. Wakes and
Plough Moondays were also suppressed, and hints were given that other customs
which were much abused, should be shortly put down. The gross Rabble loved
these things, as matters of diversion, and thought Divine Worship without them
would be but a dull business. But others looked on these as Relicts of
Heathenism, since the Gentiles worshipped their Gods with such Festivities, and
thought they did not become the gravity and simplicity of the Christian
Religion. Cranmer upon this procured an Order of Council against the carrying
of Candles on Candlemass day, of Ashes on Ash Wednesday, and Palms on
Palm Sunday; which was directed to Bonner to be intimated to the Bishops of the
Province of Canterbury, and was executed by him. But a Proclamation followed
against all that should make changes without Authority: The creeping to the
Cross and taking Holy Bread and Water, were by it put down, and power was given
to the Archbishop of Canterbury to certify, in the Kings name, what
Ceremonies should be afterward laid aside; and none were to preach out of
their own Parishes without license from the King or the Visitors, the
Archbishop or the Bishop of the Diocese. Some questioned the Councils power to
make such Orders, the Act that gave authority to their Proclamations being
repealed; but it was said the Kings Supremacy in Ecclesiastical matters might
well justify their making such 'Rules. Febr. 8.
Soon after this, a General Order followed for a removal of all Images out of
Churches: There were every where great contests whether the Images had been
abused to Superstition or not. Some thought the consecration of them was an
abuse common to them all. Those also that represented the Trinity, as a man
with three faces in one head, or as an old man with a young man before him, and
a Dove over his head; and some where the Blessed Virgin was represented as
assumed into it, gave so great scandal, that it was no wonder, if men, as they
grew to be better enlightened, could no longer endure them. The only occasion
given to censure in this order, was, that all Shrines, and the Plate belonging
to them, were appointed to be brought in to the Kings use. A Letter was at that
time writ to all Preachers, requiring them to exhort the people to amend their
lives, and forsake Superstition; but for things not yet changed, to bear with
them, and not to run before those whom they should obey. Some hot men condemned
this temper, as savouring too much of carnal Policy; but it was said, that
though the Apostles by the gift of Miracles, had sufficient means to convince
the World of their authority; Yet they did not all at once change the customs
of the Mosaical Law, but proceeded by degrees; and Christ forbid the pulling up
the Tares, lest good Wheat should be pulled up with them; so it was fit to wean
people by degrees from their former superstition, and not to run too fast.

Eighteen Bishops, and some Divines, were now employed to examine the Offices
of the Church, to see which of them needed amendment. A new Office for the
Communion.
They began with the Eucharist: They proceeded in the same manner that was used
in the former Reign. For every one gave in his opinion in Writing, in answer to
the questions that were put to them. Some of these are still preserved, which
were concerning the Priests sole communicating, and Masses satisfactory for the
dead, the Mass in an unknown tongue, the hanging it up and exposing it and the
Sacrifice that was made in it. In most of those Papers it appears that the
greatest part of the Bishops were still leavened with the old superstition, at
least to some degree. It was clearly found that the plain Institution of the
Sacrament was was much vitiated, with a mixture of many Heathenish Rites and
Pomps, on design to raise the credit of the Priests, in whose hands that great
performance was lodged. This was at first done to draw over the Heathens by
those splendid Rites to Christianity; but Superstition once begun, has no
bounds nor measures; and ignorance and barbarity increasing in the darker ages,
there was no regard had to any thing in Religion, but as it was set off with
much Pageantry: And the belief of the Corporal presence raised this to a great
height. The Office was in an unknown tongue, all the Vessels and Garments
belonging to it, were consecrated with much devotion, a great part of the
Service was secret, to make it look like a wonderful charm; the Consecration it
self was to be said very softly, for words that were not to be heard, agreed
best with a change that was not to be seen: The many Gesticulations and the
magnificent Processions all tended to raise this Pageantry higher. Masses were
also said for all the turns and affairs of humane life. Trentals, a custom of
having thirty Masses a year on the chief Festivities for redeeming Souls out of
Purgatory, was that which brought the Priests most Money, for these were
thought Gods best days, in which aecess was easier to him. On Saints days, in
the Mass it was prayed, that by the Saints Intercession, the Sacrifice might
become the more acceptable, and procure a larger Indulgence, which could not be
easily explained, if the Sacrifice was the death of Christ; besides a
numberless variety of other Rites, so many of the Relicts of Heathenism were
made use of for the corrupting of the holiest institution of the Christian
Religion. The first step that was now made, was a new Office for the Communion,
that is, the distribution of the Sacrament, for the Office of Consecration was
not at this time touched. It differs very little from what is still used. In
the Exhortation, Auricular Confession to a Priest is left free to be done or
omitted, and all were required not to judge one another in that matter. There
was also a denunciation made requiring impenitent sinners to withdraw. The
Bread was to be still of the same form that had been formerly used. In the
distribution it was said, The Body of our Lord, etc. preserve thy Body, and The
Blood of our Lord, etc. preserve thy Soul. This was Printed with a
Proclamation, requiring all to receive it with such Reverence and Uniformity,
as might encourage the King to proceed further, and not to run to other things
before the King gave direction, assuring the people of his earnest zeal to set
forth Godly Orders; and therefore it was hoped they would tarry for it: The
Books were sent over England, and the Clergy were appointed to give the
Communion next Easter according to them.

Many were much offended to find Confession left indifferent, Auricular
Confession examined.
so this matter was examined. Christ gave his Apostles a power of binding and
loosing, and S. James commanded all to confess their faults to one another. In
the Primitive Church all that denied the Faith, or otherwise gave scandal, were
separated from the Communion, and not admitted to it till they made public
Confession: And according to the degrees of their sins, the time and degrees of
public Penitence, and their Separation were proportioned: Which was the chief
subject of the Consultations of the Councils in the fourth and fifth Centuries.
For secret sins the people lay under no obligation to confess, but they went
often to their Priests for direction, even for these. Near the end of the fifth
Century they began to have secret Penances and Confessions as well as public:
But in the seventh Century this became the general practice. In the eighth
Century the Commutation of Penance for Money, or other Services done the
Church, was brought in. Then the Holy Wars and Pilgrimages came to be
magnified: Croisadoes against Heretics, or Princes deposed by the Pope, were
set up instead of all other Penances: Priests also managed Confession and
Absolution, so as to enter into all men's secrets, and to govern their
Consciences by them; but they becoming very ignorant, and not so associated as
to be governed by Orders that might be sent them from Rome, the Friars were
every where employed to hear Confessions, and many reserved Cases were made, in
which the Pope only gave Absolution; these were trusted to them, and they had
the Trade of Indulgences put in their hands, which they managed with as much
considence as Mountebanks used in selling their Medicines, with this advantage,
that the ineffectualness of their devices was not so easily discovered, for the
people believed all that the Priests told them. In this they grew to such a
pitch of confidence, that for saying some Collects, Indulgences for years, and
for Hundreds, Thousands, yea, a Million of years; were granted; so cheap a
thing was Heaven made. This trade was now thrown out of the Church, and private
Confession was declared indifferent: But it was much censured that no Rules for
Public Penance were set up at this time, but what were corrupted by the
Canonists. The people did not think a Declarative Absolution sufficient, and
thought it surer work when a Priest said, I Absolve thee, though that was but a
late Invention. Others censured the words of distribution, by which the Bread
was appropriated to the Body, and the Cup to the Soul: And this was soon after
amended, only some words relating to it are still in the Collect, We do not
presume.

The affairs of State took up the Council, Gardener is imprisoned.
as much as the matters of Religion employed the Bishops, the War with Scotland
grew chargeable, and was supported from France, but the sale of the Chantry
Lands brought the Council in some Money. Gardener was brought into new trouble,
many complaints were made of him, that he disparaged the Preachers sent with
the Kings license into his Diocese, and that he secretly opposed all
Reformation. So being brought before the Council, he denied most of the things
objected to him, and offered to explain himself openly in a Sermon before the
King. The Protector pressed him not to meddle in matters, not yet determined,
particularly the presence of Christ in the Sacrament, and to assert the Kings
power, though he was under age, and the Authority of the Council: for the
Clergy began generally to say, that though they acknowledged the Kings
Supremacy; yet they would not yield it to the Council, and seemed to place it
in some extraordinary grace conferred on the King by the Anointing in the
Coronation. So the Protector desired Gardener to declare himself in those
points; but when he came to preach on St. Peter's day, he inveighed against the
Popes Supremacy, and asserted the Kings, but said nothing of the Council, nor
the Kings power under Age: he also justified the suppression of Monasteries and
Chantries, and the putting down Masses satisfactory, as also the removing of
Images, the Sacrament in both kinds, and the new Order for the Communion; but
did largely assert the Corporal Presence in the Sacrament: Upon which there was
a noise raised by hot Men of both sides, during the Sermon, and this was said
to be a stirring of sedition, and upon that he was sent to the Tower. This way
of proceeding was thought contrary both to Law and Justice, and as all violent
courses do, this rather weakened than strengthened those that were most concerned
in it. Cranmer did at this time set out a large Catechism, which he dedicated
to the King. He insisted much on showing, that Idolatry had been committed in
the use of Images: he asserted the Divine Institution of Bishops and Priests,
and their authority of Absolving sinners, and expressed great Zeal for setting
up Penitentiary Canons, and exhorted the People to discover the state of their
Souls to their Pastors: from this it appears, that he had changed the opinions,
he formerly held, against the Divine Institution of the Ecclesiastical Offices.

But now a more general Reformation of the whole Liturgy was under
consideration, A new Liturgy composed.
that all the Nation might have an Uniformity in the Worship of God; and be no
more cantoned to the several Uses of Sarum, York, Lincoln, Hereford and Bangor.
Anciently the Liturgies were short, and had few Ceremonies in them: Every
Bishop had one for his own Diocese: but in the African Churches, they began
first to put them into a more Regular Form. Gregory the Great, labored much in
this; yet he left Austin the Monk to his liberty, either to use the Roman or
French forms in England, as he found they were like to tend most to
Edification. Great Additions were made in every Age, for the private Devotions
of some that were reputed Saints, were added to the Public offices: and
mysterious significations were invented for every new Rite, which was the chief
study of some Ages: and all was swelled up to a vast bulk. It was not then
thought on, that praying by the spirit, consisted in the inventing new words,
and uttering them with warmth; and it seemed too great a subjection of the
People to their Priests, that they should make them join with them in all their
heats in prayer: and would have proved as great a resignation of their devotion
to them, as the former superstition had made of their faith. It was then
resolved to have a Liturgy, and to bring the Worship to a fit mean, between the
Pomp of Superstition, and naked flatness. They resolved to change nothing,
merely in opposition to received practices, but rather in Imitation of what
Christ did, in the Institution of the two Sacraments of the Gospel, that did
consist of Rites used among the Jews, but blessed by him to higher purposes, to
comply with what had been formerly in use, as much as was possible thereby to
gain the People. All the Consecrations of Water, Salt, etc. in the Church of
Rome, looked like the remainders of Heathenism, and were laid aside: by these
Devils being adjured, and a Divine virtue supposed to be in them, the People
came to think, that by such observances, they might be sure of Heaven. The
Absolutions, by which, upon the account of the Merits of the Blessed Virgin,
and the Saints, the sprinklings of Water, Fastings and Pilgrimages, with many
other things, sins were pardoned, as well as on the account of the Passion of
Christ, and the Absolution given to dead bodies, looked like gross Impostures,
tending to make the World think, that besides the painful way to Heaven, in a
course of true Holiness, the Priests had secrets in their hands, of carrying
People thither in another Method, and on easier terms; and this drew in the
People to purchase their favor, especially when they were dying: so that, as
their fears were then heightened, there was no other way left them, in the
conclusion of an ill life, to dye with any good hopes, but as they bargained
for them with their Priests; therefore all this was now cast out. It was
resolved to have the whole worship in the Vulgar Tongue, upon which Saint Paul
has copiously enlarged himself: and all Nations, as they were converted to
Christianity, had their Offices in their Vulgar Tongue; but of late, it had
been pretended, that it was a part of the Communion of Saints, that the worship
should be every where in the same Language; though the People were hardly used,
when for the sake of some Vagrant Priests, that might come from foreign Parts,
they were kept from knowing what was said in the worship of God. It was
pretended, that Pilate having ordered the Inscription on the Cross, in Greek,
Latin, and Hebrew, these three Languages were sanctified; but it is not easy
to understand what authority he had, for conferring such a privilege on them.
But the keeping all in an Unknown Tongue, preserved in dark Ages the esteem of
their Offices, in which there were such Prayers and Hymns, and such Lessons,
that if the People had understood them, they must have given great scandal: In
many Prayers the pardon of sins, and the grace of God were asked, in such a
style, of the Saints, as if these had been wholly at their disposal, and as if
they had been more merciful than God, or Christ. In former times all that did
officiate, were peculiarly habited, and all their Garments were blessed: and
these were considered, as a part of the train of the Mass; but on the other
hand, white had been the color of the Priests Vestments, under the Mosaical
Law, and was early brought into the Christian Churches: it was a proper
expression of Innocence, and it was fit that the worship of God should be in a
decent habit. So it was continued, and since the Sacrifices offered to Idols,
were not thereby according to Saint Paul, of their own nature polluted, and
every Creature of God was good, it was thought, notwithstanding the former
abuse, most reasonable to use these Garments still.

The Morning and Evening Prayers were put almost in the same Method, The new
Offices.
in which we use them still, only there was no Confession nor Absolution. In
the Office for the Communion, there was a Commemoration of thanksgiving, for
the Blessed Virgin, and all departed Saints, and they were commended to God's
mercy and peace. In the Consecration, the use of crossing the Elements was
retained, but there was no Elevation, which was at first used as an historical
Rite, to show Christ's being lifted up on the Cross; but was afterward done,
to call on the People to adore it. No stamp was to be on the Bread, and it was
to be thicker than ordinary. It was to be put in the Peoples mouths by the
Priests, though it had been anciently put in their hands. Some in the Greek
Church began to take it in Spoons of Gold, others in a Linen cloth, called
their Dominical: but after the Corporal presence was received, the People were
not suffered to touch it, and the Priests Thumbs and Fingers were peculiarly
anointed, to qualify them for that Contact. In Baptism, the Child's head and
breast was crossed, and an adjuration was made of the Devil, to depart from him:
Children were to be thrice dipped, or in case of weakness, water was to be
sprinkled on their faces, and then they were to be anointed. The sick might
also be anointed, if they desired it. At Funerals, the departed Soul was
recommended to God's mercy.

The Sacraments were formerly believed, of such virtue, Private Communion.
that they conferred Grace, by the very receiving them, ex opere operato: and
so Women baptized. The Ancients did send portions of the Eucharist to the sick,
but without any Pomp: which came in, when the Corporal Presence was believed.
But instead of that, it was now appointed, that the Sacraments should be
ministered to the sick, and therefore in case of weakness, Children might be
baptized in Houses; though it was more suitable to the design of Baptism, which
was the admission of a new Member to the Church, to do it before the whole
Congregation: But this, which was a provision for weakness, is become since a
mark of Vanity, and a piece of affected state. It was also appointed, that the
Sacrament should be given to the sick, and not to be sent from the Church, but
Consecrated by their Bed-sides: since Christ had said, that where two or three
were assembled, in his name, he would be in the midst of them. But it is too
gross a Relic of the worst part of Popery, if any imagine, that after an ill
life, some sudden sorrow for sin, with a hasty Absolution, and the Sacrament
will be a passeport to Heaven, since the mercies of God in Christ are offered
in the Gospel, only to those who truly believe, sincerely repent, and do change
the course of their Lives.

The Liturgy thus compiled, was published with a Preface, concerning
Ceremonies: the same that is still in the Common Prayer Book, written with
extraordinary judgment and temper.

When the Book came into all Men's hands, several things were censured: Censures
past on the Common Prayer Book.
as particularly the frequent use of the Cross and Anointing. The former began
to be used, as a badge of a crucified Savior: but the superstition of it was
so much advanced, that Latria was given to the Crosier. The using it was also
believed to have a Virtue for driving away evil spirits, and preserving one
from dangers: so that a Sacramental virtue was affixed to it, which could not
be done, since there is no Institution for it in Scripture: but the using it as
a Ceremony, expressing the believing in a crucified Savior, could import no
superstition, since Ceremonies, that only express our duty or profession, may
be used as well as words, these being signs, as the other are sounds, that
express our thoughts. The use of Oil in Confirmation, and receiving Penitents,
was early brought into the Church: but it was not applied to the sick, till the
10th. Century; for the Ancients did not understand those words of Saint James,
to relate to it, but to the extraordinary gift of healing, then in the Church.

While these changes were under Consideration, All Preaching was for some time
restrained.
there were great heats every where, and a great contradiction among the
Pulpits; some commending all the old customs, and others inveighing as much
against them: so the power of granting Licenses to preach, was taken from the
Bishops, and restrained only to the King and the Archbishops; yet even that did
not prove an effectual restraint. So a Proclamation was set out, restraining
all Preaching, till the Order, which was then in the hands of the Bishops,
should be finished; and instead of hearing Sermons, all were required to apply
themselves to Prayer, for a blessing on that which was then a preparing, and to
content themselves in the mean while with the Homilies.

The War of Scotland continued: Affairs in Scotland.
the Scots received a great supply from France of 6000. Men, under the command
of Dessy. The English had fortified Hadington, which was well situated, and lay
in a fruitful Country: so the Governor of Scotland joining an Army of Scots
to the French, sat down before it. The Protector saw the inconveniences of a
long War coming on him, both with Scotland and France: so he offered a truce
for 10. years, in which time he hoped by presents and practices, to gain, or at
least to divide those, who were united by the War. Many of the Scotch Nobility
liked the Proposition well: and indeed the insolence of the French was such,
that instead of being Auxiliaries, they considered them as Enemies. But the
Clergy were so apprehensive of a Match with England, that they never concluded
themselves secure, till it were put out of their power: and so did vehemently
promote the Proposition made by the French, of sending their Queen over to
France: and this was in conclusion agreed to. So the French Ships that brought
over the Auxiliaries, carried back the young Queen. The siege of Hadington went
on: a great recruit sent to them from Berwick was intercepted, and cut off: but
they were well supplied with Ammunition and Provisions. Some Castles that the
English had, were taken by surprise, and others by Treachery: a Fleet was sent
to spoil the Coast of Scotland, under the Admirals command, but he made only
two descents, in both which he had such ill success, that he lost near 1200.
Men in them. The Earl of Shrewsbury led in a good Army to the Relief of
Hadington: The Siege was opened, and the place well supplied. But as Dessy
marched back to Edinburgh, his Soldiers committed great out rages upon the
Scots, so that if Shrewsbury had designed to fight, he had great advantages,
since the Scots were now very weary of their imperious friends, the French: but
he marched back, having performed that for which he was sent. Dessy followed
him, and made a great inroad into England, but would not give the Scots any
share of the spoil, and treated them in all things, as a conquered Province:
and being in fear of them, he fortified himself in Leith, which before was but
an inconsiderable Village. He also attacked the Fort which the English had in
Inchkeith, and took it. But he was recalled upon the Complaints that were sent
to the Court of France, against him. Now the People there began to feel their
slavery, and to hate those that had persuaded the sending their Queen to
France, and particularly the Clergy, and were thereby the more disposed to
hearken to such Preachers, as discovered their Corruptions and superstition.
Monluc Bishop of Valence, a Man celebrated for wisdom, and for so much
moderation in matters of Religion, that it drew upon him the suspicion of
Heresy, was sent over from France to be Chancellor of Scotland. This was like
to give great discontent to the Scottish Nobility: so he returned to France.
The English were now involved in a War, in which they could promise themselves
no good issue, unless they could conquer the Kingdom: for the end they had
proposed by a Match, was now put out of the power, even of the Scots themselves.

In Germany, the Emperor, Affairs in Germany.
after he had used all possible endeavors to bring the Council back to Trent,
but without success, protested against those at Bologna: and ordered three
Divines (one of them was esteemed a Protestant) to draw a Book for reconciling
matters of Religion, which should take place in that interval, till a Council
should meet in Germany, called from that the Interim. The chief Concessions in
favor of the Protestants were the Communion in both kinds, and that married
Priests might officiate. A Diet was summoned, where Maurice was invested in the
Electorate of Saxe, the degraded Elector being made to look on, and see the
Ceremony; which he did with his ordinary constancy of mind: and without
expressing any concern about it, he returned to his studies, which were chiefly
employed in the Scriptures. The Book was proposed to the Diet, and the Bishop
of Mentz, without any Order, thanked the Emperor for it, in their name, and
this was published, as the consent of the Diet. So slight a thing will pass for
a consent of the States, by a Conqueror that looks on himself as above Law.
Both Papists and Protestants were offended at it. It was condemned at Rome,
where no Heresy was more odious than that the Secular Powers should meddle in
points of Faith. The Protestants generally refused it: and the imprisoned
Elector could not be wrought on to receive it, neither by the Offers that were
made him, nor the severities he was put to, in all which he was always the
same. Some contests arose between Melancthon, and the other Lutherans: for he
thought the Ceremonies, being things indifferent, might be received; but the
others thought these would make way for all the other errors of Popery. The
Protestant Religion was now almost ruined in Germany, and this made the Divines
turn their eyes to England. Calvin wrote to the Protector, and pressed him to go
on to a more complete Reformation, and that Prayers for the Dead, the Chrism
and Extreme Unction might be laid aside. He desired him to trust in God, and go
on, and wished there were more preaching, and in a more lively way, than he
heard was then in England: but above all things he prayed him to suppress that
Impiety and profanity, that, as he heard, abounded in the Nation.

In the end of this Year, A Session of Parliament.
a Session of Parliament met, but no Bill was finished before February; the
first was concerning the married Clergy, which was finished by the Commons in
six days, but lay six Weeks before the Lords: Nine Bishops, and four Temporal
Lords protested against it. It was declared, An Act for the marriage of the
Clergy.
that it were better for Priests to live unmarried, free of all worldly cares;
yet since the Laws compelling it, had occasioned great filthiness, they were
all repealed. The pretense of Chastity in the Romish Priests, had possessed the
World with a high opinion of them, and had been a great reflection on the
Reformers, if the World had not clearly seen through it, and been made very
sensible of the ill effects of it, by the defilement it brought into their own
Beds and Families. Nor was there any point in which the Reformers had enquired
more, to remove this prejudice, that lay against them. In the old Testament,
all the Priests were not only married, but the Office descended by Inheritance.
In the New Testament, Marriage was declared Honorable in all: among the
qualifications of Bishops and Deacons, their being the Husbands of one Wife,
are reckoned up. Many of the Apostles were married, and carried their Wives
about with them, as also Aquila did Priscilla. Forbidding to marry, is reckoned
a mark of the Apostasy, that was to follow. Some of the first Heretics
inveighed against Marriage, but the Orthodox justified it, and condemned those
Churchmen that put away their Wives: which was confirmed by a General Council,
in the fifth Century: In Trullo.
Paphnutius, in the Council of Nice, opposed a motion that was made for it:
Hilary of Poictiers was married, Basil and Nazianzen's Fathers were Bishops.
Heliodorus, the first that wrote a Romance, moved that Bishops might live
singly; but till then every one did in that as he pleased, and even those who
were twice married, if the first was before their Conversion might be Bishops,
which Jerome himself, though very partial to celibate, justifies; all the
Canons made against the married Clergy, were only positive Laws, which might be
repealed. The Priests in the Greek Church did still live with their Wives at
that time; In the West, the Clergy did generally marry; and in Edgar's time,
they were for the most part married in England. In the Ninth Century P. Nicolas
pressed the Celibate much, but was opposed by many. In the Eleventh Century,
Gregory the 7th. intending to set up a new Ecclesiastical Empire, found that
the unmarried Clergy would be the surest to him, since the married gave Pledges
to the State, and therefore he proceeded furiously in it; and called all the
married Priests, Nicolaitans: yet in England, Lanfranc did only impose the
Celibate on the Prebendaries, and the Clergy that lived in Towns: Anselm
imposed it on all without exception; but both he, Bernard, and Petrus Damiani,
complain, that Sodomy abounded much, even among the Bishops: And not only
Panormitan, but Pius the 2d. wished, that the Laws for the Celibate were taken
away. So it was clear, that it was not founded on the Laws of God: and it was a
sin to force Churchmen to vow that which sometimes was not in their power: and
it was found by examining the forms of Ordination, that the Priests in England
had made no such vows; and even the vow in the Roman Pontifical to live
chastely, did not import a tie not to marry, since a Man might live Chaste in a
married state. Many lewd stories were published of the Clergy, but none seemed
more remarkable, than that of the Pope's Legate, in Henry the second's time,
who the very same Night after he had put all the married Clergy from their
Benefices, was found a-bed with a Whore. It was also observed that the
unmarried Bishops, if they had not Bastards to raise, were as much set on
advancing their Nephews and Kindred, as those that were married could be: Nor
did any Persons meddle more in secular affairs, than the unmarried Clergy: and
it might be reasonable to restrain the Clergy, as was done in the Primitive
Church, from converting the Goods of the Church, which were entrusted to their
care, to the enriching of their Families. None appeared more zealous for
procuring this liberty, than several Clergy men that never made use of it, in
particular Ridley and Redmayn.

Another Act past, An Act confirming the Liturgy.
confirming the Liturgy, which was now finished, Eight Bishops, and three
Temporal Lords only protesting against it. There was a long preamble, setting
forth the inconvenience of the former Offices, and the pains that had been
taken to reform them; and that diverse Bishops and Divines had, by the aid of
the Holy Ghost, with an uniform agreement concluded on the new Book: therefore
they Enacted, That by Whitsunday next, all Divine Offices should be performed
according to it, and if any used other Offices, for the first offense they
should be imprisoned six months, lose their Benefices for a second, and be
imprisoned during life for the third offense. Some censured those words, that
the Book was composed by the Aid of the Holy Ghost; but this did not import an
Inspiration, but a Divine assistance. Many wondered to see the Bishops of
Norwich, Hereford, Chichester, and Westminster, protest against the Act, since
they had concurred in composing the Book. It does not appear whether they were
dissatisfied at any thing in it, or whether they opposed the imposing it on
such severe penalties; or if they were displeased at a Proviso that was added
for the using of Psalms taken out of the Bible, which was intended for the
singing Psalms then put in Verse, and much used both in Churches and Houses, by
all that loved the Reformation. In the Primitive times the Christians used the
Psalter much, and the chief devotion of the Monastic Orders consisted in
repeating it often. Apollinarius put it in Verse, and both Nazianzen and
Prudentius wrote many devout Hymns in Verse: Others, though in Prose, were much
used, as the Gloria in Excelsis, and the Te Deum: afterward the greatest part
of the Offices was put in Latin Rhimes, and so now some English Poets turned
the Psalter into Verse, which was then much esteemed; but both our Language and
Poetry, being since that time much improved, this work has now lost its beauty
so much, that there is great need of a new Version.

Another Act past about Fasting, An Act for Fasting.
declaring, That though all days and meats were in themselves alike, yet
fasting, being a great help to virtue, and to the subduing the Body to the
mind, and a distinction of meats conducing to the advancement of the Fishing
trade, it was Enacted, That Lent, and all Fridays and Saturdays, and Ember days
should be Fish days, under several penalties, excepting the weak, or those that
had the Kings License. Christ had told his Disciples, that when he was taken
from them, they should fast: So in the Primitive Church they fasted before
Easter; but the same number of days was not observed in all places; afterward
other rules and days were set up: but S. Austin complained, that many in his
time placed all their Religion in observing them. Fast-days were turned to a
mockery in the Church of Rome, in which they both dined, and did eat Fish dressed
exquisitely, and drank Wine. This made many run to another extreme against all
Fasts, or distinction of days, which certainly, if rightly managed, and without
superstition, is a great means for keeping up a seriousness of mind, which is
necessary for maintaining the power of Religion. Other Bills were proposed, but
not past, one for making it Treason to marry the Kings Sisters, without the
consent of the King and Council: But the forfeiture of Succession in that case
was thought sufficient. The Bishops did also complain of their want of power to
repress vice, which so much abounded: But the Laity were so apprehensive of
coming again under an Ecclesiastical Tyranny, that they would not consent to
it. A Proposition was also made for bringing the Common Law into a body, in
imitation of Justinians Digests: But it fell, being too great a design to be
finished under an Infant King.

In this Parliament the Admiral was Attainted. The Admirals Attainder.
The Queen Dowager died in September last, not without suspicion of Poison;
upon that he renewed his Addresses to Lady Elizabeth; but finding it in vain to
expect that his Brother and the Council would consent to it, and that her right
to the Succession would be cut off if he married her without their consent, he
resolved to make sure of the Kings Person, till he made a change in the
Government: He fortified his House, he laid up a Magazine, and made a party
among the Nobility. The Protector employed many to divert him from those
desperate designs, but his Ambition being incurable, he was forced to proceed
to extremities against him. He sent him Prisoner to the Tower in January, with
his Confederate Sharington, who being Vice-Treasurer of the Mint at Bristol,
had supplied him with Money, and had coined much base Money for his use. Many
were sent to persuade him to a better mind, and his Brother was willing to be
again reconciled to him, if he would retire from the Court and business; but he
was intractable. So, many Articles were objected to him, both of his designs
against the State, and of his Malversation in his Office, several Pirates
having been entertained by him. Many Witnesses and Letters under his own hand,
were brought against him. Almost the whole Council went to the Tower and
examined him; but he refused to make any Answers, and said he expected an open
Trial. The whole Council upon this, acquainted the King with it, and desired
him to refer the matter to the Parliament, which he granted. Upon that, some
Counselors were again sent to see what they could draw from him, but he was
sullen, and after he had answered to three of the Articles, denying some
particulars, and excusing others, he refused to go any further. The business
was next brought into the House of Lords: The Judges and the Kings Council
delivered their opinions, That the Articles objected to him were Treason. Then
the Evidence was given, upon which the whole House past the Bill, the Protector
only withdrawing: They dispatched it in two days. In the House of Commons many
argued against Attainders without a Trial, or bringing the party to make his
Answers. But a Message was sent from the King, desiring them to proceed as the
Lords had begun. So the Lords that had given Evidence against him in their own
House, were sent down to the Commons: Upon which they past the Bill; and the
Royal Assent was given the fifth of March: And afterward, the King being pressed
to it by the Council, gave order for the Execution, which was done the
twentieth of March. This was the only cure that his Ambition seemed capable of:
Yet it was thought against nature, that one Brother should fall by the hand of
another: And the Attainting a man without hearing him, was condemned, as
contrary to Natural Justice; so that the Protector suffered almost as much by
his death as he could have done by his life.

The Laity and Clergy both gave the King Subsidies, and so the Parliament was
Prorogued. The first thing taken into care was the receiving the Act of
Uniformity: A new Visitation.
Some Complaints were made of the Priests way of officiating, that they did it
with such a tone of voice, that the people did not understand what was said, no
more than when the Prayers were said in Latin; so this Temper was found:
Prayers were ordered to be said in Parish Churches in a plain voice, but in
Cathedrals the old way was still kept up, as agreeing better with the Music
used in them: Though this seemed not very decent in the Confession of sins, nor
in the Litany, where a simple voice, gravely uttered, agreed better with those
devotions, than those Cadences and unmusical notes do. Others continued to use
all the Gesticulations, Crossings and Kneelings, that they had formerly been
accustomed to: The people did also continue the use of their Beads, which were
brought in by Peter Hermit, in the eleventh Century, by which the repeating the
Angels Salutation to the Virgin, was made a great part of their devotion, and
was ten times said for one Pater Noster. Instructions were given to the
Visitors to put all these down in a new Visitation, and to enquire if any
Priests continued to drive a trade by Trentals or Masses for departed Souls.
Order was also given, that there should be no Private Masses at Altars in the
corners of Churches, and that there should be but one Communion in a day,
unless it were in great Churches, and at high Festivals, in which they were
allowed to have one Communion in the morning, and another at noon. The Visitors
made their Report, That they found the Book of Common Prayer received
universally over all the Kingdom, only Lady Mary continued to have Mass said
according to the abrogated forms: Upon this, the Council wrote to her to
conform to the Laws; for the nearer she was to the King in blood, she was so
much the more obliged to give a good Example to the rest of the Subjects. She
refused to comply with their desires, and sent one to the Emperor for his
Protection; upon which the Emperor pressed the English Ambassadors, and they
promised that for some time she should be dispensed with. The Emperor
pretended afterward that they made him an absolute Promise that she should
never be more troubled about it, but they said it was only a Temporary Promise.
A Match was also proposed for her with the King of Portugal's Brother, but it
was let fall soon after. She refused to acknowledge the Laws made when the King
was under age, and carried herself very high, for she knew well that the
Protector was then afraid of a War with France, and that made the Emperors
Alliance more necessary to England: Yet the Council sent for the Officers of
her household, and required them to let her know that the Kings Authority was
the same when he was a child as at full age; and that it was now lodged in
them, and though as they were single persons, they were all inferior to her,
yet as they were the Kings Council, she was bound to obey them, especially when
they executed the Law; which all Subjects of what rank soever were bound to
obey. Yet at present they durst go no further for fear of the Emperors
displeasure: So it was resolved to connive at her Mass.

The Reformation of the greatest Errors in Divine Worship being thus
established; Disputes concerning Christ's presence in the Sacrament.
Cranmer proceeded next to establish a form of Doctrine: the chief point that
hitherto was untouched, was the presence of Christ in the Sacrament, which the
Priests magnified as the greatest Mystery of the Christian Religion, and the
chief privilege of Christians; with which the simple and credulous vulgar were
mightily affected. The Lutherans received that which had been for some Ages the
Doctrine of the Greek Church, that in the Sacraments there was both Bread and
Wine, and also the substance of the Body and Blood of Christ. The Helvetians
looked on it only as a Commemoration of the Death of Christ. The Princes of
Germany were at great pains to have these reconciled, in which Bucer had
labored with great Industry: But Luther being a man of a harsh temper, did not
easily bear contradiction, and was too apt to assume, in effect, that
Infallibility to himself, which he condemned in the Pope. Some took a middle
way, and asserted a Real Presence, but it was not easy to understand what was
meant by that expression, unless it was a real application of Christ's death; so
that the meaning of Really was Effectually. But though Bucer followed this
method, Pet. Martyr did in his Lectures declare plainly for the Helvetians. So
Dr. Smith, and some others, intended publicly to oppose and affront him; and
challenged him to a dispute about it, which he readily accepted, on these
conditions, That the Kings Council should first approve of it, and that it
should be managed in Scripture terms: For the strength of those Doctors lay in
a nimble managing of those barbarous and unintelligible terms of the Schools,
which though they sounded high, yet really they had no sense under that: So all
the Protestants resolved to dispute in Scripture terms, which seemed more
proper in matters of Divinity, than the Metaphysical language of School men.
The Council having appointed Dr. Cox, and some others, to preside in the
dispute, Dr. Smith went out of the way, and a little after fled out of England:
But before he went, he wrote a very mean submission to Cranmer: Other Doctors
disputed with Peter Martyr concerning Transubstantiation, but that had the
common fate of all public disputes, for both sides gave out that they had the
better. At the same time there were also disputes at Cambridge, which were
moderated by Ridley, that was sent down thither by the Council. He had fallen
on Bertrams Book of the Sacrament, and wondered much to find so celebrated a
Writer in the ninth Century, engage so plainly against the Corporal Presence:
This disposed him to think that at that time it was not the received belief of
the Church: He communicated the matter to Cranmer, and they together made great
Collections out of the Fathers on this head, and both wrote concerning it.

The substance of their Arguments was, Arguments against the Corporal Presence.
That as Christ called the Cup the Fruit of the Vine, so S. Paul called the
other Element Bread, after the Consecration; which shows that their natures
were not changed. Christ speaking to Jews, and substituting the Eucharist in
the room of the Paschal Lamb, used such expressions as had been customary among
the Jews on that occasion; who called the Lamb the Lords Passover, which could
not be meant literally, since the Passover was the Angels passing by their
Houses, when the first born of the Egyptians were killed: So it being a
commemoration of that, was called the Lords Passover; and in the same sense
did Christ call the Bread his Body: Figurative expressions being ordinary in
Scripture, and not improper in Sacraments, which may be called Figurative
actions. It was also appointed for a Remembrance of Christ, and that supposes
absence: The Elements were also called by Christ his Body broken, and his Blood
shed; so it is plain, they were his Body, not as it is glorified in Heaven, but
as it suffered on the Cross: And since the Scriptures speak of Christ's
continuance in Heaven till the last day, from thence they inferred, that he was
not Corporally present. And it was showed, that the eating Christ's Flesh,
mentioned by S. John, was not to be understood of the Sacrament, since of every
one that did eat, it is said that he has Eternal life in him. So that was to be
understood only of receiving Christ's doctrine, and he himself showed it was to
be meant so, when he said, that the Flesh profited nothing, but his words were
Spirit and Life. So that all this was according to Christ's ordinary way of
teaching in Parables. Many other Arguments were brought from the nature of a
body, to prove that it could not be in more places than one at once, and that
it was not in a place after the manner of a Spirit, but was always extended.
They found also that the Fathers had taught, that the Elements were still Bread
and Wine, and were the Types, the Signs and Figures of Christ's Body, not only
according to Tertullian, and S. Austin, but to the Ancient Liturgies, both in
the Greek and Roman Churches. But that on which they built most, was that
Chrysostom, Gelasius, and Theodoret, arguing against those who said that the
humane nature in Christ was swallowed up by its Union to his Godhead, They
illustrated the contrary thus; as in the Sacrament, the Elements are united to
the Body of Christ, and yet continue to be the same that they were formerly,
both in Substance, Nature, and Figure; So the Humanity was not destroyed by its
Union with the Word. From which it appeared that it was then the received
opinion, that the Elements were not changed; and therefore all those high
expressions in Chrysostom, or others, were only strains and figures of
Eloquence, to raise the devotion of the people higher in that holy action. But
upon those expressions the following Ages built that opinion, which agreeing so
well with the Designs of the Priests, for establishing the authority of that
Order, which by its Character was qualified for the greatest performance that
ever was; no wonder they took all imaginable pains to infuse it into the belief
of the world, and those dark ages were disposed to believe every thing so much
the rather the more incredible that it appeared to be. In the ninth Century
many of the greatest men of that Age wrote against it, and none of them were
for that condemned as Heretics: The contrary opinion was then received in
England, as appeared by one of the Saxon Homilies that was read on Easter Day,
in which many of Bertrams words were put. But it was generally received in the
eleventh and twelfth Century, and fully established in the fourth Council in
the Lateran. At first it was believed that the whole Loaf was turned into one
entire Body, so that in the distribution every one had a Joint given him; and
according to that conceit, it was given out that it did often bleed, and was
turned into pieces of Flesh. But this seemed an undecent way of handling
Christ's glorified Body, so the Schoolmen did invent a more seemly notion, That
a Body might be in a place after the manner of a Spirit, so that in every crumb
there was an entire Christ; which though it appeared very hard to be conceived,
yet it generally prevailed, and then the Miracles fitted for the former opinion
were no more heard of, but new ones agreeing to this hypothesis were set up in
their stead. So dexterously did the Priests deceive the World; and because a
mouthful of Bread, or a draught of Wine, would have been shrewd temptations to
make the people think it was really Bread and Wine that they got, therefore as
the Cup was taken away, so instead of Bread, a thin wafer was given, to make
the People more easily imagine, that it was only the accidents of Bread, that
were received by them. Upon these grounds did Cranmer and Ridley go in this
matter.

There were some Anabaptists at this time in England, Anabaptists in England.
that were come over out of Germany: of them there were two sorts, some only
objected to the baptizing of Children, and to the manner of it by sprinkling,
and not by dipping: others held many opinions, that had been anciently
condemned as Heresies: they had raised a cruel War in Germany, and set up a new
King at Munster, but all these carried the name Anabaptists from that of
Infant Baptism, though it was one of the mildest Opinions that they held. Some
of these came over to England, so a Commission was granted to some Bishops and
others, to search them out, and to proceed against them. Several Persons were
brought before them, and did abjure their errors, which were, That there was
not a Trinity of Persons, that Christ was not God, and took not flesh of the
Virgin, and that a Regenerate man could not sin. Two were burnt.
One Joan Bocher, called Joan of Kent, denied that Christ took flesh of the
substance of his Mother; she was out of measure vain and conceited of her
notions, and rejected all the Instruction that was offered her with scorn: so
she was condemned as an obstinate Heretic, and delivered to the secular Arm.
But it was very hard to persuade the King to sign the Warrant for her
Execution; he thought it was an Instance of the same spirit of cruelty, for
which the Reformers condemned the Papists: It was hard to condemn one to be
burnt for some wild Opinions, especially when they seemed to flow from a
disturbed brain; but Cranmer persuaded him, that he being Gods Lieutenant, was
bound in the first place to punish those offenses committed against God: He
also alleged the Laws of Moses, for punishing blasphemers: and he thought
errors that struck immediately against the Apostles Creed, ought to be
capitally punished. These things did rather silence than fatisfie the young
King: he signed the Warrant with tears in his eyes, and said to Cranmer, that
since he resigned up himself in that matter to his judgment, if he sinned in
it, it should lie at his door. This struck the Archbishop: and both he, and
Ridley took her into their Houses, and tried what reason, joined with
gentleness, could do. But she was still more and more Insolent, so at last she
was burnt, and ended her life very indecently, breaking out often in jeers, and
reproaches, and was looked on as a person fitter for Bedlam, than a Stake. Some
time after that, a Dutchman, George van Parre, was also condemned and burnt,
for denying the Divinity of Christ, and saying, that the Father only was God.
He had led a very Exemplary life, both for fasting, devotion, and a good
conversation, and suffered with extraordinary composedness of mind. These
things cast a great blemish on the Reformers: It was said, they only condemned
cruelty, when it was exercised on themselves, but were ready to practice it,
when they had power. The Papists made great use of this afterward in Queen
Mary's time, and what Cranmer and Ridley suffered in her time, was thought a
just retaliation on them from that wise Providence, that dispenses all things
justly to all Men. For the other sort of Anabaptists, no severities were used
against them, but several Books were written to justify Infant Baptism; and
the Practice of the Church so early begun, and so universally spread, was
thought a good Plea, especially being grounded on such Arguments in Scripture,
as did demonstrate, at least, the lawfulness of it.

Another sort of People was much complained of, The Doctrine of Predestination
abused.
who built so much on the received Opinion of Predestination, that they thought
they might live as they pleased; since nothing could resist an absolute Decree:
nor did those who had advanced that Opinion, know well how to hinder People,
from making such Inferences from it; all they did, was to warn them, not to pry
too much into those secrets: but if the Opinion was true, there was no need of
much prying to make such conclusions from it. This had a very ill effect on the
Lives of many, who thought they were set loose from all obligations: and that
was indeed the greatest scandal of the Reformation. The Preachers were aware of
it, and apprehensive of the judgments of God, that would follow on it: of which
they gave the Nation free warning.

At this time a sort of Contagion of rage run over all the Commons of England.
Tumults in several parts of England.
The Nobility and Gentry finding more advantage by the Trade of Wool, than by
their Corn, did generally enclose their Grounds, and turn them to Pasture: and
so kept but few Servants, and took large Portions of their Estates into their
own hands: and yet the numbers of the People increased, Marriage being allowed
to all; the abrogation of many Holy Days, and the putting down of Pilgrimages,
gave them also more time to work. So the Commons feared to be reduced to great
slavery. Some proposed an Aggrarian Law, for regulating this, and the King
himself wrote a Discourse about it, that there might be some equality in the
division of the soil among the Tenants. The Protector was a great friend to the
Commons, and complained much of the Oppression of the Landlords. There was a
Commission issued out, to enquire concerning Enclosures and Farms, and whether
those who purchased the Abbey Lands, and were obliged to keep up Hospitality,
performed it, or not? and what encouragement they gave to Husbandry? but this
turned to nothing. So the Commons rose every where, yet in most of the Inland
Counties, they were easily dispersed; and it was promised that their grievances
should be redressed. The Protector against the Councils mind, set out a
Proclamation against all new Enclosures, and for indemnifying the People, for
what was past. Commissioners were also sent every where, to hear and determine
all Complaints, but the power that was given to them, was so arbitrary, that
the Landlords called it an Invasion of Property, when their Rights were thus
subjected to the pleasure of such Men. The Commons understanding that the
Protector was so favorable to them, were thereby the more encouraged: and it
was afterward objected to him, that the Convulsions England fell in, soon
after, was chiefly occasioned by his ill Conduct; in which he was the more
blamed, because he acted against the mind of the greatest part of the Council.
The Rebellion in Devonshire. June 10.
In Devonshire, the Insurrection was more formidable; the superstition of the
Priests joining with the rage of the Commons, so they became quickly 10000.
strong. The Lord Russel was sent against them with a small force, and was
ordered to try, if the matter could be composed without blood: but Arundel, a
Man of Quality, commanding the Rebels, they were not a loose body of People,
easily dissipated. They sent their Demands to Court, That the old Service and
Ceremonies might be set up again, that the Act of the six Articles, and the
Decrees of General Councils might be again in force: that the Bible in English
should be called in, that Preachers should pray for the Souls in Purgatory,
that Cardinal Pool should be restored, that the half of the Abbey Lands should
be restored, to found two Abbeys in every County, and that Gentlemen of 100.
Marks a Year, might have but one Servant: and they desired a safe Conduct for
their Chief Leaders, in order to the Redress of their particular Grievances:
afterward they moderated their desires, only to points of Religion. Cranmer
writ a large Answer to these, showing the Novelty and Superstition of those
Rites and Ceremonies, and of that whole way of worship, of which they were so
fond: and that the amendments and changes had been made, according to the
Scriptures, and the Customs of the Primitive Church: and that their being fond
of a Worship, which they understood not, and being desirous to be kept still in
ignorance, without the Scriptures, showed their Priests had greater power over
them, than the common reason of all Mankind had: as for the six Articles, that
Act had never past, if the King had not gone in Person to the Parliament, and
argued for it: yet he soon saw his error, and was slack in executing it. After
that there was a high threatening Answer sent them in the King's name, charging
them for their Rebellion, and blind obedience to their Priests. In it the
King's authority, under Age, was largely set forth, for by the pretense of the
Kings Minority, the People generally were made believe, that their rising in
Arms, was not Rebellion. In Conclusion, they were earnestly invited to submit
to the Kings mercy, as others had done, whom the King had not only pardoned,
but had redressed their just Grievances. At the same time the like spirit of
rage inflamed the Commons in Norfolk; they pretended nothing of Religion, And
in Norfolk.
but only to destroy the Gentry, and put new Counselors about the King: they
were led by one Ket a Tanner, and in a few days grew to be 20000. They encamped
near Norwich, and committed great outrages: Parker, afterward Archbishop of
Canterbury, went in among them, and with great freedom inveighed against their
Rebellion and Cruelty, and warned them of the Judgments of God that would fall
on them, for which he was in great danger of his life. Ket was now their
Prince, and in imitation of the ancient Druids, he did Justice upon complaints
brought before him, under an Oak called from thence the Oak of Reformation. The
Marquess of Northampton was sent against them, with Orders to keep at a
distance, and cut off their provisions. There was at the same time a rising
likewise in Yorkshire, where the Commons being encouraged by some pretended
Prophecies run together, and committed acts of great barbarity on some
Gentlemen. The French begin a War.
The French King hearing of all this, resolved to take his advantage, and
regain Bulloigne: three days before he marched with his Army, the English
Ambassador pressing him upon the Intimations that were given him of his
designs, he assured him on the faith of a Gentleman, that he would not begin a
War, till he first gave warning. But many Princes reckon it a part of their
Prerogative, to be exempted from such ties, by which only poor Subjects ought
to be fettered. All these things falling upon the Government at once; it may be
easily imagined, they were under no small consternation. A Fast was proclaimed
at Court, where Cranmer preached with great freedom and vehemence: he laid out
before them their vicious and ill lives, particularly of those who pretended a
love to the Gospel; and set before them the Judgments of God that they might
look for, and enlarged on the fresh example of the Calamities of Germany; and
intimated the sad apprehensions he had of some terrible stroke, if they did not
repent and amend their lives.

The Rebels in Devonshire besieged Exeter: The Rebels every where routed.
the Citizens resisted their assaults, but could not so easily resist the
assaults that hunger made on them, for they were not provided for a Siege. They
were reduced at last to great extremities, which made the Lord Russel, after he
had got such supplies, as he judged necessary, resolve to fall upon them. They
possessed themselves of a Bridge behind him, both to enclose him, and to hinder
others from joining with him; but he marched back, and did quickly beat them
from it, with the loss of 600. of their Men: and by that essay he perceived how
easy a work it would be to disperse them: he upon that marched forward to
Exeter; and beat the Rebels from a Bridge, that opened his way to their Camp,
killing a 1000. of them: upon which they raised the Siege, and retired in great
disorder to Lanceston: he pursued them, as long as they kept in a body, and
great numbers of them were killed, some of their Leaders and Priests were taken
and hanged. So happily was that Rebellion subdued, without any loss on the
Kings side. But the Marquess of Northampton was not so successful in Norfolk:
he marched into Norwich. The Rebels having a great Party in the Town, which was
a place of no strength, fell in upon him next day, and drove him out of it:
100. of his Men were killed, and thirty taken Prisoners. Upon this they were
much lifted up, but the Earl of Warwick coming thither with 6000. Men, that
were prepared to be sent to Scotland, they, after some skirmishes with him,
were forced to retire, for they had wasted all the Country about, so, that
their Provisions failed them: but Warwick followed them close, and killed great
numbers, and dispersed them. Ket, and some of their Leaders were taken, and
hanged in Chains. The news of this going to Yorkshire, the Rebels there that
had not exceeded 3000. accepted the offer of pardon, that was sent them; and
some of the more factious, that were animating them, to make new commotions,
were taken and hanged. On the 21. of August, the Protector published a General
Pardon, in the Kings name, of all that had been done before that day. Many of
the Council opposed this, and judged it better to keep the Commons under the
lash; but the Protector thought, that as long as such Members continued in such
fears, it would be easy to raise new disorders: so he resolved, though without
the Majority of the Council, to go through with it. This disgusted the Council
extremely, who thought he took too much upon him.

A Visitation of Cambridge followed soon after this. A Visitation of Cambridge.
Ridley was the chief of the Visitors: When he found that a design was laid to
suppress some Colleges, under pretense of uniting them to others, and to
convert some Fellowships that were provided for Divines, to the study of the
Civil Law, he refused to go along in that with the other Visitors; and
particularly opposed the suppression of Clare Hall, which they began with. He
said, the Church was already too much robbed, and yet some Men's ravenousness
was not satisfied. It seemed the design was laid, to drive both Religion and
Learning out of the Land; therefore he desired leave to be gone. The Visitors
complained of him to the Protector, and imputed his concern for Clare-Hall to
his partiality for the North, where he was born, that being a House for the
Northern Counties. Upon that, the Protector wrote him a chiding Letter, but he
answered it with the freedom that became a Bishop, who was resolved to suffer
all things, rather than sin against his Conscience: and the Protector was so
well satisfied with him, that the College was preserved. There was at this
time an end put to a very foolish Controversy, that had occasioned some heat,
concerning the pronunciation of the Greek Tongue; which many used more suitably
to an English than a Greek accent. Cheek being the Professor of Greek, had
taught the truer Rules of Pronunciation, but Gardener was an Enemy to every
thing that was new, and so he opposed it much in King Henry's time: and Cheek
was made leave the Chair: but both he, and Sir Tho. Smith wrote in Vindication
of his Rules, with so much Learning, that all People wondered to see so much
brought out upon so slight an occasion; but Gardener was not a Man to be
wrought on by reason. Now the matter was settled, and the new way of
pronunciation took place, and that the rather, because the Patrons of it were
in such power, the one being the King's Tutor, and the other made Secretary of
State: and that Gardener, who opposed it, was now in the Tower. So great an
Influence has Greatness, in supporting the most speculative and indifferent
things.

Bonner was now brought in trouble: Bonners Process.
It was not easy to know how to deal with him, for he obeyed every Order that
was sent him; and yet it was known that he secretly hated and condemned all
that was done; and as often as he could declare that safely, he was not wanting
by such ways to preserve his interest with the Papists: And though he obeyed
the Orders of Council, yet he did it in so remiss a manner, that it was visible
that it went against the grain. August.
So he was called before the Council, and charged with several particulars,
That whereas he used to officiate himself on the great Festivals, he had not
done it since the New Service was set out; that he took no care to repress
Adultery, and that he never Preached. So they ordered him to officiate every
Festival, to Preach once a quarter, and to begin within three weeks, and Preach
at S. Paul's; and to be present at every Sermon when he was in health, and to
proceed severely against those who withdrew from the new Service, and against
Adulterers. They required him to set forth the heinousness of Rebellion, and
the nature of true Religion, and the indifference of outward Ceremonies, and
particularly to declare that the Kings Authority was the same, and as much to
be obeyed before he was of age as after. On the first of September he Preached;
he said nothing of the power of Kings under Age, and spoke but little to the
other points; but enlarged much on the Corporal Presence in the Sacrament.
Hooper, and W. Latimer, two of his hearers, informed against him. So a
Commission was granted to Cranmer, Ridley, the two Secretaries of State, and
May, Dean of S. Paul's, to examine that matter, and to imprison, or deprive him,
as they should see cause for it: They were also authorized to proceed in the
summary way of the Spiritual Courts. He was summoned to Lambeth, where he
carried himself with great disrespect and disingenuity toward the Delegates;
and gave the Insormers very soul language; and in his whole discourse he
behaved himself like one that was disturbed in his Brain. When the Commission
was read, he made a Protestation against it, reserving to himself power to
except to diverse things in it. He said the Informers were Heretics, and only
prosecuted him because he had taught the presence of Christ in the Sacrament.
At the next meeting Secretary Smith was there, who was not present at the
first: So upon that account, Bonner protested against him, he also charged
Heresy on his Accusers, who were thereby under Excommunication, and so not
capable to appear in any Court. He denied that any Injunctions had been given
him under the Kings hand or Signet; he said he had preached against the late
Rebels, which implied that the Kings power was complete, though he was under
age. It was answered to this, that the Court might proceed ex Officio, without
Informers: And that the Injunctions, concerning the heads of which he was
required to treat in his Sermon, were read to him by one of the Secretaries,
and were given him by the Protector, and they were afterward called for, and
that Article about the Kings power under age was, by Order of Council, added;
and the Paper was delivered to him by Secretary Smith. At a third appearance
the Informers offered to vindicate themselves of the charge of Heresy; but
after some scurrilous language given them by Bonner, he was called upon to
answer to the main business, which was, his saying nothing of the Kings power
under age; to this he said, he had prepared notes about it, both from the
Instances in Scripture, of Solomon, Joash and Manasses, of Josiah and Joakim,
that reigned under age; as also several instances in the English story, as
Henry the Third, Edward the Third, Richard the Second, Henry the Sixth, and
Edward the Fifth; but he pretended these things had escaped his memory; and a
long account of the defeat of the Rebels being sent to him by the Council, with
an Order to read it, had put him in some confusion, and that the Book in which
he had put his Notes, fell from him; for which he appealed to his Chaplains,
whom he had employed to gather for him the names of those Kings who had reigned
before they were of age. But this did not satisfy the Court, so they proceeded
to examine Witnesses, whom Bonner entangled all he could with Interrogatories,
and the niceties of the Canon Law. Bonner built his main defense on this, that
in the Paper which the Protector gave him, that Article concerning the Kings
age was not mentioned, but was afterward added by Smith; so that he was not
bound to obey it: But it was proved that the whole Council ordered that
addition to be made. Smith had treated him somewhat sharply, for his carriage
was very provoking; upon that, he renewed his former Protestation against him,
and refused to look on him as his Judge, since he had declared himself so
partial against him: He complained, that Smith had compared him to Thieves and
Traitors. Smith said it was visible he acted as they did: To which Bonner
answered, that as he was Secretary of State he honored him, but as he was Sir
Thomas Smith, he lied, and he defied him. And being threatened with
Imprisonment, he seemed not much concerned at it; he said he had a few Goods, a
poor Carcass, and a Soul; the two former were in their power, but he would take
care of the latter. And upon that he appealed to the King, and would not answer
any more, unless Smith should withdraw: For that contempt he was sent to the
Marshalsea; but as he was carried away, he broke out into great passion both
against Smith and Cranmer. Being called again before them, he adhered to his
former Appeal, and some new matter being brought against him, he refused to
answer. Great endeavors were used to persuade him to submit, and promises were
made him of gentler usage for the future, but he continued obstinate, and
instead of retracting, he renewed his Appeal. And deprivation.
So on the first of October, Cranmer, Ridley, Smith and May, pronounced
sentence of deprivation, because he had not obeyed the Orders of the Protector
and Council, nor declared the Kings power while he was under age. He was sent
back to prison till the King should give further Order, and a large Record was
made of his whole deportment during the Process, and put in the Register of the Sea of London, which he took no care to deface when he was afterward restored.
This was much censured, as at best a great stretch of Law, if not plainly
contrary to it. Some complained that Laymen concurred in such a Sentence: But
it was said this was no Spiritual Censure, for he was not degraded, but only
deprived of his Bishopric; and he had taken a Commission for holding it during
the Kings pleasure, and so those that were Commissioned by the King might well
deprive him, since he held it so precariously. It was also said that
Constantine had appointed Triers for hearing the Complaints made of some
Bishops; and they examined the business of Cecilian and the Donatists, upon an
Appeal from some Synods, that had before judged that matter. That same Emperor
did also by his own authority, turn out the Patriarchs of Alexandria and
Antioch, and the Bishop of Constantinople: And though the Orthodox party
complained of his doing it upon the false suggestions of the Arians, yet they
did not deny his authority in such cases: And it was ordinary for the Emperors
to appoint the Bishops that followed their Court to judge some other Bishops,
which was not done Canonically, but by the Emperors authority. But to the
matter of the Sentence, it was also said that it was hard to deprive Bonner for
an omission, that might be only a defect of his memory, as he pretended it was,
though few believed that. Upon the whole matter, it was visible that it had
been resolved to turn him out on the first occasion that could be found, and
that they took hold of him on this disadvantage, and that the fault was rather
aggravated for his sake, than he deprived for the fault, which would have been
more gently past over in another; but he had been fierce and cruel, and so was
much hated, and little pitied. He remained a Prisoner till Queen Mary's Reign,
but continued to behave himself more like a Glutton than a Divine; for he sent
about to his Friends to furnish him well with Puddings and Pears, and gave them
all to the Devil that did not supply him liberally: Such Curses were strange
acts of Episcopal Jurisdiction; yet they were mild, compared to those he gave
out when he was again restored to his See in the next Reign, by which he
condemned so many Innocents to the fire.

The English affairs in Foreign parts went very unsuccessfully this year, Ill
success of the English.
for when they were so distracted at home, no wonder if both the French and
Scots took advantage from thence. Most of the Forts about Bulloigne were taken
by the French, but though those that commanded them, did for their own excuse,
pretend they were ill provided, yet the French Writers published that they were
well stored. From these they came and sat down before Bulloigne, and though the
Plague broke into the French Camp, yet the Siege was not raised: The King left
the Army under the Command of Coligny, the famous Admiral of France. He found
the sure way to take it, was to cut it off from Sea, and so to keep out all
Supplies: But the several attempts he made to do that proved unsuccessful. The
Winter that came on, forced him to raise the Siege; but he lodged a great part
of his Army in the Forts about, so that it was in danger of being lost next
year. In Scotland there was also a great turn; the Castle of Broughty was taken
by the Scots, and the Garrison almost wholly cut off. The English took care to
provide Hadington well, expecting a Siege; but upon that the Scots let it
alone; yet the charge of keeping it was so great, and the Country about it was
so wasted, that all their provisions were to be sent from Berwick, so that the
Protector thought it more advisable to abandon it; and upon that, sent orders
to the Garrison to slight the works, and come back to England. So that now the
English had no place beyond the Borders, except Lander: and Thermes the French
General sat down before it, and if a Peace had not come, it had fallen into his
hands. The Protector had now no Foreign Ally to depend on but the Emperor; and
little was to be expected from him, for he was so dissatisfied with the changes
that had been made in the matters of Religion, that they found his assistance
was not to be trusted to. At this time the Emperor brought his Son to the
Netherlands, that he might put him in possession of those Provinces; though the
secret considerations that made him do it so early, in those places where the
Prince was not Elective, is not visible. It was thought they inclined to shake
off his yoke, and that if the Emperor should have then died, they would have
put themselves under Maximilian, Ferdinand's Son, afterward Emperor. It was
some such apprehension that moved Charles to make them swear obedience so early
to his Son; and settle not only many limitations on him in the matter of
imposing Taxes, and of not putting strangers in places of trust, not governing
them by a Military power, but make a special provision, that in case his Son
should break those rules, the Provinces should not be bound to obey him any
longer: Which was the chief ground both in Law and Conscience, upon which they
afterward justified their shaking off his yoke. Charles, that was born in
those parts, had a peculiar tenderness for them, and did perhaps fear that the
rigid Councils of the Spaniards might prevail too much on his Son, which made
him so careful to secure their liberties; a rare instance of a Princes love for
his people, by which he took such care of their rights, as to make their tie of
obedience to his Son, to depend on his maintaining them inviolably. The Princes
of Germany were now at the Emperors mercy, and saw no way to recover their
liberty but by the help of the French King: So there were applications made to
him, which he cheerfully entertained, only he was resolved first to make
himself master of Bulloigne, and then to turn his whole force toward Germany.
Advertisements were given of this to the Protector, upon which he entered into a
deep consultation with his Friends what was fit to be done in so critical a
conjuncture; whether it was better to deliver up Bulloigne to the French by a
Treaty, or to engage in a War to preserve it; which being on the French side,
would prove a much more chargeable War to the English than to the French; and
this was of very dangerous consequence when affairs were in so unsettled a
condition at home; ill success, which was like to be the event of such a War,
would turn on him that had the chief administration of affairs: so both regard
to the public, and to the establishing his private fortune, which could not be
done in time of War, without drawing much envy on him, inclined him to deliver
up Bulloigne. But his Enemies saw that the continuance of the War was like to
ruin him, whereas a General Peace would put the Nation wholly in his hands,
and therefore they who were the majority in the Council, set themselves against
all motions for a Treaty; and said it would be a lasting reproach on the
Government if such a place as Bulloigne were sold.

Paget gave his opinion in Writing, Several expedients proposed.
in which, after he had with great Judgment balanced the affairs of Europe,
he concluded that the restoring the liberty of Germany, and the bearing down
the Emperors greatness, was at present to be preferred to all other things,
and that could not be done without a conjunction with France; and that was to
be pursued by the mediation of the Venetians. Thomas, a Clerk of the Council,
and much employed in foreign affairs, was of another mind: He thought it was
very dishonorable to deliver up the late Conquests in France, therefore he
proposed their casting themselves on the Emperor, that so some time might be
gained: They knew the Emperor would not be hearty, unless they would promise
to return to the Roman Religion; but he thought that was to be done in such an
extremity of affairs; and when the present difficulty was over, they might turn
to other Councils. There was great danger in this, it would very much
dishearten the few Towns that refused to bear the Emperors yoke in Germany,
and it would provoke the Emperor more against them afterward, if he should
find that he had been deceived by them: he also proposed that in order to the
imbroiling of Scotland, some should be employed to persuade the Governor to
aspire to the Crown, and that he should be assured of the assistance of
England, for this would separate that Nation from the Interests of France.

The issue of these Consultations, The Emperor refuses his assistance.
was, first, the sending over Paget to the Emperor, to try what might be
expected from him: His public Instructions were to obtain an explanation of
some ambiguous words in the former Treaty, and a ratification of it by Prince
Philip, and to adjust some differences in the matter of Trade: but his secret
Instructions were to see, if the Emperor would include Bulloign in the League
defensive, and so protect it: or, if that could not be obtained, he was ordered
to try, whether the Emperor would take Bulloign into his hands, and what
recompense he would give for it; but this he was ordered to propose as a motion
of his own. The Emperor shifted him off for some time by delays, and pretended
that the carrying his Son about from Town to Town, making them swear obedience,
took him up so, that till that was over, he could not receive his Propositions.
But the Progress of the French about Bulloign, made Paget impatient, so the
Bishop of Arras, and the Emperor's other Ministers were appointed to treat
with him. They at first treated of some differences between the Courts of
Admiralty of both sides, and proposed some Expedients for adjusting them: for
the Confirmation of the Treaty, it was offered, that the Prince should do it,
but Paget moved likewise, that it might be confirmed by the States. It was
answered, that the Emperor would never sue to his Subjects to confirm his
Treaties: he had fifteen or sixteen Parliaments, and would be in a very uneasy
condition, if all these must know the secrets of his Negotiations: But since
the King of England was under Age, it was more reasonable for them to demand a
ratification from his Parliament. Paget answered, the King's power was the same
at all Ages, and a ratification under the Great Seal did oblige him, as much,
as if he had made the Treaty himself: and objected, that their last Treaty with
France, was ratified by the Assembly of the States. To this they answered, that
the Prerogative of the Kings of France was so limited, that they could not
alienate any thing, which belonged to the Crown, without consent of the
Parliament of Paris, and of the States; but the Emperor had a more unlimited
power in making Treaties. As for the business of Bulloign, the Bishop of Arras
said, it was taken after the Emperor's Treaty with England, and so was not
included in it, nor could the Emperor comprehend it within it, without breach
of his Faith and Treaties with France, which was so contrary to the Emperor's
honor, that it could not be done. For the honor of a Prince is a good excuse,
when he has no mind to engage in a deceitful or unjust War, but it is often
forgotten, when the Circumstances are more favorable. Paget, after several
other Conferences, found there was nothing more to be expected of the Emperor:
so he returned back to England. It was upon that proposed in Council, whether
since by the Treaty with France, Bulloign was to be delivered up within a few
Years, it were not better to prevent a new War and a Siege, the issue of which
was like to prove very dangerous, and to enter into a Treaty for doing it
presently; and if at the same time it were not more advisable to make an end of
the War in Scotland, since there was no possibility of compassing the Marriage,
for which it was first begun.

Upon this, A Faction against the Protector.
all the Protector's Enemies took off the Mask, and declared themselves against
it. The Earl of Southampton, and the Earl of Warwick were the chief sticklers:
the one hated him for turning him out of his Office, and the other hoped to be
the chief Man in business, if he should fall. Many things concurred to raise
the Protector many Enemies, his partiality to the Commons provoked the Gentry,
his cutting off his Brothers head, and building a Magnificent Palace in the
Strand, upon the ruins of some Bishops Houses and Churches, and that in a time
both of War and Plague, disgusted the People. The Clergy hated him, not only
for his promoting the changes made in Religion, but for his possessing himself
of so many of the Bishops best Manors: his entertaining foreign Troops, both
Germans and Italians, though done by the consent of Council, yet gave a general
distaste: and that great advancement he was raised to, wrought much, both on
himself and others; for it raised his pride, as much as it provoked the envy of
others: The Privy Counselors complained, that he was become so Arbitrary in
his proceedings, that he little regarded the opposition that was made by the
Majority of the Council, to any of his designs. All these things concurred, to
beget him many Enemies: and except Cranmer, who never forsook his friend, and
Paget and Smith, all turned against him: so they violently opposed the
proposition, for a Treaty with France: they also complained, that the Places
about Bulloign were lost by his carelessness, and by his not providing them
well, and that he had recalled the Garrison out of Hadington; and they put him
in mind of the conditions, upon which he was first made Protector, by which he
was limited to do nothing, but by their advice; though he had since that, taken
out a Patent, which clothed him with a far greater power. Upon Pagets return,
when it was visible, that nothing could be expected from the Emperor, he pressed
them much to consent to a Treaty with France, but it was said, that he had
secretly directed Paget to procure no better answer, that so he might be
furnished with an excuse, for so dishonorable an Action, therefore they would
not give way to it.

The Protector carried the King to Hampton Court, Which turns to a public
breach. October.
and put many of his own Creatures about him, which increased the Jealousies,
so Nine of the Privy Council met at Ely-House, and assumed to themselves the
Authority of the Council; and Secretary Petre being sent by the King, to ask an
account of their meeting, instead of returning, joined himself to them. They
made a large Declaration of the Protector's ill government and bad designs, and
of his engaging the King to set his hand to Letters, for raising Men, and for
dispersing Seditious Papers; therefore they resolved to see to the safety of
the King and Kingdom. Both the City of London, and the Lieutenant of the Tower
declared for them: They also sent Letters all over England, desiring the
assistance of the Nobility and Gentry. Seven more Privy Counselors came and
joined with them. They wrote to the King, complaining of the Protector's
obstinacy, and his refusing to hearken to their Counsels, though the late King
had left the Government of his Person and Kingdom to them in common, and the
Protector was advanced to that dignity by them, upon conditions which he had
little regarded; therefore they desired the King would construct well of their
Intentions and proceedings. The Protector had removed the King from Hampton
Court, as being an open place, to Windsor, which had some more defense about
it; and had armed some of his own Servants, and set them about the King's
Person, which heightened the Jealousies of him; yet seeing himself abandoned by
all friends, except a few, and finding the Party against him, was formed to
such a strength, that it would be in vain to struggle any longer, he offered to
submit himself to the Council: So a Proposition of a Treaty was set on foot;
and the Lords at London were desired to send two of their number with their
Propositions, and a Passeport was sent them for their safety. Cranmer, and the
other two writ to the Council, to dispose them to an agreement, and not to
follow Cruel Counsels. Many false reports, as is usual on such occasions, were
carried of the Protector, as if he had threatened, that if they intended to put
him to death, the King should dye first, which served to increase the
prejudices against him. The Council writ to Cranmer, and Paget charging them to
look well to the Kings Person, that he should not be removed from Windsor, and
that the Duke of Somerset's Servants might be put from him, and his own sworn
Servants admitted to wait: they also protested that they would proceed with all
the moderation and favor toward the Duke of Somerset, that was possible. The
Council understanding that all things were prepared, as they had desired, sent
first three of their number, to see that the Duke of Somerset, and some of his
Creatures, Smith, Stanhop, Thynne, Wolf and Cecil should be confined to their
Lodgings; and on the 12th. of October, the whole Council went to Windsor, and
made great protestations of their duty to the King, which he received
favorably, and assured them he took all that they had done in good part.

The Duke of Somerset, with the rest of his friends, The Protector's fall.
except Cecil, who was presently enlarged, were sent to the Tower, and many
Articles were objected to him, That he being made Protector, with this
condition, that he should do nothing, but by the consent of the other
Executors, had treated with Ambassadors apart, had made Bishops and
Lord-Lieutenants without their knowledge, had held a Court of Requests in his
House, had embased the Coin, had neglected the Places the King had in France,
had encouraged the Commons in their late Insurrections, and had given out
Commissions, and proclaimed a Pardon without their consent: that he had
animated the King against the rest of the Council, and had proclaimed them
Traitors, and had put his own Servants armed about the King's Person. By these,
it appears, the Crimes against him were the effects of his sudden exaltation,
that had made him too much forget that he was a subject, but that he had
carried his greatness with much Innocence, since no acts of Cruelty, Rapine, or
Bribery, were objected to him: for they were rather errors and weaknesses than
Crimes. His embasing the Coin was done upon a common mistake of weak
Governments, who fly to that as their last refuge, in the necessity of their
affairs. In his Imprisonment, he set himself to the study of Moral Philosophy
and Divinity, and writ a Preface to a Book of Patience, which had made great
Impressions on him. His fall was a great affliction to all that loved the
Reformation, and that was increased, because they had no reason to trust much
to the two chief Men of the party against him, Southampton and Warwick: the one
was a known Papist, and the other was looked on as a Man of no Religion: and
both at the Emperor's Court, and in France, it was expected, that upon this
revolution, matters of Religion would be again set back, into the posture, in
which King Henry had left them. The Duke of Norfolk and Gardener hoped to be
discharged, and Bonner looked to be re-established in his Bishopric again, and
all People began to fall off much from the new service: but the Earl of Warwick
finding the King was zealously addicted to the Reformation, quickly forsook the
Popish party, and seemed to be a mighty promoter of that work. A Court of
Civilians was appointed to examine Bonner's Appeal, and upon their report the
Council rejected it, and confirmed the Sentence that was past upon him.

But next, The Emperor will not assist them.
foreign affairs come under their care. They suspected that Paget had not dealt
effectually with the Emperor, to assist them in the preservation of Bulloign;
so they sent over Sir Tho. Cheyney, to try what might be expected from him:
they took also care of the Garrison, and both increased it, and supplied it
well. Cheyney found the same reception with the Emperor, and had the same
answer that Paget got. The Emperor pressed him much, that matters of Religion
might be again considered, and confessed, that till that were done, he could not
assist them so effectually, as otherwise he would do: so now the Council found
it necessary to apply to the Court of France for a Peace. The Earl of
Southampton left the Court in great discontent, he was neither restored to his
Office of Chancellor, nor was he made one of the six Lords, that were
appointed to have the charge of the King's Person; this touched him so much,
that he died not long after of grief, as was believed.

In November, A Session of Parliament.
a Session of Parliament met: in which an Act was past, declaring it Treason to
call any to the number of Twelve together, about any matter of State, if being
required, they did not disperse themselves: other Riotous Assemblies were also
declared felonious, the giving out of Prophecies concerning the King, or
Council, was also made Penal. Another Law was made against Vagabonds, the
former Statute was repealed, as too severe, and Provisions were made for the
relief of the Sick and Impotent, and Employing such as could work. The Bishops
made a heavy complaint of the growth of Vice and Impiety, and that their power
was so much abridged, that they could not repress it: so a Bill was read,
enlarging their Authority, but it was thought, that it gave them too much
power; yet it was so moderated, that the Lords past it. But the Commons
rejected it: and instead of it, sent up a Bill, that empowered XXXII. who were
to be named by the King, the one half of the Temporalty, and the other of
Spiritualty, to compile a body of Ecclesiastical Laws within three years, and
that these, not being contrary to the Common or Statute Law, and approved of by
the King, should have the force of Ecclesiastical Laws: of the 32. Four were to
be Bishops, and as many to be Common Lawyers.

Six Bishops and six Divines were empowered to prepare a new form of
Ordination, April next. Articles were also put in against the Duke of Somerset,
with a Confession signed by him. But some objected, that they ought not to
proceed, The Duke of Somerset fined, but restored to favor.
till they knew whether he had signed it voluntarily, or not; and some were
sent to examine him, he acknowledged he had done it freely, but protested that
his errors had flowed rather from Indiscretion than Malice, and denied all
treasonable designs against the King, or the Realm: he was fined in 2000 l. a
year in Land, and in the loss of all his Goods and Offices. He complained of
the heaviness of this Censure, and desired earnestly to be restored to the
Kings favor, and promised to carry himself so humbly and obediently, that he
should make amends for his past follies, which was thought a sign of too abject
a mind; others excused it, since the power and malice of his Enemies was such,
that he was not safe as long as he continued in Prison: he was discharged in
the beginning of February: soon after he had his pardon, and did so manage his
interest in the King, that he was again brought both to the Court and Council
in April. But if these submissions gained him some favor at Court, they sunk
him as much in the esteem of the World.

The Reformation was now, A Progress in the Reformation.
after this confusion was over, carried on again with vigor. The Council sent
Orders over England, to require all to conform themselves to the new service,
and to call in all the Books of the old Offices. An Act past in Parliament to
the same effect; one Earl, six Bishops, and four Lords only dissenting: all the
old Books and Images were appointed to be defaced, and all prayers to Saints
were to be struck out of the Primers published by the late King. A Subsidy was
granted, and the King gave a General Pardon, out of which all Prisoners on the
account of the State, and Anabaptists were excepted. In this Session the Eldest
Sons of Peers were first allowed to sit in the House of Commons.

The Committee appointed to prepare the Book of Ordination, finished their work
with common consent, only Heath Bishop of Worcester refused to sign it, for
which he was called before the Council, and required to do it, but he still
refusing, The Book of Ordinations put out.
was sent to Prison. This was thought hard measure, to punish one for not
concurring in a thing not yet settled by Law. Heath was a Complier, who went
along with the changes that were made, but was ready upon the first favorable
conjuncture, to return back to the old superstition. It was found, that in the
Ancient Church, there was nothing used in Ordinations, but Prayer and
Imposition of hands: the Additions of Anointing and giving consecrated
Vestments were afterward brought in. And in the Council of Florence, it was
declared that the Rite of Ordaining a Priest, was the delivering the Vessels
for the Eucharist, with a power to offer Sacrifices to God for the Dead and
Living, which was a Novelty invented to support the belief of
Transubstantiation. So all these additions were cut off, and Ordination was
restored to a greater simplicity, and the form was made almost the same that we
still use, only then in ordaining a Priest, the Bishop was to lay one hand on
his Head, and with the other to give him a Bible, and a Chalice, and Bread in
it. In the Consecration of a Bishop, the form was the same, that we still
retain, only then they kept up the custom of giving the Bishop a staff, saying
these words, Be to the Flock of Christ a Shepherd. In the middle of the sixth
Century, the Anointing the Priests hands was begun in France, but was not used
in the Roman Church, for two Ages after that. In the eighth Century, the
Vestments were given with a special blessing, impowering Priests to offer
Expiatory Sacrifices; then their Heads were Anointed: and in the tenth Century,
the belief of Transubstantiation being received, the Vessels for the Sacrament
were delivered. It is evident from the several forms of Ordination, that the
Church did not believe it self tied to one manner, and that the Prayer, which
in some Ages was the Prayer of Consecration, was in other Ages esteemed only a
Prayer preparatory to it. There were some sponsions promised, as a Covenant, to
which the Ordination was a Seal: The first of these was, that the Persons that
came to receive Orders, professed that they believed they were inwardly moved
to it by the Holy Ghost. If this were well considered, it would no doubt put
many that thirst after Sacred Offices to a stand, who, if they examine
themselves well, dare not pretend to that, concerning which, perhaps they know
nothing, but that they have it not: and if they make the answer prescribed in
the Book, without feeling any such motion in their heart, they do publicly lie
to God, and against the Holy Ghost, and have no reason to expect a blessing on
Orders so obtained. But too many consider that only as a Ceremony in Law,
necessary to make them capable of some Place of Profit, and not as the
Dedication of their Lives and labors to God, and to the gaining of Souls. It
were happy for the Church, if Bishops would not think it enough barely to put
these questions, but would use great strictness in examining before hand the
motives that set on those, who come to be Ordained. Another sponsion is, that
the Priests shall teach the People, committed to their charge, and exhort them
both in private and public, and visit the sick. By this they plight their
faith to God, for the care of Souls, to be managed by them in person, and upon
that they must find the Pastoral care to be a load indeed: and so will neither
desert their Flocks, nor hire them out to weak, and perhaps scandalous
Mercenaries. In which the faultiness of some have brought a blemish on this
Church, and given scandal to many, who could not have been so easily persuaded
to divide from it, if it had not been, that they were prejudiced by such gross
and public abuses.

The Council was now much perplexed with the business of Bulloign, and though
they had opposed the delivering it up by the Protector, yet that end being
served in pulling him down, they were convinced of the necessity of doing it,
and so were induced to listen to the proposition that one Guidotti made for a
Treaty. He was employed by the Constable Monmorancy, and gave them assurances
that as soon as that was ended, the French King would engage on the behalf of
the oppressed Princes of the Empire.

At this time Pope Paul the Third died. Pool chosen Pope, but lost it.
In the Conclave that followed, Cardinal Farnese set up Cardinal Pool, whose
wise behavior at Trent had raised his esteem much; it also appeared that
though he was of the Emperors faction, yet he did not serve him blindly. Some
loaded him both with the imputations of Lutheranism, and of Incontinence: The
last would not have hindered his advancement much, though true, yet he fully
cleared himself of it: But the former lay heavier, for in his retirement at
Viterbo, where he was Legate, he had given himself much to the study of
Controversies; and Tranellius, Flaminio, and others suspected of Lutheranism,
had lived in his house; and in the Council of Trent he seemed favorable to
some of their opinions; but the great sufferings both of himself and Family in
England, seemed to set him above all suspicions. When the party for him, had
almost gained a sufficient number of Suffrages, he seemed little concerned at
it, and did rather decline, than aspire to that dignity: And expressed a pitch
of Philosophy on this occasion, that was more suitable to Ancient than Modern
patterns. When a full number had agreed, and came to adore him, according to
the ordinary Ceremony, he received it with his usual coldness; and that being
done in the night, he said, God loved light, and therefore advised them to
delay it till day came. The Italians, among whom Ambition passes for the
Character of a great mind, looked on this as an unsufferable piece of dullness;
so the Cardinals shrunk from him before day, and chose de Monte Pope, who
reigned by the name of Julius the Third. His first promotion was very
extraordinary, for he gave his own Hat to a Servant that kept his Monkey; and
being asked the reason of it, he said, He saw as much in his Servant to
recommend him to be a Cardinal, as the Conclave saw in him to induce them to
choose him Pope. But others imputed this to an unnatural affection for him.

Ambassadors were sent over to France, the Lord Russel, Paget made also a
Lord, and some others, to settle the Treaty of Peace: They were ordered in the
first place to ask the delivery of the Scottish Queen, A Treaty with France.
and payment of the perpetual Pension; but the French would not treat about
these, their Master intended to marry the Scottish Queen to the Dauphin, and
would not be tributary to another Prince, or pay a perpetual Pension, but they
offered a sum of money for Bulloign; things stuck a little at the razing the
Fortifications in Aldernay and Sark, two small Islands in the Channel which the
French desired, and at the delivering up of Roxburgh and Aymouth to the Scots,
then in the hands of the English. The Council ordered their Commissioners to
insist on these things, and to offer to break up their Conference rather than
yield to them; but if that had no effect on the French, then they were to let
them go. In Conclusion, the English after a Protestation, by which they
reserved to the King all the rights that he had at the beginning of the War,
agreed to deliver up Bulloign, and all the places about it, and all the
Ordnance in it, except what the English had cast, for which the French were to
pay them four hundred thousand Crowns: All the places which the English had in
Scotland were to be delivered up, and the Forts razed; and six Hostages were to
be given on both sides for the performance, who were the Sons of the men of the
greatest quality. So was the Peace fully concluded, and the Articles were duly
performed on both hands: The Council approved of the proceedings of their
Plenipotentiaries, only the Earl of Warwick, who had declared himself much
against the delivery of Bulloign, pretended sickness, and was absent.

At this time the Earl of Warwick ordered a review to be made of all accounts,
and brought in much money, by the Fines of those who were accused for
Malversation: The Earl of Arundel was fined in 12000 l. Sir James Thynne in
6000 l. and many others of the Protectors creatures in 3000 l.

In February, Ridley made Bishop of London.
Ridley was made Bishop of London and Westminster, 1000 l. a year of the Rents
of the Sea were assigned him, with license to hold two Prebends. Reps, Bishop
of Norwich resigned, upon which Therleby, Bishop of Westminster, was removed to
Norwich; and it was intended to reunite London and Westminster, but though
they still remained different Sees, yet they were now put under one man's care.
His Patent was not during pleasure, but during life. It does not appear that
there was any design in this Reign to put down Cathedrals; for though
Westminster, Gloucester, and Durham were suppressed, the two former being
united, one to London, and another to Worcester; and the latter being to be
divided in two, yet in none of these were the Dean and Chapter Lands fallen on.

Gardener continued still in prison: During the Protectors Ministry some Privy
Counselors dealt with him, Gardiners Process.
to sue to him for mercy, and to declare whether he approved the new Service or
not: But he said he had done no fault, and so would not ask Pardon; nor would
he declare his opinion while he continued a Prisoner, lest his Enemies might
say he did it only to be set at liberty. Upon the Protectors fall, he expected
he should have been discharged of his Imprisonment, and thought it so near,
that he made a farewell Feast to the Officers in the Tower. Some Privy
Counselors were sent to him with Articles, acknowledging former offenses,
approving the Book of Common Prayer, and asserting the Kings Power when he was
under age, and his authority to reform abuses in the Church, and that the six
Articles were justly abrogated. He signed the Paper, only he wrote on the
Margin, that he could not confess former offenses, for he was not convinced of
any fault he had done. Upon this, it was believed that he was to be quickly let
out; but another Message was sent him, that he must confess that he had been
justly punished: This he plainly refused to do, and said he would never defame
himself. Ridley was sent to him with a new Paper, in which the confession of
his faults was more softly worded; the rest related to the Popes power, the
suppressing the Abbeys and Chantries, Pilgrimages, Masses, Images, the
Adoration of the Sacrament, Communion in both kinds, the abolishing the old
Books of Service, and setting up the new; with the Book of Ordinations, and the
lawfulness of a married Clergy: But he said he would sign no more Articles
while he continued in Prison; and desired that he might be either tried, or set
at liberty; for he asked not Mercy, but Justice. And being called before the
Council, and required to sign those Articles, he gave them the same answer: He
said some of these points were already settled by Law, others were not so, and
in these he was at liberty to do as he pleased. Upon this, his Bishopric was
sequestered, and he was required to conform himself within three months, under
pain of deprivation, and the freedom of the Tower was denied him. All this was
much censured, as contrary to Law, and the liberties of English men, and it was
said that it savoured more of a Court of Inquisition, than of a legal way of
proceeding. The Canon Law was not yet rectified, so the King being in the Popes
room, this way, ex Officio was excused, as grounded upon the forms of the
Spiritual Courts.

There was a discourse on foot, of a Marriage between the King, and a Daughter
of France, which grieved the Reformers, who rather wished him to marry
Maximilians Daughter, who was believed to favor the Reformation, and was
esteemed one of the best men of the age. Old Latimer preached at Court, Latimer
preaches at Court.
and warned the King of the ill effects of bad Marriages, which were made up
only as bargains, without affection between the parties; and that they
occasioned so much Whoring, and so many Divorces: He also complained of the
luxury and vanity of the Age, and of many called Gospellers, who were concerned
for nothing but Abbey and Chantry Lands; he also pressed the setting up a
Primitive Discipline in the Church. He preached this as his last Sermon, and so
used great freedom: He complained that the Kings debts were not paid, and yet
his Officers grew vastly rich: He prayed the King not to seek his pleasures too
much, and charged all about him to be faithful to him.

The Sea of Gloucester fell vacant, Hooper made Bishop of Gloucester, has
scruples concerning the Vestments.
and Hooper was named to it; upon which the heats concerning things
indifferent, that have since that time so fatally rent the Church, had their
their first rise. He had some scruples about the Episcopal Vestments, and
thought that all those Garments, having been Consecrated with much
superstition, were to be reckoned among the Elements condemned by S. Paul: But
Ridley justified the use of them, and said the Elements condemned by S. Paul
were only the Jewish Ceremonies; which, though the Apostles condemned, when
they were imposed as necessary, for that imported, that the Mosaical Law was
not yet abrogated, and that the Messiah was not come; Yet they themselves used
them at other times, to gain upon the Jews by that Compliance. And if Apostles
did such things to gain them, Subjects ought much more to obey the Laws in
matters indifferent: And Superstitious Consecrations was as good an Argument
for throwing down all the Churches, as for laying aside those Habits. Cranmer
desired Bucer's opinion concerning the lawfulness of those Habits, and the
obligation lying on Subjects to obey the Laws about them. His opinion was, that
every creature of God was good, and that no former abuse could make a thing
indifferent in its self, become unlawful: He thought ancient customs ought not
to be lightly changed, and that there might be a good use made of those
Garments; that they might well express the purity and candor that became all
who ministered in Holy things, and that it was a sin to disobey the Laws in such
matters. Yet since those Garments had been abused to Superstition, and were
like to become a subject of Contention, he wished they might be taken away by
Law; and that Ecclesiastical Discipline, and a more complete Reformation might
be set up, and that a stop might be put to the robbing of Churches; otherwise,
they might see in the present State of Germany, a dreadful prospect of that
which England ought to look for. He also writ to the same effect to Hooper, and
wished that all good men would unite against the greater Corruptions, and then
lesser abuses would easily be redressed. Peter Martyr did also deliver his
opinion to the same purpose, and was much troubled at Hooper's stiffness, and
at such contests among the professors of true Religion. Hooper was suspended
from Preaching; but the Earl of Warwick writ to Cranmer to dispense with him in
that matter: He answered, That while the Law continued in force, he could not
do it without incurring a Praemunire. Upon that, the King writ to him, allowing
him to do it, and dispensing with the Law: Yet this matter was not settled till
a year after. John a Lasco, with some Germans of the Helvetian Confession, came
this year into England, being driven out of Germany by the Persecution there:
They were erected by Letters Patents into a Corporation, and a Lasco was their
Superintendent; he being a stranger, meddled too much in English affairs, and
wrote both against the Habits, and against kneeling in the Sacrament. Polydore
Virgil was this year suffered to go out of England, and still to hold the
preferments he had in it. Pomet was made Bishop of Rochester, and Caverdale
Co-adjutor to Veysy in Exeter.

There was now a design set on foot, A review of the Common Prayer Book.
for a review of the Common Prayer Book: In order to which Bucer's opinion was
asked. He approved the main parts of the former Book, he wished there might be
not only a denunciation against scandalous persons that came to the Sacrament,
but a discipline to exclude them: That the Habits might be laid aside, that no
part of the Communion Office might be used, except when there was a Sacrament;
that Communions might be more frequent, that the Prayers might be said in a
plain voice, that the Sacrament might be put in the peoples hands, and that
there might be no Prayers for the Dead, which had not been used in Justin
Martyr's time: He advised a change of some phrases in the Office of the
Communion, that favored Transubstantiation too much, and that Baptism might be
only in Churches: He thought the hallowing the Water, the Chrisme, and the
White garment, were too scenical; nor did he approve of adjuring the Devil, nor
of the Godfathers answering in the Child's name: He thought Confirmation should
be delayed till the person was of Age, and came sincerely to renew the
Baptismal Covenant. He advised Catechizing every Holy Day, both of Children and
the Adult, he disliked private Marriages, Extreme Unction, and offering
Chrisomes at the Churching of Women: And thought there ought to be greater
strictness used in the examining of those who came to receive Orders.

At the same time he understood that the King expected a New Years gift from
him, of a Book written particularly for his own use: So he made a Book for him,
concerning the Kingdom of Christ: He pressed much the setting up a strict
discipline, the Sanctification of the Lords day, Bucer offers some advices to
the King.
the appointing many days of Fasting, and that Pluralities and Non-residence
might be effectually condemned, that Children might be Catechized, that the
Reverence due to Churches might be preserved, that the Pastoral function might
be restored to what it ought to be, that Bishops might throw off Secular
affairs, and take care of their Diocesses, and govern them by the advice of
their Presbyters; that there might be Rural Bishops over twenty or thirty
Parishes, and that Provincial Councils might meet twice a year, that
Church Lands should be restored, and that a fourth part should be assigned to
the poor; that Marriage, without consent of Parents, should be annulled; that a
second Marriage might be declared lawful, after a Divorce, for Adultery, and
some other Reasons; that care should be taken of the education of youth, and
for repressing luxury; that the Law might be reformed, that no Office might be
sold, but given to the most deserving; that none should be put in Prison upon
slight offenses, and that the severity of some Laws, as that which made Theft
capital, might be mitigated.

The young King was much pleased with these advices; The Kings great
understanding.
and upon that, began himself to form a Scheme for amending many things that
were amiss in the Government, which he writ with his own hand, and in a style
and manner that had much of a Child in it, though the thoughts were manly: It
appears by it, that he intended to set up a Church discipline, and settle a
method for breeding of youth; but the discourse is not finished. He also writ a
Journal of every thing that past at home, and of the news that came from beyond
Sea. It has clear marks of his own Composing, as well as it is written with his
own hand. He wrote another discourse in French, being a Collection of all the
places of Scripture against Idolatry, with a Preface before it, dedicated to
the Protector.

At this time Ridley made his first Visitation of his Diocese; Altars put down.
the Articles upon which he proceeded, were chiefly relating to the Service and
Ceremonies that were abolished, whether any continued to use them or not, and
whether there were any Anabaptists, or others, that used private Conventicles.
He also carried some Injunctions with him, against some remainders of the
former superstition, and for exhorting the people to give Alms, and to come often
to the Sacrament, and that Altars might be removed, and Tables put in their
room, in the most convenient place of the Chancel. In the Ancient Church their
Tables were of Wood: But the Sacrament being called a Sacrifice, as Prayers,
Alms, and all Holy Oblations were, they came to be called Altars. This gave the
rise to the Opinion of Expiatory Sacrifice in the Mass, and therefore it was
thought fit to take away both the name and form of Altars. Ridley only advised
the Curates to do this, but upon some contests arising concerning it, the
Council interposed, and required it to be done; and sent with their Order, a
Paper of Reasons justifying it: Showing that a Table was more proper than an
Altar; especially, since the opinion of an Expiatory Sacrifice was supported by
it. Sermons began to be preached in some Churches on working-days, this
occasioned great running about, and idleness; and raised emulation among the
Clergy: upon which the Council ordered them all to be put down. Since that time
there has been great contention concerning these; they were factiously kept up
by some, and too violently suppressed by others: But now that matter is
quieted, and they are in many places still continued, to the great edification
of the people. The Government was now free of all disturbance: the Coin was
reformed, and Trade was encouraged. The faction in the Court seemed also to be
extinguished, by a Marriage between the Earl of Warwick's Son, and the Duke of
Somerset's Daughter. The Duke of Lunenburgh made a Proposition of Marriage with
Lady Mary, but the Treaty with the Infant of Portugal did still depend, Affairs
of Scotland.
so it was not entertained.

In Scotland, the Governor, now made Duke of Chastelherault in France, was
wholly led by his base Brothers Counsels, who, though he was Archbishop of St.
Andrews, yet gave himself up, without any disguise, to his pleasures, and kept
another man's Wife avowedly; by such means were the people more easily disposed
to hearken to the new Teachers, and prepared for the changes that followed. The
Queen Mother went to France, on design to procure the Government of Scotland to
be put in her hands.

A Diet was called in Germany; And Germany.
the Town of Magdeburg was proscribed: But they published a Manifesto,
expressing their readiness to obey the Emperor according to Law; and that they
only stood to the defense of their liberties, without doing acts of Hostility
to others. It was now visible that the design of the late War was to extinguish
the Protestant Religion, and to set up Tyranny. It was better to obey God than
Man: And they were resolved to put all to hazard, rather than give up their
Religion. Tumults were raised in Strasburg and other Towns, when the Mass was
again set up; and all Germany was disposed to a Revolt, only they wanted a Head
Severe Edicts were also set out in Flanders; but the execution of them was
stopped, at the intercession of the English in Antwerp, who were resolved
otherwise to remove the Trade to another place. The Emperor pressed the Diet to
submit to the Council, when it should be brought back to Trent: But Maurice of
Saxe, to whom all the Protestants joined, refused to do it, unless all their
former decrees should be reviewed, and their Divines heard, and admitted to
Vote; and that the Pope would dispense with the Oath which the Bishops swear to
him: Yet he so far insinuated himself into the Emperors confidence, that he
was made General of the Empire, for the reduction of Magdeburg, and resolved to
manage that matter, so as to draw great advantages from it. The Emperor
reckoned that he might well trust him as long as he had John Duke of Saxe, in
his hands: But he had provoked him too much in the matter of the Landgrave of
Hesse, his Father-in-Law, to repose such consequence in him; so that this
proved a fatal error to him, by which he lost the power he had then in
Germany, and Maurice proved too hard for him in dissimulation, in which he was
so great a Master.

The Popish Clergy did now generally comply to every Change that was made. The
Popish Clergy comply generally.
Oglethorp afterward Bishop of Carlisle, being informed against, as favoring
the old Superstition, did under his hand declare, that he thought the Order of
Religion then settled, was nearer the use of the Primitive Church, than that
which was formerly received; and that he condemned Transubstantiation, as a
late Invention, and approved the Communion in both kinds, and the Peoples
receiving always with the Priest. Smith, who had written against the Marriage
of the Clergy, and was upon some complaints put in Prison, being discharged by
Cranmer's Intercession, writ a submission to him, acknowledging the mistakes he
had committed in his Book, and the Archbishops gentleness toward him: and
wished he might perish, if he did not write sincerely, and called God a witness
against his Soul, if he lied. Day, Bishop of Chichester did also preach a
Sermon at Court against Transubstantiation. The Principle, by which most of
that Party governed themselves, was this, they thought they ought to oppose all
the changes, before they were established by Law; yet that being done, that
they might afterward comply with them. Cranmer was a moderate and prudent Man,
and willing to accept of any thing they offered, reckoning that whether they
acted sincerely, or not, yet their compliance would be a means to quiet the
Nation; he was also of so compassionate a nature, that he would never drive
things to extremities, against Men that were grown old in their errors, and
could not be easily weaned from them: only Gardener and Bonner were such
deceitful and cruel Men, that he thought it might be more excusable to make
stretches, for ridding the Church of them.

Martin Bucer dyed in the beginning of this Year, of the Stone, Bucer's death.
and griping of the Guts. He had great apprehensions of a fatal revolution in
England; by reason of the ill lives of the People, occasioned chiefly by the
want of Ecclesiastical Discipline, and the neglect of the Pastoral charge.
Orders were sent from the Court, to Cambridge, to bury him with all the Public
honor to his Memory, that could be devised. Speeches and Sermons were made
both by Haddon, the University Orator, and Parker, and Redmayn. The last of
these was one of the most extraordinary Men, both for Learning, and a true
Judgment of things, that was in that time: he had also in many things differed
from Bucer, and yet he acknowledged, that there was none alive, of whom he
hoped now to learn so much, as he had done by his conversation with him. Bucer
was inferior to none of all the Reformers in Learning, but superior to most of
them, in an excellent temper of mind, and a great zeal for preserving the Unity
of the Church: a rare quality in that Age, in which Melancthon and he were the
most eminent. He had not that nimbleness of disputing, for which Peter Martyr
was more admired, and the Popish Doctors took advantage from that to carry
themselves more insolently toward him.

Soon after this, Gardiner's deprivation.
Gardiner's Process was put to an end: A Commission was issued out to Cranmer,
and three Bishops, and some Civilians, to proceed against him, for his
contempt, in refusing to sign the Articles offered to him: he complained, that
all that was done against him, was out of malice, that he had been long
imprisoned, and nothing was objected to him, that he was resolved to obey the
Laws and Orders of Council, but that he would acknowledge no fault, not having
committed any. The things objected to him, were, that he refused to set out in
his Sermon the King's power, when he was under Age, and had affronted the
Preachers, whom the King had sent to his Diocese; that he had been negligent in
executing the King's Injunctions, and refused to confess his fault, or ask the
King pardon; and it was said that the Rebellions raised in England, might have
been prevented, if he had timously set forth the King's authority: he answered,
that he was not required to do it by any Order of Council, but only in a
private discourse; yet Witnesses being examined upon those particulars, the
Delegates proceeded to sentence of deprivation against him, notwithstanding his
Appeal to the King in Person: and he was appointed to lie still in the Tower,
where he continued till Queen Mary discharged him. Nothing was pretended to
excuse the severity of these proceedings, but that he having taken out a
Commission for holding his Bishopric, only during the King's pleasure, he
could not complain when that was intimated to him: and if he had been turned
out merely upon pleasure, without the Pomp of a Process, the matter might have
been better excused. Poinet was put in his See, and had 2000. Marks in Lands
assigned him for his subsistence. Story was put in Rochester, and upon Veysy's
resignation Coverdale was made Bishop of Exeter. The scruples that Hooper made,
were now so far satisfied, that he was content both to be consecrated in his
Vestments, and to use them when he preached before the King, or in his
Cathedral, but he was dispensed with upon other occasions.

By this time the greater number of the Bishops were Men that heartily received
the Reformation: The Articles of Religion agreed on.
so it was resolved now to proceed to a settlement of the Doctrine of the
Church: many thought that should have been done in the first place. But Cranmer
judged it was better to proceed slowly in that matter: he thought the
Corruptions in the Worship were to be begun with, since while they remained,
the addresses to God were so defiled, that thereby all People were involved in
unlawful compliances: he thought speculative Opinions might come last, since
errors in them were not of such ill consequence: and he judged it necessary to
lay these open, in many Treatises and Disputes, before they should proceed to
make alterations, that so all People might be beforehand satisfied with what
should be done. So now they framed a Body of Articles, which contained the
Doctrine of the Church of England: they were cast into forty two Articles, and
afterward some few alterations being made in the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth's Reign, they were reduced to XXXIX. which being in all Peoples
hands, need not be much enlarged on.

In the Ancient Church, there was at first a great simplicity in their Creeds;
but afterward, upon the breaking out of Heresies, concerning the Person of
Christ, equivocal senses being put on the terms formerly used, new ones, that
could not be so easily eluded, were invented. A humor of explaining Mysteries
by similies and niceties, and of passing Anathema's on all that did not receive
these, did much overrun the Church: and though the Council of Ephesus decreed,
that no new additions should be made to the Creed, yet that did not restrain
those, who loved to make all their own conceits be received, as parts of the
Faith. The Fathers were carried too far with this curiosity, but the Schoolmen
went farther, and spun the Thread much finer, they condemned every thing that
differed from their Notions, as Heretical: Many of the Lutherans had retained
much of that peremptoriness, and were not easy to those who differed from
them. In England great care was taken to frame these Articles in the most
comprehensive words, and the greatest simplicity possible. Changes made in the
Common Prayer Book.


When this was settled, they went about the review of the Common Prayer Book. In
the daily service, they added the Confession and Absolution, that so the
worship of God might begin with a grave and humble Confession conceived in
general words, but to which every one ought to join a secret confession of his
particular sins: after which a solemn declaration of the mercy of God,
according to the terms of the Gospel, was to be pronounced by the Priest. This
was thought much better, than the giving Absolution in such formal words, as, I
absolve thee, which begat in the undiscerning Vulgar an Opinion, that the
Priest had authority to pardon sin, and that made them think of nothing so
much, as how to purchase it at his hands: and it proved, as it was managed, the
greatest Engine that ever was, for overthrowing the power of Religion. In the
Communion-Service, they ordered a recital of the Commandments, with a short
devotion between every one of them, judging that till Church Discipline were
restored, nothing could more effectually awaken such, as came to receive it, to
a due seriousness in it, than the hearing the Law of God thus pronounced, with
those stops in it, to make the People reflect on their offenses against it. The
Chrism, the use of the Cross in consecrating the Eucharist, Prayers for the
Dead, and some expressions that favored Transubstantiation were laid aside,
and the Book was put in the same Order and Method, in which it continues to
this day, excepting only some inconsiderable variations, that have been made
since. A Rubric was added to the Office of the Communion, explaining the
reason of kneeling in it, that it was only as an expression of due reverence
and gratitude, upon the receiving so particular a mark of the favor of God:
but that no adoration was intended by it, and that they did not think Christ
was corporally present in it. In Queen Elizabeth's time this was left out, that
such as conformed in other things, but still retained the belief of the
Corporal Presence, might not be offended at such a Declaration: It was again
put in the Book, upon his present Majesty's Restoration, for removing the
Scruples of those who excepted to that posture. Christ did at first institute
this Sacrament, in the ordinary Table Gesture. Moses appointed the Paschal Lamb
to be eaten by the People standing, with staves in their hands, they being then
to begin their march; yet that was afterward changed by the Jews, who did eat
it in the posture common at Meals, which our Savior's practice justifies: so,
though Christ in his state of Humiliation did Institute this Ordinance, in so
familiar a posture, yet it was thought more becoming the reverence due to him
in his Exaltation, to celebrate it with greater expressions of humility and
devotion. The Ancient Christians received it standing, and bowing their Body
downward: Kneeling was afterward used as a higher expression of devout
worship: but great difference is to be made, between the adoration practiced in
the Church of Rome, in which, upon lifting up the Host, all fall down and
worship, and our being, during the whole action, in one continued posture of
devotion: and if the Jews, who were more bound up to Ceremonies, made a change
in the posture, at the Memorial of their deliverance, without any warrant
mentioned in the Old Testament; it must be acknowledged, that the Christian
Church, which is more at liberty in such matters, had authority to make the
like change of the posture, in this Memorial of Christ's sufferings. At this
time six of the most eminent Preachers were appointed to wait on the Court by
turns, two at a time, and the other four were sent as Itinerant Preachers, into
all the Counties of England, in a Circuit, for supplying the defects of the
Clergy, who were generally very weak and faulty.

The Mass said in Lady Mary's Chapel, Lady Mary in trouble for having Mass
said.
was now again challenged. The Court was less afraid of the Emperors
displeasure than formerly, and so would no longer bear with so public a breach
of Law: And the Promise they had made being but Temporary, and never given in
Writing, they thought they were not bound by it. But the Emperor assured her,
that he had an absolute Promise for that Privilege to her: This encouraged her
so much, that when the Council wrote to her, she said she would follow the
Catholic Church, and adhere to her Fathers Religion. Answer was writ in the
Kings name, requiring her to obey the Law, and not to pretend that the King was
under age, since the late Rebels had justified themselves by that. The way of
Worship then established, was also vindicated, as most consonant to the word of
God. But she refused to engage into any disputes, only she said she would
continue in her former courses. And she was thinking of going out of England,
insomuch that the Emperor ordered a Ship to lie near the Coast for her
Transportation; which was strange advice, for it is probable, if she had gone
beyond Sea, she had been effectually shut out from succeeding to the Crown. The
Emperor espoused her quarrel so warmly, that he threatened to make War, if she
should be hardly used, and the Merchants having then great effects at Antwerp,
it was not thought fit to give him a color for breaking with them, and seizing
on these; so the Council were willing to let the matter fall, and only advised
her to have her Mass privately said: yet the young King could not be easily
induced to yield to that, for he said, he ought not to connive at Idolatry. The
Council ordered Cranmer, Ridley, and Poinet, to satisfy him in it: And they
convinced him, that though he ought not to consent to any sin, yet he was not
at all times obliged to punish it. He burst out in weeping, lamenting his
Sisters obstinacy, and his own circumstances, that obliged him to comply with
such an impious way of Worship. Dr. Wotton was sent over to the Emperor, to
convince him that no absolute Promise was ever made: For Paget and Hobbey, whom
the Emperor vouched for it, declared upon Oath, that they made not any but
what was Temporary; and since the King did not meddle in the concerns of the
Emperors Family, it was not reasonable for him to interpose in this. The
Emperor pretended, that he had promised to her Mother at her death, to protect
her, and so he was bound in honor to take care of her: But now when the
Council were not in such fear of the Emperors displeasure as formerly, they
sent to seize on two of her Chaplains, that had said Mass in her House, when
she was absent; they kept out of the way, and she writ to the Council to stop
the prosecution, and continued to stand upon the Promise made to the Emperor.
A long answer was returned to her by the Council, in which, after the matter of
the Promise was cleared, they urged her with the absurdity of Prayers in an
unknown tongue, offering the Sacrament for the dead, and worshipping Images:
All the Ancients appealed upon all occasions to the Scriptures, by these she
might easily discover the errors and cheats of the old Superstition, that were
supported only by false Miracles and lying Stories. They concluded, that they
being trusted with the execution of the Laws, were obliged to proceed equally.
Mallet, one of the Chaplains, was taken, and she earnestly desired that he
might be set at liberty, but it was denied her. The Council sent for the chief
Officers of her House, and required them to let her know the Kings pleasure,
that she must have the new Service in her Family, and to give the like charge
to her Chaplains and Servants. This vexed her much, and did almost cast her
into sickness: She said, she would obey the King in every thing in which her
Conscience was not touched: But charged them not to deliver the Councils
Message to her Servants. Upon that, the Lord Chancellor, Petre and Wyngfield,
were sent with the same orders to her, and carried to her a Letter from the
King, which she received on her knees; but when she read it, she cast the blame
of it on Cecyl, then Secretary of State. The Chancellor told her, the whole
Council were of one mind, that they could not suffer her to use a form of
Worship against Law: And had ordered them to intimate this both to herself and
her Family. She made great protestations of duty to the King; but said, she
would die rather than use any form of Worship but that which was left by her
Father, only she was afraid she was not worthy to suffer on so good an account.
When the King was of age, she would obey his Commands in Religion, and though
he now knew many things above his age, yet as they did not think him yet
capable of matters of War or Policy, so much less could he judge in points of
Divinity. If her Chaplains refused to say Mass, she could have none, but for
the new Service she was resolved against it, and if it were forced on her, she
would leave her house. She desired her Officers might be sent back to her, whom
they had put in the Tower, for not intimating the Councils order to her
Servants; which had been strange for them to have done, when she forbid it. She
charged them to use her well for her Fathers sake, who had raised them all out
of nothing. She was sick by reason of their ill usage, and if she died, she
would lay it at their door. She insisted on the Promise made to the Emperor,
who writ of it to her, and she believed him more than them all: She gave them a
token, to be carried to the King, and so dismissed them. When they had laid a
charge on her Chaplains and Servants, to the same effect, and were going away,
she called after them, and desired they would send her Comptroller to her, for
she was weary of receiving her accounts, and examining how many Loaves were
made of a Bushel of Meal. Upon this resolution that she expressed, the Council
went no further, only after this, her Mass was said so secretly, that she gave
no public scandal. From Copthall, where this was done, she removed, and lived
at Hunsden, and thither Ridley went to see her: She received him very civilly,
and ordered her Officers to entertain him at dinner: But when he begged leave
to Preach before her, she at first blushed, but being further pressed, she said he
might Preach in the Parish Church, but neither she nor her Family would be
there: He asked her if she refused to hear the word of God: She answered, they
did not call that Gods word now, that they had called so in her Fathers days;
and that in his time they durst not have said the things which they then
Preached: And after some sharp and reproachful discourse, she dismissed him.
Wharton, one of her Officers, as he conducted him out, made him drink a little,
but he reflecting on that, blamed himself for it; for he said, when the Word of
God was rejected, he ought to have shaken off the dust of his Feet, and gone
away. The Kings Sister Elizabeth did in all things conform to the Laws; for her
Mother at her death recommended her to Dr. Parker's care, who instructed her
well in the Principles of Christian Religion.

The Earl of Warwick began now to form great designs of bringing the Crown into
his Family: The Earl of Warwick's designs.
The King was alienated from his Sister Mary, and the Privy Council had
imbroiled themselves with her, and so would be easily engaged against her. The
pretense against both the Sisters was the same, that they stood illegitimated
by two Sentences in the Spiritual Courts, confirmed in Parliament. So that it
would be a disgrace to the Nation to let the Crown devolve on Bastards: And
since the fears of the Eldests revenge, made the Council willing to exclude
her, the only reason on which they could ground that, must take place against
the second likewise. And therefore though the Crown was provided to them, both
by Act of Parliament, and the late Kings Will, yet these being founded on an
Error that was indispensable, which was the baseness of their descent, they
ought not to take place. They being laid aside, the Daughters of the French
Queen, by Charles Brandon, stood next in the Act, and yet it was generally
believed that they were Bastards: For it was given out that Brandon was
secretly married to one Mortimer, at the time that he married the French Queen,
and that Mortimer outlived her, so that the issue by her was Illegitimate. The
Sweating Sickness did this year break out in England, with such Contagion that
eight hundred died in one week of it in London; those that were taken with it,
were inclined much to sleep, and all that slept died, but if they were kept
awake a day, they did sweat it out. Charles Brandon's two Sons by his last Wife
died within a day one of another. His eldest Daughter by the French Queen was
married to the Marquess of Dorset, a good, but weak man, and so he was made
Duke of Suffolk: They had no Sons, their eldest Daughter Jane Gray, was thought
the wonder of the age. So the Earl of Warwick projected a Match between her and
his fourth Son Guilford, his three elder Sons being then married: And because
the Lady Elizabeth was like to stand most in the way, care was taken to send
her out of England: and a Match was treated for her with the King of Denmark.

A splendid Message was sent to France, A Treaty for a Marriage to, the King.
with the Order of the Garter. The Marquess of Northampton carried it, three
Earls, the Bishop of Ely, and five Lords were sent with him, and above two
hundred Gentlemen accompanied them. They were to make a Proposition of Marriage
for the King with a Daughter of France. The Bishop of Ely made the first
Speech, and the Cardinal of Lorrain answered him: it was soon agreed on, yet
neither Party was to be bound, either in Honor or Conscience, till the Lady
should be of Years to give consent. A noble Embassy was sent in return from
France to England, with the Order of Saint Michael. They desired in their
Master's name the continuance of the King's friendship, and that he would not
be moved by Rumors, that might be raised to break their Alliance. The young
King answered on the sudden, that Rumors were not always to be believed, nor
always to be rejected, for it was no less vain to fear all things, than to
doubt of nothing: if any differences happened to arise, he should be always ready
to determine them, rather by reason than by force, so far as his Honor should
not be thereby diminished. This was thought a very extraordinary answer, to be
made by one of Fourteen, on the sudden.

There was at this time a great Creation of Peers. The Duke of Somerset's fall.
Warwick was made Duke of Northumberland, the blood of the Piercies being then
under an Attainder: Pawlet was made Marquess of Winchester, Herbert was made
Earl of Pembroke, and a little before this, Russel had been made Earl of
Bedford, and Darcy was made a Lord. There was none so likely to take the King
out of Northumberlands hands, as the Duke of Somerset, who was beginning to
form a new Party about the King; so upon some Informations, both the Duke of
Somerset and his Duchess, Sir Ralph Vane, Sir Tho. Palmer, Sr Tho. Arundel,
and several others, of whom, some were Gentlemen of Quality, and others were
the Dukes servants, were all committed to the Tower. The committing of Palmer
was to delude the World, for he had betrayed the Duke, and was clapped up as a
Complice, and then pretended to discover a Plot: He said, the Duke intended to
have raised the People, and that Northumberland, Northampton and Pembroke,
having been invited to dine at the Lord Pagets, he intended to have set on them
by the way, or have killed them at Dinner; that Vane was to have 2000. Men
ready; Arundel was to have seized on the Tower, and all the Gendarmoury were to
have been killed. All these things were told the young King with such
Circumstances, that he too easily believed them, and so was much alienated from
his Uncle, judging him guilty of so foul a Conspiracy. It was added by others,
that the Duke intended to have raised the City of London, one Crane confirmed
Palmers testimony, and both the Earl of Arundel, and Paget were also committed
as Accomplices. On the first of December, His Trial
the Duke was brought to his Trial: The Marquess of Winchester was Lord
Steward, and 27. Peers sat to judge him, among whom were the Dukes of Suffolk
and Northumberland, and the Earl of Pembroke. The particulars charged on him
were, a design to seize on the King's Person, to imprison the Duke of
Northumberland, and to raise the City of London; it seemed strange to see
Northumberland sit a Judge, when the crime objected, was a design against his
life: for though by the Law of England no Peer can be challenged, yet by the
Law of Nature no Man can well judge where he is a Party. The Chancellor,
though a Peer, was left out, upon suspicion of a reconciliation, which he was
making with the Duke: He was not well skilled in Law, and neither objected to
the Indictment, nor desired Council to plead for him, but only answered to
matters of fact: he denied all designs to raise the People, or to kill
Northumberland; if he had talked of it, it was in passion without any
Intention: and it was ridiculous to think, that he with a small Troop, could
destroy the Gendarmoury, who were 900. The armed Men he had about him, were
only for his own defense, he had done no mischief to his Enemies, though it was
once in his power to have done it; and he had rendered himself without making
any resistance: He desired the Witnesses might be brought face to face, and
objected many things to them; chiefly to Palmer; but that was not done, and
their Depositions were only read: The King's Council pleaded upon the Statute,
against unlawful Assemblies, that to contrive the death of Privy Counselors
was Felony, and to have Men about him for his defense, was also Felony. The
material defense was omitted, for by that Statute those Assemblies were not
felonious, except being required to disperse themselves, they had refused to do
it, and it does not appear that any such Proclamation had been made in this
case. The Proofs of his raising Rebellion were insufficient, so he was
acquitted of Treason, which raised a great shout of joy, that was heard as far
as Charing Cross, but he was found guilty of Felony, for intending to imprison
Northumberland. He carried himself, during the Trial, with great temper, and
all the sharpness which the Kings Council expressed in pleading against him,
did not provoke him to any undecent passion. But when Sentence was given, he
sunk a little, and asked the three Lords, that were his Enemies, pardon, for
his ill designs against them, and made suit for his life, and for his Wife and
Children. It was generally thought, that nothing being found against him, but
an Intention to imprison a Privy Counselor, that never took effect, one so
nearly related to the King, would not have been put to death on that account.
It was therefore necessary to raise in the King a great Aversion to him: so a
story was brought to the King, as if in the Tower he had confessed a design to
employ some to Assassinate those Lords; and the Persons named for that wicked
service, were also persuaded to take it on them. This being believed by the
King, he took no more care to preserve him, assassination being a crime of so
barbarous a nature, that it possessed him with a horror, even to his Uncle,
when he thought him guilty of it: and therefore he was given up to his Enemies
rage. Stanhop, Partridge, Arundel and Vane were tried next, the two first were
not much pitied, for they had made a very ill use of their Interest in the
Duke, during his greatness: the other two were much lamented. Arundels Jury was
shut up a whole Day and a Night, and those that were for the acquittal, yielded
to the fury of the rest, only that they might save their own Lives, and not be
starved. Vane had done great services in the Wars, and carried himself with a
Magnanimity, that was thought too extravagant: they were all condemned, and
Partridge and he were hanged, the other Two were beheaded.

The Lord Chancellor was become a secret friend to the Duke of Somerset, and
that was thus discovered: he went aside once at Council, Rich gives up the
Great Seal, and it was given to the Bish. of Ely.
and writ a Note, giving the Duke notice of what was then in agitation against
him, and endorsed it only for the Duke, and sent it to the Tower, but his
Servant not having particular directions, fansied it was to the Duke of
Norfolk, and not to Somerset, and carried it to him. He to make Northumberland
his friend, sent this to him; Rich understanding the mistake, in which his
Servant had fallen, prevented the discovery, and went immediately to the King,
and pretending some indisposition, desired to be discharged; and upon that took
his Bed, so it seemed too barbarous to do any thing further against him, only
the Great Seal was taken from him, and was put in the Bishop of Ely's hands.
This was much censured, for all the Reformers had inveighed severely against
the secular employments, and high places, which Bishops had in the Church of
Rome, since by these they were taken wholly off from the care of Souls, or
those spiritual exercises that might dispose them for it, and assumed only the
name and garb of Churchmen, to serve their Ambition and Covetousness; and by
this the People were much prejudiced against them, so upon Goodrick's
advancement, this was turned against the Reformers: it was said, they only
complained of those things, when their Enemies enjoyed them, but changed their
minds, as soon as they fell into the hands of their friends: but Goodrick was
no Pattern, he complied only with the Reformation, but turned when Queen Mary
succeeded. Christ said, Who made me a Judge? St. Paul left it as a Rule, that
no Man that warreth, entangleth himself with the affairs of this life. This
Saint Cyprian, and the other Fathers understood, as a perpetual prohibition of
Churchmen's meddling with secular matters; and condemned it severely. Many
Canons were made against it in Provincial Councils, and a very full one was
decreed at Chalcedon. But as the Bishops of Rome and Alexandria grew rich, and
powerful, they established a sort of secular principality in the Church: and
other Sees, as they increased in wealth, affected to imitate them. Charles the
Great, raised this much every where, and gave great Territories and Privileges
to the Church; upon which, the Bishop and Abbots, were not only admitted to a
share, in the Public Counsels, by virtue of their Lands, but to all the chief
Offices of the State; and then Ecclesiastical Preferments were given to
Courtiers, as Rewards for their services: and by these means the Clergy became
very corrupt, Merit and Learning being no more the standards, by which Men were
esteemed or promoted: and Bishops were only considered, as a sort of great Men,
who went in a peculiar Habit, and on great Festivities were obliged to say
Mass, or perform some other Solemnities, but they wholly abandoned the Souls
committed to their care, and left the spiritual part of their callings, to
their Vicars and Archdeacons, who made no other use of it, but to squeeze the
Inferior Clergy, and to oppress the People: and it was not easy to persuade
the world, that those Bishops did much aspire to Heaven, who were so indecently
thrusting themselves into the Courts of Princes, and meddling so much in
matters, that did not belong to them, that they neglected those, for which they
were to account to God.

On the 22. The Duke of Somerset's Execution.
day of January, the Duke of Somerset was executed at Tower Hill, the substance
of his Speech, was a Vindication of himself, from all ill designs, he confessed
his private sins, and acknowledged the mercies of God, in granting him time to
Repent: he declared that he had acted sincerely in all he did, in matters of
Religion, while he was in power: and rejoiced for his being Instrumental in so
good a work: he exhorted the People to live sutably to the doctrine received
among them; otherwise they might look for great Judgments from God. As he was
going on, there was an unaccountable Noise heard, which so frighted the People,
that many run away. Sir Anthony Brown came up, riding toward the Scaffold,
which made the Spectators think, that he brought a Pardon, and this occasioned
great shouts of Joy, but they soon saw their mistakes; so the Duke went on in
his Speech, He declared his cheerful submission to the will of God, and desired
them likewise to acquiesce in it; he prayed for the King and his Council, and
exhorted the People to continue obedient to them: and asked the forgiveness of
all, whom at any time he had offended. Then he turned to his private devotions,
and fitted himself for the blow, which upon the signal given, severed his Head
from his Body.

He was a Man of extraordinary Virtues, of great candor, and eminent Piety: he
was always a promoter of Justice, and a Patron of the oppressed. He was a
better Captain than a Counselor, and was too easy and open-hearted, to be so
cautious, as such times, and such Employments required. It was generally
believed, all this Conspiracy, for which he, and the other Four suffered, was
only a forgery: all the other Accomplices were quickly discharged, and Palmer,
the chief Witness, became Northumberlands particular confident: and the
indiscreet words, which the Duke of Somerset had spoken, and his gathering
armed Men about him, was imputed to Palmer's artifices, who had put him in fear
of his life, and so made him do, and say those things, for which he lost it.
His four friends did all end their Lives, with the most solemn protestations of
their Innocence, and the whole matter was looked on, as a contrivance of
Northumberlands, by which he lost the affections of the People entirely. Some
reflected on the Attainder of the Duke of Norfolk, and the Earl of Surrey's
death, occasioned likewise by a Conspiracy of their own Servants, in which it
was thought, this Duke was too active. He was also much censured for his
Brothers death. He had raised much of his Estate out of the spoils of Bishops
Lands, and his Palace out of the Ruins of some Churches; and to this some
added a remark, that he did not claim the benefit of his Clergy, which would
have saved him, and since he had so spoiled the Church, they imputed it to a
particular Judgment on him, that he forgot it: But in this they were mistaken,
for in the Act by which he was condemned, it was provided that no Clergy should
purge that Felony.

In Germany, The affairs of Germany.
Maurice began this year to form a great design: He entered into
correspondences not only with the Princes of Germany, but also with France and
England; and having given intimations of his designs for the liberty of
Germany, and the security of the Protestant Religion, to some that had great
credit in Magdeburg, he brought that Town to a surrender, and having made
himself sure of the Army, he quartered his Troops in the Territories of the
Popish Princes, by which they were all much alarmed, only the Emperor did not
apprehend the danger till it was too late for him. A quarrel fell in between
the Pope and the King of France, about Parma: The Pope threatened, if that King
would not restore Parma, he would take France from him. Upon that, the Council
being now again opened at Trent, the King of France protested against it, and
declared that he would call a National Council in France, and would not obey,
nor receive their Decrees. The Emperor still pressed the Germans to send
Ambassadors and Divines to Trent. The Council began with the points about the
Eucharist, and it was ordered that these should be handled according to the
Scriptures and Ancient Authors; the Italians did not like this, and said the
bringing many quotations was only an Act of Memory, and that way would give the
Lutherans great advantages: The sublime speculations of the Schools, together
with their terms, were much safer Weapons to deal with. A Safe Conduct was
demanded from the Council, for the Emperors Conduct was not thought
sufficient, since at Constance, John Hus, and Jerome of Prague were burnt,
though they had the Emperors Safe Conduct. The Council of Basil had granted a
very full one to the Bohemians; so the Lutherans demanded one in the same form,
but though one was granted, yet it was in many things short of that. The
Elector of Brandenburg sent an Ambassador to Trent, who made a general Speech
of the respect his Master had for them. The Legates answered, and thanked him
for submitting to their Decrees, of which the Ambassador had not said a word;
but when he expostulated about it, the Legates said, they answered him
according to that he ought to have said, and not to that he did say. The
Council decreed, the manner of Christ's presence to be ineffable, and yet added
that Transubstantiation was a fit term for it; for that was a notion as
unconceivable as any that could be thought on: Then they decreed the necessity
of Auricular Confession, that thereby Priests might keep a proportion between
Penances and Sins, which was thought a mockery; for the trade of slight
Penances, and easy Absolutions for the greatest sins, showed there was no care
taken to adjust the one to the other. The Ambassador of the Duke of Wirtemberg
came, and moved for a Safe Conduct to their Divines to come and maintain their
Doctrine: The Legates answered, they would enter into no disputes with them,
but if they came with an humble mind, and proposed their scruples, they would
satisfy them. Ambassadors from some Towns arrived at Trent, and those sent by
the Duke of Saxe were on their way, upon which the Emperor ordered his Agents,
to gain time, and hinder the Council to proceed in their decisions till those
were heard, but all he could prevail in, was that the Article concerning the
Communion in both kinds, was postponed till they should come.

The day after the Duke of Somerset's execution, A Session of Parliament.
The first Act they past was about the Common Prayer Book, as it was now
amended: To it only one Earl, two Bishops, and two Lords dissented. The Book
was appointed to be every where received after All-hallows next. The Bishops
were required to proceed by the censures of the Church, against such as came
not to it; they also authorized the Book of Ordinations, and enacted the same
Penalties against offenders, that were in the Act for the former Book three
years before. The Papists took occasion on the changes now made in the Book, to
say, that the new Doctrines and ways of Worship changed as fast as the fashions
did. It was answered, That it was no wonder if corruptions, which had been
creeping in for a thousand years, were not all discovered, and thrown out at
once; and since they had been every age making additions of new Ceremonies, it
might be excused, if the Purging them out was done by such easy degrees. The
Book was not to be received till All-hallows, because it was hoped that between
and then the Reformation of the Ecclesiastical Laws would have been finished: A
Bill concerning Treasons past with only one dissent, it was much opposed in the
H. of Commons; for the multiplying of Treasons is always looked on as a severity
in the Government. One Bill was rejected, but another was agreed on, If any
called the King, or his Successors, named in the Statute of 35 Hen. 8.
Heretic, Tyrant, or other opprobrious words, he was for the first offense to
be punished with a forfeiture of Goods and Chattels, for the second with a
Praemunire, and the third offense was made Treason: but if it was done in
printing or writing, the first offense was Treason. None were to be prosecuted
for words, but within three Months: and two Witnesses were made necessary, who
should aver their Depositions to the Parties face. This seems to relate to the
proceedings against the Duke of Somerset, in which the Witnesses did not
appear, so that he lost the advantage of cross examining them: and many times
Innocence and guilt discover themselves, when the Parties are confronted.
Another Law past for Holy Days and Fasts. No days were to be esteemed Holy in
their own nature, but by reason of those Holy duties which ought to be done in
them, for which they were dedicated to the service of God. Days were esteemed
to be dedicated only to the honor of God, even those in which the Saints were
commemorated; Sundays, and the other Holydays were to be religiously observed,
and the Bishops were to proceed to Censures against offenders, only Laborers
or Fishermen in case of necessity, might work on them: The Eves before them
were to be Fasts, and abstinence from Flesh was enacted, both in Lent, and on
Fridays and Saturdays. This liberty to Tradesmen to work on these days, was
abused to a public profanation of them, but the stricter clauses in the Act
were little regarded. An Act past, empowering Churchwardens to gather
Collections for the poor, and the Bishops to proceed against such as refused to
contribute; which though it was a Bill that taxed the people, yet had its first
rise in the House of Lords. A Bill was past by the Lords, but rejected by the
Commons, for securing the Clergy from falling under the lash of a Praemunire by
Ignorance; and that they ought to be first prohibited by the Kings Writ, and
not be sued unless they continued after that, stiff in their disobedience. An
Act past for the Marriage of the Clergy, four Earls and six Lords dissenting
from it: That whereas the former Act about it was thought only a permission of
it, as some other unlawful things were connived at; upon which the Wives and
Children of the Clergy were reproachfully used, and the Word of God was not
heard with due reverence; therefore their Marriages were declared good and
valid. The Marquess of Northampton procured an Act, confirming his second
Marriage, and that occasioned another to be proposed in the House of Lords,
that no man might put away his Wife and marry another, unless he were first
Divorced; but it was laid aside by the Commons. Westminster was reunited to
London, only the Collegiate Church was still continued.

An Act past concerning Usury, An Act against Usury.
repealing a Law made 37 Hen. 8. That none might take above 20 per Cent. All
Usury, or profit for Money lent, was condemned, as contrary to the Word of God,
and transgressors were to be imprisoned, and fined at pleasure. This has been
since that time repealed, and several regulations have been made of the gain by
lent Money, which is now reduced to 6 per Cent. The prohibitions of Usury by
Moses have been thought Moral, others have believed that they were founded only
on the equal division of the Land; and since it was then lawful to take Usury
of a stranger, they have inferred that the Law was not Moral, otherwise it must
be of perpetual obligation: It was also a great incitement to industry not to
lend upon profit, and it made every man lay out his Money in some way of
advantage, and their neighborhood to Tire and Sidon gave them a quick vent of
their Manufacture, without which it is not easy to imagine how such vast
numbers could have lived in so narrow a Country: So that these Laws seemed to
be only judiciary. It was thought at first suitable to the Brotherly kindness
that ought to be among Christians, to lend without gain; but at last Canons
were made against taking Usury, and it was put among the reserved Cases.
Mortgages were an invention to avoid that,

A Bill was sent to the House of Commons, signed by the King, A Repeal of the
settlement of the Duke of Somerset's estate.
repealing the settlement of the Duke of Somerset's Estate, 23 Hen. 8. made in
favor of his Children, by his second Wife, to exclude the Children by his
first, of whom are descended the Seimours of Devonshire, which some imputed to
a Jealousy, he had of his first Wife, and others ascribed it to the power his
second Wife had over him. But the Commons were very unwilling to void a
settlement confirmed in Parliament, and so for Fifteen days it was debated: A
new Bill was devised, and that was much altered, and the Bill was not finished
till the day before the dissolution of the Parliament. The Lords added a
Proviso, confirming the Duke of Somerset's Attainder, but that was cast out by
the Commons. Some Writings had been sealed with relation to a Marriage between
the Earl of Hartford, the Dukes Son, and the Earl of Oxford's Daughter, and the
Lords sent down a Bill voiding these, but upon a division in the House of
Commons, 68. were for it, and 69. were against it; so it was cast out. The
House was now thin, when we find but 137. Members in it: but that is one of the
effects of a long Parliament: many grow infirm, and many keep out of the way on
design, and those who at their first Election were the Representatives of the
People, after they have sat long, become a Cabal of Men, that pursue their own
Interests, Tonstall is imprisoned.
more than the Public Service. Tonstall Bishop of Durham, upon some
Informations, was put in Prison in the former year: The Duke of Northumberland
intended to erect a great Principality for his Family in the North; and the
accession of the Jurisdiction of the County Palatine, which is in that See,
seemed so considerable, that he resolved to ruin Tonstall, and so make way for
that. He complied in all the changes that were made, though he had protested
against them in Parliament; he writ also for the Corporal Presence, but with
more Eloquence than Learning: He was a candid and moderate Man, and there was
always a good correspondence between Cranmer and him: and now when the Bill was
put in against him, he opposed it, and protested against it, by which he
absolutely lost the Duke of Northumberland: but all the Popish complying
Bishops went along with it. There were some Depositions read in the House of
Lords to justify it, but when the Bill with these was sent down to the
Commons, they resolved to put a stop to that way of condemning Men without
hearing them: so they sent a Message to the Lords, that he and his Accusers
might be heard face to face, and that not being done, they let the Bill fall.
By these Indications, it appeared that the House of Commons had little kindness
for the Duke of Northumberland. Many of them had been much obliged to the Duke
of Somerset; so it was resolved to have a new Parliament, and this which had
sat almost five years, was on the 15th. of April dissolved.

The Convocation did confirm the Articles of Religion, A Reformation of
Ecclesiastical Laws prepared.
that had been prepared the former year, and thus was the Reformation of
Worship and Doctrine now brought to such perfection, that since that time there
has been very little alteration made in these. But another Branch of it was yet
unfinished, and was now under consultation, touching the Government of the
Church, and the rules of the Ecclesiastical Courts. Two Acts had passed in the
former reign, and one in this, impowering XXXII. to revise all the Laws of the
Church, and digest them into a body. King Henry issued out a Commission, and
the Persons were named, who made some progress in it, as appears by some of
Cranmer's Letters to him. In this Reign it had been begun several times, but
the Changes in the Government made it be laid aside. Thirty two were found to
be too many for preparing the first draught, so Eight were appointed to make it
ready for them: These were Cranmer and Ridley, Cox and Peter Martyr, Traheron
and Tailor, and Lucas and Gosnold, two Bishops, two Divines, two Civilians, and
two Common Lawyers; but it was generally believed, that Cranmer drew it all
himself, and the rest only corrected what he designed. Haddon and Cheek were
employed to put it in Latin; in which they succeeded so well, and arrived at
so true a purity in the Roman style, that it looks like a work of the best Ages
of that State, before their Language was corrupted with the mixture of
barbarous terms and phrases, with which all the later Writings were filled, but
none were more nauseously rude than the Books of the Canon Law. The Work was
cast into fifty one Titles, perhaps it was designed to bring it near the number
of the Books, into which Justinian digested the Roman Law. The Eight finished
it, and offered it to the XXXII. who divided themselves into Four Classes,
every one was to offer his Corrections, and when it had past through them all,
it was to be offered to the King for his Confirmation; but the King died before
it was quite finished, nor was it ever afterward taken up: yet I shall think
it no useless part of this work, to give an account of what was intended to be
done in this matter, as well as I relate what was done in other things.

The first Title of it was concerning the Catholic Faith: The heads of it.
it was made Capital to deny the Christian Religion. The Books of Scripture
were reckoned up, and the Apocrypha left out. The four first General Councils
were received, but both Councils and Fathers were to be submitted to, only as
they agreed with the Scriptures. The second enumerates and condemns many
Heresies, extracted out of the Opinions of the Church of Rome, and the Tenets
of the Anabaptists: and among others, those who excused their lives, by the
pretense of Predestination, are reckoned up. 3. The judgment of Heresy was to
lie in the Bishops Court, except in exempted places. Persons suspected might be
required to purge themselves, and those who were convicted, were to abjure and
do Penance, but such as were obstinate, were declared Infamous, and not to have
the benefit of the Law, or of making Testaments, and so all Capital proceedings
for Heresy were laid aside. 4. Blasphemy against God was to be punished as
obstinate Heresy. 5. The Sacraments, and other parts of the Pastoral Charge,
were to be decently performed. 6. All Magic, Idolatry, or Conjuring was to be
punished arbitrarily, and in case of obstinacy, with Excommunication. 7.
Bishops were appointed once a Year to call all their Clergy together, to
examine them concerning their Flocks: and Itinerant Preachers were to be often
employed for visiting such Precincts as might be put under their care. 8. All
Marriages were to be after asking of Banes, and to be annulled, if not done
according to the Book of Common Prayer. Corrupters of Virgins were to marry
them; or if that could not be done, to give them the third part of their Goods,
and suffer Corporal punishment. Marriages made by force, or without consent of
Parents, were declared null. Polygamy was forbid, and Mothers were required to
suckle their Children. 9. The degrees of Marriage were settled according to the
Levitical Law, but spiritual kindred was to be no bar. 10. A Clergyman guilty
of Adultery, was to forfeit his Goods and Estate to his Wife and Children, or
to some pious use; and to be banished or Imprisoned during life: a Layman
guilty of it, was to forfeit the half, and be banished or Imprisoned during
life: Wives that were guilty, were to be punished in the same manner. The
Innocent Party might marry again after a Divorce. Desertion, or Mortal Enmity,
or the constant perverseness of a Husband, might induce a Divorce, but little
quarrels, nor a perpetual Disease might not do it; and the separation from Bed
and Board, except during a Trial, was never to be allowed. 11. Patrons were
charged to give presentations, without making bargains; to choose the fittest
persons, and not to make promises till the Livings were vacant. The Bishops
were required to use great strictness in the Trial of those, whom they
ordained: all Pluralities and Non-residence were condemned, and all that were
presented were to purge themselves of Simony by Oath. The twelfth and
thirteenth were concerning the changing of Benefices. The fourteenth was
concerning the manner of purgation upon common fame: all superstitious
Purgations were condemned. Others followed, about Dilapidations, Elections and
Collations. The nineteenth was concerning Divine Offices. The Communion was
ordered to be every Sunday in Cathedrals, and a Sermon was to be in them in the
afternoon: such as received the Sacrament, were to give notice to the Minister
the day before, that he might examine their Consciences: The Catechism was
appointed to be explained for an Hour in the afternoon on Holy Days: After the
Evening Prayer, the Poor were to be taken care of, Penances were to be enjoined
to scandalous Persons, and the Minister was to confer with some of the Ancients
of the People, concerning the state of the Parish, That admonitions and
censures might be applied, as there was occasion given. The twentieth was
concerning other Church Officers. A Rural Dean was to be in every Precinct to
watch over the Clergy, according to the Bishops directions: Archdeacons were to
be over them, and the Bishop over all: who was to have yearly Synods, and visit
every third Year. His Family was to consist of Clergymen, in imitation of St.
Austin, and other ancient Bishops, these he was to train up, for the service of
the Church: When Bishops became infirm, they were to have Co-adjutors:
Archbishops were to do the Episcopal duties in their Diocese, and to visit
their Province. Every Synod was to begin with a Communion, and after that the
Ministers were to give an account of their Parishes, and follow such directions
as the Bishop should give them. Other heads followed concerning Churchwardens;
Tithes, Universities, Visitations, and several sorts of Censures. In the
thirtieth, a large Scheme was drawn of Excommunication, which was entrusted to
Churchmen, for keeping the Church pure, and was not to be inflicted, but for
obstinacy in some gross fault: all causes upon which it was pronounced, were to
be examined before the Minister of the Parish, a Justice of Peace, and some
other Churchmen. It was to be pronounced and intimated with great seriousness,
and all were to be warned not to keep company with the person censured, under
the like pains, except those of his own Family: Upon his continuing forty days
obstinate under it, a Writ was to be issued out for Commitment, till the
Sentence should be taken off. Such as had the King's Pardon for Capital
offenses, were yet liable to Church censures. Then followed the Office of
absolving Penitents. They were to come to the Church-door, and crave
admittance, and the Minister having brought them in, was to read a long
discourse concerning Sin, Repentance, and the Mercies of God. Then the Party
was to confess his sin, and to ask God, and the Congregation pardon; upon which
the Minister was to lay his hands on his Head, and to pronounce the Absolution.
Then a thanksgiving was to be offered to God, at the Communion Table, for the
reclaiming that sinner. The other Heads of this work, relate to the other parts
of the Law of those Courts. It is certain, that the abounding of Vice and
Impiety, flows in a great measure from the want of that strictness of censure,
which was the glory of the Christian Church in the Primitive times: and it is a
public connivance at sin, that there have not been more effectual ways taken
for making sinners ashamed, and denying them the Privileges of Christians,
till they have changed their ill course of life.

There were at this time also remedies under consideration, The Poverty of the
Clergy.
for the great misery and poverty the Clergy were generally in: but the Laity
were so much concerned to oppose all these, that there was no hope of bringing
them to any good effect, till the King should come to be of Age himself, and
endeavor to recover again a competent maintenance, for the Clergy, out of
their hands, who had devoured their Revenues. Both Heath and Day, the Bishops
of Worcester and Chichester, were this Year deprived of their Bishoprics, by a
Court of Delegates, that were all Laymen. But it does not appear, for what
offenses they were so censured. The Bishoprics of Gloucester and Worcester
were both united, and put under Hooper's care; but soon after, the former was
made an exempted Archdeaconry, and he was declared Bishop only of Worcester. In
every See, as it fell vacant, the best Manors were laid hold on by such hungry
Courtiers, as had the Interest to procure the Grant of them. It was thought,
that the Bishops Sees were so out of Measure enriched, that they could never be
made poor enough: but such have was made in spoiling them, that they were
reduced to so low a condition, that it was hardly possible for a Bishop to
subsist in them. If what had been thus taken from them, had been converted to
good uses, such as the supplying the Inferior Clergy, it had been some
mitigation of so heinous a robbery: But their Lands were snatched up by Laymen,
who thought of making no Compensation to the Church for the spoils thus made by
them.

This Year the Reformation had some more footing in Ireland than formerly.
Affairs in Ireland.
Henry the VIII. had assumed to himself, by consent of the Parliament of that
Kingdom, the Title of King of Ireland: the former Kings of England having only
been called Lords of it. The Popes and Emperors have pretended, that such
Titles could be given only by them: The former said, all power in Heaven and
Earth was given to Christ, and by consequence to his Vicar. The latter, as
carrying the Title of Roman Emperor, pretended, that as they Anciently
bestowed those Titles, so that devolved on them, who retained only the name and
shadow of that Great Authority. But Princes and States have thought that they
may bring themselves under what Titles they please. In Ireland, though the
Kings of England were well obeyed within the English Pale, yet the Irish
continued barbarous and uncivilised, and depended on the heads of their Names
or Tribes, and were obedient, or did rebel as they directed them. In Vlster
they had a great dependence on Scotland: and there were some risings there,
during the War with Scotland, which were quieted, by giving the Leading-men
Pensions, and getting them to come and live within the English Pale. Monluc,
Bishop of Valence, being then in Scotland, went over thither to engage them to
raise new Commotions; but that had no effect: while he was there, his
lasciviousness came to be discovered by an odd accident, for a Whore was
brought to him by some English Friars, and secretly kept by him: but she
searching among his Clothes, fell on a Glass, full of somewhat, that was very
odoriferous, and drank it off; which being discovered by the Bishop, too late,
put him in a most violent passion: for it had been given him, as a Present, by
Soliman the Magnificent, when he was Ambassador at his Court. It was called
the richest balm of Egypt, and valued at 2000. Crowns. His rage grew so
boisterous, that all about him, discovered both his Passion, and Lewdness at
once. The Reformation was set up in the English Pale, but had made a small
progress among the Irish. This Year Bale was sent over to labor among them. He
was a busy Writer, and was a Learned zealous Man, but did not write with the
temper and decency that became a Divine. Goodaker was sent to be Primate of
Armagh, and he was to be Bishop of Ossory. Two Irish Men were also promoted
with them; who undertook to advance the Reformation there. The Archbishop of
Dublin intended to have ordained them by the old Pontifical, and all, except
Bale, were willing it should be so, but he prevailed that it should be done
according to the new book of Ordinations: after that he went into his Diocese,
but found all there in dark Popery, and before he could make any Progress, A
Change in the Garter.
the King's death put an end to his designs. There was a change settled in the
Order of the Garter this Year. A Proposition was made the former year, to
consider how the Order might be freed from the Superstition, that was supposed
to be in it. St. George's fighting with a Dragon, looked like a Legend forged in
dark Ages, to support the humor of Chivalry, then very high in the world. The
story was neither credible in it self, nor vouched by any good Author: nor was
there any of that name mentioned by the Ancients, but George the Arrian Bishop,
that was put in Alexandria, when Athanasius was banished. Some Knights were
appointed to prepare a Reformation of the Order: and the Earl of Westmorland,
and Sir Andrew Dudley were this Year Installed according to the New Model. It
was appointed to be called in all time coming, the Order of the Garter, and no
more the Order of St. George; instead of the former George, there was to be on
the one side of the Jewel, a Man on Horseback, with a Bible on his Swords
point: On the Sword was written Protectio, and on the Bible Verbum Dei; and on
the Reverse a Shield, and Fides written upon it: to show that they would
maintain the Word of God, both with offensive and defensive Weapons: but all
this was reversed by Queen Mary, and the old Statutes were again revived, which
continue to this day.

There was at this time a strict enquiry made into the accounts of all,
Northumberlands severity.
who had been employed in the former part of this Reign; for it was believed,
that the Visitors had embezel'd much of the Plate of the Churches: and these
were the Creatures of the Duke of Somerset, which made Northumberland prosecute
them more vehemently: On none did this fall more severely, than on the Lord
Paget, who was not only fined in 6000 l. but was degraded from the Order of the
Garter, with a particular mark of Infamy on his Extraction; yet he was
afterward restored to it with as much honor. He had been a constant friend to
the Duke of Somerset, and that made his Enemies execute so severe a Revenge on
him. Northumberland was preparing matters for a Parliament, and being a Man of
an Insolent temper, no less abject when he was low, than lifted up with
prosperity, he thought extreme severity was the only way to bring the Nation
easily to comply with his administration of affairs; but this, though it
succeeded for some time, yet when he needed it most, it turned violently upon
him: for nothing can work on a free People so much, as Justice and Clemency in
the Government.

A great design was settled this Year, Trade flourishes much.
which proved to be the foundation of all that Wealth and Trade, that has since
that time flourished so much in this Nation. Henry the III. had been much
supported in his Wars, by the assistance he got from the Free-Towns of Germany,
in recompense of which he gave them great Privileges in England. They were
formed here in a Corporation, and lived in the Still Yard near London Bridge.
They had gone sometimes beyond their Charters, which were thereupon judged to
be forfeited, but by great Presents they purchased new ones. They traded in a
Body, and so ruined others by under selling them; and by making Presents at
Court, or lending great Sums, they had the Government on their side. Trade was
now rising much, Courts began to be more Magnificent, so that there was a
greater consumption, particularly of Cloth, than formerly. Antwerp and Hamburgh
lying, the one near the mouth of the Rhine, and the other at the mouth of the
Elbe, had then the chief Trade in these Parts of the World; and their Factors
in the Still-Yard, had all the Markets in England in their hands; and set such
Prices, both on what they imported or exported, as they pleased, and broke all
other Merchants to such a degree, that the former Year they had shipped 44000.
Clothes, and all the other Traders had not shipped above 1100. So the
Merchant-adventurers complained of the Still-Yard Men, and after some hearings,
it was judged that they had forfeited their Charter, and that their Company was
dissolved: nor could all the applications of the Hanse Towns, seconded by the
Emperor's Intercession, procure them a new Charter. But a greater design was
proposed, after this was settled; which was to open two free Mart Towns in
England, and to give them such Privileges, as the free Towns in the Empire
had, and by that means to draw the Trade to England: Southampton and Hull were
thought the fittest. This was so far entertained by the young King, that he
writ a large Paper, ballancing the conveniences and inconveniences of it, but
all that fell with his Life.

This year Cardan, Cardan in England.
the great Philosopher of that Age, past through England, as he returned from
Scotland. The Archbishop of St. Andrews had sent for him out of Italy, to cure
him of a Dropsy: in which he had good success; but being much conversant in
Astrology and Magic, he told him he could not change his fate, and that he was
to be hanged. He waited on King Edward as he returned, and was so charmed with
his great knowledge and rare qualities, that he always spoke of him, as the
rarest Person he had ever seen: and after his death, when nothing was to be got
by flattering, he writ the following Character of him.

All the Graces were in him: he had many Tongues, when he was yet but a Child;
together with the English, his Natural Tongue, he had both Latin and French;
nor was he ignorant, as I hear, of the Greek, Italian, and Spanish and perhaps
some more; But for the English, French and Latin, he was exact in them, and was
apt to learn every thing. Nor was he ignorant of Logic, of the Principles of
Natural Philosophy, nor of Music; The sweetness of his Temper was such as
became a Mortal, his Gravity becoming the Majesty of a King, and his
Disposition was suitable to his high Degree: In sum, that Child was so bred,
had such parts, and was of such expectation, that he looked like a Miracle of a
Man: These things are not spoken Rhetorically, and beyond the Truth, but are
indeed short of it. And afterward he adds, He was a mavelous Boy; when I was
with him, he was in the 15th. year of his Age, in which he spoke Latin as
politely, and as promptly as I did: He asked me, what was the subject of my
Book, de Rerum varietate, which I dedicated to him? I answered, that in the
first Chapter, I gave the true cause of Comets, which had been long enquired
into, but was never found out before. What is it, said he? I said, it was the
concourse of the Light of wandering Stars. He answered, How can that be, since
the Stars move in different motions? How comes it that the Comets are not soon
dissipated, or do not move after them, according to their motions. To this I
answered, they do move after them, but much quicker than they, by reason of the
different aspect, as we see in Crystal, or when a Rainbow rebounds from a
Wall: for a little change makes a great difference of place. But the King said,
How can that be, where there is no subject to receive that Light, as the Wall
is the subject for the Rainbow? To this I answered, That this was as in the
Milky way, or where many Candles were lighted, the middle place, where their
shining met, was white and clear. From this little taste, it may be imagined
what he was. And indeed the ingenuity, and sweetness of his Disposition had
raised in all good, and learned Men the greatest expectation of him possible.
He began to love the Liberal Arts before he knew them, and to know them before
he could use them: and in him there was such an Attempt of Nature, that not
only England, but the World has reason to lament his being so early snatched
away. How truly was it said of such extraordinary Persons, that their Lives are
short, and seldom do they come to be old? He gave us an Essay of Virtue, though
he did not live to give a Pattern of it. When the gravity of a King was
needful, he carried himself like an old Man, and yet he was always affable, and
gentle, as became his Age. He played on the Lute; he meddled in affairs of
State: and for Bounty, he did in that emulate his Father; though he, even when
he endeavored to be too good, might appear to have been bad: but there was no
ground of suspecting any such thing in the Son, whose mind was cultivated by
the study of Philosophy.

These extraordinary blossoms gave but too good reason to fear, that a fruit
which ripened so fast, could not last long.

In Scotland there was a great change in the Government: Affairs in Scotland.
the Governor was dealt with, to resign it to the Queen Dowager, who returned
this Year from France, and was treated with all that respect that was due to
her rank, as she past through England. She brought Letters to the Governor,
advising him to resign it to her, but in such terms, that he saw he must either
do it, or maintain his power by force: he was a soft Man, and was the more
easily wrought on, because his ambitious Brother was then desperately ill: but
when he recovered, and found what he had done, he expressed his displeasure at
it in very vehement terms. The young Queen of Scotlands Uncles proposed a Match
for her with the Dolphin, which had been long in discourse, and the King of
France inclined much to it. Constable Monmorancy opposed it: He observed how
much Spain suffered, in having so many Territories at a distance: though those
were the best Provinces of Europe. So he reckoned the keeping Scotland, would
cost France more than ever it could be worth: A Revolt to England would be
easy, and the sending Fleets and Armies thither would be a vast charge: He
therefore advised the King, rather to marry her to some of the Princes of the
Blood, and to send them to Scotland, and so by a small Pension, that Kingdom
would be preserved in the Interests of France. But the Constable was a known
Enemy to the House of Guise, and so those wise advices were little considered,
and were imputed to the fears he had of so great a strengthening, as this would
have given to their Interest at Court. In Scotland there were now two Factions:
the one was headed by the Archbishop, and all the Clergy were in it, who were
jealous of the Queen, as leaning too much to some Lords, who were believed to
incline to the Reformation; of whom the Prior of St. Andrews, afterward the
Earl of Murray was the chief: These offered to serve the Queen in all her
designs; in particular, in sending the Matrimonial Crown to France, upon their
young Queens Marriage with the Dolphin, if she would defend them from the
Violence of the Clergy in matters of Religion, which being made generally
subservient to other Interests in all Courts, this was well entertained by the
Queen, though she was otherwise very zealous in her own Religion.

There was a great and unexpected turn this year, in the affairs of Germany.
The affairs in Germany:
The Emperor's Ministers began to entertain some jealousy of Maurice, so that
the Duke of Alva advised the Emperor to call for him, and so to take him off
from the head of the Army; and then make him give an account of some suspicious
passages, in his treating with other Princes: but the Bishop of Arras said, he
had both his Secretaries in pay, and he knew by their means all his
Negotiations, and relied so on their Intelligence, that he prevailed with the
Emperor not to provoke him, by seeming distrustful of him. But Maurice knew
all this, and deluded his Secretaries, so that he seemed to open to them all
his secretest Negotiations; yet he really let them know nothing, but what he
was willing should come to the Emperor's ears, and had managed his Treaties so
secretly, that they had not the least suspicion of them. At last the Emperor
was so possessed with the Advertisements that were sent him from all parts, that
he writ to Maurice to come and clear himself; and then he refined it higher:
for he presently left the Army, and took Post, with one of his Secretaries, and
a small Retinue: after a Days riding, he complained of a pain in his side, so
that he could not go on, but sent his Secretary with his excuses: This
appearance of confidence made the Emperor lay down all his jealousies of him.
He had also sent his Ambassadors to Trent, and had ordered Melancthon, and
some Divines to follow them slowly, and as soon as a safe conduct was obtained,
to go to Trent. The Emperor's Agents had a hard task, between the Legates and
the Lutherans: they dealt with the Legates to hear the other; but they
answered, that it was against the rules of the Church, to treat with professed
Heretics. The Lutherans on the other hand, made such high demands, that they
had as much to do to moderate them: they pressed them not to ask too much at
once, and promised, that if they would proceed prudently, the Emperor would
concur with them, to pull down the Popes power, and to reform abuses. A
Safe Conduct was demanded, such as had been granted by the Council of Basil,
that their Divines might have a decisive voice, and the free exercise of their
Religion, and that all things might be examined according to the Scriptures.
But the Legates abhorred the name of that Council, that had acted so much
against the Papal authority, and had granted such a Conduct, that so they might
unite Germany, and engage the Empire to join with them against the Pope. The
Ambassadors from the Lutherans were heard in a General Congregation, where
they gave the Council a very cold Complement, and desired a Safe Conduct. The
Pope understood, that the Emperor was resolved to set on the Spanish Bishops,
to bear down the power of the Court of Rome, therefore he united himself to
France, and resolved to break the Council on the first occasion, upon which he
ordered the Legates to proceed to settle the doctrine; hoping the Protestants
would upon that despair of favor, and go away. But while these things were in
agitation, the War of Germany broke out, and the Legates suspended the Council
for two Years.

After this, An Account of the Council of Trent.
I shall have no occasion to speak more of this Council, so I shall offer this
remark here, that this Council had been much desired both by Princes and
Bishops, in hopes that differences of Religion would have been composed in it,
and that the Corruptions of the Court of Rome would have been reformed by it,
and that had made the Popes very apprehensive of it: but such was the cunning
of the Legates, the number of Italian Bishops, and the dissensions of the
Princes of Europe, that it had effects quite contrary to what all sides
expected. The breach in Religion was put past reconciling by the positive
decisions they made: the abuses of the Court of Rome were confirmed by the
Proviso's, made in favors of the Privileges of the Apostolic See: and the
World was so cured of their longings for a General Council, that none has been
desired since that time. The History of that Council was writ with great
exactness and Judgment, by Father Paul of Venice, while the thing was yet fresh
in all Men's memories; and though it discovered the whole secret of transactions
there, yet none set himself to write against it, for Forty Years after: of late
then Pallavicini undertook it, and upon the credit of many Memorials, he in
many things contradicts Father Paul; but as many of these are likely enough to
be forged, so in the main of the History, they both agree so far, that it is
manifest, things were not fairly carried, and that all matters were managed by
Intreagues and secret practices, in which it will be very hard to discern such
a particular conduct of the Holy Ghost, as should induce the World to submit to
their authority: and indeed Pallavicini was aware of this, and therefore he
lays down this for a foundation; That there must be a Principality in the
Church, supported by great Wealth and Dignity; and many practices are now
necessary that are contrary to what were in the Primitive time, which was the
Infancy of the Church, and ought not to be a rule to it now, when it is grown
up to its full state.

Maurice declared for the liberty of Germany, and took Ausburg, The Emperor's
designs are blasted.
and several other Towns. The King of France fell also in, upon the Empire,
with a great Force, and by surprise made himself Master of Metz, Toul and
Verdun, and thought to have got Strasburg. Maurice sent his demands to the
Emperor for the Landgrave's liberty, and for restoring the freedom of the
Empire: and the Emperor being slow in making answer, he marched on to
Inspruck, where he surprised a Post, and was within two Miles of him, before he
was aware of it, so that the Emperor was forced to fly away by Torch-light: and
from thence went to Italy. Thus that very Army and Prince, that had been
chiefly Instrumental in the ruin of the Empire, did now again assert its
freedom; and all the Emperor's great design on Germany was now so blasted, that
he could never after this put any life in it: he was forced to discharge his
Prisoners, and to call in the Proscriptions, and after some Treaty, at last the
Edict of Passaw was made, by which the free exercise of the Protestant Religion
was granted to the Princes and Towns: and so did that storm, which had almost
overwhelmed the Princes of that Persuasion end, without any other considerable
effect, besides the Translation of the Electoral dignity from John to Maurice.
The Emperor's misfortunes increased on him, for against all reason he besieged
Metz in December, but after he had ruined his Army in it, he was forced to
raise the Siege. Upon that he retired into Flanders, in such discontent, that
for some time he would admit none to come to him. Here it was believed, he
first formed that design, which some years after he put in execution, of
forsaking the World, and exchanging the Pomp of a Court, with the retirement of
a Monastery. This strange and unlookt for turn in his affairs, gave a great
demonstration of an overruling Providence, that governs all humane affairs,
and of that particular care that God had of the Reformation, in recovering it,
when it seemed to be gone, without all hope, in Germany.

In the beginning of this Year, Edward's hand. A new Parliament was called, and
sat down the first of March; a motion was made for a Subsidy of two tenths, and
two fifteenths to be paid in two years: at the passing of the Bill there was a
great debate about it in the House of Commons, which seems to have been
concerning the Preamble, for it contained a high accusation of the Duke of
Somerset's administration, and was set on by the Duke of Northumberland's
Party, to let the King see how well pleased the Representative of the Nation
was with his fall.

The Sons of the Nobility and Gentry had ordinarily Prebends given them, A Bill
proposed that Laymen should not hold Church-dignities.
under this pretense, that they intended to follow their studies, and make
themselves capable of entering into Orders: and this was like to become a great
prejudice to the Clergy, when so many of the dignities of the Church were in
Lay-hands. Upon this the Bishops procured a Bill to be past in the House of
Lords, that none might hold these, that was not either Priest or Deacon: but at
the third reading, the Commons threw it out.

Another Bill past for suppressing the Bishopric of Durham, An Act suppressing
the Bishop of Durham.
and erecting two new Sees, the one at Durham, and the other at Newcastle; the
former was to have 2000. and the latter 1000. Marks Revenue; there was also a
Dean and a Chapter to be endowed at Newcastle. Ridley was designed to be made
Bishop of Durham. But though the secular Jurisdiction of that See was given to
the Duke of Northumberland, yet the King's death stopped the further progress of
this affair. Tonstall was deprived, as Heath and Day were, by a Court of
Lay-delegates, upon the Informations that had been brought against him of
Misprision of Treason, and was kept in the Tower till Queen Mary set him at
liberty. The King granted a General Pardon, in which the Commons moved the
Lords, that some words might be put, though that is not usual to be done; for
Acts of Pardon, are commonly past without any Changes made in them: After the
passing these Acts, the Parliament was dissolved on the last of March. For it
seems either the Duke of Northumberland was not pleased with the proceedings in
the House of Commons, or he was resolved to call frequent Parliaments, and not
continue the same, as the Duke of Somerset had done.

Visitors were sent after this to examine what Plate was in every Church,
Another Visitation.
and to leave them one or two Chalices of Silver, with Linen, for the
Communion Table, and for Surplices, and to bring in all other things of value
to the Treasurer of the King's Household, and to sell the rest, and give it to
the Poor. This was a new rifling of Churches, by which it seemed some resolved
not to cease, till they had brought them to a Primitive Poverty, as well as the
Reformers intended to bring them to a Primitive purity. The King set his hand
to these Instructions, from which some have inferred, that he was ill
principled in himself, when at such an Age, he joined his Authority to such
proceedings. But he was now so ill, that it is probable, he set his hand to
every thing, that the Council sent him, without examining anxiously what it
might import.

Skip, Bishop of Hereford, dying, Harley succeeded him, and was the last that
was promoted by the Kings Letters Patents; as Barlow was the first, Bishops
made by the Kings Patent.
being removed by them, from St. David's to Bath and Wells. The form of the
Patent was, That the King appointed such a one to be Bishop during his Natural
life, or as long as he behaved himself well: and gave him power to ordain or
deprive Ministers, to exercise Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and perform all the
other parts of the Episcopal Function, that by the Word of God were committed
to Bishops, and this they were to do in the King's Name, and by his Authority.
Ferrar was put in St. David's, upon Barlow's removal: he was an indiscreet Man,
and drew upon himself the dislike of his Prebendaries, and many complaints were
made of him, which, if true, discovered great weakness in him: at last he was
sued in a Praemunire, for acting in his own name, and not in the King's, in his
Courts; and was put in Prison, where he continued, till Morgan, that was his
chief Accuser, being put in his place by Queen Mary, condemned him to the Fire;
which turned all former Censures, that he had given occasion for, by his
simplicity, into esteem and compassion. By these Patents, the Episcopal Power
was still declared to flow from Christ; they were only presentations to
Bishoprics, such as other Patrons gave to inferior Benefices; and such as
Christian Princes in France, and other Kingdoms gave in elder times, for
Bishoprics. Their Courts were ordered to be held in the King's Name; but all
this was repealed by Queen Mary: and when Queen Elizabeth came to the Crown,
instead of reviving this, she revived that made in the 25 Hen. 8. by which
Bishops were authorized to hold their Courts, as they had done formerly: and
though Queen Mary's repeal of the Statute of this King, was afterward taken
away, so that this Act seemed thereby to be again in force; yet Queen
Flizabeth's reviving that made by her Father, was understood to be, in effect,
a Repeal of it: so that in King James's time, when some scruples were started
about it, the Judges did not think it necessary to make an Explanatory Act, to
clear the matter, for the thing did not seem to admit of any debate. A new and
fuller Catechism was this Year composed by Poinet, and was published with the
Kings approbation.

The state of affairs beyond Sea, Affairs in Germany.
was now quite turned, so that the Progress the French had made, set the
English Council on mediating a Peace. The Emperor represented to them the
danger the Netherlands were in, since the French were Masters of Metz, and so
could in a great measure divide them from the assistance, that they might
receive from the Empire; therefore he desired that according to the Ancient
Leagues, between England, and the House of Burgundy, they would now engage
against the French. The Council sent over Ambassadors, both to the Emperor,
and the French King, to mediate. The Emperor was then indisposed, but his
Ministers complained much, that the French had broken with them perfidiously,
when they were making solemn protestations, that they intended to observe the
Peace religiously. The Germans proposed a League between the Emperor, the King
of the Romans, the King of England, and the Princes of the Empire. The Emperor
moved that the Netherlands might be comprehended within the perpetual League of
the Empire; but the Princes refused that, since those Provinces were like to be
the perpetual Seat of War, when ever it should break out between France and
Spain; unless they might have reciprocal advantages, for exposing themselves to
so much danger and charge. The French made extravagant Propositions, by which
it appeared, that their King had a mind to carry on the War. They asked the
restitution of Millan, Sicily, Naples, and Navarre, and the Sovereignty of the
Netherlands; and that Metz, Toul and Verdun should continue under the
Protection of France. The English would not receive these as Mediators, but
took them only as a Paper of News, and so ordered their Ambassadors to
communicate them to the Emperor. But the King's death broke off this
Negotiation.

He had contracted great Colds by Violent Exercises, which in January settled in
a deep Cough: and all Medicines proved ineffectual. The Kings sickness.
There was a suspicion taken up, and spread over all Europe, that he was
poisoned: but no certain grounds appear, for justifying that. During his
sickness, Ridley preached before him, and among other things, run out much on
works of Charity, and the duty of Men of high condition, to be Eminent in good
works. The King was much touched with this; so, after Sermon, he sent for the
Bishop, and treated him with such respect, that he made him sit down, and be
covered: then he told him, what Impression his Exhortation had made on him, and
therefore he desired to be directed by him, how to do his duty in that matter.
Ridley took a little time to consider of it, and after some consultation with
the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London, he brought the King a Scheme of several
Foundations, one for the sick and wounded, another for such as were wilfully
idle, or were mad, and a third for Orphans: so he endowed St. Bartholomew's
Hospital for the first, Bridewell for the second, and Christ's Church near
Newgate for the third; and he enlarged the Grant he made the former year, for
St. Thomas's Hospital in Southwark. The Statutes and Warrants relating to
these, were not finished before the 26. of June, though he gave order to make
all the have that was possible: and when he set his hand to them, he blessed God
that had prolonged his life, till he finished his designs concerning them.
These Houses have, by the good Government, and great Charities of the City of
London, continued to be so useful, and grown to be so well-endowed, that now
they may be well reckoned among the Noblest in Europe.

The King bore his sickness with great submission to the will of God; The
Patents for the succession to the Crown.
and seemed concerned in nothing so much, as the state that Religion, and the
Church would be in, after his death. The Duke of Suffolk had only three
Daughters, the eldest of these was now married to Lord Guilford Dudley; the
second to the Earl of Pembroke's eldest Son; and the third, that was crooked,
to one Keys. The Duke of Northumberland, for strengthening his Family, married
also his own two Daughters, the one to Sir Henry Sidney, and the other to the
Earl of Huntington's eldest Son. He grew to be much hated by the People, and
the jealousy of the King's being poisoned, was fastened on him. But he
regarded these things little, and resolved to improve the fears the King was in
concerning Religion, to the advantage of Lady Jane. The King was easily
persuaded to order the Judges, and his Learned Council to put some Articles,
which he had signed, for the succession of the Crown, in the common form of
Law. They answered, that the Succession being settled by Act of Parliament,
could not be taken away, except by Parliament: yet the King required them to do
what he commanded them. But next time they came to the Council, they declared,
that it was made Treason to change the Succession by an Act past in this Reign,
so they could not meddle with it. Mountague was chief Justice, and spoke in the
name of the rest. Northumberland fell out in a great passion against him,
calling him Traitor, for refusing to obey the King's commands: for that is
always the language of an Arbitrary Minister, when he acts against Law. But the
Judges were not shaken by his threatenings; so they were again brought before
the King, who sharply rebuked them for their delays, but they said, all that
they could do, would be of no force, without a Parliament, yet they were
required to do it, in the best manner they could: At last Mountague desired
they might have a Pardon for what they were to do, and that being granted, all
the Judges, except Gosnald and Hales, agreed to the Patent, and delivered their
Opinions, that the Lord Chancellor might put the Seal to it, and that then it
would be good in Law; yet the former of these two was at last wrought on, so
Hales was the only Man that stood out to the last: who, though he was a zealous
Protestant, yet would not give his Opinion against his Conscience, upon any
consideration whatsoever. The Privy Councillors were next required to set
their hand to it: Cecyl, in a Relation he writ of this transaction, says, that
hearing some of the Judges declare so positively, that it was against Law, he
refused to set his hand to it, as a Privy Counselor, but signed it only as a
Witness to the King's subscription. Cranmer stood out long, he came not to
Council when it was past there, and refused to consent to it, when he was pressed
to it; for he said, he would never have a hand in disinheriting his late
Master's Daughters. The young dying King was at last set on him, and by his
Importunity prevailed with him to do it, and so the Seal was put to the
Patents. The King's distemper continued to increase, so that the Physicians
despaired of his Recovery. A confident Woman undertook his Cure, and he was put
in her hands, but she left him worse than she found him; and this heightened the
jealousy of the Duke of Northumberland, that had introduced her, and put the
Physicians away. At last, to Crown his designs, he got the King to write to his
Sisters, to come and divert him in his sickness: and the matter of the
Exclusion had been carried so secretly, that they apprehending no danger, had
begun their Journey.

In the 6th. of July, The Kings death and Character.
the King felt death approaching, and prepared himself for it, in a most devout
manner: He was often heard offering up Prayers and Ejaculations to God:
Particularly a few Moments before he died, he prayed earnestly that God would
take him out of this wretched life, and committed his Spirit to him, he
interceded very fervently for his Subjects, that God would preserve England
from Popery, and maintain his true Religion among them; soon after that, he
breathed out his Innocent Soul, being in Sir Henry Sidney's arms. Endeavors
were used to conceal his death, for some days, on design to draw his Sisters
into the snare, before they should be aware of it, but that could not be done.

Thus died Edward the VI. in the sixteenth Year of his Age. He was counted the
wonder of that time: he was not only Learned in the Tongues, and the Liberal
Sciences, but knew well the state of his Kingdom. He kept a Table Book, in
which he had writ the Characters of all the eminent Men of the Nation; he
studied Fortification, and understood the Mint well: he knew the Harbors in
all his Dominions, with the depth of Water, and way of coming into them. He
understood foreign affairs so well, that the Ambassadors that were sent into
England, published very extraordinary things of him, in all the Courts of
Europe. He had great quickness of apprehension, but being distrustful of his
Memory, he took Notes of every thing he heard, that was considerable, in Greek
Characters; that those about him might not understand what he writ, which he
afterward Copied out fair in the Journal that he kept.

His Virtues were wonderful, when he was made believe, that his Uncle was
guilty of conspiring the death of the other Counselors, he upon that
abandoned him. Barnaby Fitzpatrick was his Favorite, and when he sent him to
travel, he writ often to him, to keep good Company, to avoid excess and Luxury,
and to improve himself in those things, that might render him capable of
Employment, at his return. He was afterward made Lord of Upper Ossory in
Ireland, by Queen Elizabeth, and did answer the hopes that this excellent King
had of him. He was very merciful in his nature, which appeared in his
unwillingness to sign the Warrant, for burning the Maid of Kent. He took great
care to have his debts well paid, reckoning that a Prince who breaks his Faith,
and loses his Credit, has thrown up that which he can never recover, and made
himself liable to perpetual distrust, and extreme contempt. He took special
care of the Petitions, that were given him by poor and oppressed People. But his
great zeal for Religion crowned all the rest. It was not only an angry heat
about it that acted him, but it was a true tenderness of conscience, founded on
the love of God, and his Neighbors.

These extraordinary qualities set off with great sweetness and affability,
made him be universally beloved by all his People. Some called him their
Josias, others Edward the Saint, and others called him the Phoenix that rise
out of his Mothers ashes; and all People concluded, that the sins of England
must have been very great, since they provoked God to deprive the Nation of so
signal a blessing, as the rest of his Reign would have, by all appearance,
proved. Ridley, and the other good Men of that time, made great lamentations of
the Vices, that were grown then so common, that Men had past all shame in them.
Luxury, Oppression, and a hatred of Religion had overrun the higher rank of
People, who gave a countenance to the Reformation, merely to rob the Church,
but by that and their other practices, were become a great scandal to so good a
work. The inferior sort were so much in the power of the Priests, who were
still, notwithstanding their outward Compliance, Papists in heart, and were so
much offended at the spoil they saw made of all good endowments, without
putting other and more useful ones in their room, that they who understood
little of Religion, labored under great prejudices against every thing that
was advanced by such tools. And these things, as they provoked God highly, so
they disposed the People much to that sad Catastrophe, which is to be the
subject of the next Book.

BOOK III. Book III 1553.
THE LIFE and REIGN OF Queen MARY.
BY King Edward's death, Qu. Mary succeeds.
the Crown devolved, according to Law, on his Eldest Sister Mary, who was
within half a days Journey to the Court, when she had notice given her by the
Earl of Arundel, of her Brother's death, and of the Patent for Lady Jane's
succession, and this prevented her falling into the Trap, that was laid for
her. Upon that she retired to Framlingham in Suffolk, both to be near the Sea,
that she might escape to Flanders, in case of a misfortune; and because the
slaughter that was made of Kets People, by Northumberland, begat him the hatred
of the People in that Neighborhood. Before she got thither, she wrote on the
9th. of July, to the Council, and let them know she understood, that her
Brother was dead, by which she succeeded to the Crown, but wondered that she
heard not from them; she knew well what Consultations they had engaged in, but
she would pardon all that was done, to such as would return to their duty, and
proclaim her Title to the Crown. By this it was found, that the Kings death
could be no longer kept secret; so some of the Privy Council went to Lady Jane,
and acknowledged her their Queen. The news of the King's death afflicted her
much, and her being raised to the Throne, rather increased, than lessened her
trouble. She was a very extraordinary Person, both for Body and Mind. She had
learned both the Greek and Latin Tongues, to great perfection; and delighted
much in study. She read Plato in Greek, and drunk in the Precepts of true
Philosophy so early, that as she was not tainted with the levities, not to say
Vices of those of her Age and condition, so she seemed to have attained to the
practice of the highest notions of Philosophy: for in those sudden turns of her
condition, as she was not exalted with the prospect of a Crown, so she was as
little cast down, when her Palace was made her Prison. The only passion she
showed, was, that of the Noblest kind, in the concern she expressed for her
Father and Husband, who fell with her, and seemingly on her account, though
really Northumberland's ambition, and her Father's weakness ruined her. She
rejected the offer of the Crown, when it was first made her; she said, she
knew, that of right it belonged to the late King's Sisters, and so she could
not with a good Conscience assume it; but it was told her, that both the Judges
and Privy Councillors had declared, that it fell to her according to Law.
This, joined with the Importunities of her Husband, who had more of his
Father's Temper, than of her Philosophy in him, made her submit to it. Upon
this XXI. Privy Councillors set their hands to a Letter to Queen Mary, letting
her know that Queen Jane was now their Sovereign, and that the Marriage between
her Father and Mother was null, so she could not succeed to the Crown: and
therefore they required her to lay down her Pretensions, and to submit to the
settlement now made: and if she gave a ready obedience to these Commands, they
promised her much favor.

The day after this they proclaimed Jane. But Lady Jane Gray is proclaimed.
In it they set forth, That the late King had by Patent excluded his Sisters,
that both were illegitimated by sentences past in the Ecclesiastical Courts,
and confirmed in Parliament, and at best they were only his Sisters by the half
blood, and so not inheritable by the Law of England. There was also cause to
fear, that they might marry strangers, and change the Laws, and subject the
Nation to the Tyranny of the Sea of Rome. Next to them, the Crown fell to the
Duchess of Suffolk; and it was provided, that if she should have no Sons, when
the King died, the Crown should devolve on her Daughter, who was born and
married in the Kingdom: Upon which they asserted her right, and she promised to
maintain the true Religion, and the Laws of the Land. This was not received
with the shouts ordinary on such occasions. A Vintners Boy expressed some
scorn, when he heard it, for which he was next day set on a Pillory, and his
Ears were nailed to it, to strike terror in the rest.

Many descanted variously on this Proclamation. Censures past upon that.
Those who thought that the King had his power immediately from God, said, that
then it must descend in the way of Inheritance, and since the King's two
Sisters were both under sentences of illegitimation, they said the next Heir in
blood must succeed, and that was the young Queen of Scotland; but she being of
the Church of Rome, claimed nothing upon the sentence against Queen Mary,
esteeming it unlawful, and null: yet afterward she made her claim against
Queen Elizabeth. Others said, that though a Prince were named immediately by
God, yet upon great reasons he might alter the Succession from its natural
course: for so David preferred Solomon to Adonijah. In England, the Kings
claimed the Crown by a long Prescription, confirmed by many Laws, and not from
a divine designation: and therefore they inferred, that the Act of Parliament
for the Succession ought to take place, and that by virtue of it, the two
Sisters ought to succeed: and it was said, that as the King could limit the
Prerogative, so he could likewise limit the succession. It was also said, that
Charles Brandon's Issue by the French Queen, was unlawful, because he was then
married to one Mortimer; yet this was not declared in any Court, and so could
not take place. Others said, if the Right of blood could not be cut off, why
was the Scotch Queen cut off? and her being born out of the Kingdom, could not
exclude her, as an Alien, for though that held in other cases, yet it was only
a Provision of Law, which could not take away a Divine right, and by special
Law the King's Children were excepted. It was also urged, that the Duchess of
Suffolk ought to be preferred to her Daughter, who could only claim by her
Right: and though Maud the Empress, and Margaret Countess of Richmond had not
claimed the Crown, but were satisfied that their Sons, two Henry's, the second
and seventh, should reign in their right, yet it was never heard that a Mother
should quit her right to a Daughter: that of the half blood was said to be only
a rule in Law for private Families, and that it did not extend to the Crown.
The power of limiting the succession by Patent or Testament, was said to be
only a Personal trust lodged in King Henry the Eighth, and that it did not
descend to his Heirs, so that King Edward's Patents were thought to be of no
force.

The severity against the Vintners Boy in the beginning of a Reign founded on
so doubtful a Title, Many turn to Queen Mary.
was thought a great error in Policy: and it seemed to be a well grounded
Maxim, that all Governments ought to begin with acts of Clemency, and affect
the love rather than the fear of the People. Northumberland's proceeding
against the Duke of Somerset, upon so soul a Conspiracy, and the suspicions
that lay on him, as the Author of the late Kings untimely death, begat a great
aversion in the People to him: and that disposed them to set up Queen Mary. She
gathered all in the neighboring Counties about her. The Men of Suffolk were
generally for the Reformation, yet a great Body of them came to her, and asked
her, if she would promise not to alter the Religion set up in King Edward's
days, she assured them she would make no changes; but should be content with
the private Exercise of her own Religion. Upon that they all vowed that they
would live and dye with her. The Earl of Sussex, and several others raised
Forces for her, and proclaimed her Queen. When the Council heard this, they
sent the Earl of Huntington's Brother to raise Men in Buckinghamshire, and meet
the Forces that should be sent from London at Newmarket.

The Duke of Northumberland was ordered to Command the Army. Northumberland
marches against her.
He was now much distracted in his thoughts. It was of equal Importance to keep
London, and the Privy Councillors steady, and to conduct the Army well: A
misfortune in either of these was like to be fatal to him. So he could not
resolve what to do; there was not a Man of spirit that was firm to him, to be
left behind, and yet it was most necessary once to dissipate the Force, that
was daily growing about Queen Mary. The Lady Jane and the Council were removed
to the Tower, not only for state, but for security; for here the Council were
upon the matter Prisoners. He could do no more, but lay a strict charge on the
Council, to be firm to Lady Jane's Interests, and so he marched out of London
with 2000. Horse, and 6000. Foot, on the 14th. of July: but no acclamations or
wishes of success were to be heard, as he past through the Streets The Council
gave the Emperor notice of the Lady Jane's succession, and complained of the
disturbance that was raised by Queen Mary, and that his Ambassador had
officiously meddled in their affairs. But the Emperor would not receive their
Letters. Ridley was appointed to preach up Queen Jane's Title, and to animate
the People against Queen Mary, which he too rashly obeyed. But Queen Mary's
Party increased every day. Hastings went over to her with 4000. Men out of
Buckinghamshire, and she was proclaimed Queen in many places. And now did the
Privy Council begin to see their danger, and to think how to get out of it. The
Earl of Arundel hated Northumberland. The Marquess of Winchester was dextrous
in shifting sides for his advantage. The Earl of Pembroke's Son had married the
Lady Jane's Sister, which made him think it necessary to redeem the danger he
was in, by a speedy turn. To these many others were joined. They pretended it
was necessary to give an Audience to the foreign Ambassadors, who would not
have it in the Tower. And the Earl of Pembroke's House was pitched upon, he
being least suspected. They also said it was necessary to treat with the Lord
Mayor and Aldermen, for sending more Forces to Northumberland, concerning which
he had writ very earnestly.

When they got out, they resolved to declare for Queen Mary; The Council
declares for her.
and rid themselves of Northumberland's uneasy Yoke, which they knew they must
bear, if he were victorious. They sent for the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, and
easily persuaded them to concur with them, and so they went immediately to
Cheapside, and proclaimed the Queen on the 19th. of July: and from thence they
went to St. Paul's, where Te Deum was sung. They sent next to the Tower,
requiring the Duke of Suffolk to quit the Government of that place, and the
Lady Jane to lay down the Title of Queen; she submitted with as much greatness
of mind, as her Father showed of abjectness. They sent also Orders to
Northumberland to dismiss his Forces, and to obey the Queen; and the Earl of
Arundel, and the Lord Paget were sent to carry these welcome tidings to her.
When Northumberland heard of the Turn that was in London, without staying for
Orders he discharged his Forces, and went to the Marketplace at Cambridge,
where he was at that time, and proclaimed the Queen. The Earl of Arundel was
sent to apprehend him, and when he was brought to him, he fell at his Feet to
beg his favor: for a mind, that has no balance in it self, turns insolent or
abject, out of measure, with the various changes of fortune. He, and three of
his Sons, and Sir Tho. Palmer, (that was his wicked Instrument against the Duke
of Somerset) were all sent to the Tower. Now all People went to implore the
Queen's favor, and Ridley among the rest, but he was sent to the Tower: for
she was both offended with him for his Sermon, and resolved to put Bonner again
in the Sea of London. Some of the Judges, and several Noblemen were also sent
thither, among the rest the Duke of Suffolk, but three days after he was set at
liberty. He was a weak Man, and could do little harm, so he was pitched on as
the first Instance, toward whom the Queen should express her Clemency.

She came to London on the 3d. of August, She comes to London.
and on the way was met by her Sister, Lady Elizabeth, with a thousand Horse,
whom she had raised to come to the Queen's assistance. When she came to the
Tower, she discharged the Duke of Norfolk, the Duchess of Somerset, and
Gardener, of whose Commitment mention has been formerly made; as also the Lord
Courtney, Son to the Marquess of Exeter, who had been kept there ever since his
Fathers Attainder, whom she made Earl of Devonshire. And thus was she now
peaceably settled on the Throne; notwithstanding that great Combination against
her, which had not been so easily broken, if the Head of it had not been a Man
so Universally distastful.

She was a Lady of great Virtues, Her former life.
she was strict in her Religion to superstition; her Temper was much corrupted
by Melancholy; and the many cross accidents of her life increased this to a
great degree. She adhered so resolutely to her Mothers Interests, that it was
believed her Father once intended to have taken her Life: upon which her Mother
wrote a very devout Letter to her, charging her to trust in God, and keep her
self pure, and to obey the King in all things, except in matters of Religion:
She sent her two Latin Books for her entertainment, Saint Jerome's Epistles,
and a Book of the Life of Christ, which was perhaps the famous Book of Thomas a
Kempis. The Kings displeasure at her was such, that neither the Duke of
Norfolk, nor Gardener, durst venture to intercede for her. Cranmer was the only
Man that hazarded on it, and did it so effectually, that he prevailed with him
about it. But after her Mothers death, she hearkened to other Counsels, so that
upon Anne Boleyn's fall, she made a full submission to him, as was mentioned
before. She did also in many Letters, which she writ both to her Father, and to
Cromwell, Protest great sorrow for her former stubornness, and declared that
she put her Soul in his hand, and that her Conscience should be always directed
by him; and being asked what her Opinion was concerning Pilgrimages, Purgatory,
and Relics; she answered, that she had no Opinion, but such as she received
from the King, who had her whole heart in his keeping: and might imprint upon
it, in these, and in all other matters, whatever his inestimable Virtue, high
Wisdom, and excellent Learning should think convenient for her. So perfectly
had she learned the style, that she knew was most acceptable to her Father.
After that, she was in all points obedient to him, and during her Brothers
Reign, she set up on that pretense, that she would adhere to that way of
Religion, that was settled by her Father.

Two different Schemes were now set before her; Gardener, and all that had
complied in the former times, moved, that at first she should bring things back
to the state in which they were, The Counsels then laid down.
when her Father died: and afterward by easy and slow steps she might again
return to the obedience to the Sea of Rome. But she her self was more inclined
to return to that immediately; she thought she could not be legitimated any
other way, and so was like to proceed too quick. Gardener finding that
Political Maxims made no great Impression on her, and that he was looked on by
her as a crafty temporising Man, addressed himself to the Emperor, who
understood Government and Mankind better: and undertook, that if he might have
the Seals, he would manage matters so, that in a little time he should bring
all things about to her mind: and that there was no danger, but in her
precipitating things, and being so much governed by Italian Counsels: for he
understood, that she had sent for Cardinal Pool. The People had a great
Aversion to the Papal authority, and the Nobility and Gentry were apprehensive
of losing the Abbey Lands; therefore it was necessary to remove these
prejudices by degrees. He also assured the Emperor, that he would serve all
his Interests zealously, and showed him how necessary it was to stop Cardinal
Pool, who stood Attainted by Law: In this he was the more earnest, because he
knew Pool hated him. The Emperor upon this, writ so effectually to the Queen,
to depend on Gardiner's Counsels, that on the 13th. of August, he was made Lord
Chancellor, and the conduct of affairs was put in his hands. The Duke of
Norfolk being now at liberty, pretended that he was never truly attainted; and
that it was no legal Act, that had past against him, and by this he recovered
his Estate; all the Grants that had been made out of it, being declared void at
Common Law.

He was made Lord Steward for the Trial of the Duke of Northumberland,
Northumberlands Trial,
and his Son the Earl of Warwick, and the Marquess of Northampton. All that
they pleaded in their own defense, lay in two points; the one was, whether any
thing that was acted by Order of Council, and the authority of the Great Seal,
could be Treason? The other was, whether those that were as guilty as they
were, could sit and judge them? The Judges answered, that the Great Seal, or
Privy Council of one, that was not lawful Queen, could give no Authority, nor
Indemnity: and that other Peers, if they were not convicted by Record, might
judge them. These Points being determined against them, they pleaded Guilty,
and submitted to the Queens Mercy: So Sentence past upon them: and the day
after that, Sir John Gates, Sir Tho. Palmer, and some others, were tried and
condemned: But of all these, it was resolved, that only Northumberland, Gates
and Palmer should suffer.

Heath was appointed to attend on Northumberland, And Execution.
and to prepare him for death. He then professed he had been always of the old
Religion in his heart, and had complied against his Conscience in the former
times, but whether that was true, or whether it was done in hopes of life, as
it cannot be certainly known, so it shows, he had little regard to Religion,
either in his life, or at his death. But he was a Man of such a temper, that it
was resolved to put him out of a capacity of revenging himself on his Enemies.
On the 22. of August, he and the other two were beheaded. There past some
expostulation between Gates and him: each of them accusing the other as the
Author of their ruin. But they were seemingly reconciled, and professed they
forgave one another. He made a long Speech, confessing his former ill life, and
the Justice of the Sentence against him; He exhorted the People to stand to the
Religion of their Ancestors, to reject all Novelties, and to drive the
Preachers of them out of the Nation, and declared he had temporised against his
Conscience, and that he was always of the Religion of his Forefathers. He was
an extraordinary Man, till he was raised very high: but that transported him
out of measure, and he was so strangely changed in the last passages of his
life, that it increased the Jealousies that were raised of his having hastened
King Edward's death: and that the horrors of that Guilt did so haunt him, that
both the Judgment and Courage he had expressed in the former parts of his life,
seemed now to have left him. Palmer was little pitied, for he was believed the
betrayer of his former Master, the Duke of Somerset, and was upon that service
taken into Northumberland's confidence.

There was no strict enquiry made into King Edward's death: King Edwards
Funeral.
all the honor done his Memory, was, that they allowed him Funeral Rites. On
the 8th. of August, he was buried at Westminster, and the Queen had an Exequie,
and Masses for him at the Tower. Day was appointed to preach the Sermon: in it
he praised the King, but inveighed severely against the administration of
affairs under him. It had been resolved to bury him according to the old Forms,
but Cranmer opposed that, and prevailed that he should be buried according to
the form then settled by Law: and he himself did officiate, and ended the
solemnity with a Communion, all which it may be supposed he did with a very
lively sorrow, having both loved the King beyond expression, and looking on his
Funeral, as the Burial of the Reformation, and as a step to his own.

On the 22. of August, the Queen declared in Council, That though she was fixed
in her own Religion, yet she would not Compel others to it: but would leave
that to the motions of God's Spirit, and the labors of good Preachers. The day
after that, Bonner went to Saint Paul's; and Bourn, that was his Chaplain,
preached; he extolled Bonner much, and inveighed against the sufferings he was
put to. Upon this a Tumult was raised, for the People could not hear
reflections made on King Edward: some flung stones at him, and one threw a
Dagger at the Pulpit, with such force, that it stuck fast in the wood. Rogers
and Bradford were present, who were in great esteem with the People: so they
stood up and quieted them, and conveyed Bourn safe home. This was a very
welcome Accident to the Papists, and gave them a color to prohibit preaching,
by a Public Inhibition in the Queen's Name: in which she declared, That her
Religion was the same that it had been from her Infancy, but that she would
compel none of her Subjects in matters of Religion; till public Order should
be taken in it by common Assent. She required her People to live quietly, not
to use the terms of Papist, or Heretic, or other reproachful speeches, and
that none should Preach without License: she also charged them not to punish
any on the account of the late Rebellion, but as they should be authorized by
her. She would be sorry to be driven to execute the severity of the Law; but
was resolved not to suffer Rebellious doings to go unpunished. This gave great
occasion to censure, and was thought a Declaration, not for her Fathers
Religion, but for Popery: since it was that which she professed from her
Infancy. It was also observed, that she limited her promise of not compelling
others, till Public Order should be taken in it: the meaning of which was,
till a Parliament could be brought to concur with her. The restraint upon
Preaching, without License, was justified from what had been done in King
Edward's time; though then, at first, all might preach in their own Churches
without it; It was only necessary, if they preached any where else: Bishops had
also the power of Licensing in their Dioceses: and the total restraint that
followed afterward, lasted but a short while. But now all the Pulpits were put
under an Interdict, till the Preachers should obtain a License from Gardener:
and that he resolved to grant to none, but those that would Preach as he should
direct them. The Queen's threatening to proceed against such as were guilty of
the late Rebellion, struck a general terror in the City of London; for the
greatest part had been in some measure concerned in it.

In Suffolk the people thought their Services, and the Queens promises gave
them a Title to own their Religion more avowedly: Severe proceedings against
the men of Saffolk, and others.
But orders were sent to the Bishop of Norwich to execute the Queens
Injunctions, and to see that none should preach that had not obtained a
License. Upon this, some of those that had merited most, came and put the Queen
in mind of her Promise: But she sent them home with a cold Answer; and told
them, they must learn to obey her, and not pretend to govern her: And one that
had spoken more confidently than the rest, was set in a Pillory for it three
days, as having said words that tended to defame the Queen. This was a sad Omen
of a severe Government, in which the claiming of Promises went for a crime.
Bradford and Rogers were also seized on; and it was pretended, that the
authority they showed in quieting the Tumult, was a sign that they had raised
it. Gardener, Bonner, Tonstal, Heath and Day, were restored to their
Bishoprics; they had all Appealed to the King before Sentence had past against
them; so Commissions were given to some Civilians to examine the grounds of
these Appeals, and they made report that they were good, and so that the
Sentences against them were null. Gardener had authority given him to grant
Priests Licenses to preach in any Church, as he should appoint: By this the
Reformed were not only silenced, but their Churches and Pulpits were cast open
to such as Gardener pleased to send among them. They differed in their opinions
how far they were bound to obey this Prohibition: Some thought they might
forbear public Preaching, when they were so required: But they made that up by
private Conferences and Instructions: Others thought that if this had been only
a particular hardship upon a few, the regard to Peace and Order should have
obliged them to submit to it; but since it was general, and done on design to
extinguish the light of the Gospel, that they ought to go on, and preach at
their peril; of this last sort several were put in Prison for their
disobedience, and among others Hooper and Coverdale.

The people that loved the old Superstition, began now to set up Images, and
the old Rites again in many places: And though this was plainly against Law,
yet the Government encouraged it all they could. Particularly against Judge
Hales.
Judge Hales thought his refusing to concur with the rest in excluding the
Queen, gave him a more than ordinary privilege. So when he went the Circuit,
he gave the charge in Kent, requiring the Justices to see to the execution of
King Edward's Laws, that continued still in force. But upon his return he was
committed for this, and removed from Prison to Prison; which, with the
threatenings that were made him, terrified him so much, that he cut his Throat,
but not mortally: As he recovered he made his submission, and obtained his
liberty. Yet the disorder he was in, never left him till he drowned himself.
This showed that former merit was not so much confidered as a readiness to
comply in matters of Religion; Judge Bromley, though he made no difficulty in
declaring his opinion for the Queens exclusion, yet since he professed himself a
Papist, was made Lord Chief Justice: and Montague, who had proceeded in it with
great aversion, yet because he was for the Reformation, was put in Prison, and
severely Fined; though he had this merit to pretend, that he had sent his Son
and twenty men with him, to declare for the Queen; and had this also to
recommend him to pity, that he had six Sons, and ten Daughters. Peter Martyr
was forced to retire from Oxford: He came to Lambeth, but was not like to find
long shelter there.

Cranmer kept himself quiet for some time, Cranmers Imprisonment.
which gave the other party occasion to publish that he was resolved to turn
with the Tide. Bonner writ upon that to a friend of his, that Mr. Canterbury
(so he called him in derision) was become very humble; but that would not serve
his turn, for he would be sent to the Tower within a very little while. Some
advised him to fly beyond Sea; he answered, That though he could not dissuade
others to fly from the persecution they saw coming on, yet that was unbecoming
a man in his station, that had such a hand in the changes formerly made. He
prepared a Writing, which he intended to have published: The substance of it
was, That he found the Devil was more than ordinary busy in defaming the
Servants of God; and that whereas the corruptions in the Mass had been cast
out, and that the Lords Supper was again set up, according to its first
Institution; the Devil now, to promote the Mass, which was his invention, set
his Instruments on work, who gave it out, that it was now said in Canterbury by
his order: Therefore he protested that was false, and that a dissembling Monk
(this was Thornton Bishop Suffragan of Dover) had done it without his
knowledge. He also offered that he and Peter Martyr, with such other four or
five as he should name, would be ready to prove the errors of the Mass, and to
defend the whole Doctrine and Service set forth by the late King, as most
conform to the word of God, and to the practice of the Ancient Church for many
Ages. Before he had finished this, Scory, that had been Bishop of Chichester,
coming to him, he showed it him and desired his opinion in it. He being a hot
man, liked it so well, that he gave Copies of it: and one of these was read
publicly in Cheapside. So three days after that he was cited to the
Star Chamber to answer for it: he confessed it was his, and that he had
intended to have enlarged it in some things, and to have affixed it with his
Hand and Seal to it, at Saint Paul's, and many other Churches. He was at this
time dismissed: Gardener saw the Queen intended to put Cardinal Pool in his room,
and that made him endeavor to preserve him. Some moved that a small Pension
might be assigned him, and that he should be suffered to live private: for the
sweetness of his Temper had procured him so Universal a love from all People,
that it was thought too hardy a step to proceed to extremities with him. Others
said, he had been the chief Author of all the Heresy that was in the Nation,
and that it was not decent for the Queen to show any favor to him, that had
pronounced the Sentence of her Mothers divorce. Within a Week after this, both
Latimer and he, and several other Preachers were put in Prison.

Peter Martyr that had come over upon the public faith, The strangers driven
out of England.
had leave given him to go beyond Sea: so had also a Lasco, and the Germans:
and about two hundred of them went away in December: but both in Denmark, where
they first landed, and in Lubeck, Wismar and Hamburgh, to which they removed,
they were denied admittance; because they were of the Helvetian Confession, and
in all these places the fierce Lutherans prevailed; who did so far put off all
bowels, that they would not so much as suffer these Refuges to stay among them,
till the rigours of the Winter were over: but at last they found shelter in
Friseland. Many of the English foreseeing the storm, resolved to withdraw in
time: so the strangers being required to be gone, they went under that Cover in
great numbers. But the Council understanding that about a thousand had so
conveyed themselves away, gave order that none should be suffered to go as
strangers, but those that had a Certificate from the Ambassador of the
Princes, to whom they belonged. With those that fled beyond Sea, diverse Eminent
Preachers went: among whom were Cox, Sandys, Grindall, and Horn, all afterward
highly advanced by Queen Elizabeth.

These things began to alienate the People from the Government, Popular arts
used by Gardener.
therefore on the other hand great care was taken to sweeten them. The Queen
bestowed the chief Offices of the Household on those that had assisted her in
her extremity; there being no way more effectual to engage all to adhere to the
Crown, than the grateful acknowledgment of past services. An unusual honor was
done to Ratcliffe Earl of Sussex, he had a License granted him under the Great
Seal, to cover his Head in her Presence. On the 10th. of October the Queen was
Crowned, Gardener with ten other Bishops performing that Ceremony, with the
ordinary solemnity. Day being esteemed the best Preacher among them, preached
the Sermon. There was a General Pardon proclaimed, and with that, the Queen
discharged the Subjects of the two Tenths, two Fifteenths, and a Subsidy that
had been granted by the last Parliament: and she also declared that she would
pay both her Fathers Debts and her Brothers; and though her Treasure was much
exhausted, yet she esteeming the love of her People her best Treasure, forgave
those Taxes, in lieu of which she desired only the hearts of her Subjects, and
that they would serve God sincerely, and pray earnestly for her.

On the 20th. A Parliament meets, and repeals several Laws.
of October, a Parliament met. There had been great violences used in many
Elections, and many false Returns were made: some that were known to be zealous
for the Reformation were forcibly turned out of the House of Commons; which was
afterward offered as a ground upon which that Parliament, and all Acts made in
it, might have been annulled: There came only two of the Reformed Bishops to
the House of Lords: The two Archbishops, and three Bishops were in Prison: Two
others were turned out, the rest stayed at home, so only Tailor and Harley, the
Bishops of Lincoln and Hereford came. When Mass began to be said, they went
out, as some report it, but were never suffered to come to their places again:
others say, they refused to join in that Worship, and so were violently thrust
out. In the House of Commons, some of the more forward moved, that King
Edward's Laws might be reviewed, but things were not ripe enough for that.
Nowell a Prebendary of Westminster, was returned Burgess for a Town; but the
House voted, That the Clergy being represented in the lower House of
Convocation, could not be admitted to sit among the Laity. The Commons sent up
a Bill of Tonnage and Poundage, which the Lords sent down amended in two
Proviso's, and the Commons did not then insist on their Privilege, that the
Lords could not alter a Bill of Money. The only public Bill that was finished
this Session, was a Repeal of all late Statutes, making any Crime, Treason,
that was not so by the 25. of Edward the Third; or Felony, that was not so
before King Henry the Eighth: excepting from the benefit of this Act, all that
were put in Prison before the end of September last, who were also excepted out
of the General Pardon. The Marchioness of Exeter, and the Earl of Devonshire
her Son, were restored in blood by two private Acts: and then the Parliament
was prorogued for three days, that it might be said, the first Session under
the Queen, was merely for Acts of Mercy.

At their next Meeting, The Qu.'s Mother's marriage confirmed.
after the Bill of Tonnage and Poundage was past: a Bill past through both
Houses in Four days, repealing the Divorce of the Queens Mother: In which they
declared the Marriage to have been lawful; and that malicious Persons had
possessed the King with scruples concerning it; and had by Corruption procured
the Seals of Foreign Universities condemning it, and had by threatenings and
sinistrous Arts obtained the like in England: Upon which Cranmer had pronounced
the Sentence of Divorce, which had been confirmed in Parliament: They therefore
looking on the miseries that had fallen on the Nation, since that time, as
Judgments from God for that sentence, condemn it, and repeal the Acts
confirming it. Gardener, in this, performed his promise to the Queen, of
getting her to be declared Legitimate, without taking notice of the Pope's
authority: but he showed that he was past shame, when he procured such a Repeal
of a Sentence, which he had so servilely promoted: and he particularly knew the
falsehood of this pretense, that the foreign Universities were corrupted. He had
also set it on long before Cranmer engaged in it, and sat in Court with him,
when it was pronounced. By this Act the Lady Elizabeth was upon the matter
again illegitimated, since the ground upon which her Mothers marriage
subsisted, was the Divorce of the first Marriage: and it was either upon this
pretense, or on old scores, that the Queen, who had hitherto treated her as a
Sister, began now to use her more severely. Others suggest that a secret
rivalry was the true spring of it. It was thought the Earl of Devonshire was
much in the Queens favor, but he either not presuming so high, or liking Lady
Elizabeth better, who was both more beautiful, and was XIX. Years younger than
the Queen, made his addresses to her, which provoked the Queen so much, that it
drew a great deal of trouble on them both.

The next Bill was a Repeal of all the Laws, made in King Edward's reign, King
Edward's Laws about Religion repealed.
concerning Religion: it was argued six days in the House of Commons, and
carried without a Division: by this, Religion was again put back into the
state, in which King Henry had left it: and this was to take place after the
20th. of December next, but till then it was left free to all, either to use
the old, or the new Service, as they pleased. Another Act past against all,
that should disquiet any Preacher for his Sermons, or interrupt Divine Offices,
either such as had been in the last year of King Henry, or such as the Queen
should set out: by which she was empowered to restore the service in all
things, as it had been, before her Father made the breach with Rome: Offenders
were either to be punished by Ecclesiastical Censures, or by an Imprisonment
for three Months. And the House of Commons was now so forward, that they sent
up a Bill, for the Punishing of all such as would not come to Church or
Sacraments, after the Old Service should be again set up: yet the Lords fearing
this might alarm the Nation too much, let it fall. Another Law was made, that
if any, to the number of Twelve, should meet to alter any thing in Religion, or
for any Riot, or should by any public notice, such as Bells or Beacons, gather
the People together, and upon Proclamation made, should not disperse
themselves; they, and all that assisted them, were declared guilty of Felony:
and if any more than two, met for these ends, they should lie a Year in Prison;
and all People were required, under severe Penalties, to assist the Justices,
for repressing such Assemblies. So the favor of the former Act of Repeal,
appeared to be a mockery, when so soon after it, so severe a Law made: by which
disorders, that might arise upon sudden heats, were declared to be Felonies.
The Marquess of Northampton's second Marriage was also annulled, but no
Declaration was made against Divorces in general, grounded on the
Indissolubleness of the Marriage bond; only that particular sentence was
condemned, as pronounced upon false surmises.

An Act also passed, The Duke of Norfolks Attainder repealed.
annulling the Attainder of the Duke of Norfolk: those who had purchased some
parts of his Estate from the Crown, opposed it much in the House of Commons:
but the Duke came down to the House, and desired them earnestly to pass it, and
assured them, that he would refer all differences between him and the
Patentees, either to Arbiters, or to the Queen: and so it was agreed to It set
forth the pretenses, that were made use of to Attaint him; as that he used
Coats of Arms, which he and his Ancestors had lawfully used. There was a
Commission given to some, to declare the Royal assent to it; but that was not
signed, but only stamped by the King's mark: and that not at the upper end, as
was usual, but beneath; nor did it appear, that the Royal Assent was ever given
to it, and they declared, that in all time coming, the Royal assent should be
given, either by the King in Person, or by a Commission under the Great Seal;
signed by the King's hand, and publicly declared to both Houses. Cranmer,
Guilford Dudley, and his Wife the Lady Jane, and two of his Brothers were tried
for Treason; they all confessed their Indictments: only Cranmer appealed to the
Judges, who knew how unwillingly he had consented to the Exclusion of the
Queen, and that he did it not, till they, whose profession it was to know the
Law, had signed it. They were all Attainted of Treason, for levying War against
the Queen, and their Attainders were confirmed in Parliament; so was Cranmer
legally divested of his Archbishopric; but since he was put in it by the
Pope's authority, it was resolved to degrade him by the forms of the Canon Law:
and the Queen was willing to pardon his Treason, that it might appear she did
not act upon revenge, but Zeal: she was often prevailed with, to pardon
Injuries against her self, but was always inexorable in matters of Religion.

But now her Treaty with the Pope began to take vent, which put the Parliament
in some disorder. When she came first to the Crown, A Treaty for reconciling
England to the Pope:
the Popes Legate at Brussels sent over Commendone, to see if he could speak
with her, and to persuade her to reconcile her Kingdom to the Apostolic See.
The management of the matter was left to his discretion, for the Legate would
not trust this secret to Gardener, nor any of the other Bishops. Commendone
came over in the disguise of a Merchant, and by accident met with one of the
Queens Servants, who had lived some years beyond Sea, and was known to him, and
by his means he procured access to the Queen. She assured him of her firm
resolution to return to the obedience of that See, but charged him to manage
the matter with great prudence; for if it were too early discovered, it might
disturb her affairs, and obstruct the design: By him she wrote both to the
Pope, and to Cardinal Pool; and instructed Commendone, in order to the sending
over Pool with a Legatine power: She also asked him, whether the Pope might not
dispense with Pool to marry, since he was only in Deacons Orders. This was a
welcome Message to the Court of Rome, and proved the foundation of Commendone's
advancement. There was a public rejoicing for three days, and the Pope said
Mass himself upon it; and gave a largess of Indulgences, in which he might be
the more liberal, because they were like to come into credit again, and to go
off at the old rates. Yet all that Commendone said in the Consistory, was, That
he understood from good hands, that the Queen was well disposed to a reunion.
Some of the stiffer Cardinals thought it was below the Popes dignity to send a
Legate, till an Embassy should come first from the Queen, desiring it: Yet the
secret was so whispered among them, that it was generally known. It was said,
they ought to imitate the Shepherd in the Parable, who went to seek the stray
Sheep: And therefore Pool was appointed to go Legate, with ample powers.
Gardener was in fear of him, and so advised the Emperor to stop him in his
journey; and to touch the Emperor in a tender part, it is said that he let him
know that the Queen had some Inclinations for the Cardinal. And for a Match
with the Prince of Spain.
The Emperor had now proposed a Match with her for his Son, though he was nine
years younger than she was; yet she being but thirty seven, there was reason
enough to hope for Children; and the uniting England to the Spanish Monarchy
seemed to be all that was wanting to strengthen it on all hands, so as to ruin
the French Kingdom. The Queen saw reasons enough to determine her to entertain
it: She found it would be hard to bring the Nation about in matters of
Religion, without the assistance of a soreign power: Yet it is more reasonable
to think that Gardener, who was always governed by his Interests, would have
rather promoted the match with Pool, for then he had been Infallibly made
Archbishop of Canterbury, and had got Pool's Hat; and the Government would
have been much easier, if the Queen had married a Subject, than it could be
under a Stranger, especially one whose greatness made all people very
apprehensive of him.

The restoring the Papal power, Pool's advices to the Queen.
and the Match with the Prince of Spain, were things of such uneasy digestion,
that it was not fit to adventure on both at once; therefore the Emperor pressed
the Queen to begin with her Marriage, and by that she would be powerfully
assisted to carry on her other designs; and at last the Queen her self was
persuaded to send to Pool, to advise him to stop his Journey for some time. She
sent over the Acts of this Parliament, to let him see what progress she was
making, and to assure him she would make all convenient haste in the Reunion:
But the Parliament had expressed so great an aversion to the restoring the
Popes power, and were so apprehensive of losing the Abbey-Lands, that it would
prejudice her affairs much, if he should come over before the peoples minds
were better prepared. She also desired him to send her a List of those that
were fit to be made Bishops, in the room of those that were turned out. To this
he writ a long and tedious answer; he rejoiced at the Acts that were passed,
but observed great defects in them: In that concerning her Mothers Marriage,
there was no mention made of the Popes Bull of Dispensation, by which only it
could be a lawful Marriage. The other for setting up the Worship, as it was in
the end of her Fathers reign, he censured more; for they were then in a state
of Schism, and so this established Schism by a Law: And he said, that while the
Interdict lay on the Nation, it was a sin to perform Divine Offices. He had
been very frankly dispatched by the Pope and the Consistory, with many
favorable Instructions; but if these were so despised, and he still stopped, it
might provoke him to recall his power. He knew all this flowed from the
Emperor, who would perhaps advise her to follow such Political Maxims as
himself was governed by, but his ill success in the business of the Interim,
might well frighten others from following such Counsels: And he was afraid that
Carnal Policy might govern her too much, and that so she would fall from her
simplicity in Christ. He desired her to take Courage, and to depend on God; and
advised her to go her self to the Parliament, having beforehand prepared some
to second her, and to tell them that she was touched in Conscience with a sense
of the sin of Schism, and that therefore she desired the Act of Attainder that
stood against him might be Repealed, and that he might be invited to come over,
and reconcile them to the Apostolic See: And she might assure them that all
necessary caution should be used to prevent the Nations being brought under a
thraldom to the Papacy. But the Queen was now possessed with Gardiner's
Counsels, and looked on Pool's advices as more candid than prudent. Gardener
persuaded her that though he was a good and learned man, yet he understood not
the present genius of the Nation; and Pool looked on Gardener as a man of no
Conscience, and that he was more conversant in Intrigues of State, than touched
with any sense of Religion: But the Emperor was convinced that Gardiner's
Methods were surer, and preferred them to Pool's.

When the Treaty of the Queens Marriage came to be known, The Parliament
opposes the match, and is dissolved.
the House of Commons was much alarmed at it; and they sent their Speaker with
twenty of their Members, with an Address to her, not to marry a stranger: And
they were so inflamed, that the Court judged it necessary to dissolve the
Parliament. Gardener upon this, let the Emperor know that the jealousies which
were taken up on the account of the Match were such, that except very
extraordinary conditions were offered, it would occasion a general Rebellion.
He also writ to him that great sums must be sent over both to gratify the
Nobility, and to enable them to carry the Elections to the next Parliament, in
opposition to such as would stand against them. As for Conditions, it was
resolved to grant any that should be demanded; for the Emperor reckoned that
if his Son were once married to her, it would be easy for him to govern the
Councils as he pleased: And for Money there was 400000 pound ordered to be
divided up and down the Nation, at the discretion of Gardener, and the
Emperors Ambassadors: A great part of it was paid in hand, and the rest was
brought over with the Prince. This the Emperor borrowed from some of the Free
Towns of Germany; and when they were pressing him for the re-payment of it
about a year after; he for his excuse told them the charge he had been at for
his Sons Marriage, but that he hoped to be re-imbursed from England; which was
thus bought and sold by a practicing Bishop and a corrupted House of Commons.
Gardener did also make use of his power, as Chancellor, to force all people to
comply with him; for there was no favor nor common Justice showed in his Court
of Chancery to any others.

With the Parliament a Convocation met, Harpsfield preached to them, A
Convocation meets, and disputes about the Sacrament.
he flattered the Queen, and the Bishops that had been deprived in the late
times, with a zeal that showed how fervently he aspired to preferment: He
inveighed against the late times with great sharpness; so that his Sermon was
divided between Satyr and Panegyric. Six of the Reformed Divines were
qualified by their dignities to sit in the lower House, being either Deans or
Archdeacons, Deacons, who were Philpot, Philips, Haddon, Cheyney, Ailmer and
Young. They made a vigorous opposition to a motion that was proposed for
condemning the Catechism and Common Prayer Book that had been set out in King
Edward's time, and particularly the Articles against Transubstantiation: To
this all agreed except those six. It was pretended that the Catechism was not
set out by authority of Convocation: To which Philpot answered, That the
Convocation had deputed some to compose it, and so it was on the matter, their
work. A disputation was proposed concerning the Sacrament, though all the rest
of the Convocation subscribed the Conclusion first; which was complained of as
a preposterous method. The six desired that Ridley and Rogers, with some
others, might be suffered to come and join with them; but that was refused,
since they were no members, and were then in Prison.

On the twenty third of October the dispute began, many of the Nobility, and
others, being present; Weston was Prolocutor, he opened it with a Protestation,
that they went not to dispute, as calling the Truth in question, but only to
satisfy the objections of a few. Haddon, Ailmer and Young, foresaw that it was
resolved to run them down with numbers and noise, so at first they refused to
dispute, and the last of them went away. Cheyney argued from St. Paul's calling
the Sacrament Bread, Origen's saying that it nourished the Body, and
Theodoret's saying that the Elements did not depart from their former
substance, form, and shape. Moreman answered, that Theodoret's words were to be
understood of an accidental substance: It was replied, that form and shape
belonged to the accidents, but substance belonged to the nature of the
Elements. Philpot showed that the occasion of his using these words was to
prove against the Entychians, that there was a true humane nature in Christ,
notwithstanding its union with the Godhead; which he proved by this simile,
that the Elements in the Eucharist remained in their nature; so this must be
understood of the substance of Bread and Wine: But to this no answer was made;
and when he seemed to press it too far, he was commanded to be silent. Haddon
cited many passages out of the Fathers, to show that they believed Christ was
still in Heaven, and that the Sacrament was a memorial of him till his second
coming: He also asked, whether they thought that Christ did eat his own natural
Body; and when that was confessed, he said it was needless to dispute with men
who could swallow down such an absurdity. The disputation continued several
days: Philpot made a long Speech against the Corporal presence, but was often
interrupted; for they told him that he might propose an Argument, but they
would not hear him make Harangues. He undertook to prove before the Queen and
her Council, that the Mass, as they had it, was no Sacrament at all, and that
the body of Christ was not present in it; and if he failed in it, he would be
content to be burnt at the Court Gate. After some short time spent in citing
passages out of the Fathers, Philpot was commanded to hold his peace, otherwise
they would send him to Prison: He claimed the privilege of the House for
freedom of Speech, but being much cried down, he said they were a company of
men who had dissembled with God and the World in the late Reign, and were now
met together to set forth false devices, which they were not able to maintain.
Theodoret's words were much and often insisted on; so Weston answered, if
Theodoret should be yielded to them, they had an hundred Fathers on the other
side. Cheyney showed out of Hesychius, that the custom of Jerusalem was to
burn so much of the Elements as was not consumed: And he asked what it was that
was burnt: One answered, it was either the Body of Christ, or the substance of
Bread put there by Miracle; at which he smiled, and said a reply was needless.
When much discourse had past, Weston asked if the House were not fully
satisfied, to which the Clergy answered Yes; but the Spectators cried out No,
No; for the doors were opened: then Weston asked the five Disputants if they
would answer the Arguments that should be put to them? Ailmer said, they would
not enter into such a Disputation, where matters were so indecently carried:
They proposed only the Reasons why they could not join with the Vote that had
been put concerning the Sacrament, but unless they had fairer Judges, they
would go no further. Weston broke up all by saying, You have the Word, but we
have the Sword; rightly pointing out that wherein the strength of both fides
consisted. It is not to be doubted but that the Popish party pretended they had
the Victory, for that always the stronger side does upon such occasions: Yet it
was visible that this dispute was not so fairly carried, as those were in King
Edward's days; in which for near a year before any change was made, there were
public disputes in the Universities; which were more proper places for them,
than a Town full of noise and business. The question was also here determined
first, and then disputed: And the presence and favor of the Privy Council did
as much raise the one party, as it depressed the other. In the end of this year
Veysey was again repossessed of the Sea of Exeter, Coverdale being now a
Prisoner in the Tower.

In the beginning of the next year, The Treaty of Marriage begun,
to agree the conditions of the Marriage between his Son and the Queen.
Gardener took care to have extraordinary ones granted, both to induce the
Parliament more easily to consent to it, and to keep the Spaniards from being
admitted to any share in the Government, that so he might keep it in his own
hands: But the Emperor was resolved to grant every thing that should be asked.
It was agreed that the Government should be entirely in the Queen, and that
though Pr. Philip was to be named in all Writs, and his Image was to be on the
Coin and Seals, yet the Queens hand alone was to give authority to every thing,
without his: No Spaniard was to be capable of any Office: No change was to be
made in the Law, nor was the Queen to be required to go out of England against
her will: Nor might their issue go out of England but by the consent of the
Nobility. The Queen was to have of Jointure 40000 l. out of Spain, and 20000 l.
out of the Netherlands: If the Queen had a Son, he was to inherit Burgundy and
the Netherlands, as well as England; if Daughters only, they were to succeed to
her Crowns, and to have such portions from Spain, as was ordinary to be given
to Kings Daughters: The Prince was to have no share in the Government after her
death: And the Queen might keep up her League with France, notwithstanding this
Match.

But this did not satisfy the Nation, Which provokes some to rebel.
which looked on these offers only as baits to hook them into slavery. The
severities of the Spanish Government in all the Provinces that were united to
that Crown, and the monstrous Cruelties exercised in the West Indies were much
talked of, and it was said England must now preserve it self, or be for ever
inflaved. Carew and Wiat undertook to raise the Country, the one in Cornwall,
and the other in Kent, and the Duke of Suffolk promised to raise the Midland
Counties: for the disposition to rise was general, and might have been fatal to
the Queen, if there had been good heads to have led the people. But before it
grew ripe, the design was discovered, and upon that Sir Peter Carew fled to
France.

Wiat gathered some men about him, Wiat's Rebellion.
and on the twenty fifth of January he made Proclamation at Maidstone, that he
intended nothing but to preserve the Nation from the yoke of strangers; and
assured the people that all England would rise. The Sheriff of Kent required
him, under pain of Treason, to disperse his Company, but he did not obey his
Summons: One Knevet raised a body of men about Tunbridge, and marched toward
him, but was intercepted and routed by a force commanded by the Duke of
Norfolk, who was sent with two hundred Horse, and six hundred Londoners to
dissipate this Insurrection; but some that came over from Wiat as deserters
persuaded the Londoners that it was a common cause, in which they were engaged,
to maintain the liberty of the Nation: So they all went over to Wiat. Upon
this, the Duke of Norfolk retired back to London; and Wiat, who had kept
himself under the defense of Rochester-Bridge, advanced toward it. The Duke of
Suffolk made a faint attempt to raise the Country, but it did not succeed, and
he was taken and brought to the Tower. The Queen sent the offer of a Pardon to
Wiat and his men; but that not being received by them, she sent some of her
Council to treat with him. He was blown up with his small success, and moved
that the Queen would come to the Tower of London, and put the command of it
into his hands, till a new Council were settled about her: So it appeared there
was no Treaty to be thought on. The Queen went into London, and made great
protestations of her love to her people, and that she would not dispose of
herself in Marriage, but for the good of the Nation. Wiat was now four thousand
strong, and came to Southwark, but could not force the Bridge of London: He was
informed the City would all rise, if he should come to their aid; but he could
not find Boats for passing over to Essex, so he was forced to go to the Bridge
of Kingston. On the fourth of February he came thither, but found it cut; yet
his men mended it, and he got to Hide Park next morning. His men were weary and
disheartened, and now not above 500; so that though the Queens forces could have
easily dispersed them, yet they let them go forward, that they might cast
themselves into their hands: He marched through the Strand, and got to Ludgate,
where he hoped to have found the Gate opened; but being disappointed, he turned
back, and was forsaken by his men, so that a Herald without using any force,
apprehended him at Temple Bar. It was on Ash Wednesday, and the Queen had
showed such Courage that she would not stir from Whitehall, nor would she omit
the Devotions of that day; and this success was looked on as a reward from
Heaven on her Piety. This raw and ill formed Rebellion was as lucky for the
ends of the Court, as if Gardener had projected it; for in a weak Government an
ill digested Insurrection raises the power of the Prince, and adds as much
Spirit to his Friends, as it depresses the faction against him; and it also
gives a handle to do some things for which it were not easy otherwise to find
either Colors or Instruments. The Popish Authors studied to cast the blame of
this on the Reformed Preachers: but did not name any one of them, that was in
it; so it appears, that what some later Writers have said of Poinet's having
been in it, is false; otherwise his name had certainly been put in the number
of those, that were Attainted for it.

Upon this it was resolved to proceed against Lady Jane Gray, and her Husband;
Lady Jane Grays Execution.
she had lived six Months in the daily Meditations of Death, so she was not
much surprised at it: Fecknam, who was sent to prepare her for Death,
acknowledged that he was astonished at her calm behavior, her great knowledge,
and the extraordinary sense she had of Religion. She writ to her Father, to
moderate his grief for her death, since it was great matter of joy to her, that
she was so near an end of her Miseries, and the enjoyment of Eternal glory. One
Harding, that had been her Fathers Chaplain, and a zealous Preacher in King
Edward's time, had now changed his Religion: to him she wrote a long and
pathetick Letter, setting forth his Apostasy, and the Judgments of God, which
he might expect upon it. She sent her Greek New Testament to her Sister, with a
Letter in Greek, recommending the study of that Book to her, and chiefly the
following it in her practice: these were the last exercises of this rare young
Person. She was at first much moved, when she saw her Husband led out to his
Execution, but recovered her self, when she considered how soon she was to
follow him: and when he desired they might take leave of one another, she
declined it; for she thought it would increase their Grief, and disorder: and
continued so settled in her temper, that she saw his beheaded Body carried to
the Chapel in the Tower, without expressing any visible concern about it. She
was carried out next to a Scaffold set up within the Tower, to hinder great
Crowds from looking on a sight, which was like to raise much compassion in the
Spectators. She confessed her sin, in taking an honor that was due to another,
though it was a thing neither procured nor desired by her; and acknowledged her
other sins against God, that she had loved her self, and the World too much;
and thanked God for making her afflictions a means to her repentance: she
declared she died a true Christian, trusting only to the Merits of Christ; then
she repeated the LI. Psalm, and stretched out her Head on the Block, which upon
the signal given, was cut off. Her Death was as much lamented, as her Life had
been admired. It affected Judge Morgan, that had pronounced the Sentence, so
much, that he run mad, and thought she still followed him. The Queen her self
was troubled at it; for it was rather reason of State, than private Resentment,
that set her on to it.

Her Father was soon after tried by his Peers, and Condemned and Executed.
Several others suffered.
He was the less pitied, because by his means his Daughter was brought to her
untimely end. Wiat was brought to his Trial, he begged his Life in a most
abject manner, but he was Condemned and Executed, and so were Fifty-eight more:
Six hundred of the Rabble were appointed to come with Ropes about their Necks,
and beg the Queen's pardon, which was granted them. A slander was cast on the
Earl of Devonshire, and Lady Elizabeth, as if they had set on the rising that
was intended in the West. Wiat, in hopes of Life, had accused them, but he did
them Justice at his Death; yet they were both put in Prison upon it. Sir
Nicolas Throgmorton was accused of the same crime, but after a long Trial, he
was acquitted, yet his Jury were hardly used, and severely fined. Sir Jo. Cheek
was sought for: so he fled beyond Sea, but both he, and Sir Peter Carew, hoping
that Philip would be glad to signalize his first coming to England with Acts of
Grace, rendered themselves to him: After that, Cheek was again taken in
Flanders, upon a new suspicion, and to deliver himself out of his trouble, he
renounced his Religion: But though he got his Liberty upon that, yet he could
never recover the quiet of his mind; so he languished for some time and dyed.

There was at this time a base Imposture discovered in London, The Imposture of
the Spirit In the Wall.
one seemed to speak out of a Wall, in a strange tone of Voice. Great numbers
flockt about the House, and several things, both relating to Religion, and the
State, were uttered by it; but it was found to be one Elizabeth Crofts, who by
the help of a Whistle spoke those words through a Hole in the Wall. There was
no other Complice found, but one Drake, and they both were made to do Penance
for it publicly at S. Paul's.

Injunctions were now given to the Bishops, Injunctions sent to the Bishops.
to execute such Ecclesiastical Laws, as had been in force in K. Henry's time:
That in their Courts they should proceed in their own Names, that the Oath of
Supremacy should be no more exacted: none suspected of Heresy was to be put in
Orders; they were required to suppress Heresy and Heretics, and to turn out
all married Clergymen, and to separate them from their Wives: If they left
their Wives, they might put them in some other Cure, or reserve a Pension for
them, out of their Livings: none that had vowed Chastity, was to be suffered to
live with his Wife: those that were ordained by the Book, set out in King
Edward's time, were to be confirmed by all the other Rites then left out, and
that was declared to be no valid Ordination.

The Queen gave also a special Commission to Bonner, Gardener, Tonstall, Day,
Many Bishops turned out.
and Kitchen, to proceed against the Archbishop of York, and the Bishops of St.
David's, Chester and Bristoll, and to deprive them of their Bishoprics, for
having contracted Marriage, and thereby having broken their Vows, and defiled
their Function. She also authorized them, to call before them the Bishops of
Lincoln, Gloucester and Hereford, who held their Bishoprics, only during their
good behavior, and since they had done things contrary to the Laws of God, and
the Practice of the Universal Church, to declare their Bishoprics void, as
they were indeed already void. And thus were seven of the Reformed Bishops
turned out at a dash. It was much censured, that those who had married
according to a Law then in force, which was now only repealed for the future,
should be deprived for it: and this was a new severity: for in former times,
when the Popes were most set against the Marriage of the Clergy, it was put to
their option, whether they would part with their Wives, or with their
Benefices: but none were summarily deprived, as was now done. The other
Bishops, without any form of Process, or special matter objected to them, were
turned out, by an Act of mere Arbitrary Government. And all this was done by
virtue of the Queens being Head of the Church, which, though she condemned as a
sinful and sacrilegious power, yet she now employed it against those Bishops,
whose Sees were quickly filled with Men, in whom the Queen confided. Goodrick
died this Year: It seems he complied with the change now made, otherwise he
that put the Seal to Lady Jane's Patents, could not have escaped the being
questioned for it. He was an ambitious Man, and so no wonder, if earthly
considerations prevailed more with him, than a good Conscience. Scory, that was
Bishop of Chichester, renounced his Wife, and did Penance for his Marriage, but
soon after he fled beyond Sea, and returned in the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth's reign: so that his Compliance was the effect of his weakness and
fears. Barlow resigned Bath and Wells, and a Book of recantation was published
in his name, containing severe reflections, both on the Reformers, and on the
Reformation it self; but it is not certain, whether it was writ by him, or was
only a forgery, put out in his Name: for if he turned so heartily, as the
strain of that Book runs, it is not likely, that he would have been put from
his Bishopric: but he fled beyond Sea: yet it seems, both Scory and he, gave
great offense by their behavior; for though they were the only surviving
Reformed Bishops, when Queen Elizabeth succeeded, yet they were so far from
being promoted, that they were not so much as restored to their former Sees,
but put in meaner ones. By all these deprivations and resignations, there were
sixteen new Bishops made, which made no small change in the face of the English
Church. Now the Old Service was every where set up, in which Bonner made such
have, that before the Royal Assent was given to the Bill for it, he began the
Old Service and Processions. The first opening of it was somewhat strange, for
it being on Saint Katherine's day, the Quiristers went up to the Steeple, and
sung the Anthem there, according to the Custom for that Day. Great numbers of
the Clergy were summarily deprived for being Married, they were estimated by
Parker to be 12000. and most of them were judged upon common fame, without any
Process, but a Citation; and many being then in Prison, yet were Censured, and
put out for Contumacy, and held guilty. Many Books were written against the
Marriage of the Clergy, and the accusing them of Impurity and sensuality on
that account, was one of the chief Topics used by the Popish Clergy, to
disgrace the Reformers, which made some recriminate too indecently, and lay
open the filthiness of the Unmarried Clergy, and those that were called
Religious, who led most irregular lives; in particular, it was said Bonner had
no reason to be a friend to that state, for he was the Bastard of a Bastard,
and his Father, though a Priest, begat him in Adultery.

On the 2d. of April a Parliament met, A new Parliament.
but the most considerable Members were beforehand corrupted by Gardener, who
gave them Pensions, some 200. and others 100 l. a Year for their Voices. The
first Act that past was declaratory, that all the Prerogatives and Limitations,
which by Law belonged to the Kings of England were the same, whether the Crown
fell into the hands of a Male or a Female. The secret of this was little known,
some were afraid there was an ill design in it, and that it being declared that
she had all the authority, which any of her Progenitors ever had, it might be
inferred from thence, that she might pretend to a right of Conquest, A
proposition to make the Queen absolute.
and so seize on the Estates of the English, as William the Conqueror had done.
But it was so conceived, that the Queen was put under the fame limitations, as
well as acknowledged to have the same Prerogatives, with her Progenitors: The
secret of this was afterward discovered. A projecting Man, that had served
Cromwell, and loved to meddle much, had been deeply engaged both in Lady Jane's
business, and in the late Insurrection, and was now in danger of his life, so
he made application to the Emperor's Ambassador, and by his means obtained
his Pardon. He offered a Project, that the Queen should declare, that she
succeeded to the Crown by the Common Law, but was not tied by the Statute Law,
which did only bind Kings, and therefore a Queen was not obliged by it, thus
she might pretend to be a Conqueror, and rule at pleasure: and by this means
might restore both Religion, and the Abbey-Lands, and be under no restraint:
This the Ambassador brought to the Queen, and prayed her to keep it very
secret. But she disliked it, yet she sent for Gardener, and charged him to give
her his Opinion of it sincerely, as he would answer to God for it, at the Great
Day. He read it carefully, and told her it was a most pernicious contrivance,
and begged her not to listen to such Plat-forms, which might be brought her by
base Sycophants: Upon that, she burnt the Paper, and charged the Ambassador
not to bring her any more such Projects. This gave Gardener great apprehensions
of the mischiefs that Spanish Counsels might bring on the Nation, and so he
procured the Act to be made, by which the Queen was bound by the Law, as much
as her Ancestors were. He also got an Act to be past, ratifying the Articles of
the Marriage, with strong clauses, for keeping the Government entirely in the
Queen's hands; that so Philip might not take it on him, as Henry the VII. had
done, when he married the Heir of the House of York: for, as he set up a Title
in his own Name, and kept the Government in his own hands; so the Spaniards
began to reckon a descent from John of Gaunt, which made Gardener the more
cautious: and it must be confessed, that the preserving the Nation out of the
hands of the Spaniards, was almost only owing to his care and wisdom. The
Bishopric of Durham was again restored, after a vigorous resistance made by
those of Gateside near Newcastle. The Attainders of the Duke of Suffolk, and
Fifty-eight more, for the late Rebellion, were confirmed: The Commons sent up
four several Bills against Lollard's, one confirming the Act of the six
Articles, and others against Erroneous Opinions, but they were all laid aside
by the Lords: for the corrupted Members in the lower House, were officious to
show their Zeal for Spain and Popery: Another Bill was sent up by them, that
the Bishop of Rome should have no authority to trouble any for possessing Abbey
Lands. But it was said this was preposterous to begin with a limitation of the
Pope's authority, before they had acknowledged, that he had any power at all in
England: and that would come in more properly, after they had reconciled the
Nation to him.

During this Parliament, New disputations at Oxford with Cranmer.
the Convocation sat, and that they might remove the objections that some made,
to the Disputations at their last meeting, that the ablest Men of the Reformers
were kept in Prison, while that cause was debated, they sent a Committee of
their ablest men to Oxford, to dispute with Cranmer, Ridley, and Latimer, who
were also sent thither. The Points to be disputed about, were
Transubstantiation, and the sacrifice of the Mass. When Cranmer was brought
before them, and they exhorted him to return to the unity of the Church; he
answered, that he was always for that Unity, which could consist with truth.
They fell into a long dispute concerning the words of the Institution, that
they must be true, for Christ was Truth, and was then making his Testament:
many Passages of the Fathers were also alleged against him; it was said that
he had translated many things falsely out of the Fathers, in his Book: and the
Prolocutor called him often an Unlearned and Impudent Man: But he carried
himself with that gravity and mildness, that many were observed to be much
affected at it, and to weep: he vindicated his sincerity in his Book, he showed
that Figurative speeches were true, and when the Figures were clearly
understood, they were likewise plain, he said, the Sacrament was effectually
and really Christ's Body, as it was broken on the Cross, that is, his Passion
effectually applied to us. The whole action was carried with such hissing and
insulting, and ended with such shouts of Triumph, as if Cranmer had been quite
baffled, that it was visible there was nothing intended, but to abuse the
ignorant People, and make them believe he was run down. Ridley was brought out
next day, he began with deep Protestations of his sincerity, and that he had
changed the Opinion he had been bred up in, merely upon the force of Truth; he
argued from the Scriptures, that speak of Christ's leaving the World, and
sitting at the right hand of God; and that the Sacrament was a Memorial, which
good and bad might equally receive; that it was against the Humane Nature, to
swallow down a living Man; that this Opinion was contrary to the humanity of
Christ, and was a new Doctrine, unknown to the Fathers, and brought into the
Church in the later Ages. Smith argued against him, from Christ's appearing to
Saint Stephen, and to Saint Paul, that he might be in more places at once.
Ridley said, Christ might either come down and appear to them, or a
Representation might be made of him, but he could not be both in Heaven and
Earth at once. Many of Chrysostom's expressions were alleged, but he said,
these were Rhetorical figures, and to be explained by other plainer passages.
The dispute was carried on with the same Insultings, that had been used the Day
before: and in conclusion, Weston the Prolocutor said, they saw the Obstinacy,
Vainglory, and Inconstancy of that Man, but they saw likewise the force of
Truth; so he bid them cry out with him, Truth has the Victory: upon which that
was ecchoed over and over again, by the whole Assembly. Latimer was brought out
next Day, he told them he was Fourscore Years old, and not fit for disputing,
so he would declare his Opinion, and then leave them to say what they pleased.
He thought the Sacrament was only a Memorial of Christ, all who fed on Christ
had Eternal life, and therefore that feeding could not be meant of the
Sacrament, since both good and bad received it; he said, his Memory was much
impaired, but his Faith was founded on the Word of God; so though he could not
dispute well, yet his Faith was firmly rooted: Upon this there were
extraordinary shouts raised, and during the whole Debates, the noise and
disorder was such, that it looked liker a Country Game, than a Dispute among
Divines; four or five spoke often at once, so that it was not possible to hear
what they said, much less to answer it. The Committee of Convocation condemned
them all, as obstinate Heretics, and declared them to be no Members of the
Church: They appealed from their Sentence to the Judgment of God, and expressed
great joy in the hopes they had, they should glorify God by dying for his
Truth. Cranmer sent a Petition to the Council, complaining of the disorder of
these Disputes, and of hudling them up in such have, that it was visible,
nothing was intended by them, but to shuffle up things so, that the World might
be more easily abused with the name of a Disputation. But this was not
delivered, for it was intended to keep up this boasting, that the Champions of
the Reformation were publicly baffled.

It was also resolved to carry some of the Prisoners, that were in London, to
Cambridge, and there to erect new Trophies in the same manner, they had done at
Oxford. Upon this, three of the imprisoned Bishops, and seven Divines, signed a
Paper, by which they declared, that they would engage in no dispute, except it
were in Writing, unless it were in the presence of the Queen, or the Council,
or before either of the Houses of Parliament. It was visible, the design of
disputing was not to find out the Truth, otherwise it had been done, before
these Points had been so positively determined: but now there was no benefit to
be expected by it; nor could they look for fair dealing, where their Enemies
were to be their Judges: nor would they suffer them to speak their minds
freely, and after so long an Imprisonment, their Books and Papers being kept
from them, they could not be furnished to answer many things that might be
objected to them. Then they added a short account of their Persuasions in the
chief points of Controversy, which they would be ready to defend on fair and
equal terms: and concluded with a charge to all People not to Rebel against the
Queen, but to obey all her Commands, that were not contrary to the Law of God.

In July, The Pr. of Spain lands, and marries the Queen.
Prince Philip landed at Southampton: when he set foot to Land, he drew his
Sword, and carried it a little way naked in his hand. This was interpreted, as
a sign, that he intended to rule by the Sword, but his friends said, it
imported, that he would draw his Sword for the defense of the Nation. The Mayor
of Southampton brought him the Keys of the Town, which he took from him, and
gave them back, without the least show of his being pleased with this
expression of that respect done him. This not being suitable to the Genius of
the Nation, that is much taken with the gracious looks of their Princes, was
thought a sign of vast pride and moroseness. The Queen met him at Winchester,
where they were married: he being then in the XXVII. and she in the XXXVIII.
Year of her Age. The Emperor resigned to him his Titular Kingdom of Jerusalem,
and his more valuable one of Naples, so they were proclaimed with a Pompous
Enumeration of their Titles. The Kings gravity was very unacceptable to the
English, who love a mean between the stiffness of the Spaniards, and the gaiety
of the French. But if they did not like his temper, they were out of measure in
love with his Bounty and Wealth: for he brought over a vast Treasure with him,
the greatest part of which was distributed among those, who for his Spanish
Gold, had sold their Country and Religion. At his coming to London, he
procured the Pardon of many Prisoners, and among others, of Holgate Archbishop
of York, of whom I find no mention made after this. It is very likely he
changed his Religion, otherwise it is not probable that Philip would have
interceded for him. He also interposed for preserving Lady Elizabeth, and the
Earl of Devonshire. Gardener was much set against them, and thought they made
but half work, as long as she lived. Wiat had accused them, in hopes of saving
his life, but when that did not preserve him, he did publicly vindicate them
on the Scaffold. The Earl of Devonshire, to be freed from all jealousy, went
beyond Sea, and dyed a Year after in Italy, as some say, of Poison. Philip at
first took care to preserve Lady Elizabeth, on a generous account, pitying her
Innocence, and hoping by so acceptable an act of favor, to recommend himself
to the Nation: but Interest did soon after fortify those good and wise
Inclinations, for when he grew to be out of hope of issue by the Queen; he
considered that the Queen of Scotland, who was soon after married to the
Dolphin, was next in succession after Lady Elizabeth; so if she should be put
out of the way, the Crown of England would have become an Accession to the
French Crown: and therefore he took care to preserve her, and perhaps he hoped
to have wrought so much on her, by the good offices he did her, that if her
Sister should dye without Children, she might be induced to marry him. But this
was the only grateful thing he did in England. He affected so extravagant a
state, and was so sullen and silent, that it was not easy for any to come
within the Court, and Access to him was not to be had, without demanding it
with almost as much formality as Ambassadors used, when they desired an
Audience: So that a General discontent was quickly spread into most places of
the Kingdom, only Gardener was well pleased, for the Conduct of affairs was put
entirely in his hands. Many malicious reports were spread of the Queen,
particularly in Norfolk; at one of these the Queen was much concerned, which
was, that she was with Child before the King came over; but after great
examinations, nothing could be made out of it.

The Bishops went to make their Visitations this Summer, The Bishops visit
their Diocesses.
to see whether the old Service, with all its Rites, was again set up; they
also enquired concerning the lives and labors of the Clergy, of their
Marriage, and their living chastely; whether they were suspected of Heresy, or
of favoring Heretics? whether they went to Taverns or Alehouses? whether they
admitted any to officiate, that had been Ordained schismatically, before they
were reconciled, or to preach, if they had not obtained a License? whether they
visited the sick, and administered the Sacraments reverently? whether they were
guilty of Merchandise, or Usury? and whether they did not once every Quarter at
least, expound to the People, the Elements of the Christian Religion in the
Vulgar Tongue? They did not proceed steadily, in relation to the Ordinations
made in King Edward's time; for at this time all that they did, was to add the
Ceremonies that were then left out in the Book of Ordinations: but afterward
they carried themselves, as if they had esteemed those Orders of no force; and
therefore they did not degrade those Bishops or Priests, that had been ordained
by it: Nor has the Church of Rome been steady in this matter, for though upon
some Schisms, they have annulled all Ordinations made in them; yet they have
not annulled the Ordinations of the Greek Church, though they esteem the Greeks
both Heretics and Schismatics: Thus there were many questions put in among
the Articles of the Visitation, yet these were asked only for form, the main
business was Heresy, and the performing all Offices according to the old
customs: and the least failing in these matters, was more severely enquired
after, and more exemplarily punished, than far greater offenses. Bonner carried
himself like a Madman, and it was said by his friends, to excuse the Violences
of his rage, that his brains were a little disordered by his long Imprisonment:
for if either the Bells had not rung, when he came near any Church, or if he
had not found the Sacrament exposed, he was apt to break out into the foulest
language: and not content with that, he was accustomed to beat his Clergy, when
he was displeased with any thing: for he was naturally cruel and brutal. He
took care to have those places of Scripture, that had been painted on the Walls
of the Churches to be washed off: and upon this it was said, that it was
necessary to dash out the Scripture, to make way for Images, for they agreed so
ill, that they could not decently stand together. Many mock Poems and Satires
were flying up and down; but none was more provoking, than one that followed on
an Accident at Saint Paul's on Easter Day: The custom was to lay the Host in the
Sepulcher at Even-Song, on Good Friday, and to take it out on Easter Morning;
and the Quire Sung these words, He is risen, he is not here, when it was taken
out: but when they looked to take it out, they found it was not there indeed,
for one had stolen it away, but another was quickly brought; so a Ballad was
made, that their God was lost, but a new one was put in his room: Great pains
were taken to discover the Author of this, but he was not found.

The Queens third Parliament met on the 11th. of November: Another Parliament.
In the Writ of Summons the Queens Title of Supreme Head was left out, though
she had hitherto not only used the name, but had assumed the power Imported by
it, to a high degree. Pool was now suffered to come so near as Flanders; and
the Temper of the Parliament being quickly found to be favorable to the work
he came for, the Queen sent two Lords, Paget and Hastings for him. Both King
and Queen rode in state to Westminster, and each had a Sword of state carried
before them. The first Bill that past, was a Repeal of Pool's Attainder, it was
read by the Commons three times in one Day; and the Bill was passed without
making a Session by a short Prorogation. He came over, and entered privately to
London, on the 24th. of November, for the Pope's authority not being yet
acknowledged, he could not be received as a Legate. His Instructions were full,
besides the authority commonly lodged with Legates; which consists chiefly in
the many Graces and Dispensations, that they are empowered to grant; though it
might be expected, that they should come rather to see the Canons obeyed, than
broken: only the more scandalous abuses were still reserved to the Popes
themselves, whose special Prerogative it has always been, to be the most
Eminent Transgressors of all Canons and Constitutions.

Pool made his first Speech to the King and Queen, The Nation is reconciled to
the Sea of Rome.
and then to the Parliament, in the Name of the Common Pastor, inviting them to
Return to the Sheepfold of the Church. The Queen felt a strange emotion of joy
within her, as he made his Speech, which she thought was a Child quickened in
her Belly: and the flattering Court Ladies heightened her belief of it. The
Council ordered Bonner to sing Te Deum; and there were Bonefires, and all other
public demonstrations of joy upon it. The Priests said, that here was another
John Baptist to come, that leapt in his Mother's Belly, upon the Salutation
from Christ's Vicar. Both Houses agreed on an Address to the King and Queen,
that they would intercede with the Legate, to reconcile them to the Sea of
Rome, and they offered to repeal all the Laws they had made against the Pope's
authority, in sign of their repentance. Upon this, the Cardinal came to the
Parliament: He first thanked them for repealing his Attainder, in recompense of
which, he was now to reconcile them to the Body of the Church: He made a long
Speech, of the Conversion of the Britains and Saxons to the Faith, and of the
Obedience they had paid to the Apostolic See; and of the many favors that
See had granted the Crown, of which none was more Eminent than the Title of
Defender of the Faith. The ruin of the Greek Church, and the distractions of
Germany, and the Confusions themselves had been in, since they departed from
the Unity of the Church, might convince them of the necessity of keeping that
bond entire. In Conclusion, he gave them and the whole Nation a Plenary
Absolution. The rest of the Day was spent in singing Te Deum, and the Night in
Bonefires. The Act, repealing all Laws made against the Popes authority, was
quickly past, only it stuck a little, by reason of a Proviso, which the House
of Lords put in for some Lands, which the Lord Wentworth had of the Sea of
London, with the Commons opposed so much, that after the Bill was offered to the
Royal assent, it was cut out of the Parchment by Gardener. They did enumerate
and repeal all Acts made since the 20th. of Hen. 8. against the Pope's
authority, but all foundations of Bishoprics and Cathedrals, all Marriages,
though contrary to the Laws of the Church, all Institutions, all Judicial
Processes, and the settlements made, either of Church or Abbey-Lands, were
confirmed. The Convocation of Canterbury had joined their Intercession with the
Cardinal, that he would confirm the right of the present Possessors of those
Lands: Upon which he did confirm them, but he added a heavy charge, requiring
those that had any of the Goods of the Church, to remember the Judgments of God
that fell on Belshazzar, for profaning the holy Vessels, though they were not
taken away by himself, but by his Father; and that, at least, they would take
care, that such as served the Cures should be sufficiently maintained: all
which was put in the Act, and confirmed by it, and it was declared, that all
Suits concerning those Lands were to be tried in the Civil Courts: and that it
should be a Praemunire, if any went about to disturb the Possessors, by the
pretense of an Ecclesiastical power. They also declared, that the Title of
Supreme Head of the Church, did never of right belong to the Crown; and enacted
that it should be left out of Writs in all time coming. All Exemptions granted
to Monasteries, and now continued in Lay-hands, were taken away, and all
Churches were made subject to Episcopal Jurisdiction, except Westminster,
Windsor, and the Tower of London. The statute of Mortmain was repealed for 20.
years to come, and all things were brought back to the state in which they
were, in the 20th. year of King Henry's reign. The Lower House of Convocation
gave occasion to many clauses in this Act, by a Petition which they made to the
Upper-house, consenting to the settlement made of Church and Abbey Lands; and
praying that the Statute of Mortmain might be repealed, and that all the Tithes
might be restored to the Church: they proposed also some things in relation to
Religion, for the condemning and burning all Heretical Books; and that great
care should be had of the Printing and venting of Books, that the Church should
be restored to its former Jurisdiction, that Pluralities and Non-residence
might be effectually condemned, and all Simoniacal pactions punished, that the
Clergy might be discharged of paying first fruits and Tenths, that Exemptions
might be taken away, that all the Clergy should go in their Habits, and that
they should not be sued in a Praemunire, till a Prohibition were first served
and disobeyed, that so they might not be surprised and ruined a second time. By
another Bill all former Acts made against Lollards were revived. The Commons
offered another Bill for voiding all Leases made by married Priests, but it was
laid aside by the Lords. Thus were the Pensioners and aspiring Men in the House
of Commons, either redeeming former faults, or hoping to merit highly by the
forwardness of their Zeal. By another Bill several things were made Treason:
and it was declared, that if the Queen died before the King, and left any
Children, the King should have the Government in his hands, till they were of
Age; and during that time the conspiring his Death was made Treason, but none
were to be tried for words, but within six Months after they were spoken.
Another Act past, declaring it Treason in any to pray for the Queens death,
unless they repented of it, and in that case they were to suffer Corporal
punishment at the Judges discretion. A severe Act was also passed against all
that spread lying Reports of the King, the Queen, the Peers, Judges, or great
Officers. Some were to lose their Hands, others their Ears, and others were to
be fined according to the degree of their offense.

And thus all affairs were carried in Parliament, Gardiners policy in the steps
of this change.
as well as the Court could wish: and upon this, Gardiner's reputation was much
raised, for bringing about so great a change in so little time, with so little
opposition. He took much pains to remove all the Objections, that were
generally made use of: they were chiefly two, the one was the fear of coming
under such Tyranny from Rome, as their Ancestors had groaned under; and the
other was the loss of the Abbey-Lands. But to the first, he said, that all the
old Laws against Provisions from Rome, should still continue in force: and to
show them, that Legates should exercise no dangerous authority in England, he
made Pool take out a License, under the Great Seal, for his Legatine power. As
for the other, he promised both an Act of Parliament, and Convocation,
confirming them, and undertook that the Pope should ratify these, as well as
his Legate did now consent to them. But to all this, it was answered, that if
the Nation were again brought under the old Superstition, and the Papal
authority established, it would not be possible to bridle that power, which
would be no longer kept within limits, if once they became Masters again, and
brought the World under a blind obedience. It was objected, that the
Church Lands must be certainly taken back, it was not likely the Pope would
confirm the alienation of them; but though he should do it, yet his Successors
might annul that as sacrilegious. And it was observed in the charge, which Pool
gave to all, to make restitution; and by the repeal of the statute of Mortmain,
that it was intended to possess the Nation with an Opinion of the Unlawfulness
of keeping those Lands, which would probably work much on Men that were near
death, and could not resist the terrors of Purgatory, or perhaps of Hell, for
the sin of Sacrilege: and so would be easily induced to make restitution of
them, especially at such a time when they were not able to possess them any
longer themselves.

Now the Parliament was at an end: Consultations about the way of proceeding
against Heretics.
and the first thing taken into consideration, was, what way they ought to
proceed against the Heretics. Pool had been suspected to bear some favor to
them formerly, but he took great care to avoid all occasions of being any more
blamed for that: and indeed he lived in that distrust of all the English, that
he opened his thoughts to very few: for his chief Confidents were two Italians
that came over with him, Priuli and Ormaneto. Secretary Cecyl, who in matters
of Religion complied with the present time, was observed to have more of his
favor than any English Man had. Pool was an Enemy to all severe proceedings,
he thought Churchmen should have the tenderness of a Father, and the care of a
Shepherd, and ought to reduce, but not devour the stray sheep: he had observed
that Cruelty rather inflamed than cured that Distemper: he thought the better
and surer way, was to begin with an effectual Reformation of the manners of the
Clergy, since it was the scandals given by their ill conduct and Ignorance,
that was the chief cause of the growth of Heresy: so he concluded, that if a
Primitive Discipline should be revived, the Nation would by degrees lay down
their prejudices, and might in time be gained by gentle methods. Gardener, on
the other hand, being of an abject and cruel temper himself, thought the strict
execution of the Laws against the Lollards, was that to which they ought
chiefly to trust: if the Preachers were made public Examples, he concluded the
People would be easily reclaimed: for he pretended, that it was visible, if
King Henry had executed the Act of the six Articles vigorously, all would have
submitted: he confessed a Reformation of the Clergy was a good thing, but all
times could not bear it: if they should proceed severely against scandalous
Churchmen, the Heretics would take advantage from that, to defame the Church
the more, and raise a clamor against all Clergymen. Gardiner's spite was at
this time much whetted by the reprinting of his Books of true Obedience, which
was done at Strasburg, and sent over. In it he had called King Henry's marriage
with Queen Catherine, Incestuous, and had justified his Divorce, and his second
Marriage with his most godly and virtuous Wife, Queen Anne. This was a severe
exposing of him, but he had brow enough, and bore down these reproaches, by
saying Peter had denied his Master: but others said a Compliance of 25. years
continuance was very unjustly compared to a sudden denial, that was presently
expiated with so sincere a Repentance. The Queen was for joining both these
Councils together, and intended to proceed at the same time, both against
scandalous Churchmen and Heretics. After the Parliament was over, there was a
solemn Procession of many Bishops and Priests, Bonner carrying the Host, to
thank God for reconciling the Nation again to Saint Peter's Chair; and it
having been done on St. Andrew's Day, that was appointed to be an Anniversary,
and was called The Feast of the Reconciliation.

But soon after began the Persecution: Rogers, Hooper, Tailor, Bradford, A
Persecution set on foot.
and seven more were brought before the Council, and asked one by one, if they
would return to the Union of the Catholic Church, and acknowledge the Pope:
but they all answered resolutely, that they had renounced the Pope's power, as
all the Bishops had also done; they were assured he had no authority, but over
his own Diocese, for the first four Ages, so they could not submit to his
Tyranny. Gardener told them, Mercy was now offered them, but if they rejected
it, Justice would be done next: so they were all sent back to Prison, except
one, who had great Friends, so he was only asked, if he would be an honest man,
and upon that promise was dismissed. They began with Rogers, whose Imprisonment
was formerly mentioned. Many had advised him to make his escape, and fly to
Germany: but he would not do it, though a Family of Ten Children was a great
Temptation.

Both he and Hooper were brought before Gardener, Rogers and Hooper condemned,
and burnt.
Bonner, Tonstall, and three other Bishops. They asked them whether they would
submit to the Church, or not? but they answered, that they looked on the Church
of Rome, as Antichristian. Gardener said, that was a reproach on the Queen.
Rogers said, they honored the Queen, and looked for no ill at her hands, but as
she was set on to it by them; Upon that Gardener, and the other Bishops
declared, that so far were they from setting on the Queen to the executing of
the Law, that she commanded them to do it, and this was confirmed by two Privy
Councillors that were present. In conclusion, they gave them time till next
Morning to consider what they would do, and then they continuing firm, they
declared them obstinate Heretics, and degraded them: but they did not esteem
Hooper a Bishop, so he was only degraded from the Order of Priesthood. Rogers
was not suffered to see his Wife nor his Children, yet so little did this
terrible sentence fright him, that the morning of his Execution, he was so fast
asleep, that he was not easily awakened: He was carried from Newgate to
Smithfield, on the 4th. of February, a Pardon was offered him at the stake, if
he would recant, but he refused it on such terms; and said he would not
exchange a quick fire for Everlasting burnings, but declared that he resigned
up his Life with joy, as a testimony to the Doctrine which he had preached.
Hooper was sent to Gloucester, at which he rejoiced, for he hoped by his death
to confirm many there. He spoke to several, whom he had formerly known, some of
them, in compassion to him, wept by him, which made him shed tears; but he
said, all he had suffered in his Imprisonment, had not moved him to do so much:
he was burnt on the 9th. of February: a Pardon was also offered him at the
Stake, but to no effect. A great Wind blew while he was burning, and hindered
the Flame to rise up and choke him, or destroy his Vitals; so that he was near
three quarters of an hour in great Torment, but he continued still calling on
God; his last words were, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit. Sanders, that had been
Minister at Coventry, and Tailor that was Minister at Hadly, were at the same
time condemned, and sent to be burnt at the places where they had served: The
former was first committed for preaching without License, after the Queens
Prohibition; and the latter for making opposition to some Priests, that broke
violently into his Church, and said Mass in it. Gardener was in hope, that
these four Executions being made in several parts of England, would have struck
so general a terror in the whole Party, that there would have been little
occasion for further severities: but when he saw six more were soon after
apprehended on the same account, and that the spirits of those, called
Heretics, were now rather inflamed than depressed, he resolved to meddle no
more in those Trials; and turned over that Invidious matter to Bonner, whose
temper was so cruel, that he undertook it cheerfully.

These severities were very hateful to the Nation. The burnings much condemned.
It was observed, that in King Edward's time, those that opposed the Laws, were
only turned out of their Benefices, and some few of them were put in Prison;
but now Men were put in Prison on trifling pretenses, and kept there till Laws
were made, by which they were condemned merely for their Opinion, for they had
acted nothing contrary to Law. One Piece of Cruelty was also singular: when the
Council sent away those that were to be burnt in the Country, they threatened
to cut out their Tongues, if they would not promise to make no Speeches to the
People; which they, to avoid that butchery, were forced to promise. Some made
reflections on the length and sharpness of Hooper's Torment, as a punishment on
him, for the contest he had raised in the Church about the Vestments: Ridley
and he had been entirely reconciled, and writ very affectionate Letters to one
another. The sense they had of those differences, when they were preparing for
another World, and that bitter passage, through which they were to go to it,
ought to inspire all others with more moderate thoughts in such matters. Those
that loved the Reformation, were now possessed with great aversion to the
Popish Party, and the whole Body of the Nation grew to dislike this Cruelty;
and came to hate King Philip for it. Gardener, and the other Councillors had
openly said, that the Queen set them on to it, so the blame of it was laid on
the King, the sowreness of whose temper, together with his bigottry in matters
of Religion, made it seem reasonable to charge him with it. He finding that
this was like to raise such prejudices against him, as might probably spoil his
design of making himself Master of England, took care to vindicate himself. So
his Confessor Alphonsus, a Franciscan, preached a Sermon at Court, against the
taking of Peoples lives for Opinions in Religion; and Inveighed against the
Bishops for doing it: By this the blame of it was turned back on them, and this
made them stop for some Weeks; but at last they resolved rather to bear the
blame of the Persecution avowedly, than not to go on in it.

At this time a Petition was printed beyond Sea; Arguments against them, and
for them.
by which the Reformers addressed themselves to the Queen, they set before her
the danger of her being carried by a blind zeal, to destroy the Members of
Christ, as St. Paul had done before his Conversion: they remembered her of
Cranmer's interposing to preserve her Life in her Fathers time: they cited many
Passages out of the Books of Gardener, Bonner and Tonstall, by which she might
see that they were not acted by true Principles of Conscience, but were turned
as their Fears or Interests led them. They showed her how contrary Persecution
was to the spirit of the Gospel, that Christians tolerated Jews; and that
Turks, notwithstanding the barbarity of their tempers, and the Cruelty of their
Religion, yet tolerated Christians. They remembered her, that the first Law for
burning in England, was made by Henry the IV. as a reward to the Bishops, who
had helped him to depose Richard the second, and so to mount to the Throne.
They represented to her, that God had trusted her with the Sword, which she
ought to employ for the protection of her People, and was not to abandon them
to the Cruelty of such Wolves: The Petition also turned to the Nobility, and
rest of the Nation, and the dangers of a Spanish Yoke, and a bloody Inquisition
were set before them. Upon this the Popish Authors writ several Books in
Justification of those proceedings. They observed that the Jews were commanded
to put blasphemers to death; and said the Heretics blasphemed the Body of
Christ, and called it only a piece of Bread. It became Christians to be more
zealous for the true Religion, than Heathens were for the false: Saint Peter,
by a Divine Power, struck Ananias and Saphira dead. Christ, in the Parable,
said, Compel them to enter in. Saint Paul said, I would they were cut off that
trouble you. Saint Austin was once against all severities in such cases, but
changed his mind, when he saw the good effects that some Banishments and Fines
had on the Donatists: That on which they insisted most, was, the burning of
Anabaptists in King Edward's time. So they were now fortified in their cruel
Intentions, and resolved to spare none, of what Age, Sex, or condition soever
they might be.

Bonner kept one Tomkins, a Weaver, some Months in his House, who was found to
doubt of the Presence in the Sacrament, he used diverse Violences to him, as the
tearing out the Hair of his Beard, and the holding a Candle to his Hand, till
the Veins and Sinews burst; and these not prevailing, to make him change, he
was at last burnt in Smithfield. One Hunter, an Apprentice, not above XIX.
Years old, was condemned and burnt on the same account. Bonner was so much
concerned to preserve him, that he offered him Forty Pound to change: so
mercenary did he think other Men's consciences were, measuring them probably by
his own. Two Gentlemen, Causton and Higbed, one Lawrence a Priest, and two
meaner Persons, were burnt near their own Houses in Essex. The Method in these,
and in all the other proceedings, during the rest of this reign, was summary,
and ex officio: Upon complaints made, Persons were imprisoned, and Articles
containing the Points, for which they were suspected, were offered to them,
which they were required to answer; and if their answers were Heretical, they
were burnt for them, without any thing being objected to them, or proved
against them. Ferrar, that had been Bishop of S. David's, was dealt with in the
same manner, by his Successor Morgan. When he was condemned, he appealed to
Cardinal Pool, but that had no other effect, save, that his Execution was stopped
three Weeks. Rawlins White, a poor Fisherman, was condemned by the Bishop of
Landaffe, and afterward burnt: Marsh a Priest, was burnt at Chester; and to
the ordinary Cruelty of burning, they added a new Invention of pouring melted
Pitch on his Head. One Flower, a rash and furious Man, wounded a Priest at S.
Margaret's Westminster, as he was officiating; for which being seized on, and
found to be an Heretic, he was condemned and burnt. The fact was disapproved
by all the Reformed, and he became sincerely Penitent for it, before he died.
After this, for some Weeks, there was a stop put to those severities.

The Queen about this time sent for her Treasurer, The Queen restores the
Church Lands.
and some of the other Officers of her Revenue, and told them, that she thought
her self bound in Conscience to restore all the Lands of the Church, that were
then in her hands; she thought they were unlawfully acquired, and that they
could not be held by her without a sin, therefore she declared she would have
them disposed of, as Cardinal Pool should think fit. Some imputed this to a
Bull set out by the Pope, excommunicating all that kept any Lands belonging to
Abbeys or Churches: This alarmed many in England, but Gardener pacified them,
and told them, that Bull was made only for Germany, and that no Bull did bind
in England, till it was received. But this did not satisfy Inquisitive People,
for a sin in Germany was likewise a sin in England, and if the Pope's authority
came from Christ, it ought to take place every where equally.

Pope Julius died in March, Marcellus chosen Pope. Paul the IV. succeeds.
and Marcellus was chosen to succeed him: he turned his thoughts wholly to the
Reformation of abuses: He suffered none of his Nephews, nor Kindred to come to
Court, and resolved effectually to put down Non-residence and Pluralities: but
he found it very difficult to bring about the good designs he had projected,
and that the Popes power was such, that it was more easy for him to do
mischief, than good: which made him once cry out, That he did not see how any
could be saved, that sat in that Chair. These things wrought so much on him,
that he sickned within Twelve Days of his Election, and died Ten Days after
that. Upon his death, the Queen endeavored to engage the French to consent to
the Promotion of Cardinal Pool, which she did without his knowledge or
approbation: but at Rome they were so apprehensive of another Pope set on
Reformations, that they made have in their choice; and set up Caraffa, called
Paul the Fourth, who was the most extravagantly ambitious and insolent Pope,
that had reigned of a great while.

On the day of his Election, The English Ambassadors come to Rome.
the English Ambassadors entered Rome in great state, having in their Train 140.
Horse of their own Attendants, but the Pope would not admit them to an
Audience, till they had accepted of a Grant of the Title of the Kingdom of
Ireland; for he pretended it belonged only to him to confer those Titles. The
Ambassadors, it seems, knew it was the Queen's mind, that they should in every
thing submit to the Pope, and so took that grant from him. Their Public
Audience was given in great Solemnity, in which the Pope declared, that in
token of his pardoning the Nation, he had added to the Crown the Title of the
Kingdom of Ireland, by that Supreme Power which God had given him to destroy,
or to build Kingdoms at his pleasure. But in private discourse, he complained
much, that the Abbey-Lands were not restored. He said it was beyond his power
to confirm Sacrilege, and all were obliged, under the pains of damnation, to
restore to the last farthing, every thing that belonged to the Church: he said
likewise, that he would send over a Collector to gather the Peter Pence, for
they could not expect that St. Peter would open Heaven to them, so long as they
denied him his rights upon Earth. These were heavy tidings to the Lord
Mountacute, (Sir Anthony Brown) whose Estate consisted chiefly of Abbey-Lands,
that was one of the Ambassadors. But the Pope would endure to contradiction,
and repeated this every time they came to him.

In England, The English grow backward in the Persecution.
Orders were sent to the Justices to look narrowly to the Preachers of Heresy,
and to have secret Spies in every Parish, for giving them Information of all
Peoples behavior. This was imputed to the sowrness of Spanish Councils, and
seemed to be taken from that base practice of the Roman Emperors, that had
their Informers (or Delatores) that went into all Companies, and accommodated
themselves to all Men's Tempers, till they had drawn them into some discourses
against the State, and thereby ruined them. People grew so averse to Cruelty,
that Bonner himself finding how odious he was become, and observing the
slackness of the other Bishops, refused not to meddle any further, and burnt
none in five Weeks time: Upon which the Queen writ to him, and required him to
do the Office of a good Pastor, and either to reclaim the Heretics, or to
proceed against them according to Law: and he quickly showed how ready he was
to mend his pace, upon such an admonition.

In the beginning of May, The Queens delivery in vain looked for.
the Court was in expectation of the Queen's Delivery. The Envoys were named,
that were to carry the good News to the neighboring Courts: the tidings of it
did fly over England, and Te Deum was sung upon it in several Cathedrals. But
it proved to be a false conception, and all hopes of Issue by her, vanished.
This tended much to alienate King Philip from her; and he finding it more
necessary to look after his Hereditary Crowns, than to stay in England, where
he had no hopes of making himself Master, left her, and that increased her
Melancholy.

New Fires were kindled. More Heretics burnt.
Cardmaker, that had been a Prebendary at Bath, and Warn a Tradesman, were
burnt in Smithfield, in May. The body of one that suffered for Robbery, but at
his Execution said somewhat savouring of Heresy, was burnt for it. Seven were
burnt in several parts of Essex. They were condemned by Bonner, and sent down
to be burnt near the places of their abode. The Council writ to the Great Men
of the County, to gather many together, and assist at those Spectacles: and
when they heard that some had come of their own accord to the burnings at
Colchester, they writ to the Lord Rich to give their thanks to those Persons
for their Zeal, so dexterously did they study to cherish a spirit of Cruelty
among the People. Bradford, who had been committed soon after he had saved
Bourne in the Tumult at Saint Paul's, had been condemned with the rest, and was
preserved till July. He was so much considered, that Heath Archbishop of York,
and Day Bishop of Chichester, Weston and Harpsfield, with the King's Confessor,
and Alphonsus a Castro went to see, if they could prevail on him, and had long
Conferences with him in Prison, but all to no purpose. Bourn was made Bishop of
Bath and Wells, and his Brother was Secretary of State; but though Bradford had
preserved his life, yet he neither came to visit him, nor did he interpose for
his life; on the contrary, it was objected to Bradford, that by his carriage in
suppressing that Tumult, it appeared that he had set it on: but he appealed to
God, who saw how unworthily they returned him evil for good: and he appealed to
Bourn, who was sitting among the Bishops that judged him, if he had not prayed
him for the Passion of Christ to endeavor his preservation; and if he had not
done it, at the hazard of his own Life: But Bourn, as he was ashamed to accuse
him, so he had not the honesty, nor the courage to vindicate him: a young
Apprentice was burnt with him, whom he encouraged much in his sufferings, and
in transports of joy, he hugged the Faggots that were laid about him. Thornton,
Harpsfield, and others, set on a Persecution at Canterbury, though Cardinal
Pool was averse to it, but he durst not now discover so much, for the Pope had
an inveterate hatred to him, and was resolved upon the first occasion to recall
him, and for that end, he entered in a Correspondence with Gardener, who hoped
thereby to have been made a Cardinal, and Archbishop of Canterbury: and upon
the hopes he had of that, he still preserved Cranmer, for though he was now
condemned for Heresy, yet the Sea was not esteemed void, till he was formally
degraded. Some said it was fit to begin with him, that had been the chief
promoter of Heresy in England. But Gardener said, it was better to try if it
could be possible to shake him, for it would be a great blow to the whole
Party, if he could be wrought on to forsake it, whereas if he should be burnt,
and should dye with such resolution as others expressed, it would much raise
the spirits of his followers. The Sea of Canterbury was now only sequestered in
Pool's hands, and he being afraid of falling under the Pope's rage, was willing
to let the cruel Prebendaries do what they pleased. They burnt two Priests, and
two Laymen at Canterbury, and sent a Man and a Woman to be burnt in other
Places in Kent. Two that belonged to the Dioceses of Winchester and Chichester
were condemned by Bonner, and were burnt near the places of their abode. There
were at this time several pretended discoveries of Plots both in Dorsetshire
and Essex: and Orders were given to draw Confessions from some that were
apprehended, by Torture, but the thing was let fall, for it was grounded only
on the surmises of the Clergy.

The Queen was this Year rebuilding the House of the Franciscans at Greenwich,
Religious Houses set up.
and had recalled Peyto and Elston, of which mention was made, Book 1. page
117. the one she made her Confessor, and the other was to be Guardian of that
House: The People expressed such hatred of them, that as they were passing upon
the River, some threw stones at them: but they that did it, could not be
discovered. More's Works published.
Judge Rastall published Sir Tho. More's Works at this time; but as was
formerly observed, he left out his Letter concerning the Nun of Kent; though it
lies among his other Letters, in that very Manuscript, out of which he
published them. He prefixed nothing concerning Mores Life, to his Works, which
makes it highly probable, that he never writ it: for this was the proper time
and place for publishing it, if he had ever writ it. So that Manuscript life of
Mores, pretended to be writ by him, out of which many things have been quoted
since that time, to the disgrace of King Henry, and Anne Boleyn, must be a
later forgery contrived in spite to Queen Elizabeth. The Queen did now go on
with her Intentions, of founding Religious Houses out of those Abbey-Lands,
that were still in the Crown. She recommended it also to the Councils care,
that every where there might be good Preaching, and that there might be a
Visitation of the Universities: she desired that Justice might be done on the
Heretics, in such a manner, that the People might be well satisfied about it,
and pressed them to take care, that there might be no Pluralities in England, and
that the Preachers might give good Example, as well as make good Sermons.

The burnings went on: Seven were burnt in August in several places; six more
were burnt in one fire at Canterbury, and four were burnt in other places, but
the particular days are not marked. In September five were burnt at Canterbury,
and seven in other places. In October two were burnt at Ely, by Shaxton's
means, who now completed his Apostasy by his Cruelty. The 16th of that month
became remarkable by the sufferings of Ridley and Latimer. Ridley and Latimer
are burnt.
Three Bishops, Lincoln, Gloucester and Bristol were sent with a Commission
from Cardinal Pool, to proceed against them. Ridley said, he paid great
respect to Pool as he was of the Royal Family, and esteemed him much for his
Learning and Virtues, but as he was the Popes Legate, he would express no
reverence to him, nor would uncover himself before any that acted by authority
from him. The Bishop of Lincoln exhorted him, To return to the obedience of the Sea of S. Peter, on whom Christ had founded his Church, to which the Ancient
Fathers had submitted, and which himself had once acknowledged: He began his
answer with a Protestation, That he did not thereby submit to the authority of
the Pope or his Legate; he said Christ had founded his Church not on St. Peter,
but on the Faith which he had confessed: The Bishops of Rome had been held in
great esteem, but that was either on the account of their personal worth, or by
reason of the dignity of the City: He confessed he had once been involved in
that superstition; but St. Paul was once a Blasphemer: And he had discovered
such errors in that See, that he would never acknowledge it any more. Latimer
adhered to what he said. A nights respite was granted them, but they continuing
steadfast next day, they were condemned as obstinate Heretics, and delivered to
the Secular Arm, and the Writs were sent down for their burning. They prepared
themselves for it with such patience and cheerfulness as very much amazed their
Keepers: As they were led out, they looked up to Cranmer's Window, but he was
not in it, for he was then held in dispute by some Friars; yet he looked after
them, with a very tender sense of their condition, and prayed earnestly to God
to assist them in their sufferings. When they came to the Stake, they embraced
and encouraged one another. Smith preached on those words, If I give my body to
be burnt, and have not Charity it profits nothing: And he compared their
dying for Heresy, to Judas's that hanged himself. Ridley desired leave to
answer some points in his Sermon; but it was told him, that he was not to be
suffered to speak, except he intended to recant: So he turned himself to God,
when he saw men were resolved to be so unreasonable to him. He sent a desire to
the Queen, in behalf of the Tenants of the Bishopric of London, from whom he
had taken Fines, for which he had renewed their Leases; and prayed that either
their Leases might be confirmed, or that their Fines might be restored out of
his goods, which had been seized on when he was first put in prison: After both
had prayed, and undressed themselves, the fire was kindled. Some Gunpowder was
hanged about their necks, and that being fired, put Latimer quickly out of his
pain; but Ridley had a more lingering torment: For they threw on so much wood
that it was long before the flame broke through it; and his Legs were almost
wholly consumed before the flame choked him. Thus did these two Bishops end
their days and their Ministry: The one was esteemed to be the ablest of all
that advanced the Reformation, both for Piety, Learning, and solidity of
Judgment; the other was looked on as a truly Primitive Bishop, that seemed to
have more of the simplicity of the first Ages, than the politeness or the
learning of later times. Ridley was ill rewarded both by Bonner and Heath; he
had used Bonner's Mother and Friends with great kindness, while he was Bishop
of London; and had kept the latter a year and a half in his house, after he
fell in trouble, but he made him ill returns; and when he went through Oxford
he did not so much as visit him: And so far had men been taught to put off all
humanity, that during their Imprisonment in Oxford, none of the University
either came to visit them, or took care to relieve their necessities.

It was observed that Gardener was very impatient to have those Bishops burnt,
Gardiners death.
and delayed his dinner that day till the news should be brought him, that the
Fire was kindled: But at dinner he was taken with an illness, which turned to a
suppression of Urine, of which he died the twelfth of November. He went twice
to the Parliament which was opened the twenty first of October, but could go
abroad no more; he expressed great sorrow for his former sins, and often said,
He had erred with St. Peter, but had not repented with him. He was believed to
be of noble extraction, though basely born; for his true father was supposed to
be Richard Woodvill, that was Brother to Edward the Fourth's Queen, Grandmother
to King Henry the Eighth: And this was believed to be the occasion of his
sudden preferment to the Sea of Winchester. So those that reflected on him for
his opposition to the Married state, said that no wonder if persons basely
born, as both he and Bonner were, had no regard to that state of life. He was
learned in the Civil and Canon Law; he had a good Latin style, and had some
knowledge in the Greek Tongue, but was a very indifferent Divine: He had a
quickness of apprehension, with a great knowledge of mankind, and the Intrigues
of Courts: He had all the arts of Insinuation and Flattery, and was inferior
to none in profound Dissimulation. He died now when he had the prospect of a
Cardinals Hat, and of all the honors which a Pope, that found him after his
own heart, could do him. Heath was made Chancellor during pleasure, and the
Queen gave to the Sea of York the Duke of Suffolk's house, fallen to her by his
Attainder, in recompense for White Hall, and it was afterward called
York-House.

The Parliament was now assembled, The Parliament ill pleased with the Queens
conduct.
and it appeared that the Nation was much turned in their affections. It was
proposed to give the Queen a Subsidy, and two fifteenths. This was the first
aid that the Queen had asked, though she was now in the third year of her
Reign; and what was now desired, was no more than what she might have exacted
at her first coming to the Crown; and since she had forgiven so much at her
Coronation, it seemed unreasonable to deny it now: Yet great opposition was
made to it. Many said, the Queen was impoverishing the Crown, and giving away
the Abbey-Lands, and therefore she ought to be supplied by the Clergy, and not
turn to the Laity: But it was answered, that the Convocation had given her 6 s.
in the pound, but that would not serve her present occasions; so the debate
grew high: But to prevent further heats the Queen sent a Message, declaring
that she would accept the Subsidy without the fifteenths, and upon that it was
granted. The Queen sent for the Speaker of the House of Commons, and told him
she could not with a good Conscience exact the Tenths and First fruits of the
Clergy, since they were given to her Father to support his unlawful dignity, of
being the Supreme Head of the Church: She also thought, that all Tithes and
Impropriations were the Patrimony of the Church, and therefore was resolved to
resign such of them as were in her hands. The former part past easily in the
House, but great opposition was made to the latter part of her motion: for it
was looked on as a step to the taking all the impropriations out of the hands of
the Laity; yet upon a division of the House, it went so near that 126 were
against it, and 193 were for it, so it was carried by 67 voices. A Bill was put
in against the Duchess of Suffolk, and several others that favored the
Reformation, and had gone beyond Sea that they might freely enjoy their
Consciences; requiring them to return, under severe penalties: The Lords past
it, but the Commons threw it out; for they began now to repent of the severe
Laws they had already consented to, and resolved to add no more. They also
rejected another Bill, for incapacitating some to be Justices of Peace, who
were complained of for their remissness in prosecuting Heretics. An Act was
put in for debarring one Bennet Smith, who had hired some Assassinates to
commit a most detestable Murder, from the benefit of Clergy; which by the
course of the Common Law, would have saved him. This was an invention of the
Priests, that if any, who was capable of entering into Orders, and had not been
twice married, or had not married a Widow, could read, and vowed to take
Orders, he was to be saved in many criminal cases. And it was looked on as a
part of the Ecclesiastical Immunity; which made diverse of the Bishops oppose
this Act; Yet it past, though four of them, and five Temporal Lords protested
against it. There was such heat in the House of Commons in this Parliament,
that one Sir Anth. Kingston, who was a great stickler, called one day for the
Keys of the House; but when the Parliament was dissolved, he was sent to the
Tower for it: He was soon after set at liberty, but next year he and six
others, were accused of a design of robbing the Exchequer: He died before he
was brought up to London; the other six were hanged: But the Evidence against
them does not appear on Record.

Cardinal Pool called a Convocation, Pools decrees for the Reformation of the
Clergy.
having first procured a License from the Queen, empowering them both to meet,
and to make such Canons as they should think fit. This was done to preserve the
Prerogatives of the Crown, and to secure the Clergy, that they might not be
afterward brought under a Praemunire. In it several decrees were proposed by
Pool, and assented to by the Clergy: 1. For observing the Feast of the
Reconciliation made with Rome, with great solemnity: They also condemned all
Heretical Books, and received that exposition of the Faith which Pope Eugenius
sent from the Council of Florence to the Armenians. 2. For the decent
administration of the Sacraments, and putting down the yearly Feasts in the
dedications of Churches. 3. They required all Bishops and Priests to lay aside
Secular cares, and to give themselves wholly to the Pastoral charge: And all
Pluralists were required to resign all their benefices except one, within two
months, otherwise to forfeit all. 4. Bishops were required to preach often, and
to provide good Preachers for their Dioceses, to go over them as their
Visitors. 5. All the Pomp and Luxury of the Tables, Servants, and Families of
the Bishops was condemned; and they were required chiefly to lay out their
Revenues on works of Charity. 6. They were required not to give Orders, but
after a long and strict Trial; which they ought to make themselves, and not to
turn it over to others. 7. They were charged not to bestow Benefices upon
partial regards, but to confer them on the most deserving, and to take them
bound by Oath, to reside upon them. 8. Against giving Advowsons before
Benefices fell vacant. 9. Against Symony. 10. Against Dilapidations. 11. For
Seminaries in every Cathedral for the Diocese; and the Clergy were taxed in a
fourth part of their Benefices for their maintenance: The twelfth was about
Visitations.

It was designed also to set out four Books of Homilies: The first for points
of Controversy; the second was for the exposition of the Creed, the Lords
Prayer, the ten Commandments, the Ave, and the Sacraments: The third was to be
a Paraphrase on all the Lessons on Holy Days; and the fourth was to be
concerning the several Virtues and Vices, and the Rites and Ceremonies of the
Church. In these, the wise and good temper of Cardinal Pool may be well
discerned. He thought the people were more wrought on by the scandals they saw
in the Clergy, than by the Arguments which they heard from the Reformers; and
therefore he reckoned if Pluralities and Non-residences, and the other abuses
of Churchmen could have been removed, and if he could have brought the Bishops
to have lived better, and labored more, to be stricter in giving Orders, and
more impartial in conferring Benefices, and if he could have established
Seminaries in Cathedrals, Heresy might have been driven out of the Nation by
gentler methods than by Racks and Fires: In one thing he showed the meanness of
his Spirit, that though he himself condemned cruel proceedings against
Heretics, yet he both gave Commissions to other Bishops and Archdeacons to
try them, and suffered a great deal of Cruelty to be exercised in his own
Diocese; but he had not courage enough to resist Pope Paul the Fourth, who
thought of no other way for bearing down Heresy, but by setting up Courts of
Inquisition every where. He had clapped up Cardinal Morone, that was Pool's great
friend, in prison, upon suspicion of Heresy; and would very probably have used
himself so, if he had got him at Rome.

The Jesuits were at this time beginning to grow considerable: They were tied,
He refuses to bring the Jesuits to England.
besides their other Vows, to an absolute obedience to the Sea of Rome; and set
themselves every where to open Free Schools, for the education of youth, and to
bear down Heresy. They were excused from the hours of the Quire, and so were
looked on as a mungrel Order, between the Regulars and the Seculars. They
proposed to Cardinal Pool, that since the Queen was restoring the Abbey-Lands,
it would be to little purpose to give them again to the Benedictine Order;
which was now rather a clog than a help to the Church: And therefore they
desired that Houses might be assigned to them, for maintaining Schools and
Seminaries; and they did not doubt but they should quickly both drive out
Heresy, and recover the Church Lands. Pool did not listen to this, for which
he was much censured by the Fathers of that Society. It is not certain whether
he had then the sagacity to foresee that disorder which they were like to bring
into the Government of the Church, and that corruption of Morals that had since
flowed from their Schools, and has been infused by them generally in
Confessions, so that their whole Church is now over run with it. Three were
burnt at one Stake in Canterbury in November, More of the Reformed are burnt.
and Philpot was burnt in Smithfield, in December: he had been put in Prison,
soon after that Convocation was dissolved, in which he had disputed in the
beginning of this Reign: and was now brought out to the Stake. In all sixty
seven were burnt this Year, of whom Four were Bishops, and Thirteen were
Priests.

In Germany, Affairs in Germany.
a Diet was held, in which it was left free to all the Temporal Princes, to set
up what Religion they pleased; but a restraint was put on the Ecclesiastical
Princes. Both Ferdinand, and the Duke of Bavaria, appointed the Chalice to be
given to the Laity in their Dominions, at which the Pope stormed highly, and
threatened to depose them: for that was his common style, when he was displeased
with any Prince. Charles the Fifth's Resignation.
The Resignation of Charles the Fifth, which was begun this Year, and
completed the next, drew the Eyes of all Europe upon it. He had enjoyed his
Hereditary Dominions Forty years, and the Empire Thirty six. He had endured
great Fatigues, by the many Journies he had made; Nine into Germany, six into
Spain, seven into Italy, four through France: he was ten times in the
Netherlands, made two Expeditions to Africa, and was twice in England: and had
crossed the Sea eleven times. He had unusual success in his Wars, he had taken
a Pope, a King of France, and some German Princes, Prisoners: and had a vast
accession of Wealth and Empire from the West Indies: but now as success
followed him no more, so he was much afflicted with the Gout, and grew to be
much out of love with the Pomp and Vanities of this World, and so seriously to
prepare for another Life. He resigned all his Dominions with a greatness of
mind, that was much superior to all his other Conquests. He retired to a
private Lodge of seven Rooms, that he had ordered to be built for him in the
confines of Portugal: He kept only twelve Servants to wait upon him, and
reserved for his Expense 100000. Crowns Pension. In this retreat he lived two
years: His first year was spent chiefly in Mechanical Inventions, in which he
took great pleasure: from that he turned to the cultivating his Garden, in
which he used to work with those hands, that now preferred the grafting and
pruning Tools, to Scepters and Swords. But after that he addicted himself more
to study and Devotion, and did often discipline himself with a Cord. It was
also believed, that in many points he came to be of the Opinion of the
Protestants, before he died. His Confessor was soon after his death burnt for
Heresy, and Miranda Archbishop of Toledo, that conversed much with him at this
time, was clapped into Prison on the same suspicions. At the end of two years he
died, having given a great Instance of a mind surfeited with the Glories of
this World, that sought for quiet in a private Cell, which it had long in vain
searched after in Palaces and Camps.

In March next Year came on Cranmer's Martyrdom. Cranmer's sufferings.
In September last, Brooks, Bishop of Gloucester, came down with authority from
Cardinal Pool, to judge him: with him two Delegates came to assist him in the
King and Queen's Name. When he was brought before them, he paid the respect
that was due to those that sat in the King and Queen's Name, but would show
none to Brooks, since he sat there by an authority derived from the Pope, which
he said, he would never acknowledge. He could not serve two Masters, and since
he had sworn Allegiance to the Crown, he could never submit to the Pope's
authority: He also showed that the Pope's power had been as unjustly used, as
it was ill grounded: that they had changed the Laws settled by Christ, which he
instanced in denying the Chalice, in the Worship in an unknown Tongue, and in
their pretenses to a power to depose Princes: he remembered Brooks, that he had
sworn to maintain the King's Supremacy, and when he studied to cast that back
on him, as an invention of his, he told him that it was acknowledged in his
Predecessor Warham's time, and that Brooks had then set his hand to it. Brooks,
and the two Delegates, Martin and Scory, objected many things to him, as that
he had flattered King Henry, that so he might be preferred by him, and that he
had condemned Lambert for denying the Presence in the Sacrament, and had been
afterward guilty of the same Heresy himself. But he vindicated himself from
all aspirings to the Sea of Canterbury, which appeared visibly by the slowness
of his motions, when he was called over out of Germany, to be advanced to it:
for he was seven Weeks on his Journey. He confessed he had changed his Opinion
in the matter of the Sacrament, and acknowledged that he had been twice
married; which he thought was free to all Men, and was certainly much better
than to defile other Men's Wives: After much discourse had past on both sides,
Brooks required him to appear before the Pope within Eighty Days, and answer to
the things that should be objected to him: he said, he would do it most
willingly, but he could not possibly go, if he were still kept a Prisoner.

In February this Year, 14 Febr.
Bonner and Thirleby were sent to degrade him, for his Contumacy in not going
to Rome; when he was all the while kept in Prison: He was clothed with all the
Pontifical Robes made of Canvas, and then they were taken from him, according
to the Ceremonies of degradation, in which Bonner carried himself with all the
Insolence, that might have been expected from him: Thirleby was a good natured
Man, and had been Cranmer's particular friend, and performed his part in this
Ceremony, with great expressions of sorrow, and shed many tears at it. In all
this Cranmer seemed very little concerned; he said, it was gross Injustice to
condemn him for not going to Rome, when he was shut up in Prison; but he was
not sorry to be thus cut off, even with all this Pageantry, from any relation
to that Church: he denied the Pope had any authority over him, so he appealed
from his Sentence to a free General Council.

But now many Engines were set on work, to make him recant: both English and
Spanish Divines had many Conferences with him, He Recants.
and great hopes were given him, not only of Life, but of Preferment, if he
would do it: and these at last had a fatal effect upon him; for he signed a
Recantation of all his former Opinions, and concluded it with a Protestation,
that he had done it freely, only for the discharge of his Conscience. But the
Queen was resolved to make him a Sacrifice to her resentments; she said, it was
good for his own Soul that he repented, but since he had been the chief
spreader of Heresy over the Nation, it was necessary to make him a public
Example: so the Writ was sent down to burn him, and after some stop had been
made, in the Execution of it, now Orders came for doing it suddenly. This was
kept from Cranmer's knowledge, for they intended to carry him to the Stake,
without giving him any notice, and so hoped to make him dye in despair: yet he
suspecting somewhat, writ a long Paper, containing a Confession of his Faith,
such as his Conscience, and not his fears had dictated.

He was on the 21. He Repents, and is burnt.
of March carried to St. Mary's, where Dr. Cole preached, and vindicated the
Queen's Justice, in condemning Cranmer; but magnified his Conversion much, and
ascribed it wholly to the workings of God's Spirit: he gave him great hopes of
Heaven, and promised him all the relief that Diriges and Masses could give him
in another state. All this while Cranmer was observed to be in great Confusion,
and Floods of Tears run from his Eyes; at last, when he was called on to speak,
he began with a Prayer, in which he expressed much inward remorse and horror:
then after he had exhorted the People to good Life, Obedience and Charity, he
in most pathetick expressions confessed his sin, that the hopes of Life had
made him sign a Paper contrary to the Truth, and against his Conscience: and he
had therefore resolved, that the hand that signed it, should be burnt first; he
also declared, that he had the same belief concerning the Sacrament, which he
had published in the Book he writ about it. Upon this there was a great
Consternation on the whole Assembly, but they resolved to make an end of him
suddenly, so without suffering him to go further, they hurried him away to the
Stake: and gave him all the disturbance they could, by their reproaches and
clamours: But he made them no answer, having now turned his thoughts wholly
toward God. When the Fire was kindled, he held his right Hand toward the
Flame, till it was consumed, and often said, that unworthy hand; he was soon
after quite burnt, only his heart was found entire among the ashes: from which
his Friends made this Inference, that though his Hand had erred, yet it
appeared his Heart had continued true. They did not make a Miracle of it,
though they said the Papists would have made a great matter of it, if such a
thing had fallen out in any that had dyed for their Religion.

Thus did Thomas Cranmer end his days, His Character.
in the LXVII. Year of his Age: He was a Man of great Candor, and a firm
Friend, which appeared signally in the misfortunes of Anne Boleyn, Cromwell,
and the Duke of Somerset: He rather excelled in great Industry and good
Judgment, than in a quickness of apprehension, or a closeness of style. He
employed his Revenues on pious and charitable uses; and in his Table he was
truly hospitable, for he entertained great numbers of his poor Neighbors often
at it. The Gentleness and Humility of his deportment were very singular: His
last fall was the greatest blemish of his Life, yet that was expiated by a
sincere repentance, and a patient Martyrdom: and those that compared Ancient
and Modern times, did not stick to compare him, not only to the Chrysostomes,
the Ambroses, and the Austins, that were the chief Glories of the Church, in
the fourth and fifth Centuries, but to those of the first Ages, that
immediately followed the Apostles, and came nearest to the Patterns, which they
had left the World; to the Ignatius's, the Policarps, and the Cyprians. And it
seemed necessary that the Reformation of the Church, being the restoring of the
Primitive and Apostolical Doctrine, should have been chiefly carried on by a
Man thus Eminent, for Primitive and Apostolical Virtues. More burnings.
In January, five Men, and two Women were burnt at one Stake in Smithfield: and
one Man and four Women were burnt at Canterbury. In March, two Women were burnt
at Ipswich, and three Men at Salisbury. In April, six Men of Essex were burnt
in Smithfield: a Man and a Woman were burnt at Rochester, and another at
Canterbury: and six, who were sent from Colchester, were condemned by Bonner,
without giving them longer time to consider whether they would recant, than
till the Afternoon: for he was now so hardened in his Cruelty, that he grew
weary of keeping his Prisoners some time, and of taking pains on them, to make
them recant; he sent them back to Colchester, where they were burnt: He
condemned also both a blind Man, and an aged Criple, and they were both burnt
in the same Fire at Stratford. In May, three Women were burnt in Smithfield;
the day after that, two were burnt at Gloucester, one of them being blind. Three
were burnt at Beckles in Suffolk; five were burnt at Lewis, and one at
Leicester. But on the 27th. of June, Bonner gave the signallest Instance of his
Cruelty, that England ever saw: for 11. Men, and two Women were burnt in the
same Fire at Stratford. The horror of this Action it seems had some Operation
on himself, for he burnt none till April next year. In June three were burnt at
Saint Edmondsbury, and three were afterward burnt at Newbury. This cruelty was
not kept within England, but it extended as far as to the adjacent Islands. In
Guernsey, a Mother and her two Daughters were burnt at the same stake; one of
them was a married Woman, and big with Child: The violence of the Fire bursting
her Belly, the Child that proved to be a Boy, fell out into the Flame: He was
snatched out of it, by one that was more merciful than the rest: but the other
barbarous Spectators, after a little Consultation, threw it back again into the
Fire. This was Murder without question, for no Sentence against the Mother
could excuse this Inhumane piece of Butchery, which was thought the more
odious, because the Dean of Guernsey was a Complice in it: yet so merciful was
the Government under Queen Elizabeth, that he, and Nine others, that were
accused for it, had their Pardons. Two were after this, burnt at Greenstead,
and a blind Woman at Darby; Four were burnt at Bristoll, and as many at
Mayfield in Sussex, and one at Nottingham: so that in all LXXXV. were this Year
burnt, without any regard had, either to Age, or Sex, to young or old, or the
Lame and the Blind; which raised so extreme an aversion in this Nation to that
Religion, that it is no wonder if the apprehensions of being again brought
under so Tyrannical a Yoke, break out into most Violent and Convulsive Symptoms.

By these means, the Reformation was so far from being extinguished, that it
spread daily more and more, and the Zeal of those that professed it grew
quicker. The Reformed increase upon this.
They had frequent Meetings, and several Teachers, that instructed them: and
their Friends that went beyond Sea, and settled in Strasburg, Frankfort, Embden,
and some other places in Germany, took care to send over many Books for their
Instruction and Comfort.

An unhappy difference was begun at Frankford, The troubles at Frankford.
which has had since that time great and fatal Consequences; some of the
English thought it was better to use a Liturgy, agreeing with the Geneva forms;
whereas the rest thought, that since they were a part of the Church of England,
that fled thither, they ought to adhere to the English Liturgy, and that the
rather, since those who had compiled it, were now sealing it with their Blood.
This raised much heat, but Doctor Cox that lived in Strasburg, being held in
great esteem, went thither, and procured an Order from the Senate, that the
English should continue to use the forms of their own Church: but the fire was
not thereby quenched, for Knox, and some other hot spirits, began to make
exceptions to some parts of the Liturgy; and got Calvin to declare on their
side: upon which some of them retired to Geneva. Another contest arose
concerning the censuring of Offenders, which some said belonged only to the
Minister, and others thought that the Congregation ought to be admitted to a
share in it. Great animosities were raised by these debates, which gave scandal
to the strangers, among whom they lived, and made many reflect on the Schisms
of the Novatians and Donatists, that rent the Churches of Africa; the one
during the Persecutions, and the other immediately after they were over.

In England, Pool made Archbish. of Canterbury.
Pool was Consecrated Archbishop of Canterbury, the day after Cranmer was
burnt: which gave occasion to many to apply the words of Elijah to him, Thou
have killed and taken possession: A Week after that, he came into London in
great state, and had the Pall put about him, by Heath in Bow-Church: and after
that, he made a cold Sermon concerning the beginning, the Use and Virtues of
the Pall: without either Learning or Eloquence: for it was observed, that he
had so far changed his style, which in his Youth was too luxuriant, that it was
now become flat, and had neither Life nor Beauty in it. The Pall was a device
of the Popes, in the 12th. Century, in which they began first to send those
Cloaks to Archbishops, as a Badge of their being the Pope's Legates born.

The Queen had founded a House for the Franciscans of the Observance in
Greenwich last Year: More Religious Houses.
This year she founded Houses for the Franciscans and Dominicans in London, as
also a House for the Carthusians at Skeen, and a Nunnery at Sion: She also
converted the Church of Westminster, into an Abbey. And that way might be made
to the restoring Religious Orders, she took care to have all the Reports,
Confessions, and other Records, that tended to the dishonor of their Houses,
be rased: So that no Memory might remain of them to the next Age. For this end
she gave a Commission to Bonner, and others, to search all Registers, and to
take out of them every thing, that was either against the Sea of Rome, or the
Religious Houses: and they executed this Commission so carefully, that the
steps of it appear in the defectiveness of all the Records of that time: yet
many things have escaped their diligence. This Expurgation of theirs was
compared to the rage of the Heathens in the last Persecution, who destroyed all
the Books and Registers, that they could find among the Christians. The Monks
of Glassenbury were in hope to have got their House, that had been dedicated to
the honor of Joseph of Arimathea, raised again: they desired only the House,
and a little Land about it; which they resolved to Cultivate, and did not doubt
but the People of the Country would contribute toward their subsistence: and
it is probable that the like designs were set on foot for the other Houses: and
it was not to be doubted, but that as soon as they had again infused in the
Nation the belief of Purgatory, they would have persuaded those that held their
Lands, especially if they could come near them, when they were dying, to
deliver themselves from the sin and punishments of Sacrilege; by making
restitution. It is true, the Nobility and Gentry were much alarmed at these
proceedings: and at the last Parliament, many in the House of Commons laid
their Hands on their Swords, and declared, that they would not part with their
Estates, but would defend them. Yet all that intended to gain favor at Court,
made their way to it, by founding Chantries for Masses, to be said for them and
their Ancestors; and took out Licenses from the Queen, for making those
Endowments.

A Truce was now concluded between France and Spain for five years: The Pope
sets on a War between France and Spain.
but the Violent Pope broke it. He was offended at the House of Austria, and
chiefly at Ferdinand's assuming the Title of Emperor, without his consent: he
used to say, that all Kingdoms were subject to him: that he would suffer no
Prince to be too familiar with him: and that he would set the World on fire,
rather than be driven to do any thing below his Dignity. He pretended that he
had reformed the abuses of his own Court, and that he would in the next place
reform all the abuses that were in other Courts, of which he ordered a great
Collection to be made: when he was pressed to call a Council, he said, he needed
none; for he himself was above all; and the World had already seen twice, to
how little purpose it was to send about Sixty weak Bishops, and Forty Divines,
that were not the most learned, to Trent: he resolved it should never meet
there any more; but he would call one to sit in the Lateran: he signified this
to the Ambassadors of Princes, only in courtesy: for he would ask advice of
none of them, but would be obeyed by them all: and if Princes would send none
of their Prelates thither, he would hold a Council without them, and would let
the World see what a Pope, that had courage, could do. This imperious humor of
his, made him talk sometimes like a mad man: He intended, as was believed, to
raise his Nephew to be King of Naples, and in order to that, he sent one of his
Nephews to France, to absolve the King from the Truce which he had sworn: and
promised to create what Cardinals that King would nominate, if he would make
War on Spain; though to the Queen's Ambassadors, and all others at Rome, he
gave it out, that he would mediate a Peace between the Crowns, for a Truce did
not sufficiently secure the quiet of Europe. The French King was too easily
persuaded by the Instigation of the Pope, and the House of Guize, to break his
Faith, and begin the War. The Pope also began it in Italy, and put the
Cardinals of the Spanish faction in Prison, and threatened to proceed to
Censures against King Philip, for protecting the Colonnesi, who were his
particular Enemies. He made some Levies among the Grisons, that were Heretics;
but said, he looked on 'em as Angels of God, and was confident, God would
convert them. The Duke of Alva had that Reverence for the Papacy, that he took
Arms against the Pope very unwillingly: He could have taken Rome, but would
not: and for the places that he took, he declared he would deliver them up to
the next Pope. It gave great scandal to the World, to see the Pope set on so
perfidious a breach of Truce; and it was thought strange, that in the same
Year, a Great Prince in the 56. Year of his Age, should retire to a Monastery;
and that one bred a Monk, and 80. Years old, should set Europe in a Flame.

The next Year Pool sent Ormaneto with some English Divines, to visit
Cambridge. A Visitation of the Universities.
They put the Churches, in which the Bodies of Bucer and Fagius lay, under an
Interdict. They made a Visitation of all the Colleges and Chapels, in which
Ormaneto showed great Integrity; and without respect of Persons, he chid some
Heads of Houses, whom he found guilty of misapplying the Revenues of their
Houses. The two dead Bodies were burnt with great solemnity: They were raised
and cited to appear, and answer for the Heresies they had taught, and if any
would answer for them, they were required to come. The Dead said nothing for
themselves; and the living were afraid to do it, for fear of being sent after
them: so Witnesses were examined, and in conclusion they were condemned as
obstinate Heretics, and the dead Bodies, with many Heretical Books were all
burnt in one Fire. Peru was Vice Chancellor at this time, and happened to be
in some Office four years after, when, by Queen Elizabeth's Order, public
honors were done to the Memory of these Learned Men, and he obeyed both these
Orders with so much zeal, that it appeared how exactly he had learned the
Lesson so much studied in that Age, of serving the time. After this there was a
Visitation of all the Colleges in Oxford, and there it was intended to act
such Pageantry on the body of Peter Martyr's Wife, as had been done at
Cambridge. But she that could speak no English, had not declared her Opinions
so, that Witnesses could be found to convict her of Heresy: yet since it was
notoriously known, that she had been a Nun, and had broken her Vow of Chastity,
they raised her Body, and buried it in a Dunghill: but her Bones were
afterward mixed with Saint Frideswide's, by Queen Elizabeth's Order.

The Justices of Peace were now every where so slack in the Prosecution of
Heretics, A severe Inquisition of Heretics.
that it seemed necessary to find out other Tools. So the Courts of Inquisition
were thought on. These were set up first in France against the Albigenses, and
afterward in Spain, for discovering the Moors; and were now turned upon the
Heretics. Their power was uncontrolable, they seized on any they pleased, upon
such Informations, or Presumptions, as lay before them. They managed their
Processes in secret, and put their Prisoners to such sorts of Torture, as they
thought fit for extorting Confessions or Discoveries from them. At this time
both the Pope and King Philip, though they differed in other things, agreed in
this, that they were the only sure means for extirpating Heresy. So as a step
to the setting them up, a Commission was given to Bonner and twenty more, the
greatest part Laymen, to search all over England for all suspected of Heresy,
that did not hear Mass, go in Processions, or did not take Holy bread, or Holy
water: they were authorized, three being a Quorum, to proceed either by
Presentiments, or other Politic ways: they were to deliver all they discovered
to their Ordinaries; and were to use all such means as they could invent; which
was left to their discretions and Consciences, for executing their Commission.
Many other Commissions subalterne to theirs, were issued out for several
Counties and Diocesses. This was looked on as such an advance toward an
Inquisition, that all concluded it would follow ere long. The burnings were
carried on vigorously in some places, and but coldly in most parts, for the
dislike of them grew to be almost Universal.

In January, More burnings.
six were burnt in one Fire at Canterbury, and four in other parts of Kent: 22.
were sent out of Colchester to Bonner; but it seems Pool had chid him severely
for the Fire he had made of thirteen the last Year, so he writ to Pool for
directions. The Cardinal employed some to deal with the Prisoners, and they got
them to sign a Paper in general words, acknowledging that Christ's Body was in
the Sacrament, and declaring that they would be subject to the Church of
Christ, and to their lawful Superiors. And upon this they were set at liberty;
by which it appeared that Pool was willing to have accepted any thing, by which
he might on the one hand preserve the Lives of those that were informed
against, and yet not be exposed to the rage of the Pope, as a favourer of
Heretics. In April, three Men and one Woman were burnt in Smithfield: In May,
three were burnt in Southwark, condemned by White the new Bishop of Winchester,
and three at Bristoll. Five Men and nine Women were burnt in Kent, in June: and
in the same Month, six Men and four Women were burnt at Lewis. In July, two
were burnt at Norwich; and in August, ten were burnt in one day at Colchester.
They were some of those 22. that were by Pool's means discharged: but the Cruel
Priests informed against them, and said, the favor showed to them had so
encouraged all others, that it was necessary to remove the scandal, which that
mercy of the Cardinals gave, and to make Examples of some of them. In August,
one was burnt at Norwich; two at Rochester, and one at Litchfield. One Eagle,
that went much about from place to place, from which he was called Trudge-over,
was condemned as a Traitor, for some words spoken against the Queen: But all
this Cruelty did not satisfy the Clergy, they complained that the Magistrates
were backward, and did their duty very negligently: upon which, severe Letters
were written to several Towns, from the Council Board: and zealous Men were
recommended to be chosen Mayors, in sundry Towns. In September, three Men and
one Woman were burnt at Islington, and two at Colchester; one at Northampton,
and one at Laxefield: a Woman was burnt at Norwich: a Priest with thirteen
other Men and three Women, were burnt at Chichester. In November, three were
burnt in Smithfield; Rough a Scotchman, that had a Benefice in K. Edward's
time, kept a private Meeting at Istington: but one of the Company being
corrupted, discovered the rest, so they were apprehended as they were going to
the Communion, and he, and a Woman were burnt in December: so 79. were burnt in
all this year.

This Year a horrid Murder of one Argol, The Lord Stourton hanged.
and his Son was committed by the L. Stourton, and some of his Servants: who
after they had butchered them in a most barbarous manner, buried them fifteen
Foot deep in the ground. The Lord Stourton was a zealous Papist, and had
protested against all the Acts that had past in King Edward's time; yet the
Queen not only would not pardon him, but would not so much as change the
Infamous death of hanging, into a beheading: not because the Prerogative
extends not so far, as some have without reason asserted: for both the Duke of
Somerset condemned in the Reign of King Edward, and the Lord Audley condemned
under King Charles the First, for Felony, were beheaded: but the Queen resolved
in this case to show no favor. All the distinction was, that the Lord Stourton
was hanged in a silken Rope. This was much extolled as an Instance of the
Queens Impartial Justice; and it was said, that since she left her Friends to
the Law, her Enemies had no cause to complain, if it was executed on them.

The War breaking out between Spain and France, The Queen joins in the War
against France.
King Philip had a great mind to engage England in it. The Queen complained
often of the kind reception that was given to the fugitives, that fled from
England to France, and it was believed that the French secretly supplied and
encouraged them to imbroil her affairs. One Stafford had this Year gathered
many of them together, and landing in Yorkshire, he surprised the Castle of
Scarborough, and published a Manifesto against the Queen, that by bringing in
strangers to govern the Nation, she had forfeited her right to the Crown: but
few came in to him; so he and his Accomplices were forced to render, and four of
them were hanged. The English Ambassador in France, Dr. Wotton, discovered
that the Constable had a design to take Calais: for he sent his own Nephew,
whom he had brought over, and instructed secretly, to him, he pretended he was
sent from a great Party in that Town, who were resolved to deliver it up: at
which the Constable seemed not a little glad, and entered into a long discourse
with him of the Methods of taking it: yet all this made no great Impression on
the Queen; All her Council, chiefly the Clergy, were against engaging; for they
saw that would oblige them to slacken their severities at home: so the King
found it necessary to come over himself, and persuade her to it. He prevailed
with her: and after a denunciation of War, she sent over 80000. Men to his
assistance, who joined the Spanish Army consisting of 50000. that was set down
before St. Quintin.

The Constable of France came with a great force, to raise the Siege; The
Battle of S. Quintin.
but when the two Armies were in view of one another, the French by a mistake
in the word of command, fell in disorder; upon which the Spaniards charged them
with such success, that the whole Army was defeated: Many were killed on the
place, and many were taken Prisoners, among whom was the Constable himself: and
the Spaniards lost only fifty Men. Had Philip followed this blow, and marched
straight to Paris, he had found all France in a great consternation, but he sat
still before S. Quintin, which held out till the terror of this defeat was much
over. The Constable lost his reputation in it, and all looked on it as a curse
upon that King, for the breach of his Faith.

The French Troops were called out of Italy, upon which the Pope being now
exposed to the Spaniards, fell in strange fits of rage; The Pope recalls Pool.
particularly he inveighed much against Pool, for suffering the Queen to join
with the Enemies of the Apostolic See: and having made a General Decree,
recalling all his Legates and Nuntio's in the Spanish Dominions, he recalled
Pool's Legatine power among the rest: and neither the Intercessions of the
Queen's Ambassadors, nor the other Cardinals could prevail with him to alter
it: only as an extraordinary Grace, he consented not to intimate it to him. But
after this he went further: He made Friar Peyto a Cardinal: he liked him for
his railing against King Henry to his Face, and thought that since the Queen
had made him her Confessor, he would be very acceptable to her. He recalled
Pool's powers, and required him to come to Rome, and answer to some Complaints
made of him, for the favor he showed to Heretics: He also declared Peyto his
Legate for England, and writ to the Queen to receive him: but the Queen ordered
the Bulls and Briefs that were sent over, to be laid up without opening them,
which had been the method formerly practiced, when unacceptable Bulls were sent
over: She sent word to Peyto, not to come into England, otherwise she would sue
him, and all that owned him, in a Praemunire. He died soon after. Cardinal Pool
laid aside the Ensigns of a Legate, and sent over Ormaneto with so submissive a
Message, that the Pope was much mollified by it, and a Treaty of Peace being
set on foot, this storm went over. The Duke of Alva marched near Rome, which
was in no condition to resist him: so the Pope in great fury called the
Cardinals together, and told them, he was resolved to suffer Martyrdom, without
being daunted, which they who knew that he had drawn all this on himself, by
his Ambition and Rage, could scarce hear without laughter. Yet the Duke of Alva
was willing to treat. The haughty Pope, though he was forced to yield in the
chief points, yet in the punctilio's of Ceremonies, he stood so high upon his
honor, which he said was Christ's honor, that he declared he would see the
whole World ruined, rather than yield in a Title: In that the Duke of Alva was
willing enough to comply with him, so he came to Rome, and in his Master's
name, asked pardon for Invading the Patrimony of S. Peter; and the Pope gave
him Absolution, in as Insolent a manner, as if he had been the Conqueror. The
news of this Reconciliation were received in England, with all the publickest
expressions of joy. In Scotland, the Queen Regent studied to engage that Nation
in the War: all that favored the Reformation were for it; but the Clergy
opposed it. The Queen thought to draw them into it, whether they would or not,
and sent in D'oisell to besiege a Castle in England. But the Scotch Lords
complained much of that, and required him to give over his attempt, otherwise
they would declare him an Enemy to the Nation. So after some slight skirmishes
on the Borders, the matter was put up on both sides. This made the Queen Regent
write to France, pressing them to conclude the Marriage between the Dolphin and
the Queen: upon which a Message was sent from that Court, desiring the Scots to
send over Commissioners to treat about the Articles of the Marriage, and some
of every State were dispatched for settling that matter. There was this Year
great want of Money in the Exchequer of England; and the backwardness of the
last Parliament made the Council unwilling to call a new one. It was tried what
Sums could be raised by Loan, upon Privy Seals: but so little came in that way,
that at last one was Summoned to meet in January, yet in the mean while
advertisements were given them, of the ill condition, in which the Garrisons of
Calais, and the neighboring places were, and that the French had a design on
them: but either they thought there was no danger during the Winter, or they
wanted Money so much, that no care was taken to secure them.

In Germany, Affairs in Germany.
the Papists did this Year blow up the differences between the Lutherans and
the Zuinglians, with so much Artifice, that a Conference, which was appointed
for settling matters of Religion, was broken up, without any good effect: Only
it discovered a common practice of the Popish party, in engaging those that
divided from them, into heats and animosities one against another, by which
their strength was not only much weakened, but their Zeal, instead of turning
against the Common Enemy, turned upon one another. But yet the many Experiments
that have been made of this, have not been able to infuse that moderation and
prudence in many of the Reformed Churches, which might have been expected. In
France, the numbers of the Reformed increased so much, that 200. assembled in
St. Germains, one of the Suburbs of Paris, to receive the Communion. This was
observed by the People of the Neighborhood, and a Tumult was raised: the Men
for most escaped, but 160. Women, and some few Men were taken: of these six Men
and one Woman were burnt: and most horrid things were published of that
Meeting; and among other Calumnies, it was said, they sacrificed and eat a
Child. All these were confuted in an Apology, Printed for their Vindication:
The German Princes, and the Cantons interposed so effectually, and their
Alliance was then so necessary to the Crown of France, that a stop was put to
further severities. The Pope complained much of that, and of some Edicts that
the King had set out, annulling Marriages without consent of Parents, and
requiring Churchmen to reside at their Benefices, as Invasions on the Spiritual
Authority.

The beginning of the next Year was famous by the loss of Calais. The Duke of
Guise sat down before it, on the 1. of January. Calais and other places taken
by the French.
The Garrison consisted but of 500. Men, so that two Forts about it, of which
the one commanded the Avenue to it by Land, and the other commanded the
Harbor, were easily taken: for the Lord Wentworth, that was Governor, could
not spare Men enough to defend them. The French drew the Water out of the
Ditches, and made the Assault, and carried the Castle; which was thought
Impregnable: After that the Town could do little, so it was surrendered, and the
Governor with 50. Officers, were made Prisoners of War. Thus was this
Important place, which the English had kept 210. Years, lost in a Week, and
that in Winter. From this the Duke of Guise went to besiege Guines, which had a
better Garrison of 1100. Men, but they were much disheartened by the loss of
Calais; they retired into the Castle, and left the Town to the French; but yet
they beat them once out of it. The French, after a long Battery, gave the
Assault, and forced them to Capitulate: The Soldiers, as at Calais, had leave
to go away, but the Officers were made Prisoners of War. The Garrison that was
in Hammes, seeing themselves cut off from the Sea, and lost, abandoned the
Place before the French summoned them. The loss of Calais raised great
complaints against the Council, and they to excuse themselves, cast the blame
on the Lord Wentworth; and ordered a Citation to be made of him, when he was a
Prisoner with the French: his Defense was not fit to be heard, otherwise it had
been easy for the Council to have brought him over. He had not above the
fourth part of that number, that was necessary to defend the place, and in time
of War had no more, than were usually kept there in times of Peace; of this,
both he, and Sir Edward Grimston, that was Controuler, gave full and timely
advertisements, but had not those Supplies sent them that were necessary. They
both came over in Queen Elizabeth's time, and offered themselves to Trial, and
were acquitted. Grimston was unwilling to pay the great Ransom that was set on
him; so after two years Imprisonment, he made his escape out of the Bastile,
and came to England, and lived till the 98. year of his Age. He was
Great-grand-father to Sir Harbottle Grimston, the Author's Noble Patron and
Benefactor. The French after this took Sark, a little Island in the Channel;
but it was ingeniously retaken by a Fleming, who pretended that he desired to
bury a Friend of his, that had died aboard his ship, in that Island: the French
were very careful to search the Men that came ashore, that they should have no
Arms about them; but did not think of looking into the Coffin, which was full
of Arms, and when they thought the Seamen were burying their dead Friend, they
armed themselves, and took all the French, that were in the Castle. The
Ingeniousness, rather than the Importance of this, makes it worth the
mentioning.

The discontent that the loss of Calais gave to the English, Great discontents
In England.
was such, that the Queen could not hope ever to overcome it: and it sunk so
deep in her mind, that it hastened her death not a little. Both sides took upon
them to draw Arguments from this loss: The Reformers said, it was a Judgment on
the Nation, for the contempt of the true Religion, and the Cruelties that had
been of late practiced: The Papists said, the Heretics had found such shelter
and connivence there, that no wonder the place was lost. Philip sent over, and
offered his assistance to go, and retake the place, before the Fortifications
should be repaired, if the English would send over a Force equal to such an
undertaking: but they upon an Estimate made of the Expense, that this, and a
War for the next Year would put them to, found it would rise to 520000 l.
Sterling: and as the Treasure was exhausted, and could not furnish such a Sum,
so they had no reason to expect such liberal Supplies from the People. The
Bishops were afraid lest the continuance of the War should make it necessary to
proceed more gently against Heretics, and thought it better to sit down with
the loss of Calais, than hazard that: they seemed confident that within a Year,
they should be able to clear the Kingdom of Heresy: and therefore moved that
preparations might be made for a War to begin the Year after this.

The Parliament assembled; for which the Abbot of Westminster, and the Prior of
St. The Parliament meets.
John of Jerusalem had their Writs, and sat in it. The Lords desired a
Conference with the Commons, concerning the safety of the Nation, and upon that
a Subsidy, a Tenth, and a Fifteenth were given by the Laity, and the Clergy
gave eight shillings in the Pound, to be paid in four Years. The Abbot of
Westminster moved, that the Privileges of Sanctuary might be again restored to
his House; but that was laid aside. The procurers of wilful Murder were denied
the benefit of the Clergy: but great opposition was made to it in the House of
Lords. A Bill was brought in, confirming the Letters Patents, which the Queen
had granted, or might grant. This related to the Foundations of Religious
Houses, but one Coxley opposed this; and insinuated, that perhaps the Queen
intended to dispose of the Crown, in prejudice of the right Heir: at which the
House expressed so great a dislike, as showed, they would not have it so much,
as imagined, that Lady Elizabeth could be excluded. He had a public reprimend
given him for insinuating a thing so much to the Queen's dishonor.

A Proposition of Marriage, The carriage and usage of Lady Elizabeth all this
Reign.
was at this time privately made by the King of Sweden, to Lady Elizabeth; but
she rejected it, because it was not sent to her by the Queen: though the
Messenger declared that his Master, as he was a Gentleman, began at her, and as
he was a King, he had ordered him to propose it next to the Queen. But she
assured him, that if the Queen would leave her to her self, she would not
change her state of life. When the Queen knew of this, she approved much of her
Sister's answer, and sent one to her to try her mind in it; for now the
Proposition was made to her: but she expressed her dislike of a married state
so firmly, that this motion fell to the ground. It seems her aversion was very
great, otherwise the condition she was then in, was neither so easy, nor so
secure, but that she had reason to desire to be out of her Keeper's hands; and
to apprehend that her danger increased, as the Queen's health was impaired: for
many of the Bishops were offering Cruel counsels against Her. She had been
first sent for upon the breaking out of Wiat's Conspiracy: and though she lay
then sick in Bed, she was forced to come to Court: There she was at first
confined to her Lodgings, and was afterward carried to the Tower, and led into
it by the Traytor's Gate, and was strictly guarded: Her Servants were put from
her, and none had access to her, but those that were Spies upon her: nor was
she suffered to walk on the Leads, or have the ordinary comforts of Air. Some
were put to the Rack to draw Confessions from them, but none accused her,
except Wiat, and he retracted what he had said in hopes of a Pardon, when he
was upon the Scaffold. When it appeared that nothing could be made out against
her, she was sent down to Woodstock: and was kept under strict Guards, and very
roughly used by Sir Henry Benefield. But King Philip so far mollified the Queen
toward her, that he prevailed with her to bring her to Court; and to admit her
to her Presence. Gardener, and many others dealt much with her, to confess her
offenses, and ask the Queen's pardon: but she always stood upon her Innocence,
and said she had never offended her, not so much as in her thoughts. When she
was brought to the Queen, she renewed the same protestations to her, and begged
that she would entertain a good opinion of her. The Queen, though she pressed
her much to acknowledge some faultiness, yet seemed to be satisfied with what
she said; and parted with her in good terms: of which King Philip had some
apprehensions, for he had conveyed himself secretly into a corner of the Room,
that he might prevent a further breach, in case the Queen should fall into
heats with her. After this her Guards were discharged, and she seemed to be at
liberty: but she had so many Spies about her, that to avoid all suspicion, she
meddled in no sort of business; but gave her self wholly to study: Thus was she
Employed for five years, during which time, she was under continual
apprehensions of Death, which was perhaps a necessary preparation for that long
course of Prosperity and Glory, with which she was afterward blessed.

During the sitting of Parliaments, the Bishops did always intermit their
Cruelties, but as soon as they were over, they returned to them. More burnings.
Cuthbert Simpson, one in Deacons Orders, had been taken at the Meeting in
Islington, and was rackt with extreme severity, to make him confess all the
Friends they had in London: but nothing was drawn from him; so in March, he and
two others were burnt in Smithfield. In April one was burnt at Hereford; and in
May, three were burnt at Colchester: Several Books were Printed beyond Sea, and
secretly conveyed into England: upon which a Proclamation of a very strange
nature was set out; That if any received any of these Books, and did not
presently burn them, without either reading them, or showing them to any
Person, they were to be Executed immediately by Martial Law. Seven were burnt
in Smithfield in the end of May; and another Proclamation was at that time made
in the Queens name, against all that should speak to them, or pray for them:
but no Authority could restrain those prayers, which devout minds offered up
secretly to God. Six were burnt at Brainford, in July: a Minister was burnt at
Norwich, in that Month: In August, a Gentleman was burnt near Winchester: At
St. Edmondsbury, four were burnt in August, and three more in November: at the
same time, a Man and a Woman were burnt at Ipswich: a Woman was also burnt at
Exeter; and on the 10th. of November, three Men and two Women were burnt at
Canterbury; in all XXXIX. this Year. All that were burnt during this Reign, as
far as I could gather the number, were 284. though Grindall, that lived in that
time, writes, that in two Years 800. were burnt: many more were imprisoned, 60.
died in Prison; others, after much cruel usage, Bonner himself often
disciplining them with Whips and Tortures, were prevailed on to abjure; but
carried in their minds a deep aversion to that Cruelty which had tempted them
to such Apostasy. At first pardons were offered at the Stake, to tempt the
Martyrs to the last moment of their life; but afterward the Priests Cruelty,
as it continued to the last Week of the Queens life, so it increased to that
degree, that Bembridge, who was burnt near Winchester, in August, crying out,
when he felt the Violence of the fire, that he recanted; the Sheriff made his
People put out the Fire, and hoped, that since the Clergy pretended, that they
desired the Conversion, and not the destruction of the Heretics, this act of
Mercy would not displease them: but the Council writ to him, ordering him to go
on and execute the Sentence, and to take care that he should dye a good
Catholic; for it was said, if he recanted sincerely, he was fit to dye; and if
he did it not sincerely, he was not fit to live: and when this was done, the
Sheriff was put in the Fleet for his Presumption.

This Year the Lord Clinton was sent with a Fleet of 120. Ships, and 7000. Ill
success, and strange accidents.
Land-men in it, against France, he made but one descent, and lost 600. Men in
it; so after an inglorious and expenceful Voyage, he returned back. The English
had lost their Hearts, and began to think that Heaven was against them:
Extraordinary accidents increased those Apprehensions: Thunder broke violently
in Nottingham; the Trent swelled excessively, and did much mischief.
Hailstones of a huge bigness fell in some places. Intermitting Fevers were so
Universal and Contagious, that they raged like a Plague, so that in many Places
there were not People enough to reap the Harvest: all which tended to increase
the aversion to the Government, and that disposed the Queen to hearken to
overtures of Peace. This was projected between the Bishop of Arras, and the
Cardinal of Lorrain, who were the chief Favorites to the two Kings, and were
both much set on extirpating Heresy, which could not be done, during the
continuance of the War; the Cardinal of Lorrain was more earnest in it, because
the Constable, who was the Head of the Faction, against the House of Guise, was
suspected to favor it, and his three Nephews, the Coligny's, were known to
incline to it: The King of France had also lost another Battle, this Year, at
Gravelin, which made him desire a Peace: for he thought the driving the English
out of France, did compensate both that, and his loss at St. Quintin: So both
those Princes reckoned they had such advantages, that they might make Peace
with honor: and they being thus disposed to it, a Treaty was opened at
Cambray. Philip, in his own disposition, was much inclined to extirpate
Heresy, and the Brothers of Guise possessed the King of France with the same
Maxims: which seemed more necessary, because Heresy had then spread so much
in that Court, that both the King and Queen of Navarre declared themselves for
the Reformation: and great numbers in the Public Walks about Paris, used to
assemble at Nights, and sing David's Psalms in Verse. The King of Navarre was
the first Prince of the Blood, and so was in great consideration for his rank,
but was a weak Man: His Queen was the wonder of her Age, both for great Parts,
Eminent Virtues, and a most Extraordinary sense of Religion. There was an Edict
set out, forbiding this Psalmody, but the dignity of these crowned Heads, and
the Numbers of those that were engaged in it, made it seem not advisable to
punish any for it, at least, till a general Peace had been first made.

In April was the Dauphin married to the Queen of Scotland, The Dauphin and
Queen of Scotland married.
which was honored by an Epithalamium, writ by Buchanan, reckoned to be one of
the rarest Pieces of Latin Poetry. The Deputies sent from Scotland, were
desired to offer the Dauphin the Crown of Scotland, in the Right of his Wife:
But they said, that exceeded the bounds of their Commission, so they only
promised to represent the matter to the States of Scotland: but could not
conceal the aversion they had to it. Soon after Four of the Seven, that were
sent over, died, and the Fifth escaped narrowly. It was generally suspected,
that they were poisoned: when the rest returned to Scotland, an Assembly of the
States was called, in which it was agreed to allow the Dauphin the Title of
King, but with this Proviso, that he should have no power over them, and that
it was only a bare Title, which they offered him. This was appointed to be
carried to him, by the Earl of Argile, and the Prior of St. Andrews, who had
been the chief Sticklers for the French Interest, in hopes of the Queen Regents
Protection, against the rage of the Bishops, in matters of Religion.

In England, A Parliament in England.
a Parliament was called, the 5th. of November: the Queen being ill, sent for
the Speaker of the House of Commons, and laid before him the ill condition of
the Nation; and the necessity of putting it in a posture of defense: But the
Commons were so ill satisfied with the Conduct of affairs, that they could come
to no resolution; so on the 14th. of that Month, twelve of the chief Lords of
both Estates, came down to the House of Commons, and desired them to grant a
Subsidy to defend the Nation, both against the French and Scots: but the
Commons came to no conclusion, till the Queen's death, on the 17th. put an end
to the Parliament.

Her false Conception, and the Melancholy that followed it, The Queens Death.
which received a surcharge from the loss of Calais, brought her into an ill
habit of body, and that turned to a Dropsy, which put an end to her unhappy
Reign, in the forty-third year of her Age, after she had reigned five Years,
four Months, and eleven Days. Sixteen hours after, her Cardinal Pool died, in
the fifty ninth year of his Age. He left Priuli a Noble Venetian, that had
lived twenty six years in an entire friendship with him, his Executor: but as
Pool had not studied to heap up much Wealth, so Priuli, who had refused a
Cardinal's Hat, rather than be obliged thereby to lose his Company, gave it all
away, and reserved nothing to himself, but his Breviary and Diary.

Pool was a learned, humble, Pool's Death and Character.
prudent and moderate Man: and had certainly the best notions of any of his
Party, then in England: but he was almost alone in them; so that the Queen,
whose temper and principles were fierce and severe, preferred the bloody
Counsels of Gardener and Bonner, to the wiser and better methods which he
proposed. And though his superstition for the Sea of Rome, continued still with
him, yet his Eyes were opened in many things: his being Legate at Trent, and
his retirement at Viterbo, had both enlightened and composed his mind; and that
joined to the Probity and sweetness of his Temper, produced great effects in
him: his Character deserves the more to be enlarged on, because there were no
others of the Clergy, at that time, concerning whom even a partial Historian
can find much good to relate; for their temporising and dissimulation, in the
changes that were made, and their Cruelty, when power was put in their hands,
were so scandalous, that it is scarce possible to write of them, with that
softness of style, that becomes an Historian.

The Queen had been bred to some more than ordinary knowledge: The Queens
Character.
A froward sort of Virtue, and a Melancholy Piety, are the best things that can
be said of her: she left the Conduct of Affairs wholly in the hands of her
Council, and gave her self up to follow all the dictates and humors of the
Clergy: and though she esteemed Pool beyond them all, yet she imputed the
moderateness of his Counsels, rather to his Temper, than to his Judgment: and
perhaps thought that the Pope, who pressed all Princes to set up Courts of
Inquisition, for extirpating of Heresy, was more likely to be Infallible than
the Cardinal: and as Princes were required by the fourth Council in the
Lateran, to extirpate Heretics, under the pain of forfeiting their Dominions;
so the Pope had set out a Decree this Year, by the advice of all his Cardinals,
confirming all Canons against Heretics, declaring that such Princes, as fell
into Heresy, did thereby forfeit all their Rights, without any special
sentence, and that any that could, might seize on their Dominions. The Bishops
had also this to say for their Severities, that by the Oath which they took at
their Consecrations, they were bound to persecute Heretics with all their
might: so that the Principles of that Religion, working on sour and revengeful
tempers, it was no wonder that Cruel Councils were more acceptable than
moderate ones.

BOOK IV. Book IV 1558.
OF THE SETTLEMENT OF THE REFORMATION In the beginning of Qu. ELIZABETH's Reign.
THE Morning after Queen Mary died, Qu. Elizabeth Proclaimed.
the Lord Chancellor went to the House of Lords, and communicated to them the
News of Her death, and then sent for the Commons, and declared it to them: and
added, that the Crown was now devolved on their present Queen Elizabeth, whose
Title they were resolved to proclaim: This was Echoed with repeated
Acclamations, which were so full of Joy, that it appeared how weary the Nation
was of the Cruel and weak administration of affairs, under the former Reign,
and that they hoped for better times under the next. And indeed the Proclaiming
the new Queen, both at Westminster, and in the City of London, was received
with such unusual transports of Joy, as gave the Melancholy Priests, just cause
to fear a new Revolution in matters of Religion; and though the Queen's Death
affected them with a very sensible sorrow, yet the Joy in this change was so
great, and so Universal, that a sad look was thought Criminal, and the Priests
were glad to vent their griefs at their forsaken Altars, which were now like to
be converted again to Communion Tables.

The Queen came from Hatfield, The Queen came to London.
where she had lived private, to London. The Bishops met Her at Highgate, she
received them all kindly, only she looked on Bonner as defiled with so much
blood, that it seemed indecent to treat him with the sweetness, that always
attends the beginnings of Reigns: for common Civility to a Person so polluted,
might seem some countenance to his Crimes. She past through London, in the
midst of all the Joys, that People, delivered from the Terror of Fires and
Slavery, could express: She quickly showed, that she was resolved to retain no
Impressions of the hardships she had met with in her Sister's time, and treated
those that had used her worst, with great gentleness, Bennefield himself not
excepted; only with a sharpness of raillery, she used to call him her Jailer.
She gave notice of her coming to the Crown to all foreign Princes, and writ
particular acknowledgments to King Philip, for the good offices he had done
her. Among the rest, she writ to Sir Edward Karn, that was her Sisters
Ambassador at Rome. But the Pope in his usual style told him, that England was
a Fee of the Papacy, and that it was a high Presumption in her, to take the
Crown without his consent, especially she being illegitimate: but he said, if
she would renounce her Pretensions, and refer her self wholly to him, she might
expect from him all the favor, that could consist with the dignity of the
Apostolic See. The Queen hearing this, recalled Karn's power; but he being a
zealous Papist, continued still at Rome.

Philip proposed Marriage to the Queen, Philip proposes marriage to the Queen,
but in vain.
and undertook to procure a Dispensation for it, from Rome: But the Queen, as
she continued all her life averse to that state of life, so she knew how
unacceptable a stranger, and particularly a Spaniard, would be to her People:
She did not much value the Pope's Dispensation, and if two Sisters might marry
the same Person, then two Brothers might likewise marry the same Woman: which
would have overthrown all the Arguments for her Father's Divorce with Queen
Catherine, upon which the Validity of her Mothers Marriage, and her
legitimation did depend. Yet though she firmly resolved not to marry King
Philip, she thought, that during the Treaty at Cambray, it was not fit to put
him quite out of hopes: so he sent to Rome for a Dispensation, but the French
sent to oppose it, and set up a Pretension for the young Queen of Scotland, as
the righteous Heir to the Crown of England.

The Queen continued to employ most of her Sisters Privy-Councellours, The
Counsels about changing Religion.
and they had turned so often before, in matters of Religion, that it was not
likely they would be Intractable in that point: but to these she added diverse
others; the most Eminent of whom, were Sir Will. Cecyl, and Sir Nicolas Bacon.
She ordered all, that were Imprisoned on the account of Religion, to be set at
liberty: upon which one, that used to talk pleasantly, told her, the four
Evangelists continued still Prisoners, and that the People longed much to see
them at liberty: She answered, she would talk with themselves, and know their
own mind. Some proposed the annulling all Queen Mary's Parliaments, because
force was used in the first, and the Writs for another were not lawful, since
the Title of Supreme Head was left out in the Summons, before it was taken away
by Law: but it was thought a Precedent of dangerous Consequence, to annul
Parliaments upon Errors in Writs, or particular disorders. The Queen desired,
that all the changes that should be made, might be so managed, as to breed as
little division among her People, as was possible: She did not like the Title
of Supreme Head, as importing too great an Authority. She loved Magnificence in
Religion, as she affected it in all other things; this made her incline to keep
Images still in Churches: and that the Popish party might be offended as little
as was possible, she intended to have the manner of Christ's Presence in the
Sacrament defined in general terms, that might comprehend all sides. A Scheme
was formed of the Method, in which it was most advisable for the Queen to
proceed, and put in Cecyl's hands.

It was thought necessary to do nothing till a Parliament were called: A Scheme
proposed.
The Queen had reason to look for all the mischief that the Pope could do her,
who would set on the French, and by their means, the Scots, and perhaps the
Irish, against her. The Clergy, and those that were employed in Queen Mary's
time, would oppose it; and do what they could to inflame the Nation: and the
greater part of the People loved the Pomp of the old Ceremonies. It was
therefore proposed, that the Queen should on any terms make Peace with France;
and encourage the Party in Scotland, that desired a Reformation. The Clergy
were generally hated for their Cruelty, and it would be easy to bring them
within the Statute of Praemunire: Care was also to be taken to expose the
former Councillors, for the ill conduct of affairs in Qu. Mary's time, and so
to lessen their credit. It was also proposed to look well to the Commissions,
both for the Peace and the Militia, and to the Universities. Some Learned Men
were to be ordered, to consider what alterations were fit to be made, and by
what steps they should proceed. It was thought fit to begin with the Communion
in both kinds.

Now did the Exiles, The Impatience of some.
that had fled beyond Sea, return again; and some zealous People began, in many
places, to break Images, and set up King Edward's Service again. Upon this the
Queen ordered, that the Litany, and other parts of the Service should be said
in English, and that no Elevation should be used in the Mass: but required her
Subjects by Proclamation, 27 December.
to avoid all Innovations, and use no other forms, but those that she kept up
in her Chapel, till it should be otherwise appointed in Parliament. She
ordered her Sister's Funeral to be performed with the ordinary Magnificence:
White, Bishop of Winchester, that Preached the Sermon, not only extolled her
Government much, but made severe Reflections on the present state of affairs;
for which he was confined to his House for some time.

Many Sees were now vacant: So one of the first things that came under
Consultation, was the finding out fit Men for them. Dr. Parker was pitched on,
as the fittest for the Sea of Canterbury: He had been Chaplain to Anne Boleyn,
Parker refuses the Sea of Canterbury long.
and had been employed in instructing the Queen, in the Points of Religion,
when she was young: He was well known to Sir Nicolas Bacon, and both he and
Cecyl gave so high a Character of him, that it meeting with the Queen's
particular esteem, made them resolve on advancing him: but as soon as he knew
it, he used all the Arguments he possibly could against it, both from the
weakness of his Body, and his unfitness for so great a charge. He desired that
he might be put in some small Benefice of 20. Nobles a Year; So far was he from
aspirings to great Wealth, or high Dignities: and as Cranmer had done before
him, he continued for many Months so averse to it, that it was very hard to
overcome him. Such Promotions are generally, if not greedily sought after, yet
at least willingly enough undertaken: but this looked liker the practices in
Ancient than Modern times. In the best Ages of the Church, instead of that
Ambitus, which has given such scandal to the World in later times, it was
ordinary for Men to fly from the offer of great Preferments, and to retire to
a Wilderness, or a Monastery, rather than undertake a charge, which they
thought above their Merit or Capacity to discharge. And this will still show it
self in all such as have a just sense of the Pastoral care, and consider the
discharging that, more than the raising or enriching themselves or their
Families. And it was thought no small honor to the Reformation, that the two
chief Instruments that promoted it, Cranmer and Parker, gave such evidences of
a Primitive Spirit, in being so unwillingly advanced.

The Seals were taken from Heath, Bacon's hands, Bacon made Lord Keeper.
who was declared Lord Keeper, and had all the Dignity and Authority of the
Chancellors Office without the Title, which was perhaps an effect of his great
Modesty, that adorned his other great qualities. As he was Eminent in himself,
so he was happy in being Father to the Great Sir Francis Bacon, one of the
chief Glories of the English Nation.

On the 13th. The Queen is Crowned.
of January, the Queen was Crowned: When she entered into her Chariot at the
Tower, she offered up an humble acknowledgment to God, for delivering her out
of that Lions Den, and preserving her to that Joyful Day. She passed through
London in great Triumph, and received all the expressions of Joy from her
People, with so much sweetness, as gained as much on their Hearts, as her
Sisters sowrness had alienated them from her. Under one of the Triumphal
Arches, a Child came down, as from Heaven, representing Truth with a Bible in
his hand, which she received on her Knees, and kissed it, and said, she
preferred that above all the other Presents that were that Day made her: She
was Crowned by Oglethorp, Bishop of Carlisle, for all the other Bishops refused
to assist at it; and he only could be prevailed on to do it. They perceived
that she intended to make changes in Religion, and though many of them had
changed often before, yet they resolved now to stick firmer to that which they
had so lately professed, and for which they had shed so much Blood.

The Parliament was opened on the 25th. A Parliament is called.
of January; Bacon made a long Speech, both concerning matters of Religion, and
the State of the Nation. He desired they would examine the former Religion,
without heat or partial affection; and that all reproaches might be forborne,
and extremes avoided: and that things might be so settled, that all might agree
in an Uniformity in Divine Worship. He laid open the errors of the former
Reign, and aggravated the loss of Calais: but showed, that it could not be
easily recovered. He made a high Panegyric of the Queen, but when he showed
the necessities she was in, he said, she would desire no supply, but what they
should freely and cheerfully offer. The House of Commons began at a Debate,
Whether the want of the Title of Supreme Head in the enumeration of the Queen's
Titles, made a Nullity in the Writs, by which this and some former Parliaments
had been summoned: but they concluded in the Negative.

The Treaty at Cambray stuck chiefly at the restitution of Calais: and King
Philip for a great while insisted so positively on it, that he refused to make
Peace on other terms. The Peace at Cambray.
England had lost it by a War, in which they engaged on his account; so in
honor he was bound to see to it. But when the hopes of his marrying the Queen
vanished, and when he saw she was going to make changes in Religion, he grew
more careless of her Interests, and told the English Ambassadors, that unless
they would enter into a League for keeping up the War six Years longer, he must
submit to the necessity of his affairs, and make Peace. So the Queen listened to
Propositions sent her from France. She complained of the Queen of Scotland's
assuming the Title and Arms of England: It was answered, that since she carried
the Title and Arms of France, she had no reason to quarrel much on that
account. She saw she could not make War with France alone, and knew that Philip
had made a separated Peace. She had no mind to begin her Reign with a War, that
would probably be unsuccessful, or demand Subsidies that would be so grievous,
as that thereby she might lose the affections of her People. The loss of Calais
was no reproach on her, but fell wholly on her Sister's Memory: and since she
intended to make some changes in matters of Religion, it was necessary to be at
quiet with her Neighbors: Upon this, she resolved to make Peace with France,
on the best terms that could be obtained. It was agreed, that at the end of
eight Years, Calais should either be restored, or 500000. Crowns should be
paid the Queen: yet if, during that time, she made War, either on France, or
Scotland, she was to forfeit her right to Calais. Aymouth in Scotland was to be
rased, and all differences on the Borders there, were to be determined, by some
deputed on both sides; this being adjusted, a General Peace between the Crowns
of England, France and Spain was concluded: and thus the Queen being freed from
the dangerous consultations, that the continuance of a War might have involved
her in, was the more at liberty to settle matters at home.

The first Bill, Acts past in Parliament.
that was brought to try the Temper of the Parliament, was for the Restitution
of the Tenths and First Fruits to the Crown; against this, all the Bishops
protested, but that was all the opposition made to it. By it, not only that Tax
was of new laid on the Clergy, but all the Impropriated Benefices, which Queen
Mary had surrendered, were restored to the Crown.

After this, The Commons pray the Queen to marry.
the Commons made an Address to the Queen, desiring her to choose such a
Husband, as might make both her self, and the Nation happy. She received this
very kindly, since they had neither limited her to time, nor Nation: but
declared, that as hitherto she had lived with great satisfaction in a single
state, and had refused the Propositions that had been made her, both in her
Brothers and Sisters reign, so she had no Inclination to change her course of
life. If ever she did it, she would take care, that it should be for the good,
and to the satisfaction of her People. She thought she was married to the
Nation at her Coronation, and looked on her People, as her Children; and she
would be well contented, if her Tombstone might tell Posterity, Here lies a
Queen that reigned so long, and lived and dyed a Virgin. There was little more
progress made in this matter, save, that a Committee was appointed by both
Houses, to consider what should be the Authority of the Person, whom the Queen
might happen to marry; but she sent them a Message, to proceed to other
affairs, and let that alone.

A Bill for the Recognition of her Title to the Crown was put in: Her Title to
the Crown acknowledged.
It was not thought necessary to Repeal the Sentence of her Mothers Divorce,
for the Crown purged all defects: and it was thought needless to look back unto
a thing, which could not be done, without at least casting some reproach on her
Father; so it was in general words Enacted, That they did assuredly believe and
declare, that by the Laws of God, and the Realm, she was their lawful Queen,
and was rightly and lineally descended. This was thought a much wiser way, than
if they examined the Sentence of Divorce, that past, upon the Confession of a
Precontract, which must have revived the remembrance of things that were better
left in silence.

Bills were put in for the English Service, Acts concerning Religion.
for reviving King Edward's Laws, and for annexing the Supremacy again to the
Crown. To that, concerning the Supremacy, two Temporal Lords, and nine Bishops,
with the Abbot of Westminster dissented. It was proposed to revive the Law, for
making the Bishops by Letters Patent, as was in King Edward's time, but they
choosed rather to revive the Act for Electing them, made in the 25. Hen. 8.
They revived all Acts made against the Pope's power, in King Henry's time, and
repealed those, made by Queen Mary. They enacted an Oath, for acknowledging the
Queen Supreme Governor in all causes, and over all Persons: Those that refused
it, were to forfeit all Offices that they held, either in Church or State, and
to be under a disability, during life. If any should advance the authority of a
Foreign Power; for the first offense, they were to be fined, or imprisoned; for
the second, to be in a Praemunire; and the third was made Treason: The Queen
was also empowered to give Commissions, for Judging and Reforming
Ecclesiastical matters; who were limited to judge nothing to be Heresy, but
what had been already so judged by the authority of the Scriptures, or the
first four General Councils. All Points that were not decided, either by
express words of Scripture, or by those Councils, were to be referred to the
Parliament and Convocation. The Title of Supreme Head was changed, partly,
because the Queen had some scruples about it, and partly to moderate the
opposition, which the Popish party might otherwise make to it: and the refusing
the Oath was made no other way Penal, but that all Offices or Benefices were
forfeited upon it, which was a great mitigation of the severity in King Henry's
time. The Bishops are said to have made several Speeches against this, in the
House of Lords: but that which goes under the name of Heath's Speech must be a
forgery; for in it the Supremacy is called a new and unheard of thing, which
could not have flowed from one that had sworn it so often, both under King
Henry, and King Edward. Tonstall came not to this Parliament, and he was so
offended with the Cruelties of the last Reign, that he had withdrawn himself
into his Diocese: where he burnt none himself, upon that it was now thought,
that he was so much alienated from those Methods, that some had great hopes of
his declaring for the Reformation. Heath had been likewise very moderate, nor
were any burnt under him. Upon the power given the Queen, to appoint some to
Reform and direct all Ecclesiastical matters, was the Court, called the High
Commission Court, founded: which indeed was nothing, but the sharing that
authority, which was in one Person in King Henry's time, into many hands: for
that Court had no other authority, but that which was lodged formerly in
Cromwell, as the King's Vicegerent, and was now thought too great to be trusted
to one Man.

Great complaints were made of seditious Sermons, preached by the Popish
Clergy: Preaching without License forbidden.
upon which, the Queen followed the Precedent that her Sister had made, and
forbid all Preaching, excepting only by such, as obtained a License under the
Great Seal for it: She likewise sent an Order to the Convocation, requiring
them, under the pains of a Praemunire, to make no Canons. Yet the lower House,
in an Address to the upper House, declared for the Corporal Presence, and that
the Mass was a Propitiatory Sacrifice, and for the Supremacy, and that matters
of Religion fell only under the Cognizance of the Pastors of the Church. The
greatest part of both Universities had also set their hands to all these
Points, except the last.

This, it seems, A public Conference about Religion.
was the rather added by the Clerks of Convocation, to hinder a public
Conference, which the Queen had appointed, between the Bishops and the Reformed
Divines. It was first proposed to Heath, who was still a Privy Counselor, and
he, after some Conference about it, with his Brethren, accepted of it. Nine of
a side were to dispute about three Points: Worship in an Unknown Tongue, the
power that every particular Church had to alter Rites and Ceremonies, and the
Masse's being a Propitiatory Sacrifice, for the Dead and the Living: All was to
be given in in Writing: The Bishops were to begin in every Point, and they were
to interchange their Papers, and answer them. The last of March was the first
day of Conference, which held in Westminster Abbey, in the presence of the Privy
Council, and both Houses of Parliament. The Bishop of Winchester pretended,
there had been some mistake in the Order, and that their Paper was not quite
finished: but that Dr. Cole should deliver in discourse what they had prepared,
though it was not yet in that order, that it could be Copied out. The secret of
this was, The Bishops had resolved openly to Vindicate their Doctrine, but not
to give any Papers, or enter into dispute with Heretics, or so far to
acknowledge the Queen's Supremacy, as to engage in Conferences, at her command.
Cole was observed to read almost all he said, though he affected to be thought
only to deliver a discourse so, as if most part of it had been Extemporary.

The substance of it was, Arguments for and against the Worship in an unknown
Tongue.
that though the Worship in a known Tongue had been appointed in the
Scriptures, yet the Church had power to change it, as she changed the Sabbath,
and had appointed the Sacrament to be received fasting, though it was
Instituted after Supper: to eat blood was forbid, and a Community of goods was
set up by the Apostles; yet it was in the power of the Church to alter these
things; he enlarged on the evil of Schism, and the necessity of adhering to the
Church of Rome. Vulgar Tongues changed daily, but the Latin was the same, and
was spread over many Countries. The People might reap profit from Prayers,
which they understood not, as well as absent Persons. The Queen of Ethiopia's
Eunuch read Isaiah, though he understood him not; and Philip was sent to
explain that Prophecy to him.

Horn, when this was ended, read the Paper drawn by the Reformers; he began it
with a Prayer, and a Protestation of their sincerity. They founded their
Assertion on Saint Paul's Epistle to the Corinthians; in which he enjoined them
to pray with understanding, that so the Unlearned might say, Amen; and that
nothing should be spoken, that might give an uncertain sound, but that all
things should be done to edification; and though the speaking with strange
Tongues, was then an extraordinary gift of the Holy Ghost, yet he forbids the
using it, where there was not an Interpreter. Things so expressly enjoined could
not be indifferent, or fall under the power of the Church. The Jews had their
Worship in the Vulgar Tongue, so had also the most barbarous Nations, when
converted to Christianity. The natural use of Speech was, that every thing
which was said, might be understood: Quotations were brought, to show that
Psalms were daily sung in the Vulgar Tongue among all Nations.

When they ended their Paper, it was received with a shout of applause; and was
put in the Lord Keeper's hands, signed by them all. But the Bishops refused to
deliver theirs. The next day was appointed for considering the second Point,
but the Bishops resolved to go no further in the Conference; for they saw by
the applause of the People, that the Audience was more favorable to the other
side: so the next day of Meeting, they offered an answer to the Paper given in
the former day by the Reformers. The Lord Keeper told them, that according to
the Order laid down, they were first to go through the three Points, before
they might be suffered to reply: but they said, Cole had the former day only
given his own sense in an Extemporary discourse. Their foul dealing in this was
condemned by the whole Audience, so the Lord Keeper required them to go to the
second Point: but they refused to begin, and moved that the other side should
be made to begin; and though the Lord Keeper showed them, that this was
contrary to the Order agreed on beforehand, yet they continued all resolute,
and would not proceed any further; Ferknam only excepted: but he said, he could
do nothing alone, since the rest would not join with him. The Bishops of
Winchester and Lincoln said, the Faith of the Church ought not to be examined,
except in a Synod of Divines: and it gave too great an encouragement to
Heretics, to dispute with them: and that both the Queen and her Council
deserved to be excommunicated, for suffering them to argue against the
Catholic Faith, before an Unlearned Multitude. Upon this, they were sent to
the Tower, and the Conference broke up: but the Reformers thought the advantage
was much on their side, and that things were now carried much more fairly, than
had been in those Conferences and Disputes, that were in the beginning of the
former Reign. The Papists, on the other hand, said, it was visible the Audience
was prepossessed, and that the Conference was appointed only to make way for
the changes, that the Parliament was then about, with the Pomp of a Victory;
and therefore as they blamed the Bishops, for undertaking it, so they justified
them for breaking it off.

The Book of Common Prayer was now revised, The English Service is again set up.
the most considerable alteration was, that the express Declaration, which was
made in the second Book, set out by King Edward, against the Corporal Presence,
was left out, that so none might be driven out of the Communion of the Church,
upon that account. The matter was left undetermined, as a speculative Point, in
which People were left at liberty. The Book of Ordination was not specially
mentioned in the Act, which gave occasion to Bonner afterward, to question the
Legality of Ordinations made by it. But it had been made a part of the
Common Prayer Book in the 5th. year of King Edward; and the whole Book, then
set out, was now confirmed: so that by a special Act made some years after
this, it was declared, that that Office was understood to be a part of it.

When the Bill for the English Service was put in to the House of Lords,
Speeches made against it by some Bishops.
Heath, and Scot Bishop of Chester and Ferknam, made long Speeches against it,
grounded chiefly on the Authority of the Church, the Antiquity of the
established Religion, and Novelty of the other; which was changed every day, as
appeared in King Edward's time. They said, the consent of the Catholic Church,
and the perpetual succession in St. Peter's Chair, ought to have more
autherity, than a few Preachers risen up of late. They also enlarged much
against the Sacrilege, the robbing of Churches, and the breaking of Images,
that had been committed by the Reformers, and those that favored them. What
was said in opposition to this in the House of Lords, is not known, but a great
deal of it may be gathered from the Paper which the Reformed Divines drew upon
the second Point, about which they were appointed to dispute, of the power that
every Church had to Reform it self. This they founded on the Epistles of St.
Paul to the particular Churches, and St. John's to the Angels of the seven
Churches. In the first three Ages there were no General Councils, but every
Bishop in his Diocese, or such few Bishops as could Assemble together,
condemned Heresies, or determined matters that were contested; so did also the
Orthodox Bishops, after Arianism had so overspread the World, that even the Sea of Rome was defiled with it. And abuses were condemned in many places
without staying for a general concurrence: though that was then more possible,
when all was under one Emperor, than it was at present. Even in Queen Mary's
time, many superstitions, as Pilgrimages, and the worshipping of Relics were
laid aside. Therefore they concluded, that the Queen might by her own
authority, reform even the Clergy, as Hezekiah and Josias had done under the
old Law. When the Act past in the House of Lords, eight Spiritual Lords, and
nine Temporal Lords, protested against it; among whom was the Marquess of
Winchester, Lord Treasurer. Another Act past with more opposition, that the
Queen might reserve some Lands belonging to Bishoprics to her self, as they
fell void, giving in lieu of them improprietated Tithes to the value of them:
but this was much opposed in the House of Commons, who apprehended, that under
this pretense, there might new spoils be made of Church Lands, so that upon a
Division of the House 90. were against it, but 133. were for it, and so it was
past. All Religious Houses founded by the late Queen, were suppressed and united
to the Crown. The deprivation of the Popish Bishops in King Edward's time was
declared valid in Law, by which all the Leases which had been made by those
that were put in their Sees, were good in Law: A Subsidy, and two Tenths, and
two Fifteenths, with the Bill of Tonnage and Poundage, were given, and so the
Parliament was dissolved, on the 8th. of May.

Some Bills were proposed, but not past; one was for restoring the Bishops
deprived by Queen Mary, who were Barlow, Scory and Coverdale: but the first of
these had been made to resign, and the last being extreme old, resolved to
follow Latimer's example, and not return to his See. So it was not thought
worth the while to make an Act for Scory alone. Another Bill, that was laid
aside, was, for restoring all Churchmen to their Benefices, that had been
turned Out, because they were married: but it seems, it was not thought decent
enough to begin with such an Act. Another Bill that came to nothing, was, for
impowering XXXII. Persons to revise the Ecclesiastical Laws; but as this last
was then let fall, so to the great prejudice of this Church, it has slept ever
since.

After the Parliament was dissolved, Many Bishops turned out.
the Oath of Supremacy was tendered to the Bishops, and all, except Kitchen,
Bishop of Landaffe, refused it. Tonstall continued unresolved till September,
and so long did the Queen delay the putting it to him: But at last he refused
it, and so lost his Bishopric. It was generally believed that be quitted it,
rather because being extreme old, he thought it indecent to forsake his
Brethren, and to be still changing, than out of any scruple he had in his
Conscience, concerning it. All the Bishops were at first put under confinement,
but they were soon after set at liberty: only Bonner, White and Watson, were
kept Prisoners. Many complaints were brought against Bonner, for the Cruelties
he had been guilty of against Law, and the Tortures he had put his Prisoners to
himself: but yet the Queen resolved not to stain the beginnings of her Reign
with blood, and the Reformed Divines were, in imitation of Nazianzen, upon the
like revolution, in the Roman Empire; exhorting their Followers, not to think
of revenging themselves, but to leave that to God. Heath lived privately at his
own House, in which he was sometimes visited by the Queen. Tonstall and
Thirleby were appointed to live in Lambeth, with the new Archbishop. White and
Watson were morose, and haughty Men, much addicted to the School Divinity,
which has been often observed, to incline People to an overvaluing of
themselves. All the other Bishops, except Pates, Scot and Goldwell, that had
been Bishops of Worcester, Chester, and St. Asaph, continued still in England:
but these had leave to go beyond Sea. A few Gentlemen, and all the Nuns went
likewise out of England; and so gentle was the Queen, that she denied that
Liberty to none that asked it.

The Queen inclined to keep Images still in Churches, and though the Reformed
Divines made many applications, to divert her from it; The Queen inclined to
keep Images in Churches.
yet she was not easily wrought on. The Divines put all their Reasons against
them in Writing, and desired her to commit the determining of that matter, to a
Synod of Bishops and Divines, and not to take up an unalterable resolution upon
Political Considerations. They laid before her the second Commandment against
making Images for God, and the Curse pronounced against those that made an
Image, and put it in a secret place, that is, in an Oratory: The Book of Wisdom
calls them a snare for the feet of the Ignorant, S. John charged the Christians
to beware of Idols, and not only of worshipping them. The use of them fed
superstition, and ended in Idolatry, and would breed great Divisions among
themselves. They showed that Images were not allowed in the Church, till the
7th. Century, and the Contests that were raised about them, in the Eastern
Empire, occasioned such distractions, as in a great measure made way for its
ruin, and laid it open to the Mahometans. Thief things wrought so much on the
Queen, that she was at last content they should be put down.

It was now resolved to send Visiters over England, A General Visitation.
so Injunctions were prepared for them. Those appointed in the first year of
King Edward, were now renewed with some little alteration: To which, Rules were
added concerning the Marriages of the Clergy, for avoiding the scandals given
by them. The Clergy were also required to use Habits, according to their
degrees in the Universities. All People were to resort to their own Parish
Church; and some were to be appointed to examine and give notice of those who
went not to Church: all slanderous words were forbidden. No Books were to be
Printed without License: Inquiry was ordered to be made into all the
proceedings against Heretics, during the late Reign: Reverence was to be
expressed, when the name Jesus was pronounced: An Explanation was made of the
supremacy, that the Queen did not pretend to any authority for Ministering
Divine Service; but only that she had the sovereignty over all Persons, and
that no foreign Power was to be acknowledged: and such as had scruples about
it, might declare, that they took it only in that sense. A Communion Table was
to be set, where the Altars stood formerly, but on Sacrament Days, it was to be
brought into the most convenient place in the Chancel. The Bread for the
Sacrament was to have no figure on it, and to be thicker than Wafers. The
bidding Prayer was appointed to be the same, that had been used in King
Edward's time, only an Expression that imported a Prayer for the Dead, was
changed. The obliging Churchmen to go always in their Habits, was thought a
good mean to make them observe the Decencies of their Function, when their
Habit declared what they were, and would be a reproach to them, if they behaved
themselves unsutably to it. The bowing at the name Jesus was considered, as
such an acknowledgment of his Divinity, as was made by standing up at the
Creed, or the Gloria Patri. The liberty given to explain in what sense the Oath
of Supremacy was taken, gave a great Evidence of the Moderation of the Queen's
Government; that she would not lay snares for her People, which is always a
sign of a wicked and Tyrannical Prince. But the Queen reckoned, that if such
Comprehensive Methods could be found out, as would once bring her People under
an Union, though perhaps there might remain a great diversity of Opinion, that
would wear off with the present Age, and in the next Generation all would be of
one mind. And this had the good effect that was expected from it, till the Pope
and the King of Spain began to open Seminaries beyond Sea, for a Mission to
England; which have since that time been the occasion of almost all the
distractions this Nation has labored under.

The Queen granted Commissions for the two Provinces of Canterbury and York,
The High Commission Courts.
consisting most of the Laity; some few of the Clergy being mixed with them:
Impowering them to visit the Churches, to suspend or deprive unworthy
Clergymen, to proceed against scandalous Persons, by Imprisonment or
Church Censures; to reserve Pensions for such, as resigned their Benefices, and
to restore such as had been unlawfully put out in the late Reign. By these
reserved Pensions, as the Clergy that were turned out, were kept from extreme
want, so they were in great measure bound to their good behavior by them: The
Impowering Laymen to deprive Churchmen, or Excommunicate, could not be easily
excused, but was as justifiable, as the Commissions to Lay-chancellours for
those things were. There are 9400. Benefices in England, but of all these, the
number of those who chose to resign, rather than to take the Oath, was very
inconsiderable. Fourteen Bishops, six Abbots, twelve Deans, twelve Archdeacons,
fifteen Heads of Colleges, fifty Prebendaries, and eighty Rectors, was the
whole number of those that were turned out. But it was believed, that the
greatest part complied against their Consciences, and would have been ready for
another turn, if the Queen had died, while that Race of Incumbents lived, and
the next Successor had been of another Religion.

The Sea of Canterbury was now to be filled: but Parker stood out long, Parker
is very unwillingly made Archbish. of Canterbury.
before he would submit to a burden, which he thought disproportioned to his
strength. He said, he was afraid of incurring God's Indignation, for accepting
a trust which he could not discharge, as he ought, having neither strength of
body, nor mind, equal to it: he was threatened with Imprisonment in case of
refusal; but he said, he would suffer it cheerfully, rather than engage in a
station, that was so far above him: and he had such a sense of the Episcopal
Function, that he resolved never to aspire to it. He thought he had but two or
three years more of life before him, and desired to employ these well, and not
to be advanced to a place, in which he knew, he could not answer the
expectations, that some had of him: he wished the Queen would seek out a Man,
that were neither Arrogant, Faint-hearted, nor Covetous: and expressed the
great apprehensions he had, that some Men, who he perceived, were Men still,
notwithstanding all the Trials they past through of late, would revive those
heats that were begun beyond Sea, and that they would fall a quarrelling among
themselves, which would prove a pleasant diversion to the Papists. But when by
many repeated commands, he was required to accept of that great advancement, he
at last writ to the Queen her self, and protested, that out of regard to God,
and the good of her service, he held himself bound in Conscience, to declare to
her, his great unworthiness, for so high a Function; and so, as prostrate at
her feet, he begged her to press it on him no further: for that Office did
require a Man of more Learning, Virtue and Experience, than he perfectly knew
was in himself. But as these denials, so earnestly and frequently repeated,
showed, that he had certainly some of the necessary qualifications, which were
true humility, and a contempt of the World; so they tended to increase the
esteem, which the Queen, and her Ministers had of him: And they persisting in
their Resolution, he was at last forced to yield to it. He was upon the sending
of the Conge d'eslire, chosen by the Chapter of Canterbury; and in September,
the Queen issued out a Warrant for his Consecration, which was directed to
Tonstall, Bourn and Pool (the last was Cardinal Pool's Brother, and was Bishop
of Peterborough) and to Kitchen, Barlow and Scory: by which it appears, that
there was then some hope of gaining the former three to obey the Laws, and to
continue in their Sees: but they refusing to execute this, there was a second
Warrant directed to Kitchen, Barlow, Scory and Coverdale, and to Bale, Bishop
of Ossory, and two suffragan Bishops to Consecrate Parker: and on the 17th. of
December, he was Consecrated by four of these, according to the Book of
Ordination, set out under King Edward, only the giving the Pastoral Staff was
now omitted.

After this Parker ordained Grindall for the Sea of London; Cox for Ely, The
other Bishops consecrated.
Horn for Winchester, Sandys for Worcester, Merick for Bangor, Young for St.
David's, Bullingham for Lincoln, Jewel for Salisbury, Davis for St. Asaph,
Guest for Rochester, Berkley for Bath and Wells, Bentham for Coventry and
Litchfield, Alley for Exeter, and Parre for Peterborough, Barlow and Scory were
put in the Sees of Chichester and Hereford. The Sees of York and Duresme were
kept vacant a Year, upon some hopes that Heath and Tonstall would have
conformed; but in the Year 1561. Young was translated from St. David's to York;
and Pilkinton was put in Duresme.

All this is opened the more particularly, The Fable of the Naggs-head confuted.
for discovering the Impudence of the Contrivance of the Naggs-Head Ordination,
which was first vented in King James's time, above forty Years after this. It
was then said, that the Elect Bishops met at the Naggs Head Tavern in
Cheapside, and were in great disorder, because Kitchen refused to consecrate
them; upon which Scory made them all kneel down, and laid the Bible on their
Heads, saying, Take thou Authority to Preach the Word of God sincerely; and
that this was all the Ordination that they ever had: and to confirm this, it
was pretended, that Neale, one of Bonner's Chaplains, watched them into the
Tavern, and saw all that was done through the Keyhole. This was given out,
when all that were concerned in it were dead; yet the old Earl of Nottingham,
who had seen Parker's Consecration, was still alive, and declared, that he saw
it done at Lambeth, in the Chapel, according to the Common Prayer Book, and
both the Records of the Crown, and the Registers of the Sea of Canterbury do
plainly confute this. The Author did also see the Original Instrument then
made, describing all the particulars relating to Parker's Consecration,
preserved still in Corpus Christi College in Cambridge, among the other
Manuscripts which he left to that House, in which he had his Education.

The first thing that the Bishops set about, The Articles of the Church
published.
was, the publishing the Doctrine of the Church. In order to this, a Review was
made of those Articles, that had been compiled under Edward the VI. and some
small alterations were made. The most considerable, was, that a long
determination, that was made formerly against the Corporal Presence, was now
left out; and it was only said, That the Body of Christ was given and received
in a spiritual manner, and that the means by which it was received, was Faith.
Yet in the Original Subscription of the Articles, by both Houses of
Convocation, still extant, there was a full declaration made against it, in
these words, Christ, when he ascended into Heaven, made his Body Immortal, but
took not from it the nature of a Body. For still it retains, according to the
Scriptures, a true Humane Body, which must be always in one definite place, and
cannot be spread into many, or all places at once: since then Christ was
carried up to Heaven, and is to remain there to the end of the World, and is to
come from thence, and from no other place, to judge the Quick and the Dead;
None of the Faithful ought to believe, or profess the Real, or as they call it,
the Corporal Presence of his Flesh and Blood in the Eucharist. But the design
of the Queen's Council, was, to unite once the whole Nation, into the Communion
of the Church; and it was feared, that so express a definition against the Real
Presence, would have driven many out of the Communion of the Church, who might
have been otherwise kept in it: and therefore it was thought enough to assert
only the Spiritual Presence, but that it was not necessary to condemn the
Corporal Presence, in such express words; and therefore, though the Convocation
had so positively determined this matter, it was thought more conducing to the
public peace, to dash it in the Original Copy, and to suppress it in the
Printed Copies.

The next thing they took in hand, A Tranflation of the Bible.
was a new Translation of the Bible: Several Books of it were given to several
Bishops, who were appointed to call for such Divines, as were learned in the
Greek or Hebrew Tongues, and by their assistance they were to translate that
parcel that fell to their share: and so when one had completed that which was
assigned to him, he was to offer it to the Correction of those that were
appointed to translate the other parts, and after every Book had thus past the
Censure of all, who were employed in this matter, then it was approved of. And
so great have made they in this important work, that within two or three years,
the whole Translation was finished.

There was one thing yet wanting, The want of Church discipline.
to complete the Reformation of this Church, which was the restoring a
Primitive Discipline, against scandalous Persons, the establishing the
Government of the Church in Ecclesiastical hands, and the taking it out of
Lay-hands, who have so long profaned it; and have exposed the authority of the
Church, and of the Censures of it, chiefly Excommunication to the contempt of
the Nation, by which the reverence due to Holy things, is in so great a measure
lost, and the dreadfullest of all Censures, is now become the most scorned and
despised. But upon what reasons, it cannot be now known, this was not carried
on with that Zeal; nor brought to that perfection that was necessary. The want
of Ecclesiastical Discipline, set on some to devise many new Platforms, for the
administration of it, in every Parish; all which gave great offense to the
Government, and were so much opposed by it, that they came to nothing. Other
differences were raised concerning the Vestments of the Clergy, and some
Factions growing up in the Court, these differences were heightened, by those
who intended to serve their own ends, by making the several Parties quarrel
with so much animosity, that it should scarce be possible to reconcile them:
Since that time, the fatal Division of this Nation, into the Court and Country
party, has been the chief occasion of the growth, and continuance of those
differences; so that all the attempts which have been made by moderate Men to
compose them, have proved ineffectual.

At this time there was a great revolution of affairs in Scotland. The
Reformation in Scotland.
When there was a probability of bringing the Treaty of Cambray to a good
effect, the Cardinal of Lorrain writ to his Sister, the Queen Regent of
Scotland, and to the Archbishop of St. Andrews, and let them know the
Resolution that was taken, to extirpate Heresy, and exhorted them to use their
endeavors for that end. The Queen Regent saw, that by doing this, she would
not only break her faith to the Lords, who had hitherto adhered to her, upon
the assurance she gave them of her Protection, but that the Peace of Scotland
would be endangered; for as their Party was strong, so it was not to be
doubted, but the Queen of England would support them, and so she was not easily
brought to follow her Brother's cruel Counsels. But the Bishops shut their eyes
upon all dangers, and resolved to strike a terror into the People, by some
severe Executions. They began with Walter Mell, an old insirm Priest, who had
preached in some places against many of the Opinions then received: he was
particularly accused for having asserted the lawfulness of the Marriage of the
Clergy, and for having condemned the Sacrifice of the Mass and
Transubstantiation, with some other particulars, all which he confessed, and
upon his refusal to abjure them, he was condemned to be burnt. Yet so averse
were the People from those Cruelties, that it was not easy to find any that
would execute the Sentence: Nor would any do so much as sell a Cord to tie him
to the Stake, so that the Archbishop was forced to send for the Cords of his
own Pavilion. The old Man expressed great firmness of mind, and such
cheerfulness in his sufferings, that the People were much affected at it: and
this being every where looked on as a Prologue to greater severities, that were
to follow, the Nobility and Gentry began to consider what was fit to be done.
They had offered a Petition to the Queen Regent the last year, that the worship
might be in the Vulgar Tongue, that the Communion might be given in both kinds,
and that scandalous Priests might be turned out, and worthy Men be put in their
places. The Queen Regent being unwilling to irritate so great a Party, before
the Dauphin was declared King of Scotland, promised that they should not be
punished for having their Prayers in the Vulgar Tongue. In Parliament, they
moved for a Repeal of the Laws, for the Bishops proceedings against Heretics,
and that nothing might be judged Heresy, but that which was condemned by the
Word of God; but the Queen Regent told them, these things could not pass,
because of the Opposition, which was made to them, by the Spiritual Estate;
upon that they made a Protestation, that whereas they had modestly moved for a
redress of abuses, they were not to be blamed for the ill effects of rejecting
their Petition, and the Violences that might follow.

But when the Queen had gained her end, in relation to the Dauphin, she ordered
a Citation to be served on all the Reformed Preachers: The Earl of Glencawn
was, upon that, sent to put her in mind of her former promises; she answered
him roughly, That maugre all that would take those Men's part, they should be
banished Scotland; and added, that Princes were bound only to observe their
promises, so far as they found it convenient for them to do it. To this he
replied, that if she renounced her Promises, they would renounce their
obedience to her.

In St. Johnstown, It is first set up in St. Johnstown.
that Party entered into the Churches, and had Sermons publicly in them. The
Ministers were coming from all parts, to appear on the 20th. of May, for to
that day they had been cited; and great numbers came along with them. The Queen
apprehending the ill effects of a great Confluence of People, sent them word
not to come, and upon this many went home again; yet upon their not appearance,
they were all declared Rebels. This foul dealing made many leave her, and go
over to those that were met at St. Johnstown. And the heat of the People was
raised to that pitch, that they broke in upon the Houses of the Monks and
Friars, and after they had distributed all that they found in them, except that
which the Monks conveyed away to the Poor, they pulled them down to the ground.
This provoked the Queen so much, that she resolved to punish that Town, in a
most exemplary manner: so she gathered the French Soldiers together, with such
others, as would join with her: but the Earl of Glencairn gathered 2500. Men
together, and with incredible have, he marched to that place, where there were
now in all 7000. armed Men. This made the Queen afraid to engage with them; so
an agreement was made. An oblivion was promised for all that was past; Matters
of Religion were referred to a Parliament, and the Queen was to be received
into St. Johnstown, without carrying her Frenchmen with her: But she carried
them with her into the Town, and as she put a Garrison in it, so she punished
many for what was past; and when her promises were objected to her, she
answered, Princes were not to be strictly charged with their Promises,
especially when they were made to Heretics; and that she thought it no sin to
kill and destroy them all, and then would excuse it as well as could be, when
it was done. This turned the Hearts of the whole Nation from her, and in many
places they began to pull down Images, and to raze Monasteries. The Queen
Regent represented this to the King of France, as done on design to shake off
the French yoke, and desired a great Force to reduce the Country. On the other
hand, some were sent over from the Lords, to give a true representation of the
matter, and to let him know, that an Oblivion for what was past, and the free
Exercise of their Religion for the time to come, would give full satisfaction.
The French King began now to apprehend, how great a charge the keeping that
Kingdom in peace, was like to come to; and saw the danger of the Scots casting
themselves into the Arms of the Queen of England, therefore he sent one, in
whom the Constable put an entire confidence to Scotland, to bring him a true
report of the state of that matter, that was so variously represented: But
before he could return, the King of France was dead, and the Constable was in
disgrace; and all affairs were put in the hands of the Brothers of the House of
Guise, so that all moderate Councils were now out of doors. The people did so
universally rise against the Queen Regent, that she was forced to retire to
Dunbar-Castle: She was once willing to refer the whole matter to a Parliament:
But 2000. Men coming over from France, and assurances being sent Her, of a
greater Force to follow, she took heart, and came and fortified Leith, and
again broke her last agreement, upon which the Lords pretended, that in their
Queens Minority, the Government was chiefly in the States, and that the Regent
was only the chief Administrator, and accountable to them: so they resolved to
depose her from her Regency.

They objected many Maleadministrations to her, The Queen Regent is deposed.
as her beginning a War in the Kingdom, and bringing in strangers to subdue it,
her embasing the Coin, governing without consent of the Nobility, and breaking
her Faith and Promises to them, upon which they declared that she had fallen
from her Regency, and suspended her Power till the next Parliament. The Lords,
now called the Lords of the Congregation, retired from Edinburgh to Sterlin:
upon which the French came to Edinburgh, and set up the Mass again in the
Churches, then a new Supply came from France, commanded by the Marquess of
Elbeufe, one of the Queen Regents Brothers, so that there were in all 4000.
French in Scotland. But by her having this foreign Force, the whole Nation came
to be united against the Queen, and to look on her as a common Enemy. The
Scots, who had been hitherto animated, and secretly supplied with Money and
Ammunition from England, were now forced to desire the Queen of England's aid
more openly: and France was now like to be so much divided within it self, that
the Queen did not much apprehend a War with that Crown; so she was more easily
determined to assist the Scots.

A Treaty was made between the Duke of Norfolk, and the Scots: they promised to
be the Queen's perpetual Allies, and that after the French were driven out of
Scotland, The Queen of England assists the Scots.
they should continue their Obedience to their own Queen: upon which, 2000.
Horse, and 6000. Foot, were sent to assist the Scots. These besieged Lies,
during which, there were considerable losses on both sides, but the losses on
the side of the English were more easily made up, supplies being nearer at
hand. The French offered to put Calais again in the Queen of England's hands,
if she would recall her Forces out of Scotland: She answered on the sudden,
that she did not value that Fish-Town, so much as she did the quiet of the Isle
of Britain. But she offered to Mediate a Peace between them and the Scots.

Before this could be effected, (...) June. The Queen Regent dies.
the Queen Regent of Scotland died, she sent for some of the Scottish Lords in
her sickness, and asked them pardon for the Injuries she had done them: She
advised them to send both the French and English out of Scotland, and prayed
them to continue in their Obedience to their Queen: She also discoursed with
one of their Preachers, and declared that she hoped to be saved only by the
Merits of Christ. She had governed the Nation, before the last year of her
life, with such Justice and Prudence, and was so great an Example, both in her
own Person, and in the Order of her Court, that if she had died before her
Brother's bloody. Counsels had involved her in these last passages of her life,
she had been the most lamented and esteemed Queen that had been in that Nation,
for many Ages. Her own Inclinations were Just and Moderate; and she often said,
that if her Counsels might take place, she did not doubt, but she should bring
all things again to perfect Tranquillity and Peace: Soon after a Peace was
concluded, between England, France and Scotland: An Oblivion was granted for
all that was past; The French and English were to be sent out of Scotland, and
all other things were referred to a Parliament. During the Queen's absence, the
Kingdom was to be governed by a Council of 12. all Natives; of these the Queen
was to name 7. and the States were to choose 5. So both the English and French
were sent out of Scotland: and the Parliament met in August.

In it, A Parliament meets, and settles the Reformation.
all Acts for the former way of Religion were repealed, and a confession of
Faith penned by Knox, afterward inserted among the Acts of Parliament, 1567.
was confirmed. These Acts were opposed only by three Temporal Lords, who said,
they would believe as their Fathers had done: but all the Spiritual Lords, both
Bishops, and Abbots, consented to them; and they did dilapidate the Lands and
Revenues of the Church in the strangest manner, that was ever known: the Abbots
converted their Abbeys into Temporal Estates, and the Bishops, though they
continued Papists still, divided all their Lands among their Bastards or
Kindred; and procured confirmations of many of the Grants they gave from Rome:
by which, that Church was so impoverished, that if King James and King Charles
the First, had not with much zeal, and great endeavors, retrieved some part of
the Ancient Revenues, and provided a considerable maintenance for the Inferior
Clergy, all the encouragements to Religion and Learning had been to such a
degree withdrawn, that Barbarism must have again overrun that Kingdom. When
these Acts thus agreed on in the Parliament of Scotland, were sent over to
France, they were rejected with great scorn; so that the Scots began to
apprehend a new War: but Francis the second's death, soon after delivered them
from all their fears: for their Queen having no more the support of so great a
Crown, was forced to return home, and govern in such a manner, as that Nation
was pleased to submit to.

Thus had the Queen of England divided Scotland from its ancient dependence on
France, The Queen of England the Head of all the Protestants,
and had tied it so to her own Interests, that she was not only secure on that
side of her Dominions, but came to have so great an interest in Scotland, that
affairs there, were for most part governed according to the Directions she sent
thither. Other Accidents did also concur to give her a great share in all the
most Important affairs of Europe.

In France, upon Henry the second's fatal end, great Divisions arose between
the Princes of the Blood, and the Brothers of the House of Guise, Both in France
into whose hands the administration of affairs was put, during Francis the
second's short Reign: It was pretended on the one hand, that the King was not
of Age, till he was 22. and that during his Minority, the Princes of the Blood
were to Govern by the Advice of the Courts of Parliaments, and the Assembly of
Estates: On the other hand, it was said, that the King might assume the
Government, and Employ whom he pleased at 14. A design was laid, in which many
of both Religions concurred, for taking the Government out of the hands of the
strangers, and seizing on the King's Person, but a Protestant, moved by a
Principle of Conscience, discovered it. Upon this the Prince of Conde, and many
others, were seized on, and if the King had not died soon after, they had
suffered for it. Charles the Ninth succeeding, who was under Age, the King of
Navarre was declared Regent, but he, though before a Protestant, was drawn into
the Papist Interest; and joined himself with the Queen Mother, and the
Constable. A severe Edict was made against the Protestants, but the Execution
of it was like to raise great disorders, so another was made in a great
Assembly of many Princes of the Blood, Privy Councillors, and 8. Courts of
Parliament, allowing the free exercise of that Religion: yet after this, the
Duke of Guise reconciled himself to the Queen Mother, and they resolved to
break the Edict: so the Duke of Guise happening to pass by a Meeting of
Protestants, his Servants offered violence to them; from reproachful words, it
went to the throwing of stones; by one of which the Duke was hurt: upon which
his Servants killed 60. of the Protestants, and wounded 200. and upon this the
Edict was every where broken. It was said, that the Regent's power did not
extend so far, as that he could break so Public an Edict, and that therefore
it was lawful for the Protestants to defend themselves. The Prince of Conde set
himself at the Head of them, and the King of Navarre being killed soon after
the breaking out of the War, he, as the first Prince of the Blood, that was of
Age, ought to have been declared Regent: so that the Protestants said, their
defending themselves was not Rebellion, since they had both the Law and the
first Prince of the Blood on their side. The Wars lasted near 30. Years, for in
all that time, notwithstanding some Intervals of Peace, the seeds of War were
never so rooted out, but that they were ready to spring up, upon every new
occasion. In this the Queen Interposed, and supported the Protestant Party,
sometimes with Men, but oftener with Money, so that she had near the half of
that Kingdom depending on her.

In the Netherlands, a long continuance of civil Wars almost on the same
account, gave her the like advantages. The King of Spain, And in the
Netherlands.
by endeavoring to set up the Courts of Inquisition in those Provinces, and by
keeping some Spanish Troops among them, and other excesses in his Government,
contrary to the Articles of the Laetus Introitus, provoked them so much, that
they shook off his Yoke: and were supported by the Aid and Money which the
Queen sent them. So that the Queen met with such a Conjuncture of affairs in
the Dominions of those Princes that were next her, of whom only she had reason
to be afraid, as scarce any Prince ever had.

In foreign Parts, The excellent administration of affairs in England.
she was the Arbiter of Christendom; and at home things were so happily
managed, Trade did so flourish, and Justice was so equally distributed, that
she became the wonder of the World. She was Victorious in all her Wars with
Spain; and no wonder: for it appeared signally in the ruin of the great
Armada, which Spain looked on as Invincible, that Heaven fought for her. She
reigned more absolutely over the Hearts, than the Persons of her Subjects. She
always followed the true Interests of her People, and so found her Parliaments
always ready to comply with her desires, and to grant her Subsidies, as often
as she called for them: and as she never asked them, but when the occasion for
them was visible, so after they were granted, if the state of her affairs
changed so, that she needed them not, she readily discharged them. Rome and
Spain set many Engines on work, both against her Person and Government: but she
still lived and triumphed. In the first ten Years of her Reign, the Papists
were so Compliant, that there was no stir made about matters of Religion. Pope
Pius the fourth condemned the madness of his Predecesfor, in that high and
provoking Message, which he sent her; and therefore he attempted a
reconciliation with her, at two several times: and offered, if she would join
her self to the Sea of Rome, that he would annul the sentence against her
Mothers Marriage, and confirm the English service, and the Communion in both
kinds. But she refused to enter into any Treaty with him. Pius the fifth, that
succeeded him in that Chair, resolved to contrive her death, Catena.
as is related by him, that writes his Life. The unfortunate Queen of Scotland
was forced to take Sanctuary in England; where it was resolved to use her well,
and restore her to her Crown and Country. But her own officious friends, and
the frequent Plots that were laid, for taking away the Queens life, brought on
her the Calamities of a long Imprisonment, that ended in a Tragical death:
which, though it was the greatest blemish of this Reign, yet was made in some
sort justifiable, if not necessary, by the many Attempts that the Papists made
on the Queen's Life: and by the Deposition which Pope Pius the fifth thundered
out against Her; from which it was inferred, that as long as that Party had the
hopes of such a Successor, the Queen's Life was not safe, nor her Government
secure.

This led her toward the end of her Reign, Severities against the Papists were
necessary.
to greater severities against those of the Roman Communion, of which a Copious
Account is given by Sir Francis Walsingham, that was for so many Years
employed, either in foreign Embassies, or in the secrets of State at home; that
none knew better than he did, the hidden springs that moved and directed all
Her Councils. He writ a long Letter to a French man, giving him an account of
all the severities of the Queen's Government, both against Papists and Puritans.

The substance of which is, Sir Fr. Walsingham's account of the steps in which
she proceeded.
That the Queen laid down two Maxims of State; the one was not to force
Consciences, the other was not to let factious practices go unpunished, because
they were covered with the pretenses of Conscience: At first, she did not
revive those severe Laws past in her Father's time, by which the refusal of the
Oath of Supremacy was made Treason, but left her People to the freedom of their
thoughts, and made it only Penal to extol a foreign Jurisdiction: She also laid
aside the word Supreme Head, and the refusers of the Oath were only disabled
from holding Benefices, or Charges, during their Refusal. Upon Pius the Fifth's
Excommunicating her, though the Rebellion in the North was chiefly occasioned
by that, she only made a Law against the bringing over, or publishing of Bulls;
and the venting of Agnus Dei's, or such other Love Tokens, which were sent from
Rome, on design to draw the Hearts of Her People from her, which were no
Essential parts of that Religion; so that this could hurt none of their
Consciences. But when after the 20th. Year of her Reign, it appeared that the
King of Spain designed to Invade her Dominions, and that the Priests that were
sent over from the Seminaries beyond Sea, were generally employed to corrupt
the Subjects in their Allegiance, by which, Treason was carried in the Clouds,
and Infused secretly in Confession; Then pecuniary Punishments were inflicted
on such as withdrew from the Church: and in Conclusion, she was forced to make
Laws of greater rigor, but did often mitigate the severity of them, to all
that would promise to adhere to her, in case of a Foreign Invasion. As for the
Puritans, as long as they only inveighed against some abuses, as Pluralities,
Non residence, or the like, it was not their Zeal against those, but only their
Violence that was condemned: When they refused to comply with some Ceremonies,
and questioned the superiority of Bishops, and declared for a Democracy in the
Church, they were connived at with great gentleness: But it was observed, that
they affected Popularity much, and the Methods they took to compass their ends,
were judged dangerous, and they made such use of the aversion the Nation had to
Popery, that it was visible they were in a hazard of running from one Extreme
to another: They set up a New Model of Church Discipline, which was like to
prove no less dangerous to the Liberties of private Men, than to the Sovereign
Power of the Prince: Yet all this was born with, as long as they proceeded with
those expressions of duty, which became Subjects. But afterward, when they
resolved to carry on their Designs, without waiting for the consent of the
Magistrate, and entered into Combinations; when they began to defame the
Government by ridiculous Pasquils, and boasted of their Numbers and strength,
and in some Places brake out into Tumults, then it appeared that it was
Faction, and not Zeal, that animated them. Upon that, the Queen found it
necessary to restrain them, more than she had done formerly; yet she did it
with all the Moderation that could consist with the Peace of the Church and
State. And thus, from this Letter, an Idea of this whole Reign may be justly
formed.

The Conclusion.
Thus have I prosecuted, what I at first undertook, the Progress of the
Reformation, from its first, and small beginnings in England, till it came to a
complete settlement in the time of this Queen. Of whose Reign, if I have
adventured to give an Account, it was not intended so much for a full Character
of Her, and her Councils, as to set out the great, and visible Blessings of God
that attended on her; the many Preservations she had, and that by such signal
Discoveries, as both saved her Life, and secured her Government; and the
unusual happiness of her whole Reign, which raised Her to the Esteem, and envy
of that Age, and the wonder of all Posterity. It was wonderful indeed, that a
Virgin Queen could rule such a Kingdom, for above 44 Years, with such constant
succefs, in so great Tranquillity at home, with a vast increase of Wealth, and
with such Glory abroad. All which may justly be esteemed to have been the
Rewards of Heaven, crowning that Reign with so much Honor and Triumph, that
was begun with the Reformation of Religion.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books sold by John Lawrence, at the Angel in Cornhill, near the
Royal Exchange.
THe Works of the famous Nicholas Machiavel, Citizen and Secretary of Florence,
containing his History of Florence, Art of War, discourses on Titus Livius,
etc. Written originally in Italian, and thence newly and faithfully Translated
into English. Folio.

Gells Remains, being sundry Pious and Learned Notes and Observations on the
New Testament, opening and explaining it; wherein Jesus Christ, as yesterday,
to day, and the same for ever, is illustrated; by that Learned and Judicious
man D. R. Gell, late Rector of Saint Mary Aldermary, London. Folio. Price 1 l.
10 s.

Christian Religions Appeal from the groundless prejudice of the Scepticks to
the Bar of Common Reason; wherein is proved, 1. That the Apostles did not
delude the World. 2. Nor were themselves deluded. 3. Scripture matters of Faith
have the best evidence. 4. The Divinity of the Scriptures is as demonstrable as
the Being of the Deity; by John Smith Rector of St. Mary's in Colchester.
Folio. 12 s.

The Admired Piece of Physiognomy and Chyromancy, Metoposcopy, the symetrical
Proportion, and signal moles of the Body, fully explained, with their Natural
predictive significations, being delightful, and profitable, with the subject
of Dreams made plain; whereunto is added the Art of Memory, by Rich. Saunders,
Illustrated with Cuts and Figures. Folio. 12 s.

The Jesuits Catechism, according to St. Ignatius Loyola, Quarto. 1 s.

The Privileges and Practices of Parliaments in England. Collected out of the
Common Laws of the Land. Commended to the High Court of Parliament, Quarto. 6.
d.

A Collection of Letters for the Improvement of Husbandry and Trade, Number 1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7; and intended to be still continued by John Houghton, Fellow
of the Royal Society. Quarto.

The Merchant Royal, a Sermon preached before the King at the Nuptials of an
Honorable Lord and his Lady. Quarto. 6 d.

The Admired Satyr against Hypocrites. Quarto. 6. d.

The Ruin of Papacy, or a clear display of Simony of the Romish Clergy; with a
circulatory Letter to the Fathers of those Virgins that desert their Families
to turn Nuns: by the Learned pen of that famous Divine, Peter du Moulin. Octavo.

Indiculus Vniversalis, or the Universe in Epitome; wherein almost all the
Works of Nature, of all arts and sciences, with their most necessary terms, are
in English, Latin and French, Methodically, and distinctly digested, and
composed at first in French and Latin for the use of the Dauphin of France, by
the Learned T. Pomey, and now made English by A. Lovel, M. A. Oct.

De suico Pancreatico, or a Physical and Anatomical Treatise of the Nature and
Office of the Pancreatick Juice; showing it Generation in the Body, what
Diseases arise by its Visitation, from whence in particular, by plain and
familiar Examples, is accurately demonstrated the cause andcures of Agues, or
intermitting Fevers, hitherto so difficult and uncertain, with sundry other
things worthy of Note; written by that Famous Physician, D. Reg. de Graaf of
Delph, and Translated by C. Pack, Med. Land. Illustrated with diverse Copper
Plates. Octavo. 2 s. 6. d.

Praxis Catholica, or the Country-mans Universal Remedy; wherein is plainly and
briefly laid down the Nature, Matter, Manner, Place and cure of most diseases
incident to the Body of Man; not hitherto discovered, by Chr. Pack Operator in
Chemistry. Octavo. 1 s. 6 d.

English Military Discipline, or the way of Exercising Horse and Foot,
according to the practice of this present time; with a Treatise of all sorts of
Arms and Engines of War, of fire works, Ensigns, and other Military
Instruments, both Ancient and Modern. Octavo. 3. s.

The Military Duties of the Officers of Cavalry, containing the way of
Exercising the Horse according to the practice of this present time; the
Motions of Horse, the Functions of the several Officers from the Chief Captain
to the Brigadeer. Written originally in French by the Sieur de la Fontain,
Ingineer in Ordinary to the most Christian King; and transcribed for the use of
those who are desirous to be informed of the Art of War, as it is practiced in
France; by A. L. Octavo. 2 s.

The Life and Actions of the late renouned Prelate and Soldier Christopher
Bernard van Gale, Bishop of Munster, Prince of the holy Empire, Administrator
of Corvay, Maquess of Stremberg. etc. In which is an account of the most
considerable Actions of Europe in his time. Octavo. 1 s. 6. d.

Clavis Grammatica, or the ready way to the Latin tongue, containing most plain
demonstrations for the regular translating of English into Latin, fitted to
help such as begin to attain the Latin tongue, by F. B. Schoolmaster in London.
Octavo. 1 s.

The Abridgment of the History of the Reformation of the Church of England; by
Gilbert Burnet, D. D. with several Copper Plates. Octavo.

A Mathematical Compendium, or useful Practices in Arithmetic, Geometry,
Astronomy, Navigation, Embatelling, and Quartering of Armies, Fortification and
Gunnery, etc. by Sir Jonas Moor, late Surveyor of his Majesty's Ordinance, the
second Edition, with many large Additions. Twelves. 3. s.

Humane Prudence: or the Art by which a man may raise himself and fortune to
Grandeur: by A.B. The second Edition, with the Addition of a Table. Twelves. 1
s.


