TO THE HONORABLE THE KNIGHTS, CITIZENS AND BVRGESSES OF THE COMMONS HOUSE OF
PARLIAMENT: The humble Petition of sundry Ministers entrusted to solicit the
Petition and Remonstrance formerly exhibited to this Honorable House, and of
many of their Brethren, most humbly shows,
THat the Petitioners do most thankfully value and heartily acknowledge the
indefatigable pains and Piety of this Honorable Assembly, manifested in very
many things of high concernment for the glory of God, the honor of the King,
the purging of the Church, and the safety and prosperity of this and the rest
of his Majesty's Kingdoms; but more especially, in procuring that public
Fast at your first Sitting, which has prevented many mischiefs, and drawn
down many blessings upon the Kingdom ever since: In your zeal and courage
for the true Religion professed among us against all Popish Idolatry and
Superstitious Innovations expressed by your noble and Religious Protestation
and Vow: In countenancing the Sacred Ordinance of Preaching after long and
deep contempt cast upon it by too many who had almost exiled it from diverse
parts of this Kingdom: In encouraging painful and godly Ministers formerly
set aside, and now again profitably employed in many Congregations greatly
needing them: In discountenancing bold and unmeete men, that without sufficient
Calling have presumptuously intruded into that holy Office,, as also of all
unworthy and scandalous Ministers that have been convented before you: In
accepting a former Petition and Remonstrance from the Petitioners, taking the
same into your grave Consideration, and vigorously prosecuting some part
thereof: In freeing diverse godly Ministers out of P^ison, and exile, and many
others from heavy Censures unjustly inflicted: In preventing the utter ruin
of the Petitioners, and of many more, by breaking that wicked Yoke or the late
pernicious Oath and Canons justly branded by both Houses of Parliament, and by
taking away the late dreadful tyranny of the High Commission Court, and other
illegal and heavy pressures of the rest of the Courts Ecclesiastical: In
your worthy Orders for removing of all illegal Rites and Ceremonies,
superstitious and scandalous Images and Pictures, and other Innovations out of
all Churches and Chapels: In your prudent, happy, and timely reuniting
(without spilling of Christian blood) of the two Kingdoms of England and
Scotland in a firm and religious Peace unhappily disturbed to the apparent
endangering of both: In your honorable endeavors to relieve and rescue our
distressed brethren in Ireland from the barbarous outrages and butcheries of
the Popish Rebels there: In your constant vigilancie to discover and defeat
the many desperate and divilish Conspiracies and Treasons against the King,
Parliament, and the Kingdom, plotted by Papists and their malignant Adherents,
implacable Enemies to our Religion and Peace. Together with all other your
excellent labors for reforming and settling the Affairs of the Commonwealth,
whereof the Petitioners do also with others enjoy the comfort: and the large
and blessed hopes given to the Petitioners of your further endeavors for
perfecting the Reformation of Religion and the Church according to the
necessity thereof, in a way best becoming the Honor of such a Grave and
Religious Body. All of which do much encourage them to power out their souls
in all possible thankfulness unto God for you, and to put up more fervent
prayers, publicly, and privately, upon all occasions, on your behalf, at the
Throne of Grace.

But so it is, that whereas the Petitioners did, in their former Petition
represent unto you diverse unsufferable grievances arising from sundry Invasions
made upon the public Doctrine of this Church, from some mixtures and
blemishes in the public Worship of God by Law established, as well as from
sundry gross Innovations and Superstitions in Rites and Ceremonies without Law
introduced, from many Exorbitances and unsupportable Usurpations in
Ecclesiastical Government, and from the scandalous defect of Ministers
Maintenance in too many places: All, or most of which do yet remain in
greatest part unremoved, by reason of your many necessitated diversions from
this great Work, for the preservation of the very Being of this Kingdom. And,
by means hereof, many distractions and disorders about matters of Religion and
the Church have, to the great scandal and grief of the Petitioners, happened,
and are still continued; which puts them upon a necessity of renewing their
former suit for redress of the aforesaid evils, and for removing what ever
shall appear to your Wisdom to be the root and cause of them.

And whereas further the Petitioners and very many others (in whose name and
behalf they now humbly supplicate) desirous in all things to submit to the
Laws so far as possibly they may, yet, merely out of tenderness and scruple
of conscience, dare not continue (as formerly they did) the use and exercise of
some things, as now they stand enjoined, not only because they have more
seriously weighed the nature and scandal of them, and that sundry Bishops, and
other grave Divines, called to their assistance, by Order of the House of
Peers, have (as they are informed) discovered diverse particulars needing
alteration in the Liturgy, and the use thereof; and that there is not, as they
humbly conceive, at this day commonly extant any Book of Common Prayer,
without so many variations, alterations, and additions, as render it in many
parts another thing from that which was by Law established; but chiefly
because you also have vouchsafed to be so far sensible of the defects thereof,
and of the just scruples of the Petitioners thereabout, as to take the
reformation thereof under consideration, which they hoped would be some shelter
against the strict pressing the use of it, till your pleasure, upon the full
debate thereof, had been declared in a Parliamentary way; for that it seems
most equal that the Consciences of men should not beforced upon that which a
Parliament it self holds needful to consider the Reformation of, and to give
Order in, till the same be accordingly done. And the Petitioners having been
comfortably assured of some ease therein, do now, to their great sorrow,
apprehend that the same things are a new reinforced, which (contrary to the
blessed inclination and intention of his most Gracious Majesty) may occasion
much trouble and vexation to sundry worthy and peaceable Ministers: which the
Petitioners have more cause to fear, because sundry of their Brethren, have,
since the beginning of this Parliament, been indicted upon the Stat. of 1.
Eliz. 2. and others threatened for bare omissions of somethings complained of to
this high Court, and still depending before you; whiles, in diverse places, your
Religious Orders necessarily made and published for removing of things
illegal, are not observed; and, in other places, where some superstitious
rites and practices had by virtue thereof, been laid aside, the same are
again called back and repractised, without any check or animadversion.

And because the premises are of extraordinary consequence, and cannot receive
a perfect Cure but by authority of Parliament: and that a free Synod of this
Nation, differing in the whole Constitution from the present Convocations of
the Clergy now in use among us, might be (as the Petitioners apprehend) of
great use for that purpose; and, that not only this, but all other your great
Consultations might be much furthered by a more earnest and assiduous seeking
of God by the joint and public Fasting and Prayers of the whole Kingdom in
these sad times so full of distractions and hellish Conspiracies at home, and
bloody cruelties of those Popish Rebels against our own flesh and our bones in
Ireland.

The Petitioners humbly pray that you would vouchsafe to lay hold upon the
first opportunity, that your important affairs will permit, of reassuming in^^
your further consideration their former Petition, and to proceed thereupon as
you shall find cause, either by committing the same to the debate and
disquisition of a free Synod, or otherwise; And in the mean time to become
Mediators to his gracious Majesty (who could not take notice of their former
Petition to this honorable House) for some relaxation in matters of
Ceremonies, and of reading of the whole Liturgy, which, as the Petitioners
verily believe and hope to prove, have been of late times urged further than
ever the Law intended: and that a free Synod of Grave, Learned, and Judicious
Divines of this Kingdom, the Dominion of Wales, and the Islands adjacent, may
be by authority of Parliement indicted, for the more through and fruitful
debate of the premises, to expedite a full Reformation by the high Court of
Parliament, for the settling of a godly and religious Order and Government in
this Church, as your Wisdom shall find convenient: And that a public Fast
may be commanded and religiously observed throughout the Kingdom, once in
every month, during your sitting in Parliament, for the more effectual
procuring of Gods protection of your persons, and of his blessing upon your
proceedings; and till the miseries of our brethren in Ireland be happily put
to an end.

And the Petitioners shall be ready further to attend the pleasure of this
House with their reasons of their present suite for a free Synod of this
Nation, and of a new Constitution thereof differing from those now in being,
when they shall be required; and, to pray without ceasing, etc.

This Petition was presented by the Ministers themselves, and afterward read,
and well accepted in the House, December. 20. 1641.

LONDON, Printed for John Bellamie and Ralph Smith. 1641.


