THE CHARACTER OF Sr. Arthur Haslerig THE CHURCH-THIEF.
By. F. B. Gent.
-- Minor extat sacrilegus, qui
Radat inaurati femur Herculis, and faciem ipsam
Neptuni, qui bracteolam de Castore ducat.
Juvenal. Satyr. 13.
THE Royal beams of his late Mjesties favor had no sooner began to disperse
their rays on this ungrateful wretch, but he entered into a Compact with the
Devil, and shook hands with Rebellion, Religion was his pretense of discontent,
though he was of all, but truly of none; his Cruelties in the time of his
lawless liberty are more numerous than my Pen can express; he was one of Julian
the Apostates Disciples, for he robbed the Church of its Revenues, and took
away all Benevolencies and Contributions to Schools of learning, to the end
that Children might not be instructed in any good literature, exagerating his
saeriledge with scornful jeasts, saying, that he furthered our Salvation by
making us poor, seeing it was written, Blessed are the poor, for theirs is the
Kingdom of Heaven. Certainly he and C.B. the late Dean of Wells were near
allied, for I find a great sympathy in their affections, both Church-Robbers
and Uncoverers of Gods House to build their own, not a corner in that Sacred
place of Worship went unsearch'd Herod-like, breaking up of Sepulchers and
searching the Dormitories of the dead for hidden Treasure, the Lead, Iron Bars,
Glass Pevves, nay, Pulpits were sold by these vermin, as if Paganism had
entered in among us, and Christianity were taking its farewell; he in those
unhappy times, and all such adle brain Church Projectors were with Child,
teaming with their own sacrilegious Bastard-brats or false conceptions how to
Usurp the Laws of God and Man, and to rob God most colourably. I find him at
Bristow giving order to his Myrmydons to rob the Cathedral there, the Ornament
of that City, of which the Mayor having timely notice, immediately went to him
with the rest of his Brethren to desire him to spare that Place; at whose
earnest Request he promised them not to deface it: But mark, this sacrilegious
thief and liar at that very time he gave private order and directions for
plundering and defacing that Cathedral, and before the Mayor went from him one
of his cropear'd Amsterdammers came to him and told him that the work was done,
(meaning that the Church was defaced and plundered) at which words this
villainous Rogue and Mocker of God rose out of his Chair and held up his hands
using this Expression, Even the Lord be thanked; as if the Lord were to be
thanked for sacrilege, expressly forbid in his Holy Writ: he was a dissembler
and a liar, a Monster of men, and the son of Cruelty; he tore out and rent in
pieces the bowels of his Mother the Church; he was at Court Treacherous; in the
Field a Coward; a Sycophant to his Friend; and a Hot-brained Coxcomb in
Council; he was a Day-bed for the Devil to slumber on, and his malice sucked up
the greatest part of his own Venom, wherewith he impoisoned himself, his
greatest study was to contemn Obedience and practice Treason, his Rebellion,
Church-robbing and other his cruelties made him challenge his own Damnation by
the way of purchase; he was a great lover of Church-Plate and Surplases, for he
always gave 'em fair quarter at his own house; he ruined more Families in the
time of his Tyranny, than ever his generation was or will be worth; he was a
Moath to the Church, a Canker to every man's Estate that he seized on, and a
Moule to the poor Colliers of Newcastle, who will curse his memory; the very
bowels of the Earth could not escape or satiate his plunderage and
covevetousness, nothing as he thought could put a stop to his careering
appetite, in being a second Oliver, till he was Garrisoned in the Tower, the
end of all his Projects, where had he lived a little longer, it is possible Dun
might have dubd him one of the Knights of the Halter; but he is gone to his
place where I leave him with Zacharies flying roll of curses 20 cubits long and
10 cubits broad, Zach. 5. 2, 3. Expressly sent after the Thief to apprehend him.
Thus have I given you a taste of this unsatiable sacrilegious Wretch, till an
abler and more knowing Pen shall enlarge his Character with his Crimes.


