AN APOLOGY. For the CHURCH of ENGLAND, With relation to the Spirit of
PERSECUTION; For which She is accused.
I. ONe should think, that the Behavior of the English Clergy for some years
past, and the present Circumstances in which they are, should set them beyond
Slander, and by consequence above Apologies; yet since the the Malice of her
Enemies works against her with so much spite, and since there is no
Insinuation that carrys so much Malice in it, and that seems to have such
colors of truth on it, as this of their having set on a severe Persecution
against the Dissenters, of being still sour'd with that leaven, and of carrying
the same Implacable hatred to them, which the present Reputation that they have
gained, may put them in a further capacity of executing, if another revolution
of affairs should again give them authority to set about it; it seems necessary
to examine it, and that the rather, because some aggravate this so far, as if
nothing were now to be so much dreaded as the Church of England's getting out
of her present distress.

II. If these Imputations were charged on us only by those of the Church of
Rome, we should not much wonder at it; for tho it argues a good degree of
Confidence, for any of that communion to declaim against the severities that
have been put in practice among us, since their little finger must be heavier
than ever our loins were, and to whose Scorpions our Rods ought not to be
compared; yet after all, we are so much accustomed to their methods, that
nothing from them can surprise us To hear Papists declare against Persecution,
and Jesuits cry up Liberty of Conscience, are, we confess, unusual things: yet
there are some degrees of shame, over which when People are once passed, all
things become so familiar to them, that they can no more be put out of
countenance. But it seems very strange to us, that some, who if they are to be
believed, are strict to the severest forms and subdivisions of the Reformed
Religion, and who some years ago were jealous of the smallest steps that the
Court made, when the danger was more remote, and who cried out Popery and
Persecution, when the design was so maskt that some welmeaning men could not
miss being deceived by the Promises that were made, and the disguises that were
put on; that, I say, these very persons who were formerly so distrustful,
should now, when the Mask is laid off, and the design is avowed, of a sudden
grow to be so believing, as to throw off all distrust, and be so gulled as to
betray all; and to expose us to the Rage of those, who must needs give some
good words, till they have gone the round, and tried how effectually they can
divide and deceive us, that so they may destroy us the more easily; this is
indeed somewhat extraordinary. They are not so Ignorant as not to know, that
Popery cannot change its nature, and that Cruelty and Breach of Faith to
Heretics, are as necessary parts of that Religion, as Transubstantiation and
the Popes Supremacy are. If Papists were not Fools, they must give good Words
and fair Promises, till by these they have so far deluded the poor credudous
Heretics, that they may put themselves in a posture to execute the Decrees of
their Church against them: and tho we accuse that Religion as guilty both of
Cruelty and Treachery, yet we do not think them Fools: so till their Party is
stronger than God be thanked it is at present, they can take no other method
than that they take. The Church of England was the Word among them some years
ago, Liberty of Conscience is the Word at present; and have all possible reason
to assure us, that the Promises for maintaining the one, will be as religiously
kept as we see those are which were lately made with so great a profusion of
Protestations, and shows of Friendship for the supporting of the other.

III It were great Injustice to charge all the Dissenters with the
Impertinencies that have appeared in many Addresses of late, or to take our
measures of them, from the Impudent strains of an Alsop or a Care, or from the
more Important and now more visible steps that some among them, of a higher
form, are every day making; and yet after all this, it cannot be denied but the
several bodies of the Dissenters have behave themselves of late like men, that
understand too well the true Interest of the Protestant Religion, and of the
English Government, to sacrifice the whole and themselves in Conclusion to
their private resentments I hope the same justice will be allowed me in stating
the matter relating to the so much decried Persecution, set on by the Church of
England; and that I may be suffered to distinguish the heats of some angry and
deluded men, from the Doctrine of the Church, and the practices that have been
authorized in it; that so I may show, that there is no reason to Infer from
past errors, that we are Incurable; or that new Opportunities inviting us again
into the same severities, are like to prevail over us to commit the same
follies over again. I will first state what is past, with the sincerity that
becomes one that would not lie for God; that is, not afraid nor ashamed to
confess faults, that will neither aggravate nor-extenuate them beyond what is
just, and that yet will avoid the saying any thing that may give any cause of
offense to any party in the Nation.

IV. I am very sorry that I must confess, that all the parties among us, have
showed, that as their turn came to be upper most, they have forgot the same
Principles of Moderation and Liberty which they all claimed when they were
oppressed. If it should show too much ill nature to examine what the Presbytery
did in Scotland when the Covenant was in Dominion, or what the Independents
have done in New England, why may not I claim the same privilege with relation
to the Church of England, if severities have been committed by her while she
bore rule? yet it were as easy as it would be invidious to show, that both
Presbyterians and Independents have carried the principle of Rigor in the
point of Conscience much higher, and have acted more Implacably upon it than
ever the Church of England has done, even in its angriest fits; so that none of
them can much reproach another for their excesses in those matters. And as of
all the Religions in the world the Church of Rome is the most persecuting, and
the most bound by her Principles to be unalterably Cruel; so the Church of
England is the least persecuting in her principles, and the least obliged to
repeat any errors to which the Intrigues of Courts or the Passions incident to
all parties may have engaged her, of any National Church in Europe. It cannot
be said to be any part of our Doctrine, when we came out of one of the blackest
Persecutions that is in History, I mean Q. Maryes, we showed how little we
retained of the Cruelty of that Church, which had provoked us so severely; when
not only no Inquiries were made into the illegal acts of Fury, that were
committed in that Persecuting Reign, but even the Persecutors themselves lived
among us at ease and in peace; and no Penal law was made except against the
public exercise of that Religion, till a great many Rebellions and Treasons
extorted them from us for our own preservation. This is an Instance of the
Clemency of our Church, that perhaps cannot be matched in History: and why
should it not be supposed, that if God should again put us in the state in
which we were of late, that we should rather imitate so Noble a Pattern, than
return to those mistakes of which we are now ashamed?

V. It is to be considered, that upon the late Kings Restoration, the
remembrance of the former War, the ill Usage that our Clergy had met with in
their Sequestrations, the angry Resentments of the Cavalier party, who were
ruined by the War, the Interest of the Court to have all those Principles
condemned, that had occasioned it, the heat that all parties that have been ill
used are apt to fall into upon a Revolution; but above all, the practices of
those who have still blown the Coals, and set us one against another, that so
they might not only have a divided force to deal with, but might by turns make
the Divisions among us serve their Ends: all these, I say, concurred to make us
lose the happy opportunity that was offered in the year 1660. to have healed
all our Divisions, and to have triumphed over all the Dissenters; not by
ruining them, but by overcoming them with a spirit of Love and Gentleness;
which is the only Victory that a generous and Christian temper can desire. In
short, unhappy Councils were followed, and severe Laws were made. But after
all, it was the Court party that carried it for rougher methods: some
considerable Accidents, not necessary to be here mentioned, as they stopped the
mouths of some that had formed a wiser Project, so they gave a fatal Advantage
to angry and crafty men, that to our misfortune, had too great a stroke in the
conduct of our affairs at that time. This spirit of Severity was heightened by
the Practices of the Papists; who engaged the late King in December 1662. to
give a Declaration for Liberty of Conscience. Those who knew the secret of his
Religion, as they saw that it aimed at the Introduction of Popery, so they
thought there was no way so effectual, for the keeping out of Popery, as the
maintaining the Uniformity, and the suppressing of all designs for a
Toleration. But while those who managed this, used a due reserve, in not
discovering the secret motive that led them to it, others flew into severity,
as the principle in vogue: and thus all the slacknings of the rigor of the
Laws, during the first Dutch War, that were set on upon the pretense of
quieting the Nation, and of encouraging Trade, were resisted by the Instruments
of an honest Minister of State, who knew as well then, as we do now, what lay
still at bottom, when Liberty of Conscience was pretended.

VI. Upon that Ministers Disgrace, some that saw but the half of the Secret,
perceiving in the Court a great Inclination to Toleration, and being willing to
take measures quite different from those of the former Ministry, they entered
into a treaty for a Comprehension of-some Dissenters, and the Tolerating of
others; and some Bishops and Clergymen, that were Inferior to none of the Age
in which they lived, for true Worth and a right Judgment of things, engaged so
far, and with so much success into this project, that the matter seemed done,
all things being concerted among some of the most considerable men of the
different parties. But the dislike of that Ministry, and the Jealousy of the
ill designs of the Court, gave so strong a prejudice against this, that the
proposition could not be so much as hearkened to by the House of Commons: and
then it appeared how much the whole Popish Party was allarmed at the project:
it is well known with how much Detestation they speak of it to this day: tho we
are now so fully satisfied of their Intentions to destroy us, that the Zeal
which they pretended for us, in opposing that design, can no more pass upon us.

VII. At last, in the year 1672. the design for Popery discovering it self, the
end that the Court had in favoring a Toleration became more Visible: and when
the Parliament met, that condemned the Declaration for Liberty of Conscience,
the Members of the House of Commons, that either were Dissenters, or that
favored them, behaved themselves so worthily in concurring with those of the
Church of England, for stifling that Toleration, choosing rather to lose the
benefit of it, than to open a breach at which Popery should come in, that many
of the members that were for the Church of England, promised to procure them a
bill of Ease for Protestant Dissenters. But the Session was not long enough for
bringing that to perfection; and all the Sessions of that Parliament after
that, were spent in such a continual strugle between the Court and Country
party, that there was never room given for calm and wise Consultations: yet tho
the Party of the Church of England did not perform what had been promised by
some Leading men to the Dissenters, there was little or nothing done against
them, after that, till the year 1681. so that for about nine years together
they had their Meetings almost as publicly and as regularly as the Church of
England had their Churches, and in all that time; whatsoever particular
hardships any of them might have met with in some corners of England, it cannot
be denied but they had the free Exercise of their Religion, at least in most
parts.

VIII. In the year 1678. things began to change their face: it is known, that
upon the breaking out of the Popish Plot, the Clergy did Universally express a
great desire for coming to some temper in the points of Conformity: all sorts
and ranks of the Clergy seemed to be so well disposed toward it, that if it
had met with a suitable entertainment, matters might probably have been in a
great measure composed. But the Jealousy that those who managed the Civil
concerns of the Nation in the House of Commons, took off all that was done at
Court, or proposed by it, occasioned a fatal breach in our public Councils: in
which division, the Clergy by their principles, and Interests, and their
disposition to believe well of the Court, were determined to be of the Kings
side. They thought it as a sin to mistrust the late Kings Word, who assured
them of his steadiness to the Protestant Religion so often, that they firmly
depended on it: and his present Majesty gave them so many Assurances of his
maintaining still the Church of England, that they believed him likewise: and
so thought that the Exclusion of him from the Crown, was a degree of rigor to
which they in Conscience could not consent: upon which they were generally
cried out on, as the Betrayers of the Nation and of the Protestant Religion:
Those who demanded the Exclusion, and some other securities, to which the
Bishops would not consent in Parliament, looked on them as the chief hindrance
that was in their way: and the License of the Press at that time was such, that
many Libels and some severe Discourses were published against them. Nor can it
be denied, that many Churchmen, who understood not the Principles of Humane
Society, and the rules of our Government, so well as other points of Divinity,
writ several Treatises concerning the measures of submission, that were then as
much censured, as their performances since against Popery have been deservedly
admired. All this gave such a Jealousy of them to the Nation, that it must be
confessed, that the spirit which was then in fermentation when very high
against the Church of England, as a Confederate, at least, to Popery and
Tyranny. Nor were several of the Nonconformists wanting to Inflame this
dislike; all secret Propositions for accommodating our differences were so
coldly entertained, that they were scarce hearkened to. The Propositions which
an Eminent Divine made even in his books writ against Separation, showed, that
while we maintained the War in the way of dispute, yet we were still willing to
treat: for that Great man made not those advances toward them without
consulting with his Superiors. Yet we were then fatally given up to a spirit
of Dissension: and tho the Parliament in 1680. entered upon a project for
healing our differences, in which great steps were made to the removing of all
the occasions of our Contests; the Leaders of the Dissenters, to the amasement
of all persons, made no account of this: and even seemed uneasy at it, of which
the Earl of Nottingham and Sr. Thomas Clarges, that set on that Bill with much
zeal, can give a more particular account. All these things concurred to make
those of the Church of England conclude, a little too rashly, that their ruin
was resolved on; and then it was no wonder if the spirit of a Party, the
remembrance of the last Wars, the present Prospect of Danger, and above all,
the great favor that was showed them at Court, threw them fatally into some
angry and Violent Counsels; self-preservation is very natural: and it is plain,
that many of them took that to be the case; so that truly speaking, it was not
so much at first a spirit of Persecution, as a desire of disabling those who
they believed intended to ruin them from effecting their designs, that set them
on to all those unhappy things that followed. They were animated to all they
did by the continued earnestness of the King and Duke, and of their Ministers.
That Reproach of Justice and of the profession of the Law, who is now so high,
was singled out for no other end, but to be their Common Hangman over England:
of whom the late King gave this true character, That he had neither Wit, Law,
nor Common Sense; but that he had the Impudence of ten carted Whores in him.
Another Buffoon, was hired to plague the Nation with three or four papers a
week; which to the Reproach of the Age, in which we live, had but too great and
too general an effect, for poisoning the spirits of the Clergy. But those who
knew how all this was managed, saw that it was not only set on, but still kept
up by the Court. If any of the Clergy had but preached a word for moderation,
he had a chiding sent him presently from the Court; and he was from that day
marked out as a disaffected person: and when the Clergy of London did very
worthily refuse to give Informations against their parishioners that had not
always conformed, the design having been formed, upon that to bring them into
the Spiritual Courts, and excommunicate them, and make them lose their right of
Voting, that so the Charter of London might have been delivered up when so many
Citizens were by such means shut out of the Common Council; we remember well
how severely they were censured for this, by some that are now dead, and others
that are yet alive. I will not go further into this matter: I will not deny but
many of the Dissenters were put to great hardships, in many parts of England. I
cannot deny it, and I am sure I will never justify it. But this I will
positively say, having observed it all narrowly, that he must have the brow of
a Jesuit, that can cast this wholly on the Church of England, and free the
Court of it. The beginnings and the progress of it came from the Court, and
from the Popish party: and tho perhaps every one does not know all the secrets
of this matter, that others may have found out, yet no man was so Ignorant as
not to see what was the chief spring of al those Irregular motions that some of
us made at that time: so upon the whole matter, all that can be made out of
this, is, that the passions and Infirmities of some of the Church of England,
being unhappily stirred up by the Dissenters, they were fatally conducted by
the Popish party, to be the Instruments in doing a great deal of mischief.

IX. It is not to be doubted, but tho some weaker men of the Clergy may perhaps
still retain their little peevish animosities, against the Dissenters, yet the
wiser and more serious heads of that great and Worthy body, see now their
error: they see who drove them on in it, till they hoped to have ruined them
but it. And as they have appeared against Popery, with as great a strength of
learning and of firm steadiness as perhaps can be met with in all
Church History, so it cannot be doubted, but their reflections on the dangers
into which our Divisions have thrown us, have given them truer Notions with
relation to a rigorous Conformity: and that the just Detestation which they
have expressed of the Corruptions of the Chapter of Rome, has led them to consider
and abhor one of the worst things in it, I mean their Severity toward
Heretics. And the ill use that they see the Court has made of their zeal for
supporting the Crown, to justify the subversion of our Government that is now
set on, from some of their large and unwary expressions, will certainly make
them hereafter more cautions in meddling with Politics: the Bishops have under
their hands both disowned that wide extent of the Prerogative, to the
overturning of the Law, and declared their disposition to come to a Temper in
the matters of Conformity; and there seems to be no doubt left of the sincerity
of their Intentions in that matter. Their Piety and Virtue, and the prospect
that they now have of suffering themselves, put us beyond all doubt as to their
sincerity; and if ever God in his Providence brings us again into a settled
State, out of the storm into which our passions and folly, as well as the
treachery of others has brought us, it cannot be imagined, that the Bishops
will go off from those moderate Resolutions, which they have now declared: and
they continuing firm to them, the weak and Indiscreet passions of any of the
Inferior Clergy, must needs vanish, when they are under the conduct of wise
and worthy Leaders. And I will boldly say this, that if the Ch: of England,
after she has got out of this storm, will return to hearken to the peevishness
of some sour men, she will be abandoned both of God and man, and will set both
Heaven and Earth against her. The Nation sees too Visibly, how dear the dispute
a bout Conformity has cost us, to stand any more upon such Punctilios: and
THOSE in whom our deliverance is wrapped up, understand this matter too well, and
judge too right of it, to imagine that ever they will be Priestridden in this
point. So that all considerations concur to make us conclude, that there is no
danger of our splitting a second time upon the same rock: and indeed, if any
Argument were wanting to complete the certainty of this point, the wise and
Generous behavior of the main body of the Dissenters, in this present
Juncture, has given them so just a Title to our friendship, that we must
resolve to set all the world against us, if we can ever forget it; and if we do
not make them all the returns of ease and favor when it is in our power to do
it.

X. It is to be hoped, that when this is laid together, it will have that
effect on all sober and true Protestants, as to make them forget the little
angry Heats that have been among us, and even to forget the Injuries that have
been done us: all that we do now one against another, is to shorten the work of
our Enemies, by destroying one another, which must in Conclusion turn to all
our Ruin. It is a madmans revenge, to destroy our Friends that we may do a
pleasure to our Enemies, upon their giving us some good words; and if the
Dissenters can trust to Papists after the usage that the Church of England has
met with at their hands, all the comfort that they can promise themselves, when
Popery begins to act its natural part among us, and to set Smithfield again in
a fire, is that which befell some Quakers at Rome, who were first put in the
Inquisition, but were afterward removed to Bedlam: so tho those false Brethren
among the Dissenters, who deceive them at present, are certainly no Changlings,
but know well what they are doing; yet those who can be cheated by them, may
well claim the Privilege of a Bedlam, when their Folly has left them no other
retreat.

XI. I will not digress too far from my present purpose; nor enter into a
discussion of the Dispensing power, which was so effectually overthrown the
other day at the Kings Bench Bar, that I am sure all the Authority of the Bench
it self is no more able to Support it: yet some late Papers in favor of it,
give me occasion to add a little relating to that point It is true, the
Assertor of the Dispensing power, who as lately appeared with allowance,
pretends, that it can only be applied to the Test for public Employments: for
he owns that the Test for both Houses of Parliament is left entire, as not
within the compass of this extent of the Prerogative: but another Writer, whom
by his fence we must conclude an Irish man, by his brow a Jesuit, and by the
bare designation in the title page, of James Stewarts letter, a Quaker, goes a
strain higher, and thinks the King is so absolutely the Sovereign as to the
Legislative part of our Government, that he may dissolve even the Parliament
Test: so nimbly has he leapt from being a Secretary to a Rebellion, to be an
Advocate for Tyranny. He fancies that because no Parliament can bind up
another, therefore they cannot limit the Preliminarys to a subsequent
Parliament. But upon what is it then, that Countyes have but two Knights, and
Buroughs as many: that men below such a value have no vote, that Sheriffs only
receive Writs and return Elections, besides many more necessary requisites to
the making a legal Parliament. In short, if Laws do not regulate the Election
and Constitution of a Parliament, all these things may be overthrown, and the
King may cast the whole Government in a new Mould, as well as dissolve the
obligation that is on the Members of Parliament for taking the Test. It is
true, that as soon as a Parliament is legally met and constituted, it is tied
by no Laws, so far as not to repeal them: but the Preliminaries to a Parliament
are still sacred, as long as the Law stands that settled them: for the Members
are still in the quality of ordinary Subjects, and not entered upon their share
in the Legislative power, till they are constituted in a Parliament legally
chosen and Lawfully assembled, that is, having observed all the Requisites of
the Law. But I leave that Impudent Letter to return to the most modest Apology
that has been yet writ for the Dispensing power. It yields that the King cannot
abrogate laws, and pretends only that he can dispense with them: and the
distinction it puts between abrogation and Dispensation, is, that the one is a
total repeal of the Law, and that the other is only a slackning of its
obligatory force, with Relation to a particular man or to any body of men; so
that according to him, a simple Abrogation, or a total Repeal, is beyond the
compass of the Prerogative I desire then that this Doctrine may be applied to
the following words of the Declaration; from which the Reader may Infer whether
these do Import a Simple Abrogation, or not, and by Consequence, if the
Declaration is not illegal; We do hereby further Declare, that it is our Royal
will and pleasure that the Oaths commonly called the Oaths of Supremacy and
Allegiance, and also the several Tests and Declarations -- shall not at any
time hereafter, be required to be taken, Declared, or subscribed by any person
or persons whatsoever, who is or shall be Employed in any Office or Place of
Trust, either Civil or Military, under us or in our Government. This is plain
English, and needs no Commentary. That paper offers likewise an Expedient for
securing Liberty of Conscience, by which it will be set beyond even the
Dispensing power; and that is, that by Act of Parliament all Persecution may be
declared to be a thing evil in it self, and then the Prerogative cannot reach
it. But unless this Author fancies, that a Parliament is that which those of
the Church of Rome believe a General Council to be, I mean Infallible, I do not
see that such an Act would signify any thing at all. An Act of Parliament
cannot change the nature of things which are sullen, and will not alter,
because a hard word is clapped on them in an Act of Parliament; nor can that make
that which is not evil of it self become evil of it self: for can any Act of
Parliament make the Clipping of Money, or the not Burying in Woollen evil of it
self? Such an Act were indeed null of it self, and would sink with its own
weight, even without the burden of the Prerogative to press it down: and yet
upon such a sandy foundation would these men have us build all our Hopes and
our Securities. Another topic like this, is, that we ought to trust to the
truth of our Religion, and the Providence and Protection of God, and not lean
so much to Laws and Tests: All this were very pertinent, if God had not already
given us human Assurances against the Rage of our Enemies, which we are now
desired to abandon, that so we may fall an easy and cheap Sacrifice to those
who wait for the favorable moment to destroy us: by the same reason they may
persuade us to take off all our Doors, or at least all our Locksand Bolts, and
to sleep in this exposed condition, trusting to Gods Protection: The simily may
appear a little too high, tho it is really short of the matter; for we had
better trust our selves to all the Thieves and Robbers of the town, who would
be perhaps contented with a part of our Goods, then to those whose designs are
equally against both Soul and Body, and all that is dear to us.

XII. I will only add another Reflection upon the renewing of the Declaration
this year, which has occasioned the present storm upon the Clergy. It is
repeated to us that so we may see that the King continues firm to the Promises
he made last year. Yet when men of honor have once given their word, they take
it ill if any do not trust to that, but must needs have it repeated to them: in
the ordinary commerce of the world, the repeating of promises over and over
again, is rather a ground of Suspicion than of Confidence: and if we judge of
the accomplishment of all the other parts of the Declaration, from that one,
which relates to the maintaining of the Church of England, as by Law
established, the proceedings against the Fellows of Magdalen College, gives us
no reason to conclude, that this will be like the Laws of the Medes and
Persians, which alter not: all the talk of the New Magna Charta cannot lay us
asleep, when we see so little regard had to the Old one. As for the security
which is offered us in this repeating of the Kings promises, we must crave
leave to remember, that the King of France, even after he had resolved to break
the Edict of Nantes, yet repeated in above an hundred Edicts, that were real
and visible violations of that Edict, a clause confirmatory of the Edict of
Nantes, declaring that he would never Violate it: and in that we may see what
account is to be had of all promises made to Heretics, in matters of Religion,
by any Prince of the Roman Communion, but more particularly by a Prince who has
put the conduct of his Conscience in the hands of a Jesuit.

FINIS.

