MAN'S INBRED MALADY, OR The Doctrine of Original Sin maintained, As also the
necessity of Infants Baptism.

By GEORGE BURCHES B. D. late Rector of Wood-Church in Cheshire.

Ephesians. 4.14 Henceforth be no more Children tossed to and fro, and carried about
with every wind of Doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness
whereby they lie in wait to deceive. Arausian Council. 2. c. 2. Si quis soli
Adae praevaricationem suam non and ejus propagini asserit nocuisse etc.
anathema. London, Printed by W. Wilson, and are to be sold by Thomas Johnson at
the Golden Key in Saint Paul's Churchyard. 1655.

TO HIS HIGHNESS; OLIVER Lord Protector of England, Scotland, and Ireland. G. B.
wishes Eternal Honor and Happiness.
MY LORD,
IT is observable in the Catalogue of ancient worthies that such were accounted
most eminent that arriving at the highest pitch of Honor, did prove most
humble. Hence that famous Emperor Theodosius esteemed it a greater Honor to be
called membrum Ecclesiae, then to be styled Caput Imperij. The servant of the
Church, then the Sovereign of an Empire. Humility is that Grace that Eternizes
the fame of all Gods worthies. Hence Joshuah, David and others are renowned for
ever, as most Eminent in fighting the Battles of the Great God: whose
undertakings were Crowned with the greatest success for the advancement of the
Cause of God. With no less Honor and success has it pleased the Almighty to
own your Highnesses proceedings, by many signal deliverances in Crowning your
Highness endeavors with so many renowned Victories. Upon whose Gracious
temper I have presumed to present my weak endeavors which contains that
subject which King David himself thought necessary to be searched into: And
being the practice of so Holy a man as David, I hope may prove acceptable to
your Highness; into whose Clemency and goodness, I cast my self, and all at
your merciful Interpretation, which if I were not in some measure assured of,
the place where these labors had their Birth should have been the place of
their Burial; neither should they have gone any further then those walls
wherein they were Enclosed, and so have breathed forth their last where they
had their first Being: Presuming therefore on your Highness, who is not only
the Patron but Protector of the Truth: I shelter my poor labors under the
wings of your Protection, desiring a favorable construction, and rest

The least and unworthiest of yours and the Churches servants G. BURCHES.

To the Reader.
IT is not the thirst of Vain glory that makes me run the hazard of the worlds
censure, neither am I fearful of those venomous reproaches which either malice
or ignorance can lay unto my charge in expressing my labors to the public
view: Quiquid recipitur, recipitur ad modum recipientis.
I very well know Sermons and Trastates have their Dooms partly according to
the capacities, partly according to the affections of the Readers and Hearers.
Hence though some applauded Christ, and said he was a good man; others derided
him and said, he deceived the people. Its no strange thing in this latter Age
of the world to hear and see the most bitter invectives of malicious tongues
spit out to blemish the most innocent persons. Ne cibus ipse juvat morsu
fundatus aceti. Mar. Epigr.
The breath of Hatred turn the most wholesome food into poison; and where the
Bees (the Saints of God) gather Honey, the most hurtful creatures, (malicious
persons) conveigh all into poison and become banefull too. These like Lamia
that Witch in the Fable, whom Plutarch mentions, put on their eyes when they go
abroad, are Eagle-sighted in condemning their brethren: but lay them aside when
they come home, Sentiant, dicant quid velint, dum mea me conscientia non
accusat coram. Deo. Aug.
blind in perceiving their own faults. For my own part I pass not the Worlds
censure, so long as I keep the peace of a good Conscience, neither will I
censure any that unjustly lies at my repu^e; but rather will endeavor to
requite their malice with forgiveness, who one day may be made sensible of
their own folly. And therefore all that I w^ll say unto the Reader, shall be
this, If thou provest judicious and learned, I respect and love thee; If
Critical and but simple, I slight thee: If malicious and hateful, I pity
thee; If pious and charitable, I prize and honor thee: If Factious and
Heretical, I have here prescribed a remedy to cure the Crotchets and whimsies
of thy brain and so farewell.

Errata.
PAge 11. l. 19. r. excellent. p. 22. l. 14. dele a. p. 25. l. 7. r. any one
man. p. 30. l. 10. r. whole race. p. 37, l. 23. r. that Adam p. 56. l. 4. r.
that is and dele. p. 76. l. 3. r. given. p. 85. l. 7. r. their for the. p. 81.
l. 20. for and r. which. p. 82. l. 8. r. omit. p. 98. l. 14. r. Be not like
hills the higher the barrenner, but like unto Diamonds, the bigger the better.

The Doctrine of Original sin maintained.
Psalm. 51.5. Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother
conceive me.
THis Psalm conteines a relation of the Royal Prophets recovery, out of those
foul and damnable sins of Murder and Adultery: And it is an exact description
of Man's misery and Gods mercy; showing that as the one abounds, the other
superabounds, both exemplified in and upon the person of David: evidently
manifesting and declaring, that as sin had abounded by him, so the Grace of God
unto him, and the power of Grace within him had abounded much more. And it may
be divided into six parts, and reduced into six principal heads, which may be
called the degrees of true Conversion and Regeneration.

1. The first means of Conversion is the Grace of God, reproving the sinner for
his iniquity, and recalling him to repentance by the Ministry of the Prophets,
the Preachers of his word, contained in the Title of the Psalm; To him that
excels.

2. The power of Faith signified by the Prophets submission thereunto, in the
first and second verses. Have mercy upon my O Lord, and teaching us, that when
we are reproved and convicted of sin by the preaching of the Law, not to wax
furious and discontent through impatience, or despair, but in meekness and
humility to seek unto the Phycsiian; and humbly to present our selves at the
feet of Gods mercy.

3. The Prophets ingenuous acknowledgement of the heinousness and hatefulness
of his sin. ver. 3, 4. For I acknowledge my transgression, and my sin is ever
before me.

4. Contrition, which is a curious search and enquiry that he made into the
ground and nature of his sin. ver. 5.

5. Hence the Prophet proceeds to the procuring of the remedy, or the
Application of the medicine, which is the blood of Christ. ver. 7. Purge me
with Hysop and I shall be cleansed, etc.

6. The perfection of Regeneration, which by some is called satisfaction, by
others vivification. The power and practice of Religion consisting in holiness
and newness of life, set forth in the rest of the Psalm.

These are the ways wherein we must walk; these are the true means and works
of Conversion: the want of any of which does frustrate all our hopes, and makes
all the rest ineffectuall to us.

Now if we make Examination and enquiry in which of these we are most
defective: it will appear without all question, to be that which of all other
is most cross and troublesome to flesh and blood, most irksom to nature; and is
therefore most neglected of all sorts of men, and that is true and unfeigned
contrition, a diligent search and inquisition in the Original ground and causes
of our sin, a thing of all other most necessary, as being the chiefest and most
principal part of repentance, the truest part of mortification, without the
which, there can be no other certain assurance of Grace nor sincerity of
Religion. And therefore in survey and meditation of this Psalm, I make choice
to speak of this subject before the rest; as being by the strange neglect and
ignorance of men therein, the most needful to be urged and pressed upon the
conscience of all sorts, that flatter and delude themselves, only with a
superficial and shallow acquaintance and conformity with the external exercise
of Religion, without any true power and practice thereof, the subject whereof
is excellently, and substantially proposed in the words of the Text, Behold I
was shapen, etc.

Which Text give me leave to term

Man's inbred malady.

1. The designation of the Prophets disease, the cause of the misery and
complaint, the subject whereof he intends to speak, in this particle, Behold.

2. The disease it self, set forth by these two words, Sin, and Iniquity.

3. The original ground from whence it sprung, and proceeded, intimated also in
these words, Shaping, and Conceiving. Behold I was shapen, etc.

All of them affording both intellectual instructions, for the information of
our understanding; and also moral documents, for the reformation of our lives:
the one teaching us what we are to know, the other directing us what we are to
do; and therefore of them all briefly in their order.

And first of the designation of the Prophets disease, or the cause of his
complaint: and surely it is such a designation, as does imply wonder, and
therefore it is expressed with this particle of admiration, Behold.

For it is a Doctrine strange and obscure, and of great difficulty, such as few
men truly know and understand, and fewer thoroughly weigh and consider. A
Doctrine so full of depth, and also of such necessity, that it requires most
serious attention and consideration; a Doctrine so grounded in truth, and
likewise so full of terror, as of all other, it is most powerful, and
effectual, to magnify the justice and mercy of God; as also to humble the
insolence of the proud heart of man; and therefore it is intit'led and styled
with an Ecce, Behold.

As indeed, wheresoever we find in scripture such an inscription, it should
prepare us to an expectation of high mysteries, of matter of such great
consequence, as does expect from us our best endeavors, and diligence to know,
and our willingness and forward readiness to obey, which is in this particular
plainly verifyed.

For in the whole course of Divinity, there is no point, either more obscure in
it self to know, or more unpleasing to our nature to learn; and yet nothing
more profitable or behoofefull to our reformation, nothing more necessary to be
discussed for our edification: without the knowledge of which, all the rest are
in vain, it being the ground of all. The subject of his justice, and the object
of his me^cy: The last principle which the wise sages of the world prescribed
unto their scholars to study, and the first wholesome document, which all the
Divine Prophets of God have proposed to their Disciples.

So that briefly having pointed out the disease whereof the Prophet complains,
let us in the next place set our eyes upon it, and consider what it is, and
wherein it does consist. Behold, etc.

All things that are, both are in themselves, and also demonstrable what they
are by their causes: those principles, of which their nature and essence does
consist, and whereby they are distinguished from all other things; which things
we cannot do in demonstrating the nature of sin, because it is nothing: for
every thing that has any being or existence in nature, was created by God; and
all things that were created, were exceeding good. Whence it is, that Ens and
bonum are convertibilia. That every thing that has a Being is good, and every
thing that is good, has a being in it self. Since therefore being evil is
nothing, and of nothing there can be no causes proposed, by which we may
demonstrate the same, so properly and exactly, as of things that have natural
existence and being in themselves.

And yet by the way, to prevent the ignorant mistaking, whereunto vulgar
conceits are subject, we are not to think, that, because sin is said to be
nothing, we are therefore to set light by it, and to esteem it (as we say) as a
thing of nothing. For there is a difference to be put betwixt non ens et nihil.
Between non ens privativum and non ens negativum. Between that nothing which is
no being at all, and that which is only the privation of that good, which is in
that which is good. As for example, there is a difference betwixt no eyes at
all, which is nothing negatively, and blindness which is nothing privatively,
which is nothing but the want of sight in the eye; the one importing an utter
vacuitie of any thing at all, the other destruction of that which has a being:
the privation of the goodness of all things wherein it is, and the very
blemishing and disfiguring of that eye-lent character of Beauty, which the
wisdom of God has imprinted upon the comely face of nature, as it was first
created.

Now in discovering of this, we are (I say) not able to make any certain
demonstration, because there can be no certain and univocall causes prescribed
thereof: only we may analogically, by way of resemblance, by reflecting our
cogitations, and comparing sin with the habit, whereof it is the privation,
illustrate, and after a sort demonstrate the same. For cognitio privationis
praesupponit cognitionem habitus, et sine ea acquiri non potest. The knowledge
of the privation of any thing, does presuppose the knowledge of that Habit
whereof it is the privation: and without which, it cannot be attained unto. It
is therefore necessary, that in searching out of the knowledge of sin, we
compare it with righteousness, being that habit whereof sin is the privation.

To proceed therefore. Privatio et Habitus dicitur cicra idem aliquid, says
the Oracle of Nature, in his book of praedicaments. Both the privation and
Habit, are conversant about the same thing or object. The object of
righteousness being the Law, it does follow that the object of sin is the Law
also: but what Law? Both the Law of nature, which God had prescribed unto every
thing in nature to be observed by them, as being unto God most honorable, and
to themselves most proper, and behoofefull. Those rules and limitations, those
orders and prescriptions, which the wisdom of God had proposed and imprinted
upon all creatures: either of the preservation of their being, or the
destruction of their sexes, or the propagation of their kinds, or the
moderation of their power and manner of working, or the manifestation of his
own Almighty power, wisdom and glory, the same are termed Laws. So He made a
Law for the rain, said Job, Job. 2.8. And he gave a decree unto the Sea, that
the waves should not pass his commandment. And by this Law it is, that heavy
bodies move downwards, but light bodies ascend upward: that the motion of the
Heavens are circular, and that every thing observes that manner of motion and
working, which is peculiar and proper unto his kind.

Now creatures having their several degrees of perfection, and Law being as it
were the several rules and spurrs thereof; it will follow, The persecter any
creature is, the more general, and of larger excellency are those Laws, by
which the same is guided. So we see that Minerals are of a perfecter
constitution and being, then simple bodies: as Air, or Water, or Earth, or
Plants, are perfecter then Stones, and Beasts are more perfect then Plants, and
that Man is more perfect then all: So that every one of these in their several
kinds, have more or less notion and motion belonging unto them, and
accordingly are subject to more or less Laws.

Now men being as it were a compendium or Epitome, or abbreviature of all the
creatures of God, and participating of all the perfections, has so many
actions and operations proper unto him, as makes him subject to all the laws;
not only to the part of natures law, that concerns only his reasonable Soul and
will, and is therefore called the moral Law, but likewise unto all the
subordinate parts, that may any ways concern his inferior parts and faculties:
so that not only the Soul, the understanding, but the senses and humors, yea
the very whole proportion and constitution of the body, and every particular
therein, had their several prescriptions and motions peculiar unto themselves,
which both for ability and power, and end, and all other circumstances, they
ought to have observed exactly, and could not transgress without sin.

So that first hearing of the subject of sin, namely, the law of nature: That
Law which Almighty God had prescribed universally unto all things in nature to
be observed, let us proceed unto the farther search thereof: And therefore in
the second place we say, that the form of righteousness, is the observation of
this Law: and hence we insert, tanquam formale peccati, that the transgression
of the law is as it were the form of sin. For so 1 John 3.8. defines that sin
is the transgression of the Law, that it is an aberration and excursion out of
the bonds and prescripts of Gods Law, 1. John 3.4.

3ly, The material causes of Righteousness, were the actions and operations,
faculties and parts of man; and therefore we must propose them also tanquam
materiale peccati, as the matter and subject of sin: For look how the parts and
faculties both of Soul and body were ordered, and framed, and beautified, and
exercised in Righteousness: So likewise the same parts and faculties both of
Soul and body, are confused, distempered, deformed, and perverted by iniquity
and sin. For the efficient cause of righteousness being liberum arbitrium
hominis, the free will of man; it must needs follow, that the efficient cause
of sin must needs be the same, or else could not be said to be our sin; for
that which makes a work to be our work, is, because it proceeds from our own
will: for sin in the forms and abstracted nature thereof, namely, as it is the
transgression of the Law, may be, and is, in beasts, and other creatures, yet
cannot be said to be the sin of the creature, because it proceeds not from will
in the creature; for the creature is subject to vanity, says the Apostle, Romans
8.20. Neither is it sufficient to make a work ours, unless it proceed freely
from us, without any necessity compelling us unto: for then the act would be
attributed as much, yea principally, to the necessity, and we should be but as
instruments thereof: That therefore is the efficient of sin unto man, which
does appropriate sin unto man, and that does appropriate sin unto him, which is
the principal faculty by which he works, namely, Liberum Arbitrium, his free
will.

Lastly, the final cause or effect of righteousness was joy, and peace, and
comfort, and contentation, and perfection, and all the happiness which the
soul and body of man was capable of. So e contrario, for rectum est Index sui
and obliqui: we most still measure that which is crooked by that which is
straight, the final cause and effect of sin is sorrow, affliction, crosses, and
destruction, and all the miseries in this life, and in the life to come. For as
malum culpae was the privation of bonum morale; so malum poenae is the
privation of bonum delectabile. As sin was the privation of righteousness, so
effect of sin is the privation of happiness, which is the fruit of
righteousness: For all the miseries and pains that has or shall ever befall
man, are no positive thing, but a mere privation of that goodness which was
created in him. As for example; If sharp needles shall be thrust under the
nails, it is nothing but the violent disorder and disturbance of the frame of
nature in those parts. If our hands or feet should be dipped in boiling lead; it
were but the violent distemper of heat in these members; and so of other
torments which are all privations. Neither did the eye see, nor has ear heard,
nor did ever possibly enter into the heart of man the joys that are prepared
for the righteous: All things in the world are too low to express them. So on
the contrary it will follow, that neither eye, nor ear, or heart, has either
seen, or can imagine those pains that are prepared for sinners; all things in
this world are too short to resemble them.

For as the choice and precious stones mentioned Rev. 2. are there used to
represent the new Jerusalem, and the beauty and joys thereof, which are far
more excellent, and of an higher, and transcendent quality: So, under
reformation of better judgment, I suppose, that the fire, which the spirit of
God in the Scripture makes choice of, to express the torments of Hell, is not
material fire, but being the most violent and consuming element, is used only
as the fittest thing to represent those unconceivable pains: For I conceive
those torments to be much more, then any fire can inflict: for the pains,
afflictions, and crosses of this life, are not to be spoken of, in respect of
those endless and infinite ^orrowes in the life to come: That we suffer here is
but a miserable passage to that we shall feel here^fter, and rather to be
counted blessings then crosses, being forcible means which God uses to humble
us, and as bridles to check our unruly and headstrong lusts; yea as wormwood to
wean our appetites from the desire of the worlds vanities: For howsoever many
do account themselves happy that live in ease and abundance here on earth, yet
most certain it is, that there can be no greater a curse or cross befall any
man in this life, then to prosper in the course of sin and iniquity.

But to return from whence we digressed. The miseries of sin shall be far
greater then any thing in this world can resemble, when as by the power and
just Judgment of God, there shall be such exact and exquisite distemper and
pains inflicted upon every part and parcel of man, that if all the most
forcible torments that ever were invented by the most cruel Tyrants that ever
lived were put together, they were as nothing in respect of those infinite
pains and tortures which man shall everlastingly suffer in hell: where the
humors shall be both inflamed and benumed, with unsufferable heat and cold;
where the senses are infected with most loathsome and abominable stenches and
savours; their eyes terrified with ghastly and fearful spectacles; when the
affections shall find no refreshing, but endless grief and afflictions, when
every joint shall be disordered and racked in extensum as possibly it can bear;
when the glandules, the muscles, and all the fleshie parts shall fry in
scorching heat, where the entrals and bowels shall perpetually gnaw with
continual griping; yea, when these shall be filled with everlasting anguish
and horror, by being banished for ever from the presence of almighty God, and
the communion of his blessed Saints and Angels, and instead thereof astonished
with the deceitful and hideous noise and wailing of wretched souls, never to
see hope for ease or end of such unspeakable miseries. And lastly, when those
carnifices, those damned executioners of Gods judgments, the Devils, being cast
down from the glorious presence of God's Almighty Majesty, and suffering the
infinite and unsupportable burden of his justly deserved wrath and anger, shall
execute their unspeakable malice and furious vengeance upon the miserable
bodies, and distressed Souls of reprobate and condemned sinners. Nay, to
conclude, if all their griefs and diseases, all the anguish of mind whereunto
the body and soul of men are subject, and, which all the men, from the
beginning of the world unto this day have suffered, were in the extremity upon
any other man; and that the souls and bodies by the Almighty power of God were
so fastened together, and so perpetually conjoined, that there could be no
dissolution, yet all this must the sinner eternally endure, besides infinitely
more sorrows and pains, all unspeakable, all unconceivable. Hence from the
causes, we define the sin that it is

A determinate and wilful transgression of Gods Law, depriving all the parts
and faculties both of Soul and body, of all kind of goodness, of all kind of
righteousness in it self, and of all manner of happiness, which had been the
effect and consequent thereof.

So that having pointed out the disease, and considered what it is, it remains
in the last place to search out the Original ground, whence it springs, and
proceeds, intimated in these words [ shaping, and conceiving] Behold I was
shapen, etc.

Peccato Originali (says Aug.) nihil ad praedicandum notius, nihil ad
intelligendum secretius. There Is nothing more commonly preached, and yet
nothing more obscurely to be understood, then Original sin. And iniquity is a
mystery (says the Scripture) neither of which does imply an impossibility,
but only a difficulty of understanding the depth and secrets thereof: and
therefore, as the search of the knowledge thereof requires deeper speculation;
so does the delivery thereof, deserve more heedful, and serious attention. I
was shapen in iniquity.

I may not now stand to dispute that question, which is disputed in the works
of some great Divines; namely, whether propagation and traducing of sin be from
the Father or Mother: Some collecting and affirming from that, Romans 5. As by
one man sin entered into the world, etc. that sin proceeded only, and is
derived from the man, and if the woman could conceive and bring forth without
the man, the child be without sin. Others again inserting that, 1 Timothy 2. That
the man was not deceived but the woman was, and was in the transgression: And
also from this of the Prophet in the Text, In sin has my Mother conceived me.

Inferring, I say, that it is probable that sin is principally derived from the
Mother; which question may easily be decided, by acknowledging it both ways.
True, that it descends from the man and the woman; for under that phrase, as by
one man, may be well employed both sexes; and certain it is, that both being
Parents, and both sinful, they are as well the parents of the sin as of the
child.

But to return to our purpose, I was shapen in iniquity, says the Prophet,
declaring thereby the original ground and cause of this disease, the manner how
it became sinful; wherein it may be probably objected, that in as much as the
principal guilt of sin depends upon the efficient cause thereof; namely,
Liberum arbitrium hominis, the freewill of man, in the wilful disobedience of
Gods Law, which David never had, but was born, as all other men, captives to
their lusts, and could not obey the Law, if he had been never so willing; and
which never man had, but one: Neither was sin in that extense and high nature,
which the free and malicious a version of the will perpetrated and committed by
any one, but by that one; and that by a transient act many hundred years before:
how then can the Prophet be said to be guilty of sin in that kind, which only
properly and undequaque completly is sin, or justly assum^ the last unto
himself.

To which I answer, that although the act of our first parents was transient,
yet the will of that act was permanent, and remaine^, and it is justly reputed
unto the Prophet and unto all men that descend from their loins. It standing
both with the rule of equity and righteous judgment, justly to attribute and
impute that unto us, which we as it were did in our progenitors: for can any
man be more just and equal, then to charge every part by that which is
committed by the whole; for all the generations and successions of men make but
one body, and every one is member of that body: and the whole lease of man is
but as one tree, whereof our first parents are the root, and therefore that
sprig which has but newly sprouted out this year, proceeds Originally (though
by the mediation of the body and branches of that root, which may be was
planted many hundred years ago) If the root be corrupt, struck, and die, it is
likewise corrupt, stricken and dies with it; and why? because it is a part of
that body that is of the same nature, quality, and condition with the root:
Even so it is with all men that both have been, and now are born, they lineally
descended, and by the mediation of the body, the generations and successions of
men, they proceed from the first parent of mankind, as from the root, they
participate of his nature, qualities, and properties, and therefore if his
condition be sinful, damnable, their's likewise is sinful, damnable; because
the guilt of what he did is justly imputed unto them, as being then with him;
and now descending from his loins; and that according to the rule of natures
Law, according to the equity of divine justice: all the species, the whole
kind of man were potentially in Adam, and by right of inheritance from sin, are
entitled to the privileges of nature; whatsoever belonged to him, they may
justly challenge; that is, all kind of sustenance for the preservation of their
being: as nature has given unto us a being, so it owes unto us a sustenance;
shall we challenge God for maintenance and preservation of life, in right of
our first parents? and shall not he as justly challenge us as guilty of sin,
and subject to his wrath, and descending from him who wilfully transgressed and
disobeyed his Law? shall we not partake of the good and evil whereunto we are
entitled in right of our first parents? surely both alike belongs unto us;
and therefore even in our conception, when we as it were first sprout out, even
then are we justly accounted guilty of wilful disobedience and sin, because we
descend from the loins of him that did wilfully disobey and transgress the Law
of his mighty Creator: So that all excuse by just imputation hereof being taken
away, by this means sin being appropriated unto us, we made guilty thereof in
the highest degree, as proceeding from the intent disobedience of the
reasonable will.

Let us proceed to consider out of the Prophets words, the Original of sin,
when, after what manner, or in what measure we are made sinful, hence employed
in this word, Mother; that is, from the very act of generation; for the first,
she takes upon her the office of Mother, after what manner expressed in these
two words, shaping, and conceiving; and lastly, in what measure, employed in
this particle, I; that is, not this, or that part of me, but I wholly; that is
every part and faculty in me.

In the former clause, namely; of the guilt of the imputation of our first
parents sin, we speak of sin only in relation to the efficient cause, who did
it, and how it was actual: In this we consider sin in the form thereof, namely,
as it transgresses the law, how it is originally diffused over every part and
faculty of us, and so it becomes habitual, I was shapen, etc.

By shaping is understood the first framing and fashioning of us in the womb;
and by conceiving is meant the first being and breeding and growing up unto
perfection in the womb: for Tremel. translats it, in peccando fovet me mea
Matter, In sin has my Mother cherished me up. And so is our Hebraisme in our
English margent: In sin did my mother warm me, which implies the same thing;
both importing, that man both in his first beginning, and- also in his
continual grouth and increasing, is sinful, that is, every way exceeding
sinful. If a man should be born, having his face standing backward, and his
legs coming out where his arms should be, and his arms out of his belly, and
his belly upon his head, it would surely be esteemed an ugly monster, fearful,
and prodigious; and yet the deformity and obliquity of the Soul and body of man
by sin, is much more monstrous, where every part and faculty is disordered;
where every particular is both extra and praeter intentionem naturae; both
besides and beyond the intention of nature, as by the sequel shall appear.

Now perfect and complete shaping does imply two several acts: First, the exact
temperature of internal qualities: 2ly, the due proportion of the external
parts and lineaments; In both these there is sin formally, which is the
transgression of the law. For God, in the creation, had set down a law also for
things of this inferior quality and respect, which could not be transgressed
without sin; in the first place prescribing unto every thing such a just and
limited temper and mixture of primari^ qualities of heat and cold, of drienesse
and moisture, whereof all mixed bodies consist, and was most behoofeful to the
perfection and preservation of his being: and Secondly, squaring out such a due
and excellent proportion and fashion in all the body, as might best adorn it
with most beauty and comeliness, thereby so manifesting his power and wisdom
in all things, that there was neither distemper inwardly, nor deformity
outwardly in any thing that he has made.

Both these laws are broken and transgressed in the shaping of men.

For first, there is such a distemper of such unequal iniquity of the radical
heat and radical moisture, which are principia vitae, as the Physicians call
them, the very principles and grounds of life; that the healthiest man living
is not perfectly in health, though yet not sensibly and thoroughly sick, but
lives as it were in a neutrality betwixt both, yet rather sick then well,
because the disease is still growing, though not ripe, until the distemper
thereof wax so strong and predominant, that nature is so weakened and subdued
thereby, that it is not able without grief to resist the same.

2ly, In the outward framing and fashioning of the body, there is no man that
has that exact proportion and comeliness in the parts of the body, then Adam
had that was immediately created by God, but there is in it some imperfection
or blemish, which does some way either di^figure or deform him: Nay, I will say
that, which many perhaps will think strange, that there is not in us the least
joint, but sin is in it, not only formally, as there is a want of perfection in
the composition and constitution thereof, according to the law of God, but also
imputatively, because it became so by the rebellion of our will, that thereby
we have transgressed the law, defaced the workmanship of God within us,
deprived our selves of health and perfection, and so justly become the subjects
of Gods vengeance. Nay, I will say more, that there is no grief nor pain that
the beasts or other creatures in the world do suffer, but it is sin formally, a
transgression of this Law. Because God intended no such affliction to any of
his creatures by the Creation, but by his Law both established it and ordained
it otherwise, that namely, the creatures should live in that perfection and
happiness, whereof by nature they were capable. There is no imperfection in
any creature but man is guilty thereof, as being by his sin: For cursed is the
earth and all things therein for man's sake: and why for man's sake? but for sin;
and what is that cursing? but the substraction and deprivation of the Lords
protection and guidance of the creatures in the laws and rules of natures law.
Rightly therefore says the Prophet, I was shapen, etc.

And not only therein does express the whole ground and Original cause of his
disease, but he adds also, that in sin his Mother warmed and cherished him up,
both root and branches were sinful. In consideration whereof it will appear,
that as the structure and composition of man is most admirable, so the
corruption of sin in man is most damnable, as being a general disturbance of
the whole course of nature, a pestilent infection universally diffused over all
the faculties both of Soul and body.

For as nature has several degrees of perfection, and still the former is the
ground of the latter, so also have these degrees their degrees of infection;
and still the latter is enforced by the former.

1. The first degree of natural perfection in man is esse, consisting in the
constitution and temperature of the body, which is the ground of all motions
and life.

2. The second is Vegetare, by receiving nourishment to increase, and grow to
perfection in himself.

3. The third is Sentire, an ability to discern and know all outward and
corporeal objects, and their simple qualities.

4. The fourth is ratiocinari, by discourse of reason, in the contemplation of
outward things, and to draw out such rules and directions for this life as are
consonant to that law which God had established in all things.

5. Secundum rationem agere, to work and frame all his actions according to
their destinated ends: namely, the preservation of natures perfection, and the
glory of natures God.

Now as these degrees of natural perfection have their dependence the one upon
the other in their order; so likewise in the infection and diffusion of sin
upon the natural qualities, do the vital faculties depend upon the vital, the
animal upon the animal, the rational upon the rational, the moral, etc.

1. For the first; if there be an intemperate mixture of cold and heat in the
natural constitution, as has been declared there is, then do the vital
faculties fail in the exercise of t^eir functions; as too much heat does
inflame the blood, increase choler, dry the brain; too much cold does beget
melancholy, augment phlegm, hinder digestion, dull the spirits, and such like.

2. If the vital faculties be disordered, the animal are distempered thereby:
as the over abundance of ill humors does send up noysom and unwholesome fumes
into the head, which do stupifie the sense, dull the imagination, and hurt the
memory, so that if the fantasy and memory be any way impaired, then in the
third place, the reasonable soul is greatly disabled in the exercise of her
faculties.

And lastly, if reason be absurd and defect, in that it is not able to direct,
how then can the will execute or perform any thing that is agreeable to Gods
Law?

Behold how great a flame a little fire kindles, for the natural temperature
of the first qualities heat and cold, etc. though in men's ordinary
imaginations, they are things of small moment or respect; and nothing so
material and worthy, as the superior faculties; yet are they so necessary, and
of such force in the whole frame and constitution of man, that upon their goodn
sse does the goodness of all the rest depend, no otherwise then as the spring
or poize in a curious clock, which seems to be dull and of no great necessity,
and yet it is of the greatest power, as that which moves all the rest of the
wheels: for the perfection of a clock is to keep its time and due hours; but
if the spring or poize be disordered, all the rest is disordered, if it be too
strong, then the hours are too short, and if slack and loose, then are they
too long. So the natural faculties, if too cold, then all the rest are
d^stitute and too remiss; if tooo hot, then are they too violent and redundant;
for the disposition and perfection of the Souls working, depends principally
upon the bodies temperature. For as the eye, the int^rmedium, that which is
interposed betwixt the eye and the object be thick, as in a mist, it is
obscured, and the sight made imperfect: So the Soul, if the Organs, those
instruments by which it works, be disordered and distempered, is disabled in
the exercise and use of its faculties. As for example, we see in a drunken man,
when the stomach is oppressed with a thick and strong moisture, the heat of the
liver by concoction, and digestion rarifies the same, there rises such a fume,
no otherwise then we see in a boiling pot, which ascending up into the head,
does so stupifie and distemper the brain, the Organ of the understanding,
imagination and discourse; that man thereby that distempers himself, does
quite lose the use of his reason, and the chief faculty of his soul, and
becomes for the time, (if not worse) even a very beast. Even so every man by
the distempered mixture of corrupted nature, is made either more or less
defective in the use of the souls vigor and power, by how much more or less
the instruments and organs, by which the soul works, are polluted, and
distempered.

From hence it is we see, that some men are more quick and active of
apprehension and conceit; others likewise are stupid and of duller capacity,
which only proceeds from the good or evil disposition of the parts of the body;
yea the very best and purest that is begotten by the corrupt generation of man,
is infinitely far short of that purity and quickness of capacity which man
by his creation naturally was endued withal.

From hence therefore may appear the vanity of the Pelagians arguments,
intending to prove that sin is only learned by imitation, because the body
cannot work upon the Soul which is a Spirit; for though the body cannot work
upon the substance of the soul, yet can it hinder and disorder the operations
of the Soul, which it is to perform in and by the body; for by the bodies
corruption and disordered distemper, there is either irregularity or iniquity
in the manner, or confusion and ataxie in the order; but especially excess or
defect in them, sure of every faculty of and action of man. As for example, if
we survey some particulars; and first in those faculties which are called
concupiscibles, as hunger, a natural appetite to create for sustenance and
preservation of life and being, cannot do it without sin; not that the desire
of meat or action of eating is sinful, for it is natural, and all that is
natural is good, as being the work of God; but the irregularitie and disorder
of the desire and act is sin; either we eat too much, or are not contented with
that which will suffice nature, or desire that which is unwholesome, or loath
that which would best nourish us, or in some measure and degree or other of
gluttony; the law, that is, those rules and limitations, which God had
prescribed in nature unto that faculty, is transgressed: So thirst becomes
drunkenness, and that same cupiditas venerea is changed into lust, and so by
excess is made sloth; and so of the rest.

Secondly, consider the faculties called Irascibiles, and there we see that joy
by excess is turned into voluptuousness, and sorrow into anxiety, that fear
becomes horror, and anger is turned into fury, and hatred into malice.

3. Proceed we unto the reasonable faculties, and see how hope exceeds by
presumption, how mercy becomes foolish pity, how zeal runs into superstition,
and knowledge into heresy, and so of all the faculties of man.

Neither do these only transgress the law of God, by exceeding their limits
and prescriptions, but also being defective in the measure and intention
thereof; so fear offends by security, and anger by stupidity, so hope
oftentimes becomes despair, and mercy is turned into cruelty; so the defect of
zeal is dullness of spirit, and the defect of knowledge is ignorance; so of all
the rest which I may not now enumerate, their inordinate motion is the
transgression of the law, either on the right hand or on the left, either in
excess or defect of their functions and operations: so virtue consists in
medio, as it is in the mean between them: of the moderation of these excesses
and the supplies of these desires are called virtues or graces by their several
effidients, virtues by moralists, in so much as by education and by the light
and strength of nature, they are in some measure corrected: and graces by
Divines, because by the power of Gods gracious spirit they are reformed.

So that to draw all into a sum, we may reduce Original sin unto these three
h^^d.

1. Reatus inobedient to, guiltiness of disobedience against Gods law.

2. Defectus boni, a defect or w^n^ of all goodness in our selves.

3. Proclivitas ad malum, an inclination unto wickedness in all things we go
about to do.

The first in respect of the time past, the second or the time present, and the
third of the time to come. The one by imputation, the other by inhaesion, the
last by inclination. Being in the first place made guilty of sin by the just
imputation of the wilful disobedience of our first Parents, because we were
then in their loins as parts of them, that now descend from them and sprung out
of them.

2 Being thereby made deficient, and deprived of all righteousness which God
had created in us, and that happiness that was intended for us.

Lastly, being then wickedly disposed, there being in every part of us as well
inferior of the body, as superior of the soul, a disposition or propensity, an
inclination or proclivity to err from the rules of Gods Law; whereby we our
selves every one of us, shall effect or bring to perfection our own final
overthrow or destruction, unless by the mercy of God it be prevented.

This is the Catastrophe, this is the universal Corruption, and subversion of
man: being every way sinful, both in Semine, in Embrione, and in Homine.
Sinful in his Conception and shaping, sinful in his growth and increasing,
and also sinful in his strength and perfection of being: and that not in any
mean or remiss degree, but in every one of these, sin being out of measure
sinful. All this and much more then this was the sorrowful and penitent soul
of the Prophet strongly possessed and afflicted with all, in his deep meditation
of sin in this place. Where he says, I was shapen in iniquity and in sin did
my mother conceive me.

And thus having briefly run over the matter, and unfolded the scope and sense
of the Text, as well as my understanding would serve: and therein propounded
only matter of Instruction, for the information of our understanding, teaching
us what we are to know. It remains in the next place, that we collect out of
the precedent discourse, such moral documents for the reformation of our
lives, as may direct us what we are to do. Out of which, though I may observe
many, yet I will pitch my thoughts only upon those two.

1. That the dearest Saints so well as the greatest sinners are in their
Infancy Originally sinful.

2. That the sin which we are from our very infancy stained withal, is
conveyed by our Parents unto us.

Concerning the first Truth, you have it here confirmed by the confession of
one that is recorded to be a man after Gods own heart, and thereby reputed to
be a most dear Saint; yet for all that pleads not immunity from sin in his very
infancy, but says, that he was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did his mother
conceive him. Of the same mind with David the Father, was Solomon the Son.
Prove. 22.15. where he lays it down as an undeniable Axiom. That foolishness
is bound up in the heart of a child. By which phrase is meant nothing but
wickedness and finn, which is on a child as a fardle or pack on a horse back,
which he can never of himself shake off. And this is the ground why the Lord
himself speaks of the whole Nation of the Jews which were then the only
Church he had in the world. Esaias 48.8. Thou wast called a transgressor from
the womb. Though they were a people in Covenant with God, yet in their infancy,
in the womb a transgressor, yea, out of the womb so visibly before Circumcision
transgressors also. According to that of Saint Paul Ephesians. 2.3. We are all by
nature the children of wrath as well as others. Though the chosen of God, yet
herein can plead no more privilege from the exemption of this inbred pollution
then Judas himself could, whom our Savior calls no less then a Devil. Ioh.
8.44. Have not I chosen twelve, and one of them is a Devil. Hence is that of
Aug. damnati antequam nati. And therefore by some, Original sin is concluded
to be not only a privation, but a corrupt habit, like unto a disease, which
beside the privation of health has humores male dispositos, the humors ill
disposed: whence it comes to pass, that the imagination of man's heart (as the
Lord speaks, Genesis 8.21.) us evil from his very youth, there is a nature prone.
There is in him a natural pronesse, and disposition to every thing that is
evil: as there is in the youngest whelp of a Lion, or Bear, or a Woolfe to
cruelty; or in the very egg of a Cockatrice before it be hatched: which is the
comparison which the Holy Ghost uses. Esaias 59.5. whereupon says Aug.
Concupiscentia lex peccati cum parvulis nascitur. Concupiscence which is the
Law of sin, is even born with Children. And Saint Paul says as much, Romans
7.18. I know that in me (that is, in my flesh) dwells no good thing. And 2
Cor. 3.5. We are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our
selves: but our suffiencie is of God. The reasons of which Doctrine are these.

R. 1. Because of that guilt which Infants stand in Adam; In whom says the
Apostle, Romans 5.12. (for so is that place rendered) all have sinned. For Adam
was not then as one particular person, but as the Common stock and root of all
mankind: Whereupon by this sin, all his posterity which had been in sin as in
the root becomes equally sinful. Hence is that of our Savior, Mat. 7.18. A
corrupt tree cannot bring forth good ^ruit. And he gives the reason, Ioh. 3.6.
Because that which is born of the flesh is flesh: (that is, of the corrupt
Parents) is sinful; which is Jobs meaning, where he says, no man can beget a
child that is clean from sin, himself being unclean. This treason committed by
Adam runs through the whole blood: this leaven infecteth the whole lump: this
poison is diffused into all mankind. And since it comes to pass that man is
disabled from acting that which is good. For we know that water can rise no
higher then the Fountain is; Nature will give it leave to go no higher: the
fire gives heat only within a certain compass and distance; and no farther.
Nothing can work beyond the sphere of its own reach and activity. So it is
impossible to corrupt nature, to elevate it self to supernatural grace; or to
do any action preparing, bending, or inclining the will to it. For as water
being cold by nature, cannot be made hot until an higher principle be first
insused into it: no more can mere nature do any thing tending to saving grace,
until it be raised up by an higher influence. For the guilt of Adams offense
lies heavy upon all his posterity, so that there being not left strength in
them as of themselves to remove it, it disables them from either thinking or
acting any thing that is good, and though they may be Saints, yet in their
Infancy are not freed from sin: and therefore the state of infancy it self
has been severely punished, as appears, 1 Samuel 15.3. God commanded Saul to
slay the very Infants and Sucklings of the Amalekites, and forbad to spare or
show pity unto any of them: And Psalms 137.9. the Lord pronounces him happy
that shall take the little ones of the Babylonians, and dash out their brains
against the stones: And Genesis 19.25. we shall find, that in the destruction of
Sodom, none of the inhabitants were spared, no not the Infants and sucklings,
but God rained down fire and brimstone upon them: The like you shall find Numb.
16, 27. where from the Tabernacle it is said, that Dathan and Abiram came out,
and stood in the door of their Tents, and their wives and their sons and their
little children; all which were swallowed up by the earth, ver. 32. as Moses
said, and so went down quick into the pit. Now there can be no punishment
inflicted, but where sin is presupposed, neither can there be any sin in
Infants thought on, but what is originally in their natures; and therefore to
clear the justice of God in punishing, the Doctrine of the Text is evident,
that being originally sinful, they suffer most justly by the hand of God.

Obj. But these be most lewd men, and God forbid but that there should be a
difference betwixt them and the godly.

Ans. The Infant of the best Christian is by nature no better then the infant
of a Sodomite, as appears, Ephesians. 2.3. and the sin those Infants was guilty of
was the cause why God did thus deal with them: for Romans 5.12. God is no
respecter of persons, and therefore hates sin as well in them as in us; for
has not the infants of Gods own people been born fools natural, or deaf, or
blind, as we may see, John 9.1. has not many of them been smitten with many
and grievous and strange diseases, as David's child was, 2 Samuel 12.15. And what
is this but a witnessing of Gods wrath against them as well as others; for how
can a most pure God love any thing that is polluted? This is contrary to his
nature, whose pure eyes cannot behold iniquity: and therefore it is as easy
for light and darkness to agree together, as the most pure Creator, and impure
creature to love each other. This I speak not to abridge Gods mercy, how in his
favor he may look upon Infants in his Son, but how God in himself may behold
them in their original sin, being children of wrath, and so may become the fit
objects of his wrath, to be severely punished with their Parents.

2ly, Because of that filth which is conveyed from their Parents unto them: And
therefore by Isa. 48.8. are said to be transgressors from the womb: whose
hearts are evil from their very youth, Genesis 8.11. Hence is that of Ambrose, who
is just in the sight of God, whereas an Infant of a day old cannot be clear
from sin? every thing that is born, carries with it the nature of that which
bare it, as touching the substance and accidents proper to that special kind:
But we are all born of corrupt and guilty parents; hence by nature in our birth
we draw their guilt and corruption, and by this means we have the spawn and
seed of all sin within us, so that every imagination becomes evil, only evil,
and continually evil, Genesis 6.6. as God himself sets us out in our natural
condition.

Ob. The 1 Cor. 7.14. the children of the faithful are said to be holy,
therefore without Original sin and pollution.

Ans. They have not this Holiness from carnal propagation, for it is said, Romans
9.11.13. when they had neither done good nor evil, I have loved Jacob, and
hated Esau. But they are said to be holy, in respect of the external fellowship
of the Church; that is to say, they are to be accounted members of that body,
the Church, whereof Christ is the head: and so also for the chosen and
sanctified of God, which place does not any way infringe or prejudice this
truth, for the natures of the best men's children are sinful, though their
persons in respect of the external fellowship of the Church be reputed holy,
and therefore Parents by nature derive not unto their posterity righteousness,
which is freely imputed, but unrighteousness and damnation, unto which
themselves by nature are subject: and the reason is this, because their
posterity are not born of them according to grace, but according to nature;
neither is grace and justification tied to carnal propagation, but to the most
free election of God; so that though Infants be by the Apostle said to be holy,
yet it is not to be understood in respect of their natures, for that appears to
be sinful and filthy, but in regard of that stipulation and covenant which is
made between God and the faithful: and therefore concludes nothing against this
truth, but that the Infants of the dearest Saints are originally sinful.

R. 3. Because Children are deprived of those supernatural gifts and
endowments, which otherwise they should thorough Adam have possessed, if he had
stood firm to his God. It Is true, at the first when man was created, it was no
small part of his happiness in that primary condition to be ignorant of sin,
though a Quidditative knowledge perchance of the nature of sin, he had by
reason of the Law writ in his heart: yet a practical experimental knowledge
he had not, he could not have; the misshapen brat of sin being then unbegot, it
was a mere Chimaera, an imaginary Monster, having no Existence but in Satan's
brain, the shop and forge of Hell. But alas this happiness being but a dream
of happiness, of small continuance through men's ambition; he is forthwith
stripped of it, and so becomes not only a spectacle of misery himself, but makes
his whole posterity miserable also: So that what he acted, we in him became
equally guilty and liable to the same wrath. For so says the Apostle. Romans
5.12.14. In him we are, have sinned, that is, in Adam, and are by nature the
children of wrath: woeful spectacles of wrath stripped of al those excellencies
and gifts which in him we might have enjoyed had he proved obedient to the
command of his God. But being a wretched progenitor, begets a miserable
progeny, whose blood is so stained with his treason, as that they have
forfeited all supernatural gifts and endowments through him: and though by the
grace of Christ, restoration in some measure may he made to the Saints; yet
are their Infants not freed from this inbred malady, but are by nature
originally sinful.

Obj. Ezekiel 18 20. The Son shall not bear the iniquity of the Father. Ergo
Injustice that Adams posterity should suffer for Adams sin.

Answ. It Is true, if he falls not into the same, and approves it not, but
disliketh and avoideth it. But we justly bear the iniquity of Adam for these
reasons.

1. Because the fault is so Adams that it also becomes ours: For the Apostle
witnesses, We all sinned in him: and so his sin becomes ours.

Secondly, because Adams whol^ nature was guilty, and we being as part
proceeding out of his substance and mass, we cannot but be guilty also our
selves.

Thirdly, Because Adam received the gifts of God to be imparted unto us on that
condition, if himself did retain them: or lose them unto us if himself lost
them: whereas then Adam lost them, he lost them not only in himself, but in
all his posterity also. So that hence it came to pass, that all those
supernatural gifts and endowments which he had, we are deprived of, by reason
of his falling from God.

R. 4. Because Original sin is peccatum hominis, a sin of the whole man;
whereupon this infection is conveyed by conjunction of both, they jointly
making one man, enter into one condition, and so are partakers of each others
woe or welfare. For though the soul comes immediately from God, and so is a
pure substance: and the body cannot be sinful without the soul being a dead
mass, yet as peccatum hominis, the sin of the whole man's infection is conveyed
by conjunction of both.

Neither does this infringe the Justice of God, whatsoever some may say to the
contrary, to thrust a poor soul into an unclean body. For the soul and body are
not of God respected as single substances; but as they are joined together to
make one man, and therefore there is but one Constitution of both. The soul in
respect of Gods creation is a pure Creature, yet it continues not in that
estate one moment, for it is created in the midst of the body in an unclean and
polluted place; and forthwith being coupled to the body, begineth to be
unclean. As a clear water cast into a muddy place becomes suddenly foul. So
does the soul when united to the body, becomes suddenly sinful. Or as sweet
Oil powered into a fustie vessel, loses its pureness. So the soul infused
into the body, becomes impure and sinful. The pure soul is infected with the
contagion of impure seed, as a fair flower is sullied with unclean hands. Hence
Original sin is said to be, ex carne Causaliter, yet is in the soul subjective
and formaliter. And so becoming peccatum hominis, the sin of the whole man. The
Infants of the best become Originally sinful.

Use 1. Seeing Infants are originally sinful, this may serve in the first
place, to confute that opinion of the Pelagians, who deny that sin comes by
nature, but is learned only by example or imitation, which if this could be, I
would gladly know by what example did Cain learn to play the hypocrite, or
murder his brother? who was his president to imitate? I read not at that time
of any vile wretch bes^^es himself in the whole world, that was guilty of such
horrid crimes; surely then it must be somewhat within him, that must move him
to sin so greatly againg the God of heaven and earth, which can be nothing but
that seminale principium, that inbred in lady, that David here confesses he was
conceived and born in: this every man that knows himself knows to be true I
appeal to the conscience, especially of a good man, whether he finds not in his
nature an inclination to the foulest sin in the world; he that does not feel
this suggestion of concupiscence, (...) ^^a^^^ dead in disobedience. Aw^y then
with this horrid opinion of the Pelagians, which is both contrary to the truth
of God, and the Saints experience. If Infants were not sinful, then they
should need no Savior, Christ dyed in vain for them. But God has concluded
all under sin, that he might have mercy upon all: nay, how could Infants die if
they were not sinful, death could have no power over them, Romans 6. ult. which
sin cannot proceed by imitation, then the faculties of Infants should not be
corrupted, for they cannot imitate neither good nor evil, yet they have sin, or
they could not die. If it were possible to keep any children from hearing a ly,
or seeing the practice of any filthiness or cruelty, yet their very nature
upon occasion offered would carry them to these sins: so that you shall find
it is not by imitation, but by corruption of nature, that Infants becomes
originally sinful.

Use 2. This discovers the great necessity of Infants Baptism, which though I
do not hold with Suar. Vt si medicus infirmo dixerit, nisi hanc acceperis
medicinam non sanaberis, etc.
an intrinsecal necessity as he expresses it by this similitude: As if the
Physician should say to his Patient, unless thou take this remedy, thou shall
not be healed, implying an absolute necessity, without which, there can be no
salvation; yet I hold a necessity of the precept and means, it being that
Gospel-ordinance of imitation that does render them Disciples, and does
manifest their visibilitie of membership in the Church of Christ: which thing
makes greatly for the confirmation of the strength of their Parents for the
present, and their future comfort afterward, that as they are by nature so
filthy and loathsome in the sight of God: so the Lord has in the blood of
Jesus Christ (whereof the water in Baptism is a sign and seal) provided a
laver to wash and cleanse them in, even the laver of regeneration, which, as
Saint Paul calls it, Tit. 3.5. yea, a fountain opened, as the Prophet speaks,
Zach. 13.1. for sin and for uncleanness, sufficient to cleanse them of all this
filthiness and corruption of their nature. But here perchance may some object.

Obj. If Baptism be so necessary, what ground or precept have you for it out
of Gods word.

Ans. I answer, this will appear unto us, Mat. 28.19. where Christ commands
his, Disciples, and in them all Ministers successively unto the end of the
world, to go and disciple all nations, Baptizing them in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; which words of our savior are
not (...), teach, but (...), that is, make Disciples, which is by by being
admitted into Christ's School, their parents giving their names to Christ both
for themselves and their families: And in Christ's precept, teaching does not go
before, but follow baptizing, ver. 20. teaching them to observe all things,
etc. which is punctually observed in the children of the faithful, who after
they are baptized, when they come to years of discretion, are taught to observe
all things whatsoever Christ has commanded.

Obj. Though this be the command of Christ for the institution of Baptism, yet
there is not one word of Infants, nor any command giving for baptizing them.

Ans. I answer, a thing may be said to be commanded in Scripture two ways.

1. Literally, Syllabically, terminis terminantibus, in express terms.

2. Implicitly, by way of implication, by good consequence: though in the
former sense Infant Baptism is not commanded, yet in the latter it appears to
be, by promises, proportions, example, and considerations of the like grounds
and causes, comparing Scripture with Scripture, and look what can be thus
proved, is as strong and valid, as though it were commanded in so many
syllables and letters: What command is there for women to partake of the Lords
supper? yet the proportion of the Lords Supper with the Passover makes it
lawful: What express command is there for a Sabbath in the new Testament, yet
by consequential grounds it does appear to be so. The least filings of gold, is
gold, as well as the whole tag: so whatsoever is drawn out of Scripture by just
consequence and deduction, is as well the word of God, as that which is an
express commandment or example in Scripture, Tombs exam. p. 110. 111.
yea a learned Anabaptist does confess, that a command by way of implication,
is equivalent to a command. Now that Infants are thus included, will appear in
the word Nations, and Them, whereof Infants being an essential part, without
whom, a Nation cannnot subsist, are inclusively and collectively under the
comprise of Christ's command: Yea, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2. to the 7th. there you shall
find a clear place, a Typo ad veritatem, from the type to the truth, from the
signs in the Law, to the thing signified in the Gospel, Aug. in Johan. tract.
26. sacramenta, illa fuerunt in signis diversa, in rebus quae significabantur
paria.
that Infants are to be baptized: For says the Apostle, all our Fathers were
under the cloud, and all passed through the sea, and were baptized unto Moses
in the cloud and in the Sea, etc. which cloud and seawere types of our baptism,
and did shadow it out unto us; and by this all, is meant all our Fathers, which
synechdochically is to be understood of all the people of Israel, both young
and old, men, women, and children, they all were baptized unto Moses, (1.)
under the conduct or guidance of Moses, or into the Doctrine or law of Moses,
even the children as well as the parents, as will appear, Exodus 12.37. for we
cannot imagine them so unnatural as to leave their children behind them in the
wilderness; so that it appears plainly, their Baptism being the same in
substance and signification as ours was, that even children by name are within
the compass of Christ's command.

Obj. How can such be baptized that are not capable of baptism, who have not
understanding to know any benefit by it?

Ans. There is a twofold incapacitie, 1. Total, Capaces sunt spiritus fidei,
per quem animos accipiunt esse spirituale ac supernaturale, ande.
as in stocks and stones, which have no life nor reasonable soul for the spirit
to work upon, as Infants have. 2. Partial, or a proximate incapacitie which are
in Infants, who, though for the present are incapable of actual faith and
repentance, yet not of the principal and root of both; as they have in them a
principal and root of reason, though for the present they cannot act it.
Besides, they are capable of Baptism as well as Circumcision under the law,
since they are merely passive in both. For what is circumcision, but the same
in substance with baptism, which the Apostle calls, the seal of righteousness
which is by faith? Shall then the Gospel put them in a worse condition then
they were before? this were to abridge the mercy of Christ, and draw it into a
narrower compass then he intended, who to show his mercy to Infants, did take
them into his arms, and blessed them, Mark 10.14. If then they were capable of
blessing, when they were not able to go, but must be brought to Christ, being
such as of whom peculiarly the Kingdom of God consists, Mat. 10.6. What then
hinders, but that they may be capable of the early charity of the Church, in
bringing and admitting them to baptism (though they do not understand the
vow) and receive benefit and advantage by partaking of it: and rather when it
is remembered that Christ baptized not at all, and so thought not to baptize
these, did yet afford the ceremony to them, and in the ancient Church was
preparatorie and antecedent to baptism: viz. imposition of hands, and blessing
them, which they being capable of, shows them to be in as great a capacity of
baptism, it being a passive ordinance, when the person baptized is a mere
patient, as in the case of circumcision.

But to admit all further objections for the clearing of this truth, it being
already manifest from the capacity of Infants, and the command of Christ, it is
sufficient to justify the practice of Apostolical Ministers in the
advancement of this Ordinance for the good of them. If any desire to be further
satisfied, he may confer with the learned worthies of these times, as Reverend
Featly, Reverend Baxter, learned Hamond, who have so cleared this truth, that
he that runs may read a full satisfaction in it.

Use 3d. Reprove such as think it folly to be troubled with the sins of little
ones, with their lying and swearing, cursing, and the like, not considering
that the very Original sin of the Infant, the sin of his nature before it does
thus break forth, makes him odious to God, and deserves damnation, much more
will these same cursed fruits do it? See an example in this, 2 King. 2.23. where
those forty that mocked the Prophet were devoured by Bears: where youth was no
excuse for the heinousness of their offense, but were severely punished by the
hand of God.

Use 4. Let this then humble us, in considering the sharp and severe judgments
that often light upon little ones, yea, and take them to heart, and to be much
affected with them, as with most evident demonstrations of Gods wrath against
sin, even against the sin of our nature. Our Savior sighed, Mark 7.34. to
behold the judgment of God upon the deaf man, as a sign of Gods anger upon him
for sin; how much more does it become us to do so in this case. The Lord in his
judgments upon us, that are of years, may have other ends and respects, but in
those upon Infants, he can have no other but only to make known upon them his
wrath against sin. Oh that we could seriously in this case thus expostulate
with our own souls. If God be so angry with the sin of the infant, alas, what
measure of wrath is due to me, that besides the sin of my nature, wherewith I
am every whit as much defiled as it can be, have so many actual sins to answer
for; and have sinned in a far more odious manner then this infant has done? If
this be done to the green tree (says our Savior, Luke 23.31. What shall be
done to the dry; surely this is enough if well considered to melt the hardest
heart into tears thoroughly to bewail the Original corruption especially when
they consider the next point following, namely.

Doct. 2d. That the sin which we are from our very infancy stained withal: is
conveyed by our Parents unto us.

It Is Leprosy began in Adam, and you ran over all successions of mankind. Hence
the Prophet acknowledges, I was conceived in sin, not meaning any particular
sin of his Parents, in the act of generation, for he was begotten and born in
lawful marriage: but his hereditary sin whererof he was guilty in his mothers
womb.

For though many causes may be assigned of actual sins committed by men or
women, as either of themselves, James 1.14. the world, 1 John 2.16. or the
devil, Ephesians. 2.2. yet of original sin that is in Infants, no other cause can be
assigned, no root, no fountain, but this, that they received it from their
parents. Hence is that of Aug. per duos homines transisse peccatum. Both says
Ambrose, parents ut generis sic et erroris. This is agreeable to the law of
nature, Partus sequitur ventrem. If a free man get a child by a bondwoman, the
child shall be bond by the mother, not free by the Father. As sin entered into
Paradise, so it entered into the world: for it is the same sin in us that was
in them; in them actually, in us originally; and the same sin must have the
same beginning: but it came into Paradise by them both, therefore so into the
world: And therefore, Genesis 5.3. it is said, that Adam after his fall, begat a
son in his likeness, after his image, sinful and corrupt as himself was: and
the Evangelist making an opposition between the causes from whence corruption
and grace comes, says, John 1.13. The one comes from bleod, and from the will
of the flesh, and from the will of man, but the other comes from God alone.
Hence there was never any that had parents, (a Father to beget him, and a
Mother to conceive him) that was free from this original sin and corruption of
nature: no not such as had the godliest Parents that ever lived: as the the
children of Noah, Abraham, Isaac, David, did stand in need of circumcision,
Genesis 21.4. which signifies the cutting away of the filthy foreskin of their
hearts, this original corruption, as the Prophet expounds it, Jer. 4.4.
wherefore, Job. 14.4. when he would give a reason why man, every man, young and
old, is not only subject to so many troubles in this life, but also so filthy
and sinful, alleges no more but this, Man that is born of a woman; he is born
of a woman, and therefore must needs be so. So again, Job 15.14. and 25.4. and
though the Mother only be named by Job and David, yet is this corruption
derived to the child, not from the Mother only, but from the father as much as
from the mother. The sin came by two, and the Apostle says it entered by one,
for they two made but one, Two shall be one flesh. By one it entered, yet both
sinned.

R. 1. Because all parents have been poisoned with sin, wher^by their natures
being infected, does convey this poison unto their children: As the brood of
Vipers, Toads, and Spiders, must needs resemble them, and have poison in them.
Hence is that of our Savior, Mat. 7.18. a corrupt Tree cannot bring forth good
fruit; for if the tree be not found, the fruit will prove tainted; and
therefore says Job, Job 14.4. Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean?
Not one. This reason our Savior gieth why all that is in man by nature is
flesh, that is corrupt and sinful, because he that is born of the flesh, that
is, of corrupt parents, John 3.6. is flesh, that is, sinful, which is Job's
meaning, when he says, who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? that is,
no man can beget a child that is clean from sin, himself being unclean: For
such as the fountain is, such is the stream, such as the ground is, such is the
corn, such as the fuel is, such is the fire, such as the mine is, such is the
metal, such as the parents are, so are their children.

Obj. If the root be holy, the branches are holy; therefore the children of the
Saints are holy, and have not this sin conveyed to them by their parents.

Ans. Parents beget children as men, not as they are holy men; Sanctus generat,
non regenerat filius carnis: by generation they derive unto them their nature,
they cannot derive grace which is above nature; we give them that, which our
earthy parents give us, not what our Heavenly Father infuseth into us. There is
a wide difference betwixt infusion and propagation; neither does holiness in
this place signify a freedom from sin, or integrity, or uprightness of
nature; Sanctitas est duplex, fidei and faederis, sancti sunt non virtute
nativitatis secundum carnem, sed virtute Testamenti gratiae et promissionis
dei. Bulling.
but the prerogative and privilege of Abraham's posterity, whereby God
covenanting with him, had appointed always to convert some of his posterity,
and to give them inward holiness; so that here is meant not any inherent
internal qualitative personal holiness, but an external relative faederal
holiness. Hence is that of Grotius, Non loquitur Apostolus de sanctitate
naturali, et naturae liberorum inhaerente, sed de sanctitate adhaerente its
extrinsice (i. e.) de sanctitate faederis, credentium liberi faedere gratiae
comprehensi sunt, et eatenus sancti adeo censentur. This Text shows, that
children are still in covenant with their parents, but proves nothing at all
that they are freed from original sin.

R. 2. Because this sin proceeds causally from the flesh, though subjectively
and formally it is in the Soul; as sickness comes of corrupt meats as the
cause, yet not the meats, but the body is the subject of sickness. They that
live in a smoakie house must needs be smu^ched, and contract some of the
blackness: if you put the whitest wool into the Die-fat of Oade, it will come
out blew: So here a pure soul in an impure body cannot but infect it with
impuritie; this then is an hereditary disease, as a leprous father begets a
leprous son, the disease being in the blood, runs through the whole progeny,
which verifies that of Isa. 18.2. The Fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the
childrens teeth are set on edge. And therefore says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.46.
That was not first which was spiritual, but that which was natural, and
afterward that which was spiritual. The first man was of the earth, earthy,
and so begat children like himself, sinful and corrupt, which was the ground
of this original contagion, which was sprung in our parents by their offense;
and so by the same it is conveyed to posterity.

Obj. If sin be conveyed by the parents to the children, it passes to them
either by the body or by the soul, but by neither it cannot be in the body till
the soul come, and in the soul it is not, because that is immediately created
pure of God. Ergo, unless the soul be traduced from the parents, where place
you original sin?

Ans. The consequence and coherence of the major is to be denied, because in it
there is not a sufficient numeration of the parts by which original sin
passes: for it passes neither by the body nor by the Soul, but by the offense
of our parents; in regard whereof, God, whilst he creates men souls, bereaves
it of original righteousness, which he gave on that condition to our first
parents, that they should continue or lose them to posterity, according as
themselves either kept or lost them; which privation of righteousness, in
respect of God, for man's offense, is not a sin, but a just punishment, though
in respect of the parents which draw it unto themselves and their posterity,
it be a sin; which through the conjunction of both, is conveyed from the
parents unto their children; so neither the body alone, nor the soul is to be
respected, but as they jointly make one man.

Use 1. This may meet with the proud hearts of men, who are ready to advance
themselves in respect of their birth and parentage, which if they did truly
consider, this Doctrine would rather humble them, seeing nothing is derived
from them but baseness and corruption, their natures being vile, contaminats
their posterity, and instead of making them honorable, does make them odious
in the pure eyes of God, yea, and most miserable for ever, if they be not born
again, John 3.3. if we got not a better birth then that which we had from our
parents, it may be said of us, as it was said of Judas, it had been better for
us that we had never been born, Mat. 26.24. It is reported of Diogenes, that he
told Alexander the great, that he could know no difference betwixt the bones of
King Philip and other men: what he spoke of dead men lying in the ground, holds
true of all men living, so long as they lie in the grave of sin, there is no
difference betwixt the greatest and the meanest, for all are by nature sinful,
and this sin of our nature is conveyed from the fathers to the children; so
that here is no cause of boasting, but rather matter of abasement, whereby the
best may be humbled upon the sense of this their condition. The greatness of
birth through thy corruption makes thee more incapable of grace, then those of
meaner degree. You see your calling brethren (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.26.
and surely so may we now) how that not many great men, not many noble are
called: Even greatness of birth and nobility is a bar oftentimes to keep men
from salvation, and life eternal; though, blessed be God, some great men are
called, yet there are but few, not many, says the Apostle. O what madness
then is it to rest and glory in our birth, in that we were born of such
parents, and never seek to be born of God. This is that which makes men truly
honorable, when they become truly gracious. Hence 1 Samuel 2.30. They that honor
God, them will God honor. As they of Berea, Acts 17.11. were more noble then
they of Thessalonica, showing the fruits of grace, in receiving the word with
all readiness of mind. And thus if our nobility appears, we may take comfort
in our estate, otherwise we may be abased for the sadness of our condition. Be
not then like the bigger the better; hills the higher the barrener; but like
unto a Diamond.

Use 2. This may serve to humble all parents in the consideration of those sins
that break forth in their childrens lives, their pride and stubbornness, their
averseness from God and prophannesse, all which is by them the cause of great
sorrow and humiliation. Hence is that of Solomon, Prove. 10.1. A foolish Son is
the heaviness of his mother. And 17.25. A foolish Son is a grief to his
father, and bitterness to her heart that bare him. For the root, from whence
all this evil springs, they had from their Parents: the plague sore of sin
was conveyed by them, and this they were infected with from their very birth.
In the time of the plague, we count it a great affliction to bring the
infection into our houses, and set it upon our children; and yet we have all
done worse to our children then this, we have set upon them a far more
dangerous and deadly disease, which does not only slay the body, but overthrow
the Soul, and that everlastingly, if God look not in mercy upon them. 1 If the
Lord was angry with the Serpent, and had laid a curse upon it, because it was
but an instrument used by the Devil, for the corrupting of our first parents,
though it were no cause of it, Genesis 3.14. how much more reason has he to be
angry with us, that have not only been instruments to convey this cursed
contagion of nature into our children, but the principal agents and causes of
it. Oh consider then this, you that forget God, that have no care in the
education and bringing up of your children in the knowledge of the ways o^
God, ye have much to answer for at the Tribunal seat of Christ, that having
conveyed poison into your children at their birth, you seek not after the
antidote to prevent their eternal ruin: will you be instruments to wound their
souls, and never seek after a Chyrurgeon to heal them? shall you be the cause
of giving a deadly potion that will work their undoing, and never have recourse
to the Physician in their behalf to cure them? Oh, here is a cursed neglect! Be
abashed therefore in the thoughts of this, and l^^ not your souls be so
secure, as to endanger your own eternal welfare by neglecting the duty in
preventing your childrens woe; but be humbled for them your selves, being the
cause of their inbred malady, which by you were conveyed unto them.

Use 3d. Exhort to stir up parents to do their utmost to work grace in their
children, and so to cure that deadly poison and infection that they have
conveyed into them. Now for the better enforcing so necessary a duty, I will
set down

1. Certain motives that may provoke them to this care.

2. Discover the means that they must use to this purpose.

Mot. 1. Because of that natural affection that we bear to our children,
whereby we are moved to love them, hence bowels of pity and compassion appears
toward them, when we see them in any misery. And therefore the Lord has been
pleased to set forth his mercy and compassion toward his children, by the
compassion of a Mother. Isa. 4.15. Can a Mother forget her sucking child, that
she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? And by the compassion of
a Father, Psalm 103.13. Like as a Father pittieth his children, so the Lord
pittieth them that fear him. He is worse then a beast that pittieth not his
children, and grieves not to see them in misery Lam. 4.2. Even the
Sea Monsters draw out the breast, they give suck to their young ones. Yea,
where there is not natural affection, there the very light of nature is
extinguished, and such in the just judgment of God, are given up unto a
reprobate mind, Romans 1.31. Now what love can we bear to our children, if we
have no care of their souls; the nature of Christianity is to seek the good
(...) their souls whom we love: as Abraham expressed his love to Ishmael, Genesis
17.18. O that Ishmael might live in thy sight, which should be the desire of
all godly parents, Oh that my children might live in thy sight! that they might
fear thee, and know thee, and learn truly to serve thee: this is the greatest
portion that can be given them, the largest possessions we can desire to leave
them, as that they may live in the sight of God: For godliness is the greatest
gain, and has the promises of this life, and of a better, 1 Timothy 4.8. Strive
then to make your children godly, and let the bent of your affections toward
them lie that way, and if they become once sincerely to love God, then ^^ve you
showed natural affection in the highest degree toward them, which at the last
will bring not only grace to them, but glory for ever to your selves.

2d. Mot. Because the rule of justice requires that we should make them amends
for the wrong we have done them; if we injure any man in body, goods, or good
name, we are bound in conscience to make him satisfaction: See the equity of
Gods Law in this point, Exodus 21.19. He that smote him shall pay for the loss of
his time, and shall cause him to be thoroughly healed; how much more are we to
be careful to cure the inbred malady of our children, and to heal that filthy
dissease, which from our selves have been conveyed unto them? Shall we be the
causes of their misery, and not use our best endeavors to cure them? It is
through us that they become odious as soon as they are born in the sight of God,
and shall not we seek to make them amiable and lovely in his presence? shall we
be the progenitors of their evil, and not the promoters of their good? Oh far
be it from us to be so forgetful of our own duty, and so neglectful in not
using all means for their good. This was that which good Hezekiah meant in his
prayer, Isa. 38.18, 19. The grave cannot praise thee, death cannot celebrate
thee, the living shall praise thee (and who among the living?) the Father to the
children shall make known thy truth. Hence is that of the Apostle, Epb. 6.9. Ye
fathers bring up your children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. And
so Psalm. 78.5. He established a Testimony in Jacob, and appointed a Law in
Israel, which he commanded our Fathers that they should make them known unto
their Children. Let all parents therefore, think of this seriously, and
consider, that it will be a most heavy reckoning one day they must give for the
neglect of their childrens souls; those especially, that instead of reforming
them, do tolerate them in most sinful courses, as in lying, swearing,
Sabbath-breaking, and the like; these are far from Abraham's practice Genesis
18.19. and Josuah's resolution, Jos. 24.15. that instructed their families, and
brought their children to fear the Lord. Consider then this motive, you that
desire to serve the Lord; remember it is but justice to seek after all means to
do your children good; you have wronged them greatly, ^ow recompense that
wrong you have done them by seasoning their tender years with the knowledge of
Jesus Christ.

3d. Because the propagation of Religion depends principally in the education
of our children. To this purpose you have a notable example of this care in the
two Tribes and the half, that had their possessions given them beyond Jordan
Iosuah. 2.24, 25. we have done it (set up this Altar) for fear of this thing,
saying, In time to come your Children might speak to our Children: saying, what
have you to do with the Lord God of Israel? so shall your Children make our
Children cease from fearing the Lord. Concerning which you must understand,
that there is no man does so much desire to have a posterity, and to provide
for posterity as the Lord does. And surely the means whereby the Lord may have
a posterity raised and preserved is, to derive Religion unto them, when Parents
are not only Religious themselves, but be careful to provide that their
Children may be so also. This is that Seminary of Gods Church. Here was the
cause of that Commandment. Deuteronomy. 4.9. Take heed to thy self, and keep thy soul
diligently, lest thou forget the things which thine eyes have seen, and lest
they depart from thy heart all the days of thy life; but teach them thy son,
and thy sons sons. This is made by the Prophet Malachi 2.15. to have been the
cause why the Lord at the first institution of marriage, appointted but one
woman for one man, and did so restrain promiscuous lust, that he might seek a
seed of God; that is, that he might provide for the continuance of his Church.
And that is one principal end. Psalm. 22.29, 30. in converting of us Gentiles
unto the Gospel, and men of all sorts amongst us, poor and rich, that our seed
might serve him, and might be accounted unto the Lord for a generation: that
God might have a posterity and a people to serve him when we are gone. How
should then this encourage us in the education of our children, seeing the
propagation of Religion does thus greatly depend upon it. How should we seek
to train them up in the fear of God, and so season their tender years with the
knowledge of Christ, that they may be instruments to glorify the God of their
Fathers, and to continue faithful in their service to him all the days of
their life. If Parents were but careful in this, then should they find that of
the wise man to prove true, Prove. 17.6. That their Childrens Children would be
a crown of old age, and be an enlargement of the greatest comforts unto their
souls; whereas on the contrary, if Parents be neglective in this, it will add
to the store of their confusion.

4. Because of that heavy charge God has given Parents concerning their
children. For this they must know, that their children are not their own but
the Lords. Hence Ezekiel. 16.20. The Lord says, thy sons and thy daughters whom
thou have born unto me, thou have taken and sacrificed. And as we have begotten
and born them for him, so has he charged us to educate and bring them up for
him. And that with such a charge as the Prophet tells Ahab in a parable, that
he had received for the keeping of a man committed to his trust in the battle
1 King. 20.39. If by any means he be missing, thy life shall be for his life.
If the child's soul perish) through the Parents default, whom God put in trust
to keep and look to it) the Parents soul must die for it. For this is the
righteous sentence of God against them, whom he has charged with the souls of
others. Ezekiel. 3.18. He shall die in his iniquity, but his blood will I require
at thy hand: but some will here say, this charge concerns the Ministers not
the Parents; I answer, that every Parent is as deeply charged by God with the
souls of his children, as any Pastor with the souls of his flock, and more
deeply too. Exodus 13.8. Thou shall show thy son the meaning, the end, and use
of the Sacrament of the passover, and Deuteronomy. 6 6, 7. These words which I command
thee this day, thou shall teach them diligently to thy children; which place
discovers expressly the care that Parents should have toward their childrens
souls; that they might not be careless in their duty, in their behalf to
instruct and teach their children according to the command of God. Oh the
shameful neglect that Parents herein are guilty of? how do they suffer their
children to run into all manner of wickedness, and never seek to restrain or
reform them in the least measure. Surely the doom will lie heavy one day on
their souls for this horrible neglect of their duty in failing to instruct
their Children. Oh consider this betimes all you that God has given the
blessings of Children unto; remember that those sweet babes are but lent to you
from God, that you might bring them up in his fear, that they may become babes
of grace: and let it be your endeavors so to instruct them, as that God may
have the glory, and your souls reap the comfort in thus discharging your duty.

And for further direction, let us be careful to use these means which will
further us in the discharge of our duty, toward curing that inbred malady,
which is conveyed from our selves to our children.

1. Let us seek to instruct them in the fear of God: this God has appointed to
prepare their hearts, and make them more capable of Grace. Hence Prove. 4.3, 4.
Solomon says when he was young and tender his Father taught him: yea and his
Mother too. Prove. 31.1. yea, he often puts Gods people in mind, not only of
the instruction and charge they receive from their Fathers; but also of the Law
and Doctrine of their Mothers. Prove. 19.6.26. which shows plainly it was the
practice of the Church of God then; that even Mothers were teachers of their
Children. Hence that direction comes seasonable to Parents. Prove. 22 6. Train
up a child in his way, says Solomon, that is, that way that is fit for him
according to his capacity, as he is able to receive it by little at once, as
pouring out liquor into narrow mouthed bottles: to move beyond the sphere of
their activity is to prejudice their capacity; and therefore we must be tender
of their condition, lest we hinder their reception of instruction. Young
children are like the twiggs of trees, which being young will bend to our minds,
but if much bowed, will break in pieeces. So if we do not much oppress the
memory of children, they will be ready to receive the instructions we give
them, but if herein we burden them, they will grow dull and weary in well doing,
we must then be careful of the measure of instruction, that so giving them
according to their capacity, they may receive comfort and benefit by it: To
this end we must acquaint them with the practice of religion, as reading the
Word and Prayer, giving of thanks at their meat, and singing of Psalms. We
shall find, Mat. 21.15. That the little children had learned of their parents
to sing Hosanna, part of the hundred and eighteen Psalm, to the praise of
Christ, yea more then this, parents should endeavor to restrain their children
from evil, and to breed in them a conscience of sin, even while they are young,
to bring them to the public worship of God, and to examine them how they
profit under the means of grace; to wit, how they understand plain what they
hear, and to make it to them; and in thus doing, they will learn in time to know
the will of God, and in knowing of it, to come to the practice of the same, to
the glory of God, and their own eternal comfort.

2. Acquaint them betimes with the knowledge of Gods word; for this is life
eternal, to know Christ as he is revealed in his word. It is a true saying,
(which though the expression be homely) we have our children as we breed them;
if we suffer them to lie, swear, and dishonor God in their Infancy, we shall
see the fruits of it in riper years; but if we season their tender years with
the knowledge of God in his word, we shall see the comfortable fruits of this in
our lives, the tender plants are pliable to bend, Quo semel est imbutea recens
servabit odorem testadiu: Habitus difficulter mobiles.
which once grown trees, become inflexible. An habit in sin is hard to be
removed, which by timely prevention of frequent acts in the practice of
holiness may be hindered: It is therefore a seasonable advice given by Solomon,
Eccles. 12.1. Remember thy creator in the days of thy youth: Youth being that
spring time, wherein should appear the hopeful blossoms of goodness, if not
blasted through the parents neglect, for want of timely instruction. It Is a
rare character which God gives of Abraham, Genesis 18.19. and takes notice of him
on this score, in that he knew he would instruct his children in the fear of
his name: Happy then are those parents that herein imitate faithful Abraham,
timely to acquaint their children with the knowledge of God: God will own such
as he did Abraham, and give them the blessings of his right hand, with the
greatest joy and comfort. Hence we may say with David, Psalm. 127.3. Lo children
are an heritage of the Lord. And verse 5. Happy is the man that has his quiver
full of them; they shall not be ashamed, but they shall speak with their enemies
in the gate.

3. Cause them to frequent the public worship of God, when you have the spouts
of grace pouring forth incomparable sweetness and comfort, on the souls of
all such as shall attend and wait upon it. We find, Exodus 10.9. that Moses told
Pharaoh, that they must have the little ones with them to solemnize the worship
they were to perform to God in the wilderness. It cannot but add much joy to
the parents to hear their children sing the song of Sion, before they have
known the ditties of sin, and to speak plainly the language of Canaan, before
they have been corrupted with the expressions of Ashdod: Cause them therefore
to frequent the public worship, where the presence of Christ does most
gloriously appear, not only in the tender of his grace and mercy for our
childrens good, but in the choice embracings of their ^^ligious endeavors, who
have been educated in the fear of his holy name. It is a practice much to be
condemned in many parents, in that they are careless of their childrens good,
in causing them to frequent the public worship of God; they do rather
tolerate them to stay at home, to be nursed in profaneness and ignorance,
then to cause them to frequent the public worship of God, where they may be
directed to walk in the comfortable paths of grace and holiness; it is to be
feared that such children one day will have cause to curse their parents
indulgency; yea, their very parents, for this neglect may expect, that those
darlings of theirs, when they should become their greatest comforts, to prove
the greatest crosses and grief of heart unto them. Be advised then you parents
that are herein guilty, remember the doctrine you have read, that you conveigh
nothing but corruption to your children; and will you add fuel to the fire, be
guilty of more injury in keeping your children from the public worship of God?
let this be far from you so to do, but rather endeavor as to acquaint them
betimes with the knowledge of God, so to cause them to frequent his public
worship, where they shall find great comfort and sweetness administered unto
their souls.

Fourthly, Give good ex^mple to them, that by your light they may shine in a
continued light of holiness and piety. This made David, Psalm 101.2. resolve
to walk in his house with a perfect heart. And Job Job, 11.14. to say, let not
wickedness dwell in thy Tabernacles. The loose lives of parents, do too often
prove much injurious to their childrens souls; so that we may observe in the
childrens practice, the fathers guilt of their impiety: Hence you have it in
the proverb, that when the child swears, the Chicken crows but as it hears the
old Cock; and if the father reprove, the child is ready to say, Medice cura
teipsum: Father, reform thy self, if thou had brought me up better, I had
learned to be better: this is the fruits of a bad example, which parents must
learn to avoid, if they desire, either to discharge their own duty, or to save
their poor childrens souls. Learn then, Oh parents, to cull out the best
examples for your children, be ye followers of Christ, that they may follow you
in the ways of Christ; let your light so shine in the presence of God before
them, that they may see your good works, to glorify their father in heaven. Do
not with Samson pull down those pillars of goodness by your sins, that shall
not only quash your self, but be the ruin of your children; your facts become
examples, those examples laws; and it is natural for your children to follow
the law of fact, before the law of faith, a visible pattern, rather then a mere
audible Doctrine.

5. Examine your children how they profit by the means of grace; this is the
means to sharpen, and whet them on your children; use in this case makes
perfect, and the more fit for the practice of holiness: A pious education is a
great prevention of those gross evils which their natures are prone to commit.
Examination is the trial which by grown experience encourages their practice in
old age; hence are they ready to praise God for the care and zeal their parents
had in their education: and considering the progress they have made in the
ways of Christ under God; they are ready to acknowledge it from their Parents
care, which must needs cause great comfort to them.

6. Lastly, be earnest to God by prayer for them. Solomon's Mother Prove. 31.2.
calls him the Son of her youth. She was wont to pray much for him: what
greater comfort can arise to the child when grown in years, then to consider he
was the Son of his Parents prayers: they begged him of God, and God gave a
return to their prayers in giving grace unto him. There are too many herein
faulty in the neglect of their duty, both for themselves and their children:
yea, they are so far from praying for them, as that they are too ready upon
the least occasion to curse them bitterly: What comfort can these expect from
the hands of God, either for themselves or children? but that the Lord might
justly plague them in their offspring in suffering their children to prove the
greatest crosses; whom otherwise had yielded the greatest comforts? Let us then
with Hannah pray for our children, and with Monica pray for the salvation of
them, prayer is requisite, that we may be new born in grace, and that being so
born, we may grow in grace. Prayer it is the Key to open the gates of Heaven
and let grace out; and prayer is a lock to fasten our hearts, and keep grace
in. Let all Parents therefore be exhorted to be earnest to God by prayer for
their children; So shall they wash away those stains wherewith they have
polluted their childrens souls, and take away that guilt they have brought upon
them by conveying their corruption unto them. That whereas by nature they are
the children of wrath and heirs of Hell, God hearing their prayers in their
childrens behalf, will make his promise not only to be their God, but the God
of their seed in making them the sons of God, and children of light to shine as
stars in the firmament of glory. To which he bring both us and our children
for his sake who has so dearly bought us, even Jesus Christ the righteous. To
whom with the Father and blessed spirit, three persons but one God be ascribed
all glory and honor now and for ever. Amen.

Imprimatur,

Edm. Calamy.

FINIS.

