Alderman Bunce HIS SPEECH TO THE Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council of
LONDON, TOUCHING The Kings Resolution to accept of Honorable Conditions from a
Free-Parliament for his Admitment.

LONDON, Printed by T. S. for O. H. and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange.
1660.

Alderman Bunce's Speech to the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of
LONDON, touching the KINGS Resolution to accept of Honorable Conditions from a
Free-Parliament for his Admitment.
My Lord, Gentlemen, and Fellow-Citizens,

THat I am after so long a time of Banishment, and almost despair, returned
again without fear into my native Country, I need not I think tell you how much
I rejoice at; but I cannot indeed tell you that unexpressible joy which I feel
within my bosom, to find my poor distressed and distracted Country in some
hopes of Settlement and Restoration to her pristine Glory, even then when she
seemed to be most overwhelmed and swallowed up, under the usurpation and
tyranny of the most mean and Fanatic Spirits of the Nation.

Nor can I here forbear to burst out into Praises and Thanks to God for his so
great a Mercy and Deliverance, That he has at length been pleased to withdraw
his afflicting hand in some measure from us; That he has opened the eyes of
the greatest part of this Nation, except those who are wilfully and obstinately
blinded by their own pernicious and covetous Interests; That after we had
wilfully run headlong into the Ditch of Ruin, he is pleased to lay to his
hand to help us out.

It Is well (my Lord) that though we have bought our Knowledge and Repentance at
so dear a rate, at the expense of so much Blood and Treasure, yet that we can
repent at last, That we are at las: sensible of our Distractions, that now we
are able to bear no more, we have one who will help us to throw off our
Burdens, That we can now see our blindness, our error, our folly, that whilst
we endeavored to free our selves from the pretended Tyranny of our lawful
King, Sovereign, and Superior, we subjected our selves under the Arbitrary
will and power of our Equals, if not Inferiors.

I must confess (my Lord) though it is well known to you all Gentlemen, that I
was at the beginning of the late unhappy wars, blinded as well as others, yet I
utterly disown that I ever had any design or intention to wrong my Printe,
though I accounted it then the duty of every Freeborn Englishman to stand for
the privilege of Parliament, as for his Native Birthright, so far I durst go,
but no farther; for when I saw those, who before they had got the power into
their hands, pretended to maintain Parliamentary privileges, pretended to
settle the King in Glory, violently infringe the first, and murder the second,
I could not but in reason and conscience protest against them.

Nor was the murdering of their King, or infringing the privileges of
Parliament, the furthest those men went who had then got the power into their
hands, and ruled only by Sword-law, but having given the Name of a Parliament
to a select number of their Creatures, and some who durst do no otherwise than
obey their Commands, they made Laws at their pleasure, disinheriting the
lawful Heir, and abolishing the power of the House of Lords, the chief part of
a Parliamentary Grand Council, they sold the Kings, Queens, Bishops, Deans and
Chapters Lands, to maintain their Violencies and Villainies, or to enrich
themselves, making a prey of these Nations, and over-throwing the Fundamental
laws of the Land.

This my Lord you very well know was the Praemunire we had run our selves into.
This was that we fought for, this was that for which we consumed so much Blood
and Treasure: in short, we fought for Liberty that we might be enslaved, we
fought for Religion that we might nourish Heresies, Sects and Schisms in the
Church, we spent our Estates freely, to maintain a War amongst our selves under
specious pretenses, that we might have them preyed upon by ravenous Wolves.

But when we had run our selves into all these miseries, under a piece of a
Parliament, who had endeavored all that lay in their power to establish their
own Government, yet were they themselves at length turned out by their Servant,
their General, (the just reward of their treachery to their Master) who
Establishes in himself that power, which he had before avowed as tyrannical,
and usurps to himself, though not fully the Title, yet more than the power of
any King of England; so it fairly proved that he only defamed Kingship as
Tyrannical, that he might be a Tyrant.

The many changes and Alterations since in the English Government, are so new,
that they need no recital, only thus much, that as all they in whose hands the
Government was, were equally guilty of the forementioned crimes, so though they
did oppose one another, yet they all agreed together in continuing and adding
to the Nations Distractions, in preferment to employments, either in Church or
State, such only as were either as guilty as themselves, or else possessed with
their Fanatic Opinions, in defaming the lawful Heir, and endeavoring by
Calumnies, to engender an odium of him in the peoples minds, which might have
found its desired effect, had not the people for their Cheats and Delusions,
conceived a just odium of them, so that the arrow they shot, returned again
upon their own heads.

But many of the good people of England are still possessed with their Calumnies,
and believe many of them for truth, though against such clear and certain
Evidences; Many understanding people of the Nation, convincing themselves by
Imaginary circumstances, that not only his Majesty, but his Brothers, the
thrice Noble Dukes of York and Gloucester, have left the Religion of their
Fathers and Country, and are turned to the Fopperies of Romish Superstition and
Idol try, which how false it is, the God of Heaven knows, and my self can
witness his and his Brother, constant use and practice of the English
Liturgy, and other Customs of the best reformed Church of England, his
constant encouragement of such servants of his, as profess the true Protestant
Religion, whether in Episcopacy or Presbytery, and his contrary discoragement
of all such who permit themselves to be inveigled into Popish or Jesuitical
opinions and tenants, being sufficient evidence, that he is so far from leaving
of his true and mother Church, that all possible encouragement is, will
certainly be at all times given by him, to the true and sound professors of the
Protestant Religion.

For those other Calumnies laid upon, and only settled in the hearts of the
common Soldiers, (whom their Officers here have made believe, that they must
expect nothing but death, if he should be admitted to his Crown) viz. that he
is revengefull, cruel, never forgetting injuries, but though soothing for a
time, yet at fit opportunities resolute in his revenge, all that know him, know
to be false, for he is Gentle, Merciful, Peaceable, and rather inclined to
suffer injuries, than either to give or avenge them.

That he intends (as some say) to come with a Foreign Force to regain his Right,
and settle himself in his Throne, would be but what we might in justice expect,
who have so long exposed him to the miseries of the wide world, and made him
the pattern of Patience to future generations, it being lawful both by the
Laws of God and man for any one to use all means and endeavors for the
recovery of his own; yet so meek and patient has he been, that it has not so
much as entered into his thoughts to acquist his Kingdom by force or violence,
whilst he can hope to have it by the love of his Subjects; he therefore is
resolvedly bent to attend the pleasure of a free Parliament, and wholly intent
to accept of such conditions, as shall be proposed with honor by them, rather
resolving to part with some of his Right, than to let these Nations run on into
further distractions, or his Subjects be oppressed.

That we might as a just judgment of God have expected a foreign force here
amongst us for our obstinacy, we cannot but be sensible of, but that we have so
merciful a Prince, who rather waves his Right, and endures with patience his
expulsion, than feeks or attempts to invade us by a Foreign Power, by which,
though he might gain revenge and satisfaction to himself, yet must it
necessarily be with our utter Ruin, and deserved destruction, we must
acknowledge as a great mercy of Gods.

It is not unlikely that you my Lord, and these other Gentlemen my
fellow-Citizens may admire somewhat, that I, who was once so far drawn on the
other side, should now declaim so much against it, but experience has now
undeceived me, I was for the maintaining, not the infringing Privileges of
Parliament. I was for the restoring, not murdering of the King, I was for them
so long as they stood fast to the Oath they took in the Solemn League and
Covenant, to maintain the King and his Posterity, not for them, when they had
beheaded him, and banished his Posterity; I was for the moderation of a Kingly
Government, not for the erecting of Anarchichall Tyrannies, or Governments ad
libitum.

But when I saw that those, who pretended that they acted only for the Nations
good, intended only for their own, to distract and ruin these Nations, to
depresse the Nobility and Gentry, only to raise themselves; that they began to
oppress and force unheard of impositions and burdens upon the Commonalty, to
maintain their Villainies, and enrich themselves, to confound and overthrow all
Religion, under a pretense of settling and maintaining it, 'twas time to
withdraw my self from, nor could my Conscience proceed any further with them,
'twas they (my Lord) that are changed, and not I.

What I at first declared for, and have already ventured my Estate for, that I
still will, and shall maintain to the utmost drop of my blood, viz. to defend
the Privileges of Parliament, without infringing the Royal Prerogative, to
endeavor the maintaining the King, his Posterity, according to the Solemn
League and Covenant, this I think (my Lord) was the first pretense of these
men's raising War against his late Majesty, which at first drew so many honest
men to their party; but what has been the issue of these pretenses, we have
seen by too sad experience.

I think it was therefore the duty, my Lord, of every honest man to stand to
those first Principles that he undertook, and not with the multitude (blinded
by the ambition and self Interests of some particular men) run into those
wickednesses and mischiefs which they have since perpetrated, and I think you
my Lord, and the rest of my brethren and Fellow Citizens here, ought to take
these things into consideration, and remember that Oath which I presume most of
you took in the Solemn League and Covenant.

I think my Lord I need make no further apology, either for my self or the
cause I plead for, there is so much of justice in it, that it needs no Oratory
to confirm, nor could that cause be ever confuted but by the Sword, whose
Tyrannical power we have sufficiently felt, and seen the difference, between a
Government by usurping and perjured persons, and the Clemency of a too mild and
gracious Prince.

I shall my Lord, add no further, but only conclude with this Prayer, That
the God of Heaven would open your eyes, and the eyes of this whole Nation, and
strengthen your hands in the settlement of these three distressed Nations in
peace and quietness, which can no better be done than by your hearty prayers
and endeavors for the Restoration of the lawful Heir to his Right: for how
can we expect that he will ever let Justice flourish amongst us whilst we deny
Justice to our Soveraegn.

FINIS.

