REASONS SHOWING the Necessity of Reformation of the Public 1. Doctrine, 2.
Worship, 3. Rites and Ceremonies, 4. Church Government,
and Discipline, Reputed to be (but indeed, not) Established by LAW.

Humbly offered to the Serious Consideration of this present PARLIAMENT.

By diverse Ministers of sundry Counties in ENGLAND.

2 COR. 13.8. For, we can do nothing against the truth; but, for the truth.
LONDON: Printed by JA: COTTREL. MDCLX.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE Lords and Commons ASSEMBLED in PARLIAMENT.
IT is far from our thoughts to oppose, or disparage Orthodox Doctrine, a
well-composed Liturgy, Rites for decency and order, Ordination of Ministers,
Apostolical Episcopacie, or due Rules of Discipline. We are for all these, with
Truth; and, against rigid Impositions which may debar a Christian of any
liberty allowed him by Christ.

Nor do we offer any Polemical Discourse, or Theological Debates proper for a
Divinity-School, or Synod: but only, what we humbly conceive more suitable to
a Parliament. Our work, chiefly, is, out of those Laws, which we, as Ministers,
are bound to take special notice of; and, out of those Books said to be by
those Laws settled; to make out these two things. First, that (so far as we can
apprehend) neither the Articles of Religion, the Books of Com. Prayer, or
Ordination, the Jurisdiction of Bishops, claimed before 17 Car. 1. nor so much
as their Being, as Bishops, sithence; nor those Canons so much contended for,
are indeed established by Law. Secondly, that none of these, as they now stand,
ought to be confirmed and settled. But, all, with submission. And this we trust
shall not be censured as Eccentrick. For, albeit we acknowledge the learned in
the Law to be far more able in matter of Law, touching these things; yet,
seeing every Subject is to inform himself of all such Laws as more especially
concern his own calling, we hope it will not be judged an extravagancie, or
presumption in us, to produce those Laws which more nearly concern all of our
Function.

Of this, we apprehend some necessity. 1. Because it is already too obvious,
that too many (notwithstanding all pretenses of Moderation) do already fly
higher than ever; some, in asserting Arminianisme to be the Doctrine of the
Church of England, thinking thereby to force all to embrace it; some, in
stickling for the Liturgy commonly used; some, still holding up sole Ordination
by, and sole Jurisdiction of Bishops; and, all Canons, not only made in
England, but in Rome it self, (if not repugnant to our Laws;) laboring to
possess the people that all these are settled by Law, and therefore to be
continued, and imposed, without alteration; and that all who seek a Reformation
of them, do oppose and violate the established Laws. 2. Because if men go on in
such ways, and prevail therein, it is to be feared, that, in short time, every
Minister of different judgment, (how able, godly, and useful soever) will be
put, not only out of his present place, but out of the Ministry also, as it
has already too often happened. And indeed, it can hardly be found in any age
since the Conquest, that where Kings have not curbed the violence of Bishops,
they have ever sharply persecuted all that threw off Popery; which Persecutions
usually produced Confusions in the Commonwealth. For prevention whereof, we
humbly beseech all Noble Spirits, and faithful prudent Patriots, to look back
upon the Mutinies, Insurrections and Rebellions, in Edw. 6. his time,
occasioned by fomenting, and not moderating the furious Zeal even of those that
were most countenanced by that pious King; which notwithstanding the Act of 1.
Edw. 6.1. made many to flee so high, as exasperated the other side so far, as
that it put several parts of the Kingdom into Combustion. Nor will those rivers
of blood shed in Q. Mary's days, by recalling the Bishops and others formerly
deprived, and giving way to their wonted tyranny, in the height thereof, be
forgotten, while ought of Protestant Religion remains. Nor will it be
unseasonable to reflect upon the throwing out of many worthy Ministers in Q.
Elizabeth's reign; and, of many more, under K. James. For, that Noble King,
immediately after his coming to the Crown, was so plied by Bishops, that,
notwithstanding the Conference at Hampton Court, the Prelatical Party prevailed
so far, that the Liturgy (then much complained of) remained in greatest part,
and in the most material points, unreformed: to which, they all were compelled
to subscribe: which had never been required before; and many Illegal Canons
were made, and enforced so far, that within the space of two years (as was
credibly reported) 70 Ministers were deprived, 113 not suffered to preach; and,
about 94 more, were under Canonical Admonition, the next door to Deprivation.
The carrying on of all which, together with the countenancing of Arminianism,
formerly declared against, by that Learned King James (witness his promoting of
the Synod of Dort) did so much, and so generally offend, and exasperate, that,
after many thousands were compelled to leave their native Countries, to dwell
in Mesech, and to take up their habitations in the tents of Kedar; others were
drawn on to engage so deeply in the public differences, (which, as to matters
of Religion, were occasioned by the continuing of the former corruptions, and
by those Canons, of 1639.) as produced all those horrid and bloody effects,
which we abhor to mention, and tremble to remember.

May it therefore please your Wisdoms, Piety, and Goodness, to procure a review
of all these things, after the example of the Parliament in 3.4. Edw. 6. and,
to call some of the most moderate and able persons of every different party to
assist therein; and thereupon to settle all the things of God in a solid and
moderate way, that all Ordinances of Christ may be restored to their pristine
Purity, all Christians reduced to the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace:
and, in the mean time, nothing to be imposed which may grieve or offend those
who shall be careful not to disturb the Public Peace. In order to which ends,
we humbly recommend to your Noble and Pious thoughts, that of the Apostle; Let
your moderation be known to all men; the LORD is at hand. For this, and for
your Honors,

Your humble Servants shall ever pray.

REASONS SHOWING The Necessity of Reformation, etc.
I. Of DOCTRINE.
THe Public Doctrine of the Church of England, as it is commonly received, and
insisted upon, is said to be contained in the 39 Articles, agreed upon by the
Archbishops and Bishops of both Provinces, and the whole Clergy, in the
Convocation holden at London, in the year 1562. Those Articles are taken to be
ratified and confirmed by Act of Parliament, in 13 Eliz. cap. 12. Which Act
provideth, That no person shall be admitted to any Benefice with Cure, except
he shall first have subscribed the said Articles in presence of the Ordinary,
and publicly read the same in the Parish Church of that Benefice whereof he
shall have Cure, with declaration of his unfeigned assent thereunto, within two
months after his Induction, etc. upon default hereof, to be ipsofacto,
immediately deprived. And, if any Ecclesiastical Person shall advisedly
maintain, or affirm any Doctrine contrary or repugnant to any of the said
Articles; and being convented, shall persist therein, or not revoke his error,
or, after revocation return again to it, he shall be deprived of his
Ecclesiastical Promotions. This is the effect of that Statute, as to this Point.

But these Articles are both Doubtful, and Defective.

1. Doubtful.
1. Because, it appears not that they were all, or any of them confirmed by
Parliament in the 13 Eliz. for as much as they are not therein in expressly
inserted, nor so much as their number; but only the Title Page of them
mentioned. Nor is it known where the Original is enrolled.

2. Of those 39 Articles, there were 36 of them set forth (yet not ratified by
Parliament) in Edw. 6. his reign: the other were added by the Convocation, in
An. 1562.

3. In the Books of Articles now printed, and ever since 10 Caroli 1. there is
a Declaration of that his late Majesty prefixed thereunto, by the advice and
procurement of the then Bishops, (after Arminianism began to perk, and to be
openly preached by the rising Party) to this effect, viz. 1. That those
Articles contain the true Doctrine of the Church of England, agreeable to Gods
Word: all therefore, are required to continue in the Uniform Profession
thereof; and, the least difference from them, prohibited. 2. That the Bishops
and Clergy, from time to time in Convocation, upon their humble desire, should
have license under the Broad This shows who did pen it.
Seal, to deliberate of, and to do all such things, as being made plain by
them, and assented unto by his then Majesty, shall concern the settled
continuance of the said Doctrine (as well as Discipline) then established; from
which no variying or deparing in the least degree, should be endured. 3. That
all curious search, and disputes, touching any points contained therein, be
laid aside, and shut up in Gods Promises, as generally set forth, and in the
general meaning of these Articles. And, that no man shall either print or
preach, to draw any Article aside any way, nor put his own sense or Comment
upon it, but shall take it in the Literal and Grammatical sense of it. This
Declaration is published with the said Articles, by Command.

If this be still continued, and confirmed, then all these sad Consequences
must needs follow:

1. That no Minister shall have so much liberty to interpret any one of those
Articles, as is not only allowed, but required of him, in his Ordination, to
expound the Word of God it self. But this is a notorious truth, that after that
Declaration was printed and published, as also a Proclamation to the same
effect, issued, those of the Prelatical Party had their Spies every where to
see who durst to preach a word against any Arminian Tenet; or, to explain any
one Article, as not making for, but against any of those Opinions. If any were
found so to do, he was sure to be Convented, for breach of the Kings
Declaration and Proclamation; yea, some have been brought into the High
Commission-Court, for this very cause. While in the mean time, that other Party
took liberty to vent and preach up those points, without control. Which no
Anti-Arminians durst call into question; for that the then Bishops of greatest
power (who might, by that Declaration, obtain license to explain all things as
they thought fit) favored those Advocates of Arminianism, and must have been
their Judges, if they had been complained of.

2. That where (in Art. 16.) it is said, Not every deadly sin willingly
committed after Baptism, is a sin against the Holy Ghost; We may not dare to
open the nature of deadly sin; nor, to say, that all sins are deadly, contrary
to the Popish distinction of sins into mortal and venial. Nor may we presume to
explain the next part of that Article, viz. After we have received the Holy
Ghost, we may depart from grace given, etc. which Clause, Bishop Montacute, and
(after him) others allege to prove falling from grace; and thereby pretend that
this is the Doctrine of the Church of England, which is contrary not only to
Art. 17. but, to 1 John 3.9. 1 Pet. 1.5.

3. That, it being said ( Art. 20.) The Church has power to decree Rites or
Ceremonies, and Authority in Controversies of Faith; we may not enquire what is
meant by the Church, whether the Church Catholic; or, of England: nor what the
Church of England is: what Rites or Ceremonies it may ordain: or how far her
Authority extends in Controversies of Faith. And if she do happen to ordain
ought, contrary to Gods Word, or expound one place of Scripture repugnant to
another; or, to enforce any thing to be believed for necessity of salvation,
that is beside the Word; no man may question it; but we must (if a Convocation
once declare for it) assent and subscribe unto it, in the Literal and
Grammatical sense of it; or, be deprived of all Ecclesiastical Promotions.

4. That, whereas the 34 Article, treats of the Traditions of the Church, we
must not curiously search what is here meant by Traditions; and whether it be
meant of the Traditions of the Church of Rome, or of any other Church. But we
must rest in this General, That whosoever, through his private judgment
willingly and purposely does openly break the Traditions and Ceremonies of the
Church, which be not repugnant to the Word of God, and be ordained by common
Authority, ought to be rebuked openly, as offending against the common Order of
the Church, hurting the Authority of the Magistrate, and wounding the weak.
Whereas, this Church has no where set forth what she means by Traditions;
whether distinct from Ceremonies, or the same with them: how a Tradition may be
said to be ordained; and, what is meant by common Authority. Yea, if power be
given to the Bishops and Clergy in Convocation, when and so often as they shall
desire it, to ordain any more Traditions, (which seems to be a strange
Expression) and new Ceremonies; and, the Royal Assent pass thereupon, all
Ministers must subscribe thereunto, before they know what they be; yea, before
they be ordained: after which, it will be too late to dispute them, or to vary
from them in the least degree, upon any pretense whatsoever. It will be too
late then, for any man to say, They are repugnant to the Word of God.

5. That all, being by Art. 35. to admit both Books of Homilies to contain a
godly and wholesome Doctrine necessary for these times; and therefore, to be
read in Churches by the Ministers diligently, men must subscribe to false
Doctrines, or assertions. Take instance in but one or two particulars, for
brevities sake.

Par. 2. Hom. 2. Of the place and time of Prayer, page 147. Pluralities of
wives was by special Prerogative suffered to the Fathers of the Old Testament,
not for satisfying their carnal and fleshly lusts; but, to have many children,
because every one of them hoped, and begged oft-times of God in their Prayers,
that that blessed seed which God promised should come into the world to break
the Serpents head, might come, and be born of his stock and kindred. As if all
did not know, out of what Tribe Christ was to issue.

Par. 2. Hom. 2. of Alms, page 160. The same lesson does the Holy Ghost teach
us in sundry places of the Scripture, saying, Mercifulness and almsgiving,
purges from all sins, delivers from death, and suffers not the soul to
come into darkness, For this, is alleged, Tob. 4. ver. 10. Then there is
added, The wise Preacher the son of Sirach, confirms the same, when he says,
That as water quenches burningfire, even so mercy and alms resists, and
reconcileth sins. (Excellent sense!) For this, Ecclus. 5. is quoted in the
margent. But, it is, cap. 3.30. where the words in the New Translation are,
Alms makes an atonement for sins. Of which words, however a charitable
construction may be wyre-drawn: yet, those expressions, (the same lesson does
the Holy Ghost teach us in sundry places of the Scripture) evidently admit of
these two gross Errors, 1. That the Book of Tobit is to be taken for Holy
Scripture. 2. That it was indicted by the Holy Ghost. The former of these is
contrary to Art. 6. in which, only the Canonical Books there named, are owned
for the Scripture of the Old Testament: And that of Tobit is there numbered
among the Apoeryphals, which the Article says (out of Hierom) the Church does
not apply to establish Doctrine: yet, this Homily applies these Apocryphal
passages to confirm the Doctrine of Alms deeds. And as touching the Holy Ghosts
teaching of this, in those places alleged out of Tobit, and Siracides, this is
denied by all, who receive not those Books as Canonical. Take but one witness
(instead of many) King James, who, in his Book directed to his Eldest son, and
called Basilicon Doren, having spoken to him of reading of the Holy Scriptures,
says thus: As to the Apocrypha Books, I omit them, because I am no Papist: and
indeed some of them are no way like the ditement of the Spirit of God.

6. That, by the 37th Article (as it is still printed, and may not be altered)
where it is said, The Queens Majesty has the chief power in the Realm of
England, etc. (meaning Queen Elizabeth, who is after named therein;) all
Ministers are bound to read those very words unto this day: and may not say,
The Kings Majesty has the chief power; for the Articles must be read, every
word of them as they are printed, with the Kings Declaration before them: or,
the Minister must be deprived, if he alter any word, or shall not take it in
the sense of the very Letter of it. And if he keep not to all the very words of
the Articles, who can swear that he did read them after his Induction, if put
unto it?

7. That by this means, we shall have no settled or fixed Doctrine of the Church
of England at all; if so often as the Bishops and Clergy in Convocation, shall
obtain License to deliberate of all such things as they shall think fit to
explain, and shall obtain thereto the Royal Assent, they may put what sense
they please, upon the Doctrine established; which, by the Declaration prefixed
to the Articles, is promised to be, from time to time granted unto them.

If it be said, There is an easy Cure for all this. The Declaration before the
39 Articles, was never confirmed by any Act of Parliament, nor is now in force:
or, if it be, it is but the taking of that away, and causing the Books to be
printed without it: So, will the subscribers to the Articles be at as much
liberty as by the Act of 13 Eliz. was allowed them.

To this it is Answered, that this will signify nothing, if Ministers be still
tied to subscription. For,

1. It has been already declared, (yea, adjudged) that, by that Statute, there
is no liberty for any man to subscribe the Articles with any limitation, or
explication; if any credit be given to Sir Edward Cook, who says Instit. 4.47.
p. 324. edit. 1658.
, that he has heard Wray chief Justice in the Kings Bench, Pasch. 23 Eliz. (
quoting Dier 23 Eliz. 377. lib. 6. fol. 69. Grenes Case, Smiths Case) report,
that where one Smith subscribed to the said 39 Articles of Religion, with this
addition (so far forth as the same were agreeable to the Word of God) that it
was resolved by him, and all the Judges of England, that this subscription was
not according to the Statute of 13 Eliz. Because the Statute required an
absolute subscription, and this subscription made it conditional; and that this
Act was made for avoiding diversities of opinions, etc. And, by this Addition
the party might by his own private opinion, take some of them to be against the
Word of God: and by this means diversities of opinions should not be avoided,
which was the scope of the Statute; and the very Act it self made touching
subscription, hereby of none effect. Thus, He.

2. This shows a necessity of repealing that branch of the Act, so far as it
concerns subscription, because, 1. if we may not subscribe with such an
addition (so far forth as the same Articles are agreeable to Gods Word) it must
needs be granted, that the Composers of them are admitted to be infallible; and
their Articles, of equal Authority with Canonical Scripture: or else, that the
Statute intended to tyrannize over the Consciences of men; which is not to be
imagined. 2. There is no more necessity for Ministers to subscribe those
Articles which that Act confirms, then there is for others to subscribe to all
other Acts of Parliament which do concern them. If an Act once confirm and
ratify a thing, under a penalty, it will take place, and keep all in as much
obedience, as if all the Subscriptions in the world were made to it. It is not
particular Subscriptions, but public Legislative Authority, that makes it a
binding Law. 3. This Subscription, is for the most part, required of men, while
they be young, and have not time, or solidity thoroughly to ponder and weigh all
the Articles, in the balance of the Sanctuary, or in the scaies of the Laws; so
that hereby they are cast into a snare ere they be aware; and, by their own
inconsiderate and rash act, bound (as men are apt to make them believe, if they
afterward, upon never so just grounds, begin to hesitate) to maintain every of
those Articles, although contrary to the Word of God: which is expressly
contrary to the very Letter of the 20th Article, which says, It is not lawful
to ordain any thing that is contrary to Gods Word written. And afterward, As
it ought not to decree any thing against the same (that is, the Word) so,
beside the same, ought it not to enforce any thing to be believed for necessity
of Salvation. But the Statute does require belief of every one of these
Articles, when it enjoins not only subscription, but an assent unto them,
punishing all with Deprivation, that shall affirm, and maintain any Doctrine
repugnant to them; which every man must do, if they be found contrariant to the
Word; or, he must be false to God. 4. If subscription to these, or any other
Articles, be still continued, How can any just liberty be granted to tender
Consciences; But that they must swallow all that is enjoined, although beside
(yea contrary to) the Word, or be persecuted and ruined? Thus much of the
Doubtfulness of the Articles, and of the inconvenience and mischief of
subscribing them. Which inconvenience and mischief will be greater, if we
should be tied to those Articles alone (though never so sound:) as shall now
appear in the Defectiveness of them.

2. The Articles are Defective: Because

1. The sixth Article, speaking of the Holy Scripture, says, In the name of
the holy Scripture, we do understand those Canonical Books of the Old and New
Testament, of whose Authority there was never any doubt in the Church.
Nevertheless, albeit it enumerate the Canonical Books of the Old Testament
(yea, and all the Apocrypha too) yet it names not any of the New Testament;
but only concludes thus; All the Books of the New Testament, as they are
commonly received, we do receive and account Canonical. Now, it being not
unknown, that there has been doubts in the Church, of some of them; insomuch
as the Epistle of St. James, the second Epistle of St. Peter, and several other
books and passages in the New Testament, have been not only doubted, but
refused; the Article is defective in the not enumerating all the Books of the
New Testament.

2. There are no Articles for discovering and condemning sundry points of
Popery in Doctrine, which (being first the Tenets of Arminius, the first
Protestant Writer that was not a professed Lutheran, that ever openly
maintained them) are too commonly sucked in, and cried up by some, as the
Doctrine of the Church of England, which, since the Reformation, never owned
them; but are all maintained by Bellarmine, and generally by all Franciscans
and Jesuits; but confuted by all approved Writers of the Protestant Reformed
party, that have written against Bellarmine and others of that crew: as
likewise by the learned Whitgift, Whitaker, Junius, Zanchius, Pareus, Chamier,
Dr. Prideaux, and many others. The learned King James also took so much notice
of, and distaste at those Arminian-Popish Opinions touching Predestination
abused, universal Redemption, universal Grace, the manner of conversion, and
falling from grace; that his Majesty was the chief procurer and promoter of the
late Synod of Dort, to which he sent Bishop Carlton, Dr. Davenant, Dr. Hall,
(afterward, Bishops) Dr. Goad, and Dr. Balcanqual, to assist in that Synod;
whose judgments touching all those points, were given in to the said Council,
subscribed with their hands, and afterward printed and published. Agreeable
whereunto, in the main, has the late Assembly of Divines sitting at
Westminster, declared their judgments in the Confession of Faith (afterward
ratified by both Houses of the late Long Parliment:) for which reason is that
Assembly so much slighted, reviled, and opposed.

3. Those Articles contain nothing of the Creation, of Providence, Fall of man,
of Sin, of the Punishment of sin, of Gods Covenants, Effectual Calling,
Adoption, Sanctification, Faith, Repentance, Perseverance, of the Law of God,
Christian liberty and Liberty of conscience, Religious Worship, of the Sabbath
or Lords day, of Marriage and Divorce, the Communion of Saints,
Church Government and Discipline, of the Resurrection, or of the last
Judgment; all which the Scripture teaches, and that, as necessary; as appears
by the comprizing most of them in the Apostles Creed, and therefore necessary
to be explained and held forth unto all, as the Doctrine of this Church;
especially considering the differences and Controversies about many of them.
Upon this reason it was, that the late Assembly of Divines have taken so much
pains to compose several Articles (which they call Chapters;) wherein both
those of the 39 Articles which are held to be indeed fit to be retained, are
more fully cleared and explained; and the rest, added, with pertinent proofs of
Scripture, to make it manifest that they are all evidently grounded upon the
Word of God. But, all proofs are wanting in the 39 Articles: no text of
Scripture being produced to make cut any one of them.

II. Of WORSHIP.
THe Form of Public Worship in England, (except Preaching) is set down in the
Liturgy or Book of Common Prayer, established by Law, in 1 Eliz. 2. entitled,
An Act for the Uniformity of Common Prayer and Service in the Church, and the
Administration of the Sacraments. This Act repealeth another, made in 1 Mar. 2.
which had repealed a former Statute made in 5.6. Edw. 6. for the Uniformity of
Common Prayer, etc. and re-established that Common Prayer Book, which the said
last mentioned Act of Edw. 6. had ratified and confirmed. But yet the Act of 1
Eliz. which authorizeth and enjoyneth the use of that Book of 5.6. Edw. 6. does
it, with allowance of one alteration or addition of certain Lessons to be used
on every Sunday in the year, and the form of the Letany altered and corrected,
and two sentences only added in the delivery of the Sacrament to the
Communicants: but, none other, or otherwise.

Now, it is here to be observed, that in the Act of 5.6. Edw. 6. for confirming
that Book, it is said, that, The Kings most Excellent Majesty, with the assent
of the Lords and Commons in that Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of
the same, had caused the aforesaid Order of common service, entitled, The Book
of Common Prayer, to be faithfully and godly perused, explained, and made fully
perfect, and by the foresaid Authority annexed and enjoined it so explained and
perfected, to that present Statute. So that the same was enrolled together with
the Act it self. Which being repealed by Queen Mary, the Original Book was
taken off from the Parliament-Roll, and so lost.

But, in the Act of 1 Eliz. 2. there is no mention at all of joining the Book
then revived and re-confirmed, to the said Act: nor does it appear that ever it
was again enrolled, whereby, by having recourse to any Record or
Parliament-Roll, it may be proved, that that Book of Common Prayer, printed in
the year 1559. (the first of Queen Eliz.) is confirmed by Law, or that any man
is bound to use it as the only form now established by Parliament; or, to be
punished for not using it at all.

And albeit the Act of 1 Eliz. Quere therefore whether he that either uses
them not; or uses other, be punishaable.
takes notice of some alterations above mentioned, to be made in the Book then
ratified, yet it does not name, nor express what those alterations were. So
that all men are lest in a blind touching the same, if put to prove that those
alterations now found in the printed Common Prayer Books, are the very same,
which the last mentioned Act intended to allow and confirm.

Howbeit, that we may go so far as we can herein, take notice that by-comparing
the Book printed in 5, 6, Edw. 6. with that which was printed in 1 Eliz. the
alterations therein found (which are only hinted in the Stat. of 1 Eliz. 2.)
are these:

1. As touching Proper Lessons. The Calendar of 5.6. Edw. 6. appointed no
Proper Lessons for Sundays (except for Easter Day, Whitsunday, and Trinity
Sunday) but only for Holy Days. The Lessons for all other Sundays, were only
set down in the Calendar in ordinary course of reading the rest of the Bible,
upon that, and other days of the week, in a continued way of reading all. But,
the Book, in 1 Eliz. in the Calendar of Proper Lessons, has it thus; Proper
Lessons to be read, for the first Lessons both at morning Prayer and evening
Prayer on the Sundays, throughout the year; and, for some also, the second
Lessons. Then, it after adds, Lessons proper for Holy Days. All which proper
Lessons were appointed in 1 Eliz. to take place of all Chapters which in
ordinary course of reading, according to the day of each month, had been
before ordered in the Calendar to be read, without respect to either Sunday or
Holy Day, but only to the day of the month in course. What alterations have
been made either in that Book printed An. 1559. 1 Eliz. of other proper
Lessons, not warranted by the Act of 1 Eliz. 2. (namely, of such as were before
appointed for Holy Days, etc.) or that have been made since, shall be
afterward showed.

2. As touching the Letany, there is no material alteration in that, save only
this; that whereas both the Books of 2 Edw. 6. ran thus: From all sedition and
privy conspiracy, from the tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, and all his
detestable Enormities, from all false Doctrine and Heresy, etc. those words
touching the tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, and all his detestable Enormities,
are lest out in 1 Eliz. 2. and ever sithence.

3. In the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, the words used at the delivery of the
bread, and wine, ran thus: Take and eat this in remembrance that Christ dyed
for thee, and feed on him in thine heart by faith with thanksgiving: but in the
Book of 1 Eliz. and in all since, the words are these: The Body of our Lord
Jesus Christ which was given for thee, preserve thy body and soul unto
everlasting life; take and eat this in remembrance that Christ dyed for thee,
and feed on him in thine heart by faith with thanksgiving. The words at giving
the Cup, in 5.6. Edw. 6. were these: Drink this in remembrance Christ's blood
was shed for thee, and be thankful. But in 1 Eliz. and since, the words are,
The Blood of our Jesus Christ which was shed for thee, preserve thy Body and
Soul into everlasting life; drink this, in remembrance Christ's Blood was shed
for thee, and be thankful. Now, it is to be noted, that, whereas only the two
former Clauses, which run in the forms of Prayers, were in the Book of 2. Edw.
6. and the two latter Clauses only, are in the Book of 5.6. Edw. 6. as here
above showed, that Book of 1. Eliz. takes in, and joins them both together. If
these be not the alterations to which the Act of 1 Eliz. refers, it will be
very difficult (if not impossible) to find what they were.

Now having thus prepared the way to speak to the necessity of Reformation in
Worship, it is desired that all Readers of this Piece, will take notice, that
there was lately printed, in one sheet of Paper, some of the Differences and
alterations in the present Common Prayer Book from that which was established
by Law in 5.6. Edw. 6. and in 1 Eliz. (or, at least supposed so to be) which is
but a Specimen, or short hint of what is here intended to be set forth more
largely and fully: and that, in the same Order and Method which is there
propounded; (none of those printed Papers being now left) it is thought fit to
reprint and insert that sheet (with some few Revisals) in this larger Tract,
which shall now follow in the next place. And then after that, we shall add
what shall be necessary for making out more fully the necessity of reforming
the whole Liturgy; not by way of reducing, so much as of new moulding the whole.

Some of the DIFFERENCES and ALTERATIONS In the present Common Prayer Book,
FROM The Book established by Law, in quinto and sexto, Edw. 6. and 1 Eliz.
The CALENDAR.
THere are sundry Saints days (although in black Letters) not found in the
Books of 5.6. Edw. 6. or 1. Eliz. to the number of 50. and more. Which however
it may seem a small matter, yet Time may turn them into Red Letters, and so
claim observance of them. For Dr. Cousens in his Calendar (which he calls the
Calendar of the Church) in his Book of Devotion, has put one of them already,
viz. St. Barnabies Day, into Red. But, however the Epistle and Gospel for that
day, and for the Conversion of St. Paul, be extant in the Service Book; (and,
in the Liturgy printed for Scotland, An. 1637. both these are put into Red, and
enjoined to be observed) yet in 2. Edw. 6. and in 5.6. Edw. 6. those days were
expunged out of the Catalogue of Holy Days.

On Aug. 7. The Name of Jesus is put in for an old Holy Day; which, however
used in times of Popery, (but, under a more gentle Title Fest. Jesu.
) yet even in 2. as well as in 5.6. Edw. 6. and 1 Eliz. it was expelled.
Howbeit, Dr. Cousens, in his forementioned Devotions, has already set down
proper Lessons for that day, viz. Mat. 1. and Philip. 2. which shows how
desirous some are to keep an Holy Day to a Name.

The Order for Proper Lessons.
On Whitsunday, 1. Eliz. the first Lesson at Even. Prayer, was Deuteronomy. 18. now,
that is thrust out, and Wisd. 1. crept into the room. And if we look into the
Lessons for Holy Days, we shall find many Chapters of the Canonical Scripture
laid aside, and Apochyphal Chapters ordered to be read. See some instances in
the Margent, at the Letter Old Calendar. The New. Jan. 25. Genesis 46. Wisd. 5.
Jan. 25. Genesis 47. Wisd. 6. Feb. 2. Exodus 12. Wisd. 9. Feb. 2. Exodus 13. Wisd.
12. Feb. 2^. Numb. 33. Wisd. 19. Jun. 29. Job 31. Ecclus. 15. Jun. 29. Job 32.
Ecclus 19. Jul. 25. Eccles. 10. Ecclus. 21. Jul. 25. Eccles 11. Ecclus. 23.
Aug. 24. Ezekiel 3. Ecclus. 25. Aug. 24. Ezekiel 6. Ecclus. 29. Sep. 21. Mic. 7.
Ecclus 35. Sep. 21. Naum. 1. Ecclus 38. Sept. 29. Zach 7. Ecclus. 39. Sept. 29.
Zach 8. Ecclus. 44. October. 18. Judge. 14. Ecclus. ^1. Dec. 28. Isa. 60. Wisd. 1.
.

There are sundry other Lessons altered, which I here omit. It is true, the
Stat. of 1. Eliz. allows one alteration or addition of certain Lessons to be
used on every Sunday in the year: but, after mention of some by name, it
adds, And none other, or otherwise. Also in the present Kalendars, there are
four Chapters of Joshua left out, that were in the Kalendars of 5. and 6. Edw.
6. And, on October. 13. Judith 15.16. are appointed now to be read; which was not
so in 5.6. Edw. 6. This deserves consideration, seeing so many Canonical
Chapters of use, are not at all appointed to be read in public.

The RUBRICKS.
The first Page of the present Books, appoint Ministers to use such Ornaments
as were of use in 2. Edw. 6. not declaring what they be. The Book of 2. Edw. 6.
enjoined only a sur^lis in Parish Churches and Chapels. See last page of that
Book, where are notes for explanation. So also, in Rubr. before Morn. Prayer. 5
6. Edw. 6.
The Book established in 5.6. Edw. 6. names a Surplice only. The Book of
Canons, Can. 58. enjoyneth other Ornaments. Hereby some Ministers must break
that Canon, or the present Rubric, which the 14th Canon requires all to
observe. So that the 14th Canon and the 58th contradict each other. And neither
those Canons, nor that Rubric, nor this Book, are established by Law.

After the Communion, there are in all Service-Books of 5.6. Edw. 6. seven
Rubricks. Which number remains; but, the Third is divided into two, and the
fourth wholly lost. In which fourth, the Compilers had solidly and excellently
declared in what sense they intended Kneeling at the Communion. The loss
whereof has occasioned much stumbling and offense; yea, much trouble and
persecution. That Rubric was this.

Although no Order can be so perfectly devised, but it may be of some, either
for their Ignorance and Infirmity, or else of Malice and Obstinacy,
misconstrued, depraved, or interpreted in a wrong part; yet because brotherly
Charity wills that, so much as conveniently may be, Offenses should be taken
away; therefore we willing to do the same. Whereas it is Ordained in the Book
of Common Prayer, in the Administration of the Lords Supper, that the
Communicants, kneeling, should receive the Holy Communion; which thing being
well meant for a signification of the humble and grateful acknowledging of the
benefits of Christ, given unto the Worthy Receiver, and to avoid the
profanation and disorder which about the holy Communion might else ensue. Lest
yet the same kneeling might be thought or taken otherwise, we do declare, that
it is not meant thereby, that any Adoration is done, or ought to be done,
either unto the Sacramental Bread and Wine there bodily received, nor unto any
real and essential Presence there being of Christ's natural flesh and blood.
For, as concerning the Sacramental Bread and Wine, they remain still in their
very natural Substances, and therefore may not be adored: for, that were
Idolatry to be abhorred of all faithful Christians. And, as concerning the
natural Body and Blood of our Savior Christ, they are in Heaven, and not here:
for it is contrary to the truth of Christ's true natural Body to be in more
places than one, at one time.

The Body of the Book it self.
There is a whole Prayer now left out, at the end of the Letany, which was
extant in the Books of 5.6. Edw. 6. to be used in times of Dearth or Famine:
which was this:

O God merciful Father, which in the time of Heliseus the Prophet, did
suddenly turn in Samaria, great scarcity and dearth into plenty and cheapness,
and extreme famine into abundance of victual; have pity upon us that now be
punished for our sins with like adversity. Increase the fruits of the Earth by
thy heavenly benedi, ction; and grant that we receiving thy bountifvl
liberality, may use the same to thy glory. our comfort, and relief of our needy
Neighbors, through Jesu Christ our Lord, Amen.

Moreover, there are sundry Prayers (some before some in King James his time)
put into the present Leiturgy; as also some things into the Catechism, which
are not confirmed by Parliament. Which Additions (although useful) being not
legally ratified, has imboldened some to make alterations at their pleasure.
For instance, The Prayer for the Queen and Royal Family, before the year 1627.
began thus; Almighty God which have promised to be a Father of thine elect and
of their seed: but now, thus; Almighty God the fountain of all goodness. Which
change was a great Presumption, and may seem to imply an exclusion of the Royal
Stem out of the number of Gods Elect. This alteration was first made in the
Books appointed to be used, about that time, at public Fasts; and thence, was
stolen into the Book of Common Prayer. Of which, no reason can be discovered,
unless this; that the word Elect, distasted the favorers of Popish Arminianism.

Likewise the reading Psalms, now thrust into the Common Prayer Books,
(pretended to be established by Law) were no part thereof in 5.6. Edw. or in 1.
Eliz. For neither of the Books then printed in Folio, for public use in
Churches, had the Psalms in them; but only a direction what Psalms should every
day be read; which were accordingly read out of the Bibles then used in
Churches. It is therefore, very hard, and unreasonable, to continue that
Translation; and, to enjoin, and tie men to read out those abused Psalms, as
now they stand in that Book. And it is a great wrong to the people: that
Version being very defective and corrupt. Take some instances wherein that
differs from the Kings last authorized Translation now only allowed to be read
in Churches; as also, from the Original it self.

Psalm. 28.9. The Lord is my strength. In the new, thus, Old Transt.
The Lord is their strength, ver. 8. 37.38. Keep innocence, and take heed to
the thing that is right. In the new, Mark the perfect man, and behold the just,
ver. 37. 58.8. So let indignation vex them as a thing that is raw. In the new,
He takes them away as with a whirlewind, both living and in his wrath, ver. 9.
68.6. Makes men to be of one mind in an house. In the new, Sets the
solitary in families. 105.28. They were not obedient. In the new, They rebelled
not against his word Let which of those by Fuller or Dr. Prideaux be thought
the better; yet, while they both stand, they cause scandal.
. 107.40. Though he suffer them to be evil entreated. In the new, He pours
contempt upon Princes. 125.3. The rod of the wicked comes not. In the new, the
rod of the wicked rests not upon the lot of the righteous.
In Psalm. 14. there are three whole Verses, which are not in the Original, nor
in the revised Translation, nor in the Greek 72. but only in the Popish vulgar
Bibles. To excuse it by saying, All those Verses are found together in Romans 3.
is a fig-leaf. For, the Apostle never meant to produce all those words as taken
out of one place; but only to collect out of several Texts of the Old
Testament, sundry testimonies to prove all men to be sinners. Accordingly, he
took three Verses out of Psalm. 14. one out of Psalm. 140. another out of Psalm.
10. another out of Isa. 59. All which, the Old Translators unadvisedly thrust
into the 14. Psalm, as parts of that one Scripture.

I forbear to mention other Psalms, wherein, sometimes words, sometimes whole
verses are left out; and, much of the rest is very improperly and impertinently
translated: which in the Leiturgy provided for Scotland, was redressed; yet the
Book (for sundry other defects, impertinencies, and redundances) was refused:
This makes sport for Papists and Atheists, to find how much our Translations
publicly used, do enterfere, and jar; and how corrupt some of them be.

Thus of the differences between the old Common-prayer-books confirmed by Law,
and the present Common-prayer-books so much magnified and adored, not only by
the common sort, but by too many of those who pretend to learning and skill in
the Public Offices of the Church of England; but abuse the people; yea,
Magistracy, and God himself therein. For, still the Preface of the Book runs
thus: That nothing is enjoined to be read, but that which is the pure word of
God, or that which is evidently grounded thereupon: which (as our bold Masters
have ordered the matter) is false; and a mere cheat put upon the people of God.

Having thus given a taste of the Differences between the Old and New Books, I
hold it needful to show how unsafe it might be hereupon to conclude no more but
this: Then let the present Book of Common Prayer be compared with the old that
was established, and be reformed by it. For, even in the Book that was
established by Parliament, there are sundry incongruous and uncomely
expressions, unwarrantable passages, and, some gross mistakes of the Scripture
it self; especially in the Translations of the Epistles and Gospels. Which
Translation used in the Book of Common Prayer, is as ancient as the 35. of Hen.
8. (and used first in private Primmars, being translated out of the Mass books
and other Offices of the Romish Church) for want of a better Translation in the
Reign of Edward the sixth. For Example, G^sp. The old Translation.
on 2 Sund. after Epiph. When men be drunk. But, in the new, When men have well
drunk. Epist. Indeed Dr. Prideaux says, all these are amended in the Kings New
Transtation of the Bible. But what is this to the Service Book, in which these
corrupt passages are still printed, and pressed to be read in Divine Service?
on 4 Sund. in Lent. Mount Sinai is Agar in Arabia, and hordereth upon the City
which is now called Jerusalem: a gross mistake both of Scripture, and
Topography. The new Translation therefore renders it thus: This Hagar is mount
Sinai in Arabia, and answers to Jerusalem which now is. He says not, Mount
Sinai is Agar; for, that is not so. But, Hagar is mount Sinai: that is, a
representation or figure of it. Nor does the Apostle say, that mount Sinai in
Arabia bordered upon Jerusalem. For, that is false; Arabia being many hundred
miles distant from Jerusalem. And the Mount whereof St. Paul speaks, was a
type of it, not bordering on it. Epist. on Palm Sunday. He was found in his
apparel as a man. In the new, He was found in fashion as a man. The word is
(...) which imports, not apparel, but the form, or figure, which includes the
real substance and true nature of the thing whereof it is a form. Epist. on 16
Sun. after Trin. Which is Father of all that is called father in heaven and in
earth. Then, the Father, must needs be Father to himself. The new Translation,
therefore renders it, Of whom the whole family of heaven and earth is named. So
the Original, (...).


Much more might be added, not only against the present unestablished Leiturgy,
but against that which was confirmed. But this shall suffice. For my intention
neither is, nor ever was, to destroy, or cast off all Forms: but only to show
some grounds of exception against this. And seeing this is so much cried up,
that the most, place all their Devotion and Religion in it, and come little
short of the Israelites in abusing of the brazen Serpent, which by Gods own
command, was erected in the Wilderness; Authority may consider whether it be
not honorable, safe, and necessary to deal with both Books, as Hezekiah did
with that Idolized Serpent; and carefully to provide a better in the room; as
that good King did, in reforming the whole Public Service of God: there being
now far better means, and fairer opportunities of so doing, than in the times
of compiling the Ancient Leiturgy by those Reverend and Renowned Bishops and
Matyrs that did compose it.

ROMANS 10.22. Happy is he that condemns not himself in that thing which he
allows.
Having reprinted the foregoing Sheet, we must now go on, in the same Order and
Method (as was before promised) to observe some more incongruous and unworthy
passages (all which call for a New Form of Liturgy) in the rest of the
Calendar, Rubricks, and Body of the Book it self.

I. In the CALENDAR.
THe Calendar is either that which appoints Proper Lessons for Sundays and
Holy Days (to speak in the Common Prayer Book Language) or that which in each
Month shows what Chapters are to be daily read on weekdays, according to the
days of the month; and is prefixed, in all Editions, to the Book it self.

In the Proper Lessons appointed for Holy Days. The Calendar of 5.6. Edw. 6.
omitteth proper Lessons for the Conversion of Paul, because that was then no
Holy Day, but abrogated by the Act of 5.6. Edw. 6. ca. 3. Therefore in the
Common Calendar then established, the first Lessons for that day (being Jan.
25.) as being a Common-day of the Week, were Genesis 46. and Genesis 47. But in the
Book of 1 Eliz. these two Chapters are laid by, and Wisd. 5, and 6. put in the
room. This (however touched upon in the printed Sheet) is here again taken
notice of, to show by this (among other arguments) that the Book then printed
was not confirmed by 1. Eliz. 2. because that Act admits of no alterations of
Lessons on Holy Days, or other days, save only on Sundays. Yet is this also
thrust into the New Scottish Leiturgy, and that day, made an Holy Day again.

And whereas in all the proper Lessons for Holy Days in 5.6. Edw. 6. only All
Saints day, had, for those Lessons, Wisd. 3, and 5. and all other Holy Day
Lessons were Lessons out of the Canonical Books; the Calendar of 1 Eliz. has
appointed 20. more Apocryphal Chapters for Holy Days, and thrust out so many
Canonical Chapters, that by the Calendar of 5.6. Edw. 6. were appointed for
those very days; as for instance.

Calendar 5.6. Edw. Kal. of 1 Eliz. On the Purification. None: yet, on Feb. 1
(which is the Day) Exodus 12. Exodus 13. Wisd. 9. Wisd. 12. On St. Mathias. None:
yet, on Feb. 25. (which is the Day) Numb. 33. Numb. 34. Wisd. 19. Ecclus. 3. On
the Annunciat. None: yet, on Mar. 25. (which is the day) Josh. 21. Josh. 22.
Ecclus. 2. Eccl. 3. On St. Mark. None: yet, on Apr. 25 (which is the day) 2 Samuel 3. 2 Samuel 4. Ecclus 4. Ecclus. 5. On St. Barnaby. None: it is no holy day.
Yet on June 11. Hest. 3. Hest. 4. Eccl. 10. Eccl. 12. On St. Peter. None: yet
on Jun. 29. (which is the day) Job. 31. Job. 32. Eccl. 15. Eccl. 19. On St.
James. None: yet on July 25. (which is the day) Eccles. 10. Eccles. 1^. Eccl.
21. Eccl. 23. On St. Barthol. None: yet, on Aug. 24. (which is the day) Ezekiel.
3. Ezekiel. 6. Eccl. 25. Eccl. 29. On St. Matthew. None: yet, on Sept. 21. (which
is the day) Mic. 7. Naum 1. Eccl. 35. Eccl. 38. On St. Mich. None: yet, on
Sept. 29. (which is the day) Zech. 7. Zech. 8. Eccl. 39. Eccl. 44.

Can we think there could ever have been so much boldness in those that printed
the Common Prayer Book in 1 Eliz. to make so many alterations, in that very
year wherein the Act of Eliz. passed for confirmation of that in 5.6. Edw. 6.
(which admits not of one of them:) if that Book (which has been followed ever
since) printed in 1 Eliz. were the very Book then re-established? And is not
every Minister which reads those Apocryphals on the days aforesaid,
punishable (if he persisteth therein) by the Act of 1. Eliz. 2?

And here, let it be noted, that albeit there be sundry whole Canonical Books
left out, and no less then 188. Chapters of the Old Testament not read at all:
yet, of the Apocrypha, which contains but 173 Chapters, there are read 121
Chapters, by the Calendar of 5.6. Edw. 6. as well as the Kalendars of later
date. Whereas St. Hierom in his directions for reading the Scriptures in
private, by an holy woman, gives warning, Caveat omnia Apocrypha. Let her
beware of all the Apocrypha. Which is not unlike to that of King James, to his
Son, who, by saying, (I omit them, because I am no Papist) declares plainly,
that such husks were first cast before the Church by Popery, and is fit food
for none but doting Papists. No more is that Calendar, of 5.6. Edw. 6. from
October. 5. to November. 28. wherein very few Canonical Chapters are appointed to
be read.

We shall now offer one Observation out of the late compiled Liturgy for
Scotland, which is this; that (however so many Apocryphal Chapters still stand
in our Liturgies:) in all the Calendar for Scotland, there are but 12.
Apocryphals to be read in their Churches (which yet, they would not endure:)
this shows plainly, that our great zealous Masters who gave order for the
Composing of that Book, had somewhat upon their Consciences that rounded them
in the ear against the continuing so many Apocryphals in ours: especially
considering that some of them, have been reputed but Fables (as namely the Book
of Judith, the History of Susanna, etc.) acted first in Interludes or Plays.
And some of the Chapters contain mere delusions and lies: yet even those very
Chapters are appointed to be read in our Churches.

To make this last out, take notice of somewhat observed before, out of the
second Homily of Alms-deeds, which quoteth Tobit 4. and Ecclu^. 5. (both being
appointed to be read, the one October. 6. the other October. 30.) which I here pass
over. In Tobit 3. (appointed by the Calendar of 5.6. Edw. 6. to be read October.
6.) where mention is made, ver. 8. that Sarah the daughter of Raguel had been
married to seven husbands, whom Asmodeus the evil spirit, had killed, before
they had lien with her. (a likely matter!) Yet was she reproached by her own
Fathers maids, that she had strangled them all. In Tobit 3. (ordered to be read
October. 9.) ver. 9. it is said, Alms does deliver from death, and shall purge
away all sin. What need then the blood of Christ? And in ver. 15. one Raphael
tells Tobit, thus: I am Raphael one of the seven holy Angels, which present
the prayers of the Saints, and which go in and out before the glory of the holy
One. Whereas none but the Angel of the Covenant, now at the right hand of God
to make intercession for the Saints, do present their prayers, Revel. 8.3. This
Raphael was far from being one of the Angels that go in and out before the
glory of the holy one; for he was a lying either man, or spirit. This was he
that was hired by Tobias, son to Tobit, to show him the way to Rages; and being
asked by Tobit himself, of what Tribe he was, answered, I am Azarias the son of
Ananias the great, and of thy brethren, Tob. 5.12. Now, you find him in two
tales to the same man: in one of which he must needs lie. They that desire to
read more of his pranks, may read that Book of Tobit: and particularly, Chap.
6. where he taught Tobias how to chase away the Devil, by taking the heart, the
liver and gall of a fish, and thereof to make a smoke, which when the Devil
(who was said to be in love with Sarah before named, and therefore in the
Marriage-Chamber, had killed those seven husbands, before mentioned, who had
married her) should smell, he should flee away, and never come again any more.
And are not these gallant Chapters to be read in Churches? yet our Calendar
appoints them to be read, viz. Tob. 5. and 6. on October. 7.

So likewise Judith, cap. 9. (appointed to be read, October. 16.) tells a story
of a prayer which her self made to God, (when she had it in design to cut off
Holofernes head:) in which prayer she takes notice of father Simeon (who with
Levi slew the Shechemites, for deflouring their sisters; Genesis 34.) and tells
God, concerning the Shechemites, ver. 4. Thou have given their wives for a
prey, and their daughters to be captives, and all their spoils to be divided
among thy dear children, which were moved with thy zeal, and abhorred the
pollution of their blood, and called upon thee for aid, etc. Can we think this
pious Amazon, had ever read Jacobs censure of that fact of Simeon and Levi, and
his curse upon it, Genesis 49.5, 6, 7. even while he was blessing the rest of his
Sons (except incestuous Reuben) at the very point of death? Simeon and Levi are
brethren, instruments of cruelty are in their habitations. O my soul, come not
thou into their secret: unto their assembly, mine honor, be not thou united:
for in their anger they slew a man, and in their self-will they dug down a
wall. Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce; and their wrath, for it was
cruel. I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel.

The rest of her prayer is conformable to this. Therefore she prays, ver. 10.
(in reference to Holofernes and his men) smite by the deceit of my lips (for
she meant to destroy him by lying) the servant with the prince, and the prince
with his servant, etc. And in ver. 13. Make my speech and deceit to be their
wound and stripe, etc. Was not this a brave resolution, a pious petition, to
tell a lie for God? We forbear more instances, because we delight not to scrape
in such Dung-hills. We have done with the Calendar.

II. Of the RUBRICKS.
RVbricks are Directions given in the Common Prayer Book, how to officiate and
read the said Book, in the several parts thereof. And they are called Rubricks,
because anciently printed in Red Letters; and are as much established by Law,
as any other part of the Book of Common Prayer it self. I shall instance only
in some of them, not meddling with those before noted in the inserted Paper of
Differences.

1. There are many Rubricks wherein the Minister is called Priest, which is the
old Style and Title in the Mass Book, from whence it was taken. We never find
it in the New Testament; but only in the Old: which Title was then given to
such of the Levites as were made Priests to sacrifice at the Altar. And thence
the Papists borrowed that name for their Popish Sacrificers at their Altars. It
is now then, a mere Superstitious and Antichristian Name, no way warranted by
the Word of God, in the Pontifician Sense; yet is it used above fifty times in
our Liturgy. It is true, one seeks to excuse it by saying, Use has made this
so Popular, as it is not safe to remove it; yet, confesses it may be altered
without prejudice to Religion. But why may not the Word Priest be taken away,
and the word Minister put in the room? The Name of Minister is not unknown:
yea, it is as often used in the Rubricks of the same Book, as the name Priest.
Therefore it may, without the least danger, or offense, be wholly obliterated.
Hence it is, that in the Scots Liturgy it is wholly omitted, and Presbyter put
into the room thereof. Whereas this is a more strange and unknown name, being
borrowed from the Greek (...), which was never used to signify a Priest, but
an Elder, and thence borrowed to denote a Minister, as all the Learned know:
and none but Papists use the word Priest; unless Scoffers at Ministers, whom in
scorn and derision they call and nickname, Priests.

2. In the fifth Rubric of the Order for reading of the holy Scripture, it is
said, That the Collect, Epistle and Gospel appointed for the Sunday, shall
serve all the week after, except there fall some Feast that has his proper. By
virtue of this, these in Cathedrals were read every day, albeit they had no
Communions. But another Rubric prefixed to the Epistles and Gospels, runs
thus: The Collects, Epistles and Gospels to be used at the celebration of the
Lords Supper, and holy Communion, throughout the year. These therefore were
never intended to be read, but when there is the Sacrament of the Lords Supper
administered. This was anciently administered every day, in the Church of
England; and so, to be used still, at least in Cathedrals, as appears by the
Rubric after the first Exhortation at the Communion. If then, upon any
reasonable cause, there be no Communion, there ought at that time to be no
Epistle and Gospel read. If there be any read, it is without warrant. So that
these two Rubricks fight; and which to follow, is uncertain. And indeed, they
are both but blind guides that lead into the ditch, and make a man obnoxious to
the Law.

3. The Rubric before the general Confession at the Communion, runs thus: Then
shall this general Confession be made in the name of all those that are to
receive the holy Communion, either by one of them, or else by one of the
Ministers. This gives liberty to Lay, or private men to officiate, in part at
least, as to this Confession, which is a branch of the Office peculiar to the
Minister, to be the mouth of the people unto God in Prayer; especially in the
Administration of the Sacraments, in the Congregation. What is this but to
admit a private person to assist and bear a share in administering the Lords
Supper? Is not this to hit against the 17 Article of Religion, which declares
it to be unlawful to any but such as be lawfully called, and sent; to wit,
Ministers duly ordained? In all other parts of the Liturgy, all Confessions and
Prayers are expressly put upon the Minister alone, at least to begin, and lead
the Congregation therein.

4. In the Rubricks before the proper Prefaces at the Communion, it is said,
that upon Christmas day, and seven days after; upon Easter Day, and seven days
after; upon the Ascention-day, and seven days after; upon Whitson-day, and six
days after, the same several Prefaces appointed for each of these solemn days,
shall be read; as if every of the seven days following were one and the same
with the first; and, what was done on the first day, was done over again every
one of the following days: which yet was never done but once; and, but upon one
day, at all; and perhaps, upon neither of those days on which it is said there
to be done. But, of this, more, when we come to speak of the Body of the Book.

5. The last Rubric after the Communion, says, Note, that every Parishioner
shall communicate at the least three times in the year, of which Easter to be
one; and shall also receive the Sacraments, and other rites, etc. But, the
first Exhortation before the Communion, to be used when the people are
negligent to come unto it, requires the Minister to say unto the whole
Congregation, I bid you all that be here present, and beseech you for the Lord
Jesus Christ's sake, that ye will not refuse to come thereto, being so lovingly
called and bidden of God himself. Yet the aforesaid Rubric seems to dispense
with Gods own Invitation: How rightly, let all sober men consider. And if
thrice communicating will suffice, (contrary to the Primitive Practice, which
was, for all to Communicate at every solemn meeting) why must Easter be one of
the three times, more then any other Lords Day, seeing every Lords Day is
celebrated upon the same account that that called Easter Day, is, viz. in
memory of the Resurrection of our Lord?

But where it is added in that Rubric, He shall also receive the Sacraments,
and other rites, etc. this is no other but nonsense, or worse. For, what
Sacraments else are there for a Communicant of the Lords Supper to receive? Is
Baptism to be reiterated? are the Popish Sacraments to be recalled? And if they
were, must every Parishioner receive them; and that thrice a year? And what are
the Rites he must receive? Be they Ceremonies? Humane Inventions? Superstitious
antique Crossings; duckings, bowing to the Altar, toward the East, to Images,
etc? If so, where are these, or any of these enjoined? And, if not enjoined,
why must they be all received thrice a year; or, at all? But of this, more
hereafter.

6. The last Rubric before the Catechism, in order to Confirmation, concludes
thus: And that no man shall think that any detriment shall come to children by
deferring of their Confirmation, he shall know for truth, that it is certain by
Gods Word, that children being baptized, have all things necessary for their
salvation, and be undoubtedly saved. Where is that Word of God? This cannot be
understood of Children, after Baptism, dying in Infancy; for it speaks of such
as are capable of Confirmation; and, of Confirmation deferred. This supposes
their living a good while after Baptism; even till they come to some
understanding, and are able to give some good account of the Catechism, (else
can they not be admitted to Confirmation, as appears by the first Rubric
before Confirmation:) before which time, they may be guilty of many actual
sins; every of which (without true repentance) makes liable to Condemnation. So
that this Rubric gives to Children once baptized, more assurance of their
undoubted salvation, than ever God has given them. For, if they be baptized,
let them live or die, be godly or wicked, they must know for truth, that it is
certain, (but not by Gods Word:) they not only have all things (on Gods part)
necessary to salvation; but, are undoubtedly saved. Is this a truth?

7. The Rubric after Matrimony, says, The new-married persons the same day of
their marriage, MVST receive the holy Communion. Who do so? what necessity of
so doing? And if they do not so, who shall be punished for their omission? The
Minister, if any body; because he is bound to do all things according to the
Book, if established; and not otherwise. And if the married Persons will not
receive, what can the Minister do? As for the married persons, they (by the
Rubric before mentioned) are not bound to receive above thrice in one year:
which, if they do, they need not receive on their marriage-day.

8. In the last Rubric after Communion of the sick, it is said, In the time of
the Plague, Sweat, or such other like contagious times of Sicknesses or
Diseases, when none of the Parish, or Neighbors, can be gotten to communicate
with the sick in their Houses, for fear of the Infection, upon special request
of the diseased, the Minister may only communicate with him. By this, the
Minister is bound not only to visit every person sick of the Plague, etc.
(standing at some distance) but, to administer the Lords Supper also to him, if
he desire it; and that alone, if none else will join, as it is not to be
expected they should. This is no way agreeable to Christianity, or common
Humanity.

Not to Christianity: for, first, the very nature of the Sacrament requires a
public Administration, because there must be a Communion of more then two
persons in the receiving of it. This appears plainly by several other Rubricks
of the same Book. For, 1. in the first Rubric after the public Communion, it
is ordered, that, if there be not above twenty persons in the Parish, of
discretion to receive the Communion, yet there shall be no Communion, except
four, or three at the least communicate with the Priest. If it be said, this is
the Order for Public Communions; but, it concerns not Private Communions of
the sick: it is answered, 1. that it appears not by the Word, that there is any
warrant, much less necessity for such private Communions: for, the first
Rubric after Communion of the sick, directs the Minister thus: If a man,
either by extremity of sickness, or for want of warning in due time to the
Curate, or for lack of company to receive with him, or by any other just
impediment, do not receive the Sacrament of Christ's Body and Blood; then the
Curate shall instruct him, that if he do truly repent of his sins, and
steadfastly believe that Jesus Christ has suffered death upon the Cross for
him, and shed his Blood for his Redemption, earnestly remembering the benefits
he has thereby, and giving him hearty thanks therefore, (without all which,
what good will be get by receiving the Sacrament?) he does eat and drink the
Body and Blood of our Savior Christ profitably to his souls health, although
he do not receive the Sacrament with his mouth. 2. In the Rubric before the
Communion of the sick, this Order is given, that the Curate having knowledge
over night, or early in the morning, of the desire of the sick person to
receive the Communion, and being signified also how many be appointed to
communicate with him, and having a convenient place in the sick man's house,
where the Curate may reverently minister, and a good number to receive the
Communion with the sick person, with all things necessary for the same, he
shall there minister the holy Communion. Therefore by these Rubricks, no
Communion is to be ministered to the sick, where there be but two to receive it.

Secondly, This is also no way agreeable to Humanity. Must a Minister, who has
the charge of many souls, adventure his health, and life, to gratify an
infectious person in that which (as by what has been before alleged) is no
way of necessity to the fick man's salvation? Must the Minister do this, or be
punished with Deprivation, or otherwise? What cruelty is this? Nay, the very
Canons of 1603. Can. 67. provided more mercifully then so; which runs thus:
When any person is dangerously sick in any Parish, the Minister or Curate
(having knowledge thereof) shall resort to him or her, (if the Disease be not
known, or probably suspected to be infectious) to instruct and comfort them,
etc. Here is a Dispensation in case of the Plague, or other infectious disease,
for so much as visiting the sick: and no word at all of giving the Holy
Communion. So much shall at present suffice to be spoken of the Rubricks.

III. Of the Body of the Book.
1. THe first words of it, (which the Minister is to read) are these: At what
time soever a sinner does repent him of his sin from the bottom of his heart, I
will put all his wickedness out of my remembrance, says the Lord. This is (in
the Rubric before it) called, A sentence of Scripture: and the place alleged
is Ezekiel. 21.22. But that Text runs otherwise in the Original, and in the new
Translation of the Bible; viz. But if the wicked will turn from all his sins
that he has committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful
and right, he shall surely live, he shall not die. All his transgressions that
he has committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him: in his righteousness
that he has done, he shall live. Here is little harmony between the
Service Book and Gods Book: especially considering the very first words in the
Liturgy, At what time soever. Which has no warrant from that Text, and is
dissonant from another, [ To day if ye will hear his voice, etc.] and from that
Application of it, Take heed, brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil
heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God; but exhort one another
daily, while it is called To Day, lest any of you be hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin. Most men are convinced of the necessity of repenting:
but, such is the deceitfulness of their hearts, that too many defer it, and
that upon that very ground expressed in these words, (which have no ground or
warrant from the Word of God) At what time soever a sinner repents, etc. as
if he could repent when he list; which carries many to Hell.

It is true, this is seemingly put off by a great Doctor, thus: D. P. de
Disci^. Eccl. 2.^. Sect. 3.
Dixit Dominus quoad sensum, licet non verbatim. The Book speaks the sense,
although not the very words of the Text. But this is too frigid an answer to
satisfy the Objection. For, 1. It is said to be a sentence of Scripture; not
an Exhortation according to the sense only. It is one thing to give the sense,
another to repeat the words. 2. This agrees not with the sense, but is contrary
thereunto, as was but now demonstrated. Therefore it is untrue and injurious to
charge the Apostles with the like, in alleging the Old Testament in the New.

2. That expression in the general Confession of sins, viz. There is no health
in us, (although well meant) is incongruous, and improper, because most of the
common sort understand not the true meaning of it; yet patter it over, out of
custom, without being (through their ignorance) duly sensible of what is indeed
intended by it. Howbeit, the Minister may not alter the Phrase.

3. After the first Lesson, at Morn. Prayer, Te Deum, or, Benedicite, (both of
them, being Apochrypals) are to be read before the second Lesson; and so they
interrupt the continued reading of the holy Scripture; which, the Preface to
that Book would bear us in hand, is provided against.

As for Te Deum; or, We praise thee, O God, etc. it is a piece taken out of the
Mass Book; and in Popish Churches usually sung, at times of great Victories,
Deliverances, and other Triumphs. From thence, some Bishops (little to their
credit) have introduced it, upon like occasions, into Protestant Churches: that
being no where enjoined, nor warranted by any Law in force.

This shows what able men such Bishops are to govern, that know not how to
express their thanksgiving to God for any extraordinary mercy, so well, as in a
superstitious formal dress usually sung in Popish Churches. And, as for
Benedicite, viz. O all ye works of the Lord, etc. it is a piece of the
Mass Book also, and taken out of the Apocryphal song of the three Children. And
it is bungled too; not set forth as it is in the Song it self, as by comparing
them may appear. And whereas that Song is said, in the Title of it, in the
Apocrypha, to be the song of the three holy Children which follows in the
third of Daniel, after this place; [And they walked in the midst of the fire,
praising God, and blessing the Lord,] this is an abusing, and belying of the
Canonical Text, in Daniel 3. in which there is no hint of any such thing. Yet
must this come in, and be kept in, in our Liturgy (though, cast out of the
Scotch Book) to give another lie to the Preface of our Book of Common Prayer;
of which, more by and by.

4. The many Antiphonies and Responds (except the peoples saying, Amen) have no
pattern or warrant in the Word. Yet above an hundred of these Antiphonies and
Responsals, or Answerings between Minister, Clerk and people, are enjoined to
be used; beside the accompanying of him, in the Confession of sins, Creed,
reading every other verse of the Psalms, etc. How can such things (having no
warrant in the Word) be done in Faith, in the Public Worship of God; and not
rather be accounted Will Worship? This is the rather to be excepted against,
not only because it is so frequent in the Mass-Books, (but, no where else;)
but because also the Preface to the Book of Common Prayer, says, That the
reading of the holy Scripture is (therein) so set forth, that all things shall
be done in order, without breaking one piece thereof from another: and for this
cause, be cut off Antiphonies, Responds, Invitatories, and such like things as
did break the continual course of the reading of the Scripture. How then, do so
many Responds and Answers of Clerk and People, while the Minister is reading;
as likewise those Anthems beforementioned, which interpose between the first
and second Lesson (all which are still continued in the Book) agree with that
Preface still printed with the Book?

5. If the Letany must be read (which contains petitions for more particulars
then all the Book besides; and, being put into one continued prayer, without so
many interpositions and interruptions, might be of far better use then now it
is) why must the praying part be so much performed by the People, and not by
the Minister, whose proper Office it is in public, to pray for the people as
their mouth; and not they to be his mouth? There is no ground for this in
Scripture: yet we must be made to believe, that there is nothing in the
Leiturgy, but what is evidently grounded upon the Word. And wherefore must that
clause in the Let any [from the tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, and all his
detestable Enormities] be still left out? was there no fear of his return to
tyrannize over this Land again? Had he ever more Instruments at Work in this
Kingdom since the Reformation, then now? If it be said, The Act for Uniformity
gives notice of an alteration in the Letany: yet, that Act does not tell us
what that is in particular. Therefore, till that alteration be named, that
clause needs not, yea ought not, to be omitted, so long as the Letany is used.

6. In the Book printed in 1 Eliz. there be added (after the Letany) two
Prayers; one for the then Queen, another for Bishops (both which were prayed
for before, in the Letany, and also in the Prayer at the Communion for the
whole estate of Christ's Church) which are not in the Book of 5.6. Edw. 6. And,
in 1 Jac. these were continued, with one other Prayer for Queen Anne, the
Prince, etc. Now, albeit the Prayers for the King, Queen, and Royal Family be
useful, and necessary; yet, when the Act of 1. Eliz. 2. admits of no
alterations from, or additions to that Book in 5.6. Ed. 6. save only in proper
Lessons for Sundays, one in the Letany, and two more in the Communion; and,
none other, or otherwise; how can those Prayers be used, without making them
that use them liable to the Law (if rigorously urged,) till they be confirmed
by Act of Parliament; Or rather, till that Act of 1. Eliz. 2. be repealed and
taken away?

7. Albeit the Preface to the Book, says, that therein, many things be left
out, whereof some be untrue, some uncertain, some vain, and superstitious, and
nothing is ordained to be read but the very pure Word of God, the holy
Scriptures, or that which is evidently grounded upon the same: yet are there
sundry things more, in the Body of that Book, which are neither certain, nor
true, nor evidently grounded on the Word. For, to omit the imperfect and
corrupt Translations mentioned before in the Sheet of Paper inserted into this
present Book; and, many more, not therein cited, (which show there is too much,
which is not the very pure Word of God:) it is too too palpable, that, in the
Prayers, and proper Prefaces for Christmas day, and Whitsunday (as they are
called) there are some things not only uncertain, but false; yea, impossible to
be true; and therefore, not evidently grounded upon the Word of God. In the
Collect or Prayer for Christmas day and seven days after, we must, in prayer,
say unto God, that he has given Christ, this day ( viz. December. 25.) to be
born of a pure Virgin. On what Scripture is this ( viz. that he was born that
very day) evidently grounded? and, if it did so appear; how can we say the same
(without manifest and gross lying unto God) seven other days more, one after
another, seeing he was born but once, and on one day only? The like must be
said of the proper Preface, for that Day; of which before, in the Rubricks.
Such also is the Collect for Whitsunday, which begins thus: God which as upon
this day, etc. And, more clearly, in the Proper Preface, it is said, the Holy
Ghost came down this day from heaven, etc. And this must be said not only on
that day, but on six days after. Can this be true, when he came down in that
manner, but once? And, when that day was, is very uncertain; especially with
us, with whom Whitsunday is a Moveable Feast, falling out (as Lent, and Easter
do) some years in one month; some, in another; but never on the same day of the
same month, two years together, What horrible abusing of God, and that in very
Prayers, is this?

8. After the Proper Prefaces at the Communion, follows this: Therefore with
Angels, and Archangels, and with all the Company of heaven, we laud and
magnify thy glorious Name, etc. Here is another uncertainty (to say nothing of
the untruth of it;) for the Scripture never speaks of more Archangels then one:
which is mentioned, 1 These. 4.16. This one, was Michael, Jude 12. to wit,
Christ, the Prince of his people, Dan. 10.21. which most, if not all, expound
of Christ: Even Him who is mentioned in Revel. 12.7. where it is said, There
was war in heaven, Michael and his Angels fought against the Dragon, and the
Dragon fought and his Angels, and prevailed not, etc. It is true, that the
supposititious Dionysius Areopagita, takes upon him, in his Celestial
Hierarchy, to divide the Angels into three several Hierarchies: but, Quo
warranto, further then his own bare word, he does not at all so much as
propound; only he pretends to take it from Ephesians. 6.12. Col. 1.16. (of which
interpretations, see Zanch. in Ephesians.) that exposition being a mere dream.

9. In one of the Prayers after the Communion, it is prayed, that those things
which for our unworthiness we dare not, and for our blindness, we cannot ask,
vouchsafe to give us, etc. This is a Contradiction: for, while we say we dare
not ask, we do ask, and pray him to give us. Can we pray thus in faith? Yes,
you will say, when we pray for this, for the worthiness of Christ, as after
follows. But then take this Reply. If our own unworthiness causes us not to
dare to ask, why do we pray elsewhere, for ought else at all? It is not man's
worthiness, but Gods promise (2 Samuel 7.18, 19. and ver. 25, 26, 27. and Psalm.
119.49) but especially Christ's warrant and command ( Joh. 16.23, 24.) that
gives us boldness, to dare to ask whatsoever we need.

10. In the second Prayer at public Baptism, we pray, that Infants coming to
Baptism, may receive remission of their sins by spiritual regeneration. How can
this be? it is true, Remission of sins and regeneration, flow from one and the
same fountain, and are both conveyed and sealed in Baptism, seminally at least,
to those within the Covenant by the same Spirit. But remission of sins is not
received by, or from spiritual Regeneration, but by, and from the blood of
Christ. For, without shedding of blood there is no remission, Heb. 9.22. that
is to say, the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us (in respect of guilt) from
all sin, 1 John 1.7. It is not then by the grace of regeneration wrought in us,
but by the blood of Christ shed for us, that we receive remission of sins. Away
then with that expression in Baptism; unless we be more for man's falsehood, then
for Gods Truth.

11. All that is in the Catechism, touching the Sacraments, was (contrary to
the Act of 1. Eliz. 2.) added in King James his Reign, but never confirmed by
Parliament, therefore not safely to be used, although somewhat in that kind be
useful and necessary: yet not that model. The Answer to the first Question [
viz. to that, How many Sacraments has Christ ordained in his Church?] is this,
Two only as generally necessary to salvation: which Answer is very dubious, and
liable to exception. For it may (without racking) be interpreted as a tacit
admission of more (as Marriage, Holy Orders, etc.] though not generally
necessary for all. Again, where it is demanded, why are Infants baptized, when
by reason of their tender age they cannot perform them? that is, they cannot
repent, nor believe [which the Answer to the next preceding Questions, admits
to be required of persons that are to be baptized] the Answer is this: Yes,
they do perform them by their Sureties, etc. which is a mere tale. For, however
the Sureties promise, and engage for these, in behalf of the infant; and, upon
that account, a charge (after Baptism) is given to the Sureties, to take care
that the Infant, so soon as he is able to learn, be taught what he by them,
vowed in Baptism, and what further is required of him: yet it was never read or
heard of in Scripture, that one man either repented, or believed in the name
and room of another, whereby that other did receive all or any of the spiritual
benefits, exhibited and sealed in either of the Sacraments to such as are
admitted to them. And to say, the Infants perform ( repentance and believing)
by their Sureties, because the Sureties vow them both in the Infants names, is
a strange and untrue expression: for it is not vowing by one, that another
shall repent, and believe, when he is not at present able to do either, that
can truly be said, to be a performing of them, by him that makes that vow;
supposing him to be a true believer, which many Sureties be not.

12. In the Commination appointed and enjoined by the Rubric before it, to be
used diverse times in the year, (however a learned Doctor would shift off the
objection against it, by saying, Non tam exigitur quam consulitur:) there is a
service set up, which, however it was appointed by God to be once used by the
children of Israel so soon as they were gone over Jordan into Canaan, Deuteronomy. 27.
yet is now no way warrantable in the Public Worship of God: that is, for the
Minister openly to denounce Curses upon all sinners, diverse times in the year;
and that, not in the ordinary Reading-place, but out of the Pulpit: To which,
all the people are required to say, Amen: Whereby many of them are necessitated
to curse themselves. But, as for that place in Deuteronomy, that is no warrant
for this, now; Because, that was no part of the Public Service then incumbent
on the Priests, or Levites, nor to be done by any in the place of Public
Worship: but upon Mount Ebal: and that by six of the Tribes, to wit, Reuben,
Gad, Asher, Zebulun, Dan and Naphtali, ver. 13. and that, but once. And let it
be observed, that Levi was none of them that were appointed to Curse; nor were
they of that Tribe, so much as among them. But he was to be upon Mount
Gerizzim, with Simcon, Judah, Iss^char, Joseph and Benjamin, to bless, ver. 12.
And this was the charge before given of God by Moses unto Aaron and his sons,
(as their constant duty at all public Assemblies of the Congregation for
Worship) Numb. 6.23, etc. to bless the Congregation, thus: The Lord bless thee,
and keep thee; the Lord make his face to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto
thee; the Lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace. This
indeed was an Ordinance, to which God there promises a good success, saying;
They shall put my Name upon the children of Israel, and I will bless them. For
Ministers of the Gospel then, whose Office it is to be Messengers of Peace, and
to bring glad tidings of good things to his people; to be employed, and that
often, in cursing the people as a part of his Office and of public Worship,
(not this or that particular offender, being according to Christ's Ordinance
convicted, and censured, and still remaining refractory and impenitent:) is
such a piece of humane and unchristian-like invention, as has no warrant from
the Word of God, nor from the practice of the Primitive Church, which this very
Commination it self, in the first lines of it plainly confesses, where it
says that, then the Discipline was, to put notorious sinners to open penance,
in Lent: and that, in stead thereof, until the said Discipline may be restored,
it is thought good, to use this. Which shows plainly, that this is no other
then a later spawn of Antichrist in his Popish Services. More might be said of
sundry other particulars in the Service Book: but we suppose that he that shall
duly weigh that which has been already noted, will think these enough.

III. Of RITES and CEREMONIES.
HAving spoken of the necessity of Reformation in Worship, it is necessary, in
the next place, to show the like necessity of Reformation in Rites and
Ceremonies, which are appurtenances of, and appendents to Worship, in relation
to the Injunctions of the Apostle, Let all things be done decently and in order
1 Cor. 14.40.
; and, to the use of edifying 1 Cor. 14.26.
.

And here we speak not of Rites and Ceremonies, which be Divine, by Gods own
Institution; for these are all, in some respects, parts of external Divine
Worship, in their use, prescribed by himself (such are, the outward elements in
the Sacraments, etc.) and, in other respects, Ceremonies appendent to that
Worship, which is internal, and principally intended in and by that which is
external by Divine Institution.

But we speak of Rites and Ceremonies, appointed by the Lights and Guides of
the Church, for decency, order and edification; being of Humane institution,
and alterable, although used in the exercise of Religious Worship: according to
the 34th Article of Religion, which teaches that it is not necessary that
Ceremonies be in all places one, or utterly like; for, at all times they have
been diverse, and may be changed, according to the diversities of Countries,
Times, and Men's manners, etc.

The reasons why such Ceremonies not only may, but sometimes must be changed,
according to the diversities of Countries, Times, and Men's manners, (which may
make it evident that what is now desired, no way tends to disorder,
confusion, or Schism; but, to godly order, without the least infringement of
holy unity in the Church) are plainly set forth before the Book of
Common Prayer it self, under that Preface, or Title; Of Ceremonies, why some be
abolished, and some retained. Where it is said, Of such Ceremonies as be used
in the Church, and have had their beginning by the institution of man; some, at
the first, were of godly intent and purpose devised, and yet at length turned
to vanity and superstition; some entered into the Church by indiscret Devotion,
and such a zeal as was without knowledge; and for because they were winked at
in the beginning, they grew daily to more and more abuses, which not only for
their unprofitableness, but because they have much blinded the people, and
obscured the glory of God, are worthy to be cut away, and clean rejected.

The same Preface says further, Some are put away, because the great excess
and multitude of them has so increased in these later days, that the burden of
them was intolerable: whereof St. Augustine in his time complained, that they
were grown to such a number, that the estate of Christian people was in worse
case concerning that matter, then were the Jews. And he counseled that such
yoke and burden should be taken away, as time would serve quietly to do it.
But what would St. Augustine have said, if he had seen the Ceremonies of late
days used among us, whereunto the multitude used in his time was not to be
compared? This our excessive multitude of Ceremonies was so great, and many of
them so dark, that they did more confound and darken, then declare and set
forth Christ's benefits unto us.

Upon these and other reasons it was, that many Ceremonies introduced into the
Mass-Books and other Popish Breviaries, such as, ducking and bowing to the
East, to the Altar, the standing up at Gloria Patri, or Glory be to the Father,
etc. at the reading of the Gospels of the Day, the wearing of Robes, Copes,
Lawn sleeves, or other Vestments, (save only a Rochet to be worn by an
Archbishop, or Bishop, and Surplice only by Priests and Deacons;) the wearing
of Sandals or Slippers, when men go into Churches or Chapels; the turning
Communion Tables, and setting them Altar-wise (at the East end of the Chan^^l,
or setting up Altars of stone in that place, whether the Congregation can hear
or not:) women's wearing of Vails, and offering of Chrisomes at Churchings, and
that at the high Altar; the reading of the Lessons in one place, and the second
Service, at the Altar; which second Service was never appointed by the
Common Prayer Book to be used but only at the celebration of the Lords Supper:
the setting up of Tapers of wax, Candlesticks, Basins and Ewres, upon the high
Altar, and ducking to them every time a man comes into the Church or goes out,
or stirs, while he is in it: (Whereas Cups, Pots and Basins for Alms, were
never since 5. Edw. 6. to be set there, but at the Communion; nor then, to be
bowed unto, though the Bread and Wine were on the Table;) The wearing of Hoods
of degrees, and many other such like devices, all which were laid aside in 5.6.
Edw. 6. as appears by the Rubricks, and the Act for Uniformity in 1. Eliz. 2.
compared together, which allows nothing but what was in the Book of 5.6. Edw.
6. save only the alterations mentioned in the said Act, as has been before
showed. And, however the Rubric before the Book printed in 1. Eliz. directs
to use such Ornaments as were in use in 2. Edw. 6. yet that is no part of the
Book established: because the Book of 5.6. Edw. 6. has no such Rubric; and
the Act enjoins all to be done according to that Book, and none other, or
otherwise. However, afterward, another Statute of Q. Eliz. did so appoint.

Now, the same Preface before the Common Prayer, touching Ceremonies, gives
all men to understand, that the most weighty cause of the abolishing of certain
Ceremonies, was, that they were so far abused partly by the Superstitious
blindness of the rude and unlearned, and partly by the unsatiable avarice of
such as sought more their own luere, then the glory of God, that the abuses
could not well be taken away, the thing remaining still. Upon which grounds,
there was a removal of them in 5.6. Edw. 6. For then, was that Preface of
Ceremonies first prefixed to the Book of Common Prayer.

But so great is the itch of man's corrupt nature after Humane inventions in
Divine Worship, and so natural are Popish Gue-gaws and outward pompous toys
that please the senses, that many of these (who had been laid aside, as
abovesaid, in 5.6. Edw. 6.) and that, at the Conference at Hampton Court, it
was desired that those Ceremonies and Rites of the Cross in Baptism, kneeling
at the Communion, the Surplice, etc. might be put away; yet such was the
violence of the prevailing party at that time; that, having obtained License
under the Great Seal, they in Convocation, An. 1603. recalled sundry of those
rejected Ceremonies again; and enjoined all Students in Colleges to wear
Surplices in time of Divine service, Can. 17. Copes by him that Ministers the
Sacrament; Epistolers and Gospelers, according to 7. Eliz. (there being no such
Statute, nor Parliament in 7. Eliz.) and sundry other things: under color
whereof, by degrees, most of those things before cast out, viz. bowing to the
East, and to the Altar, with the rest before named, were retroduced; and now
devoutly (or rather superstitiously) observed, without any show or color of
warrant, but ancient custom, which being, duly examined, will appear to all to
be first used in the Popish Churches, as too palpably appears by the Preface
touching Ceremonies before alleged.

Yea, those very men who are so much for these; and not only urge the 18th
Canon of 1603. but the Queens Injunctions 52 Injunct
for bowing at the Name of Jesus, which no Common Prayer Book, or Statute has
enjoined; yet, in other things, regard not those Injunctions, nor the Book of
Homilies; no, nor the Act for Uniformity it self touching such Ceremonies as
they have a mind to recall and advance: witness their setting up Candles in
Candlesticks on the High Altar (as they call it) and such like superstitions
which the third Injunction of Eliz. reckons among those things which tend to
Idolatry and Superstition, which of all other offenses God does most detest and
abhor. They must have their Antiphonies, Responds, etc. which the Preface to
the Common Prayer Book, tells us are laid aside, etc. Not content with this,
they must have all (except Candles lighted) that are upon the Popish Altars
where Mass is used, upon their high Altars; yea, piping on diverse Instruments,
singing (so as none can understand the matter, but only be tickled with the
music) playing upon Organs, etc. all which were laid aside in Edw. 6. and even
by the 2 Hom. of the Place and time of Prayer, (which is by virtue of Art. 35.
subscribed unto by every Minister in England that ever was admitted to any
Ecclesiastical Promotion, according to the Act of 13. Eliz. 12.) are censured
and declared openly to all, to be displeasing unto God, and sore and filthily
to defile his holy House and Place of Prayer. All which are here mentioned, to
show how far they deviate, and whither they are tending and posting amain, who
under color of upholding, and practicing of the laudable Rites and Ceremonies
of the Church of England, do recall and retroduce many Popish Rites cast out of
this Church, and despise all Laws and Constitutions made against them; and are
thereby liable to Inditements every time they use them, upon the Statute of 1
Eliz. 2. We shall forbear to insist longer upon this, but leave it to others to
judge what sad and dangerous effects, these things (if they be suffered and
countenanced) are likely to produce.

That which we chiefly aim at, is, to show a necessity of reforming those Rites
and Ceremonies contained in the Book of Common Prayer, or enjoined by the
Canons of 1603. Such are, the Surplice, Copes, etc. enjoined to be used by
Ministers; the Cross in Baptism, Kneeling at the Communion, Marriage with the
Ring, Bowing at the Name of Jesus, and such like, imposed upon all, as
established by Law. But, such Establishment, we do, and must deny, until we see
a Record produced, by which that Book now in use, or printed in 1 Eliz. is by
Act of Parliament, ratified and confirmed. For if either there be no Record, of
that, to which an Act refers, or that there be more alterations in the Book
said to be established, than the Act mentions; can that Book be properly said
to be established by Law, and not rather made void thereby? In all other
things, nothing is admitted for Law, or as being of force by Law, but what is
expressly contained in verbis, in the Act it self; especially, if the Act refer
to any thing to be confirmed by it, of which no Record can be produced, and
which differs from ought else that is said to be ratified by it. And this is
the case of the present Liturgy, which neither is Recorded, nor agrees with,
but has sundry alterations from, and additions to that of 5.6. Edw. 6. besides
those hinted in the Act of 1 Eliz. 2. And if any Deed or Bond be rased, or
altered after sealing; or, if rased, or altered before sealing, and that not
witnessed; will such a Deed or Bond be admitted as good evidence at Law, or in
Equity, if produced and pleaded? We therefore cannot understand how the present
Service Book can be established by Law, it being no where Recorded; and, in
sundry things, (beside those mentioned in the Statute of 1 Eliz. 2.) varying
from that which was once Recorded, as has been before demonstrated. To say,
the Book, in what remains, still binds, in tanto at least, is but a
mistake: for, any Record, or Deed, vitiated in any one part, makes void the
whole, in Law.

And as for those Rites enjoined in the Book of Canons, we shall forbear to
speak of the Legality of them, till we come to show the necessity of
Reformation in Discipline, a great part whereof is contained in that Book.

Nor is it our purpose to insist upon the unlawfulness of those Ceremonies, so
as to make any dispute thereupon, nor to justify or condemn those who hold
them simply unlawful in themselves. But we, taking it for granted that they are
in themselves (...), or things indifferent, do humbly pray that these things
may be duly considered, in the general:

1. That being such, they ought not to be imposed on those, who cannot be fully
persuaded in their own minds and Consciences that they are lawful, and
therefore must sin, if they use them. This is St. Paul's own Doctrine and
Practice touching things of this nature, notwithstanding his own judgment of
the lawfulness of them. In his days, many godly Christians, both in Rome,
Corinth, and elsewhere, made scruple of sundry meats forbidden in the Levitical
Law, and of omitting days enjoined by it. Others, satisfied of the lawfulness
of both, did eat those meats, and omit those days; at which others were
scandalized: some, by adventuring through other men's example, to do the like,
albeit they were not fully satisfied of the lawfulness thereof, and thereby
sinned: others took offense, and were grieved, and thereupon censured all that
used their Christian Liberty in those things of which they that used it, were
fully satisfied: and hereupon, the weak, for censuring, sinned also: and, by
both these, the weak were in danger to be destroyed, Romans 14.15.

Now, what was our Apostles Doctrine, and Practice herein? His Doctrine was
this: I know, and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing unclean
of it self: but to him that esteems any thing unclean, to him it is unclean,
Romans 14.15. And, All things indeed are pure; but, it is evil for that man who
eats with offense. It is good neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor
any thing whereby thy brother stumbleth, or is made weak, verse. 20, 21. His
Practice was this: 1. Touching himself; If meat make my brother to offend, I
will eat no flesh while the world stands, lest I make my brother to offend, 1
Cor. 8.13. And, as toward others, he straightly charge on all, these two
things: 1. To take heed lest by any means this liberty of yours become a
stumbling block to them that are weak, ibid. verse. 9. that is, by using that
Liberty before others not satisfied in the lawfulness of it. 2. If the one will
yet use this liberty, and the other will take offense, then, his charge is, Let
not him that eats, despise him that eats not; and let not him that eats
not, judge him that eats, Romans 14.3. But, as for enjoining the eating of what
himself held to be lawful, on those that doubted the lawfulness of it,
(although he had more Authority then all our Bishops and Clergy in Convocation,
to make Canons) we never find that he did it; but, warned and forbade all the
very use of it, before any that, through weakness, took offense at it. If then,
Authority will follow the Apostles rule, they will find a necessity, not only
of taking off all Impositions already made, but the taking away of all the
things so imposed, at which so many able and godly peaceable Ministers and
People do take offense; and, for which, so many thousands have deeply suffered,
to avoid sinning against God by conforming to them. For, whatsoever is not of
faith, is sin.

2. If it be said, The instances last given concern only private things, and
private practices; what is this to Public Order in the House of God, where the
Service and Worship of Almighty God, by the Hedge of Ceremonies is preserved
from lying open to all profaneness; as a confident stickler for Ceremonies,
groundlesly pretends? To this, it is answered, That Ceremonies are no such
Hedge; unless to keep out such as have as good right to the Ordinances as they
who do impose them, (for which they must one day give a sad account;) and, that
it is much more dangerous and sinful to enjoin things of this nature for
Public use in the Administration of Public Ordinances. Because, those private
meats, etc. may be avoided by such as take offense at them; for, what
necessity, to be present at the use of them? But, there is a necessity of being
present at the other: which he that neglects, is liable to punishment by the
Law. The Law tyeth all to come to the Common Service, every Sunday, and
Holy Day; to receive the Holy Communion thrice at least in every year: and,
imposes a sharp penalty for neglect hereof. So that, while these are imposed,
or used, (where weak Christians take offense at them) many godly men are forced
to offend, either against God, by submitting to that they are not satisfied in
the lawfulness of it; or, against the Laws of the Land, by not conforming to
them, which they cannot do without sin. So that the imposing of them upon all,
or the using of them before all, who cannot, without sin, submit to them, is
the abusing of Authority, and the making it to sin against Christ, by putting
it upon the forcing those for whom Christ died, to sin against their own
Consciences, and to drive them on to destruction in Hell, as a man would force
a Beast into the water, or fire that will surely devour him. It is then a
groundless put off, to say, that such things being commanded by just Authority,
the indifference by that command determines, and they become necessary: which
is quite contrary to the Apostles rule.

3. If these be retained in some places where no offense is taken at them: yet
there is no reason to impose, or use them in other places where any are
offended at them. For, 1. to plead Imposition for order and unity in the Church
of England, is to no purpose; because there is no necessity of the same, in all
places, no more then of all the same Orders and Practices in all Corporations
in England; and, of every Company within those Corporations (who all have
different Orders and Rules) to preserve Order and Unity in the Civil Government
of the Kingdom. 2. Our very Articles of Religion, (as has been showed) say,
Art. 34.
That it is not necessary that Ceremonies be in all places one, or utterly
like; for at all times they have been diverse, and may be changed, according to
the diversities of Countries, times, and men's manners. 3. If it be said, These
refer to different Countries; not to different places within the same Country:
It is answered, that times, and men's manners, must produce a Change, where ever
a removal of those in being, is necessary, as appears by the Article. And where
things of this nature, that at first were of godly intent and purpose devised,
but at length turned into vanity and superstition; by the Preface touching
Ceremonies, (before cited) they are adjudged worthy to be cut away, and clean
rejected: and so many of them have already been, (as was the Brazen Altar by
Hezekiah.) And it further tells us, that as those be taken away which were
most abused, and burdened men's consciences without any cause: so the other that
remain may (upon just causes) be altered and changed. So that here is nothing
desired, in the taking away the imposition, yea, all use of them, but according
to Law.

4. The Book of Common Prayer of 2 Edw. 6. is in some things referred to, and
particularly as to Ornaments and Rites, both by the Rubric before
Morning-Prayer in the present Liturgy; and, by the Stat. of 1 Eliz. 2. So that,
as to this point, so much of that first Book is still in force by Law. But,
that Book has expressly given a liberty in some of the things here desired to
be no further imposed, where (in the last Page thereof, called, Certain Notes
for the more plain Explication, and decent Ministration, of things contained
therein) it says, As touching kneeling, crossing, holding up of hands,
knocking upon the breast, and other gestures, they may be used or left, as
every man's devotion serves, without blame. This is still good Law. So that
whatever is enjoined in the Canons for the imposing this, is void in Law by the
Stat. of 25. H. 8.19. (although made by the Kings License and Assent) because
contrary to that Law of 1 Eliz. 2. in this particular.

Now, if the Law it self give a Liberty in some; we trust that, upon the
foregoing Reasons, our Lawgivers will take off the imposition of the rest, if
not wholly remove them.

5. The Bishops themselves take Liberty to omit one Ornament imposed on them to
be used: namely, the Pastoral Staff, which in the same place of the Book of 2.
Edw. 6. he is enjoined to have in his hand, or to have it born by his Chaplain;
and this is not left Arbitrary, as the Rites last before named, are: yet the
Bishops herein can dispense for themselves: is there not reason then to
dispense with Ministers in the rest?

Having thus pleaded the necessity of Reformation in Rites and Ceremonies (but
especially of providing against the Imposition of any of them) in general; we
shall not enter into any debate of the particulars: for, of that there is no
need in this place. But, because we are subject to be upbraided, that many of
us have both subscribed to use all those, contained in the Liturgy; and, some
of us have accordingly used them: and that therefore we are Revolters from our
Subscription, and thereby liable to the penalty of Excommunication, by the
sixth Canon: It behooves us to make this Apology for our selves. 1. That albeit
some of us have unadvisedly subscribed to use them, and perhaps have used them
sometimes; yet finding that many sober Christians are scandalized at them, we
hold our selves bound to imitate the Apostle; and, what he did in the Case of
meat (which he held to be lawful) we must do, in the Case of Ceremonies; to use
them no more while the world stands, rather then make our brother to offend.
2. As to the danger incurred thereby, we must not so much stand upon that, as
to choose iniquity rather then affliction. 3. And as touching the validity and
force of the Canon, we fear it not, it being void in Law: of which we shall
speak more under the head of Discipline.

IIII. Of CHURCH GOVERNMENT.
BY Church Government is meant the Ecclesiastcal Government of the Church of
England, said, and commonly reputed to be established by the Laws of the Realm.
For, however some have of late pretended to a Jus Divinum, or Divine
Institution of Episcopacy, of late years used in England; yet the Laws of the
Kingdom would never own any such thing, nor suffer them to exercise any power,
but what the Municipal Laws Authorize them unto. Yea, the Statute of Provisors,
25th of Edw. 3. An. 1350. Declares plainly that Prelacy it self was erected in
England by the Kings of England, and not by any other Authority. For that
Statute begins thus: Whereas late in the Parliament of good memory of Edward
King of England, Grandfather to our Lord the King that now is, the five and
twentieth year of his Reign, holden at Carlisle, the Petition heard, put before
the said Grandfather and his Counsel in his said Parliament by the Comminalty
of the said Realm, containing; That whereas the Holy Church of England was
FOUNDED IN THE ESTATE OF PRELACIE within the Realm of England by the said
Grandfather, and his Progenitors, and the Earls, and other Nobles of his said
Realm, and their Ancestors, to inform them and the people of the Law of God,
etc. Therefore, we cannot look upon such Bishops in any other Capacity, in
England. And, according hereunto, take notice, under this Head of
Church Government, 1. Of their Constitution by Consecration; 2. Of their
Jurisdiction, by Delegation of his Majesty according to his Laws. 3. Of their
Execution of Discipline accordingly. By their Consecration, they have a power
of Ordination. By their Jurisdiction, they have a power to Govern. And, by
their Execution of that Office, they have a power of Discipline. But, all
these, according to the Laws of the Land; and none other, or otherwise. We
shall therefore speak somewhat to each of these, and humbly offer Reasons of
the necessity of reforming Episcopacy and Church Government, in every one of
these.

I. Of the Consecration of Bishops, and their power of Ordination thereupon.
1. BY the Laws of the Land, after the death of any Bishop, Dr. Heylin,
Advertis^o^ Hist. of K. Charles, p. 193.
his Majesty uses to send out his Writ of Conge d' Eslier, to the Dean and
Chapter to Elect another. Which Election being made, signified under the
Chapter-Seal, and confirmed by the Royal Assent; the King sends out his
Mandate to the Archbishop of the Province, to proceed to Consecration (of the
person so elected) or Confirmation (if consecrated before, and now but
Translated from one See to another) as the case may vary. So is it acknowledged
by one that takes on him to know more than many others of this particular. But,
whereas he adds, that thereupon it must needs be, that when the Church comes
to such a condition (that is, to be without Archbishops and Deans and Chapters;
of both which the same Author says, the late King was content (in the Confer.
at the Isle of Wight) to grant an abolition;) and, that this was acknowledged
on all sides that where there is no Dean and Chapter to Elect, and no
Archbishop to Consecrate, and Confirm the Person elected; there can be legally,
and regularly no succession of Bishops: There is no necessity of such a
Consequence, nor of making more Archbishops, or Deans and Chapters, or
continuing of any such, if it shall please the King and Parliament, by any Act
or Statute to appoint any other way and course of Election and Consecration of
Bishops. Which is as easy to be done, as any thing else Enacted in Parliament;
there being no Divine Right so much as pretended unto, for such Election, or
Consecration as of late was used in England.

2. Whereas it is of late much insisted upon, that Episcopacy is not only an
Office of Precedence and Presidency above other Presbyters and Ministers, given
to them by the free Election of the rest; to regulate, order, and act things
agreed upon by the Presbytery joined with them, as the Commander in chief in an
Army, as the Capital Justice in a Court, or as the Speaker in either House of
Parliament; but that it is a distinct and specifical Order (by Divine Right)
Superior to all other Presbyters, which Order only, is Authorized to exercise
such things as none else may meddle with: We say, that this in England was never
at all arrogated by any Bishops, till of very late times. 2. The things they
make peculiar to Bishops, ratione Ordinis, are, sole Ordination, and sole
Jurisdiction; as if none had power in either of these but themselves: neither
of which, even they who pretend to derive their Episcopacy from the Apostles,
ever undertook to make good by any solid Antiquity. Yea, 3. those very
Antiquities which they allege, are either spurious, or else speak nothing
either of sole Ordination, or of sole Jurisdiction; but rather, the contrary;
as might easily be made out. But, we tie our selves to speak to these
particulars only, as said to be made out by Law.

3. This was never yielded by any Law of England; nor, by the Book of
Ordination. For, however that Book established in 5.6. Edw. 6. and (after
repeal by Queen Mary) confirmed in 8. Eliz. cap. 1. Yet when it speaks of the
making of Bishops, it calls that a Consecration, and not an Ordination; as it
does, when it speaks of making Deacons, and Presbyters, which it calls
Priests: calling one, The form and manner of Ordering Deacons; the other, The
form of Ordering Priests. But when it speaks of the other, it changes this
Word Ordering, and calls it, The form of Consecrating an Archbishop, or Bishop.
Which shows plainly, that the Book of Ordination never meant to make Bishops,
or (as Dr. Gauden calls it) Legal Episcopacy, to be not only in Degree, and
Office of Prolocutor, but in a distinct Order, of Christ's and his Apostles
institution, Superior to a Presbyter. It is indeed an easy matter for a bold
man to contradict this; and, to say, that the ancient Writers call the Solemn
form of consecrating a Bishop by no other name then that of Ordinatio Episcopi:
but, it seems, it is not so easy to prove what he says. For he produces no
such proof at all: so that this confident saying touching such Ordination of
Bishops (affirmed by his Adversary to be a Novel Popish Position) that this is
[Not Novel, he is sure] is but a mere shift, and a put off, no confutation at
all. And, where he is pleased afterward to urge the Preface to the Book of
Ordination, Dr Heylin Certam. Epistol. p. 143.
which mentions, three Orders of Ministers in the Church; Bishops, Priests
and Deacons; and, one passage in one of the Prayers, at the Consecration of an
Archbishop or Bishop, to prove that Episcopacy is a distinct Order from, and
Superior to that of Presbyters: he must be entreated to take notice, 1. That
the Preface alleged says not (as he speaks) these THREE Orders; but, only,
these Orders of Ministers, etc. But even there, by way of explanation, the
Preface calls them Offices, [which Offices were evermore had in such reverent
estimation, etc.] now we deny them not to be distinct Offices; only we cannot
admit, in his sense, the Office of a Bishop to be a distinct Order, above
Presbytery. For, even, in that very Preface, it speaks of Consecrating, not of
Ordaining a Bishop, as the Book all along does of Ordering, that is, Ordaining
of Deacons and Priests: but never of other then of Consecrating of Archbishops
and Bishops, that is, of setting them over the rest in degree, to be the mouth
and hand of the rest, in executing what by the rest is agreed upon. And 2.
touching that Prayer he mentions, wherein Episcopacy is called, in that Part of
the Book it self which concerns Bishops, an Order: This is but a wyre-drawing
of the Words, and a mere wresting of them. The Words of the Prayer are these,
Almighty God, giver of all good things, which by thy holy Spirit have appointed
diverse Orders of Ministers in thy Church, mercifully behold this thy Servant,
now called to the Work and Ministry of a Bishop, etc. Now, how do these words
prove a Bishop to be a distinct Order, when speaking of the person then to be
made Bishop, it is not said, he is called to the Order, but to the Work and
Ministry of a Bishop? And seeing he only talks of ancient Writers, but
produces none, we shall make bold to mind him what is the sense of the
Canon Law (which he pleads to be still in force in England) if Lindwood (that
great English Canonist) be of any value with him; who says expressly,
Episcopatus non est Ordo. Yea, the very Book of Ordination, in ordering of
Priests, appointing 1 Timothy 3. to be then read [ If any desire the Office of a
Bishop, he desires an honest work. A Bishop must be blameless, etc.] does more
then tacitly admit a Bishop and a Presbyter not to differ in Order. To which we
shall add the judgment of an ancient Archbishop of Canterbury, even Anselmus
himself (an high man for the Pope, and a great Contestor with the King for
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, even beyond the bounds of the Laws of this Land)
who in his Commentary on the Epistle to the Philippians, where Paul, cap. 1.
saluteth but two Orders, Bishops and Deacons, on the word Episcopis, says
thus: Episcopis, id est, Presbyteris -- Episcopos namque pro Presbyteris more
suo posuit. Non enim plures Episcopi in una civitate erant, neque Presbyteros
intermitteret, ut ad Diaconos descenderet. Sed dignitatem and excellentiam
Presbyterorum declarat, dum eosdem qui Presbyteri sunt, Episcopos esse
manifestat. Quod autem postea unus electus est, qui caeteris praeponeretur, in
Schismatis remedio facium est, ne unusquisque ad se trahens Evangelium,
rumperet. Nam est Alexandriae a Marco Evangelista usque ad Heraclam, and
Dionysium Episcopos (qui sederunt in Centuria 3.) Presbyterum unum de se
elecium, and in Excelsiori loco and Gradu collocatum Episcopum nominabant,
quomodo si Exercitus, Imperatorem faciat, aut Diaconi elegant de se, quem
industrium noverint, and Archidiaconum vocent. Constat ergo APOSTOLICA
INSTITUTIONE, omnes Presbyteros esse Episcopos, licet nunc illi majores hoc
nomen obtineant. Episcopus enim Superintendens dicitur: and omnis Presbyter
debet intendere curam super oves sibi commissas. For brevity sake we forbear to
English this long allegation. The sum of it is, that in the Primitive Church,
Bishops and Presbyters were one, in respect of Order; however, a Bishop chosen
by the Presbytery were over them in respect of place and degree.

4. Bishops, being Consecrated, have power by the Stat. of 5.6. Edw. 6. and 8.
Eliz. 1. to Ordain both Deacons, and Presbyters, which the Book incongruously
calls Priests. But, whereas the Episcopal Party claims sole Ordination, as
if no Minister can be rightly Ordained, who is not ordained by a Bishop; and,
under this pretense, many of the present Prelatical Party stick not to degrade
and unordain such Ministers as are Ordained by Presbyters alone (even where no
Bishops are allowed to execute that Office) and Schismatically to advise and
persuade all to withdraw from all Assemblies and Ordinances, as being no
Ordinances of Christ, where such Ministers as are ordained only by the
Presbytery without a Bishop, do administer: We must give this Answer. 1. That
there is no Scripture that appropriateth this to Bishops alone. 2. There are
several warrants in the New Testament to justify the laying on of hands
without a Bishop in their sense. When Barnabas and Saul (after called Paul)
were to be sent out to preach, the Holy Ghost commanded to separate them for
that Work; whereupon Simeon sur-named Niger, Lucius of Cyrene, and Manaen (not
one of them a Bishop in our Prelatical Advocates sense) laid hands on them, and
sent them forth, Acts 13. Thus, Timothee was ordained by the laying on of hands
of the Presbytery, 1 Timothy 4.14. This made him a preaching Presbyter and Bishop:
although the laying on of Paul's hands made him an Evangelist, 2 Timothy 1.6. 3.
The Book of Ordination it self, though it appoint the Bishop to be (...), the
president and chief Actor; yet it allows him not to act (as in Confirmation of
Children) alone, in the Ordaining of Presbyters or Priests; But, the Bishop
with the Priests present shall lay their hands severally upon the head of every
one that receives Orders. So, the Rubric: therefore no Bishop has sole power
of Ordination, nor may he Ordain alone. 4. That very Statute of 8. Eliz. 1.
which ratifieth the Book of Ordination, does not tie all to that one Form, as
appears by the Stat. of 13. Eliz. 12. which says thus: Be it Enacted by the
Authority of this present Parliament, That every person under the degree of a
Bishop, which does, or, shall pretend to be a Priest or Minister of Gods holy
Word and Sacraments, by reason of any other form of Institution, Consecration,
or Ordering, then the form set forth by Parliament, in the time of the late
King of most worthy memory, King Edward the sixth, or now used in the Reign of
our most gracious Sovereign Lady, before the Feast of the Nativity next coming,
shall in the presence of the Bishop -- Subscribe to all the Articles of
Religion, etc. Therefore the Law intended not to tie all to the form of
Ordination by Bishops; but, tyeth Bishops to give them Institution if they
subscribe the Articles, and be otherwise qualified as that Act prescribes. 5.
This is to un-Church all the Protestant Churches in Christendom, where there
are no Bishops; and, to deny them Communion with the Church of England, which
hitherto has owned them, and held Communion with them as true Churches of
Christ.

Now, in sew words, we must a little take notice of the necessity of Reforming
that Book it self.

1. In the Preface. For, where that says, It is evident unto all men
diligently reading the holy Scripture, and ancient Authors, that from the
Apostles time, there has been these Orders of Ministers in Christ's Church,
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons: it has been showed before, that (however we
read of Bishops, Presbyters, or Elders, and Deacons) these are not three
distinct Orders of the Ministry; for that Bishops and Presbyters are of the
same Order. Nor are Presbyters, Priests: there being no such name in the New
Testament, nor any such Office in the Ministry of the Gospel. Now seeing, this
Preface is so much made use of, and wrested, to prove an untruth touching the
distinction of Orders; and, gives such a name to Ministers, as argues them to
be Sacerdotes Sacrificuli, sacrificing Priests, (which is not so, but repugnant
to their Office) it ought to be reformed.

2. In the Ordering of Deacons, the Bishop (alone) is to lay on hands, whereas
it is not so to be done in the Ordering of Priests, (as they are nicknamed) or
Consecration of Bishops. And this also is contrary to the practice of the
Apostles themselves, expressed in that very Scripture, Act. 6. appointed to be
one of the Epistles to be read at that time; where, after choosing the seven
Deacons, it is said, These they set before the Apostles; and when they bad
prayed, THEY (not, one of them) laid their hands on them. Now, seeing this was
so; and, that at every Ordination of Deacons, other Ministers, beside the
Bishop, are present; and seeing further, it is said in the third Prayer then
used after the Letany, that God did inspire his Apostles to choose to this Order
-- St. Stephen, with other; which directly crosses the Text, which says, The
whole multitude chose them; and that by order from the Apostles: Why should
such a practice be continued by a single Bishop, so contrary to that of the
Apostles themselves, and every other Ordination in our own Church?

3. In the Ordering of Priests. We say, as before, that Title or name of
Priest, ought to be changed, for the Reasons abovesaid. But, that which most
offends, is, that in the very act of Ordaining, the Bishop takes upon him to
give that, which none but God himself has power to bestow, where it says,
Receive the Holy Ghost, etc. which be the words of Christ himself to his
Apostles, without any warrant from him to be used by Bishops, or any others.
For, however Ordination be necessary, yet there can be no reason, that a
Bishop, or other persons, should in this assume more in officiating, then in
all other Ministrations, where the words of Institution, in Baptisin, in the
administering the Lords Supper, etc. are first rehearsed; and then, at the act
of ministering, a Prayer is used, not a Magisterial use of the very words of
Christ himself in the first institution; as is obvious to all. This therefore
savors of presumption, not to be admitted in so holy an action: especially,
where a Bishop shall (as by report, some now do) take upon him to breathe upon
the person he ordains, as Christ did upon his Apostles. Moreover, it being
now claimed as peculiar to Episcopacy (as a distinct Order) to have the sole
power of Ordination, which has been proved not to be so; It is requisite that
herein also some Declaration be made to the contrary, that we may not give
offense to the Protestant Churches with whom we hold Communion; nor admit of
such an untruth among our selves, to which all must subscribe.

4. As for Consecrating of Archbishops and Bishops, (in which the same
Scripture, 1 Timothy 3. is read again, that was used in Ordaining of Priests;
which shows, that the Compilers of that Book never dreamt of a distinction of
Orders between Bishops and Presbyters) we only say thus much, That there being
no warrant in Scripture for Archbishops; but only from the practice of
aftertimes, whereby they were, by men only, called to that height, we see no
necessity of their Consecration; no more does our Church; for that it makes the
same Consecration which is for Bishops, to serve for Archbishops. Upon this
account, we see no reason why a solemn Oath of Canonical Obedience to the
Archbishop, should then be administered to every person that is to be Bishop.
The Exception against that Expression of the Archbishop in the act of
Consecration of a Bishop, Take the Holy Ghost, being spoken to before; here we
only make the same profession against it, which there we did, and so leave it,
and proceed to the next Head of Ecclesiastical Government, which is
Jurisdiction.

II. Of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.
IT has been of late the claim of our Bishops to have in them the sole power
of Jurisdiction in Causes Ecclesiastical: which is now pleaded for so boldly
and openly by their Advocates, and such as asspire to the same Office and
Dignity, that it is now made (though very groundlesly) an Essential part of
Episcopacy, by Divine Right; witness among other, the Author of an Answer to a
Letter sent to Doctor Turner, to Oxford, who alleges several Scriptures, viz.
1 Timothy 5.19. Tit. 1.5. to prove that Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction is in Bishops
only. To the same effect, the Author of another Book, entitled, Church Lands
not to be sold. So others.

But, seeing Bishops can exercise no Jurisdiction in England, but what is
allowed by the Laws of the Land, as we shall after make it manifest to every
eye; we shall not much trouble our selves, at this time, with their claim by
Divine Right. Howbeit, lest they should think there is nothing to be said
against it, we desire it may be considered, (which is known to all that have
seriously consulted Antiquity) that in the Primitive Ages of the Church, there
was no Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction exercised, but by the Bishops, and their
Consistory of Presbyters together. Even, in Rome it self, there was, even in
Cyprians time, a number of the Clergy, who acted with the Bishop, as well as
elsewhere. Thence grew (by Corruption) their Conclave of Cardinals. And, from
the same Original, here in England, first, Monks; afterward, Deans and
Chapters, were joined with the Bishops, to assist both in Ordination and
Jurisdiction: although of late times they joined with them in neither: Such was
the Pride of the one, and the Idleness of the other. Which last, his late
Majesty was content to part withal. They being of no use, but only to confirm
Grants of the Bishop; as he, confirmed theirs: keeping sundry Benefices of Cure
in their hands, and seldom or never residing on them; under pretense of
residence near the Bishop; whereas the Canons of 1603. require them to reside
on their Benefices with Cure, all but the space of one month in the year Can.
44.
, unless he be a Dean, Master, Warden, or chief Governor of a Cathedral, or
Church, who, by Can. 42. is to reside there, ninety days, Conjunctim or
Divisim. This is spoken not to justify the Continuation of Deans and Chapters;
or, to move for reducing them to the ancient course of corrupt times, in making
them alone to be the Adjutors of Bishops: for Jurisdiction is as proper to all
the Presbytery, as to those Cathedral Presbyters. But we urge it, merely and
only to demonstrate the falsehood of that upstart Assertion, that Bishops have
sole power of Jurisdiction.

And that we may contract our selves within necessary brevity (considering to
whom we make our Address) we shall give but one instance more; and that shall
be out of the Book of Ordination, in the Ordering of Priests. Where, among
other Questions propounded by the Bishop to him that is to be ordained Priest,
this is one; Will you reverently obey your Ordinary, and other chief Ministers,
unto whom the Government and Charge is committed over you; following with a
glad mind and will their godly Admonition, and submitting your self to their
godly Judgments? To this each of them that are to be ordained, answers, I
will so do, the Lord being my helper. By this it is evident, that more, beside
Bishops, have power of Jurisdiction. If it be said, this may be meant of
ARchdeacons, Deans, etc. that have it under the Bishop: what is this to the
intituling of all Ministers thereunto? It is answered out of the Rubric before
the Communion, whereby every Curate is authorized to keep off from that
Sacrament, every open and notorious Liver, by whom the Congregation is
offended, until he have openly declared himself to have truly repented, and
amended his former wicked life, that the Congregation may thereby be satisfied.
Yea, where he finds hatred and variance, he is to suspend from the Sacrament,
the party refusing to be reconciled to the other, and be content to forgive
from the bottom of his heart, all that the other has transgressed against him,
and to make amends for that he himself has offended. What is this, but as much
and as high Jurisdiction as any Bishop can use in that particular?

If this suffice not, take one passage more. In the same Book of Ordination, in
the Ordering of Priests. The Bishop asks every person whom he ordains a
Priest, this Question; Will you give your faithful diligence always so to
minister the Doctrine and Sacraments, and the DISCIPLINE of Christ, as the Lord
has commanded, and as this Realm has received the same? etc. To which, each
Priest is to answer, I will so do, by the help of the Lord. What can be a more
clear evidence of the intention of our Church in the first Reformation, then to
admit all Presbyters to have a share in Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and in the
Administration of it?

How long Bishops and others under them, have had Ecclesiastical Consistories
to exercise Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, to us is not certain. Yet it appears
by Sir Edw. Cook, ^ Instit. ca. 53. p. 2259.
that William the Conqueror was the first that, by his Charter to the Dean and
Chapter of Lincoln, did prohibit Sheriffs, in their Turn Courts (wherein,
before-time, all Ecclesiastical matters were heard, and determined) to
intermedle any more with Ecclesiastical Causes, but leave them to the Bishops.
Thence, some conclude, that Bishops have held Courts ever since William 1.
Others, finding no inrollment of that Charter, until 2 Ric. 2. will not admit
of so great Antiquity thereof. And the same Sir Edw. Cook there alleges the
Red Book of Hen. 1. De general. Placitis Comitatuum, Cap. 8. extant in the
Office of the Kings Rememb. in the Exchequer, wherein, in the Sheriffs Turn
Court, is said, Ibi agantur primo debita vere Christianitatis jura: Secundo,
Regis placita; postremo, causae singulorum dignis satisfactionibus expleantur.
There, let be handled, first, all due Laws of Christianity, (or,
Court-Christian.) Secondly, Pleas of the King. Lastly, Causes of particular
persons, etc. Whereupon they (that is, others) conclude that Ecclesiastical
causes were handled in the Tourn, in H. 1. long after the said supposed
Charter. Then he adds, And certain it is, the Bishops Consistories were
erected, and causes Ecclesiastical removed from the Tourn to the Consistory
after the making of the said Red Book.

But, let the Antiquity thereof, be what it will; it is most certain, that
however the Popes and their Agents did often intrude, and usurp Authority
within this Realm, yet the King and Parliament ever held the Bishops and Clergy
of England within the verge of the Laws of the Land; never permitting them,
either by color of Magna Charta, or otherwise, to exercise any Authority, but
with submission to the Municipal Laws. So that, whoever shall endeavor to put
them into any further power, (in case they have a mind to restore them to
former Jurisdictions) does put to his hand to make them so many Popes; which
this Realm, even in times of Popish Religion here, would never endure.

And whereas some are pleased to affirm, that by the Statute of 25. Hen. 8.
cap. 19. there was a stricter restraint laid upon the Bishops and Clergy, than
in the times before, when they sat in Convocation, viz. No Canons should be
made and put in exercise, that were contrariant or repugnant to the Laws of the
Land: it is manifest that the same limitation was long before set upon them.
For Sir Edw. Cook (ibid, cap. 74. page 323.) says, That the King did often
appoint Commissioners by Writ, to sit with them at the Convecation, and to have
cognizance of such things as they meant to establish, that nothing should be
done in prejudice, etc. and for this he cites 51. Ed. 3. nu. 42.46. Edw. 3.
prem. 8.21. Ed. 4.45. Rot. Parl. 1 Ric. 2. nu: 114. from which he concludes,
that the Statute of 25. H. 8.19. is but Declaratory of the old Common Law.

And, so strict were the Kings anciently over Bishops and Archbishops too, that
when the Clergy petitioned in Parliament (51. Edw. 3. 4 Instit. ca. 74. of
Archdeacons. p. 339.
number. 83.) that of every Consultation conditional, the Ordinary may of himself
take upon him the true understanding thereof, and therein proceed accordingly,
(that is, without appeal to the King, whereupon Delegates by Commission under
the Great Seal, might hear and determine the same.) The Kings answer was, that
the King cannot depart with his right, but to yield to his Subjects according
to Law. To which Sir Edw. Cook subjoyns an Item to all. his Readers, Nota hoc,
and stude been.

Nay, this is not all. For, so far did the Kings of England, engage in the
overruling of Bishops, that they did not only limit their Jurisdiction, but
allowed them not liberty to make a Will without license from the King, till
they made composition with him; as the same Author tells us, saying, Ibid. p.
338
It appears by many Records in the reigns of H. 3. Edw. 1. (as taking some one
or two examples for many) that by the Law and custom of England, no Bishop
could make his Will of his Goods or Chattels coming of his Bishopric, etc.
without the Kings license. The Bishops, that they might freely make their
Wills, yielded to give to the King, after their deceases respectively for ever,
six things: 1. Their best Horse, or Palfrrce, with Bridle and Saddle. 2. A
Cloak with a Cape. 3. One Cup with a Cover. 4. One Basin and Ewre. 5. One Ring
of Gold. 6. His Kennel of Hounds. For these, a Writ issues out of the
Exchequer after the decease of every Bishop. Whether this be still in use, we
meddle not; but mention it, only to show what a strict eye our Kings have ever
had upon Bishops, so as the Law allows them not power so much as of their own
personal Estates, much less of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, without the King.

What power they had in the High Commission Court, is needless to mention, the
Court being happily laid aside by the Statute of 17 Car. 1. cap. 11. But,
whereas they insisted upon sole Jurisdiction, and now begin to exercise it; or
at least, to renew their claim thereunto, it is very well known, that by the
Statute of 1. Edw. 6.2. they could hold no Courts, but in the Kings name; nor
that, without Commission under the Great Seal: which power was indeed revived
and re-established by the Act of 1. Eliz. after it had been repealed 1. Mar. 2.
Howbeit, all that power is again repealed, and made void for ever, by the same
Act of 17. Car. 1. and now, no Commissions to be granted them any more. To make
this out, we shall rehearse the words of both those Acts of Parliament, which
run thus:

1. The Act of 1. Eliz. cap. 1. having first united and annexed all Spiritual
and Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to the Imperial Crown of this Kingdom, it after
adds what power shall be given by Commission under the Great Seal, to
exercise the same, in this following Clause only, viz. And that your Highness,
your Heirs and Successors, Kings or Queens of this Realm, shall have full Power
and Authority by virtue of this Act, by Letters patents under the Great Seal of
England, to assign, name and authorize, when, and as often as your Highness,
your Heirs or Successors, shall think meet and convenient, and for such and so
long time as shall please your Highness, your Heirs or Successors, such person
or persons being natural born Subjects to your Highness, your Heirs or
Successors, as your Majesty, your Heirs or Successors, shall think meet, to
exercise and use, occupy and execute, under your Highness, your Heirs and
Successors, all manner of Jurisdictions, Privileges, and Preheminencies, in
any wise touching or concerning any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction,
within these your Realms of England and Ireland, or any other your Highnesses
Dominions and Countries. And to visit, reform, redress, order, correct and
amend all such Errors, Heresies, Schisms, Abuses, Offenses, Contempts and
Enormities whatsoever, which by any manner Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Power,
Authority or Jurisdiction, can, or may lawfully be reformed, ordered,
redressed, corrected, restrained or amended, to the pleasure of Almighty God,
the increase of Virtue, and the Conservation of the Peace and Unity of this
Realm. And that such person or persons so to be named, assigned, authorized,
and appointed by your Highness, your Heirs or Successors, after the said
Letters Patents to him or them made and delivered, as is aforesaid, shall have
full power and authority by virtue of this Act, and of the said Letters
Patents, under your Highness, your Heirs or Successors, to exercise, use, and
execute all the premises, according to the tenor and effect of the said
Letters Patents: any matter, or cause to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding. This is one entire Clause of that Act; nor is there any Branch
or Clause in that whole Act that gives more, or other Jurisdiction to Bishops,
or any other Ecclesiastical persons whatsoever.

2. Now the Act of 17. Car. 1.11. having repeted this Clause at large, adds,
Be it Enacted by the Kings most excellent Majesty, and the Lords and Commons in
this present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That the
aforesaid Branch, Clause, Article, or Sentence, contained in the said Act, and
every word, matter and thing contained in that Branch, Clause, Article, or
Sentence, shall from henceforth be repealed, annulled, revoked, annihilated and
utterly made void for ever, any thing in the said Act to the contrary in any
wise notwithstanding. This (as we humbly conceive) puts a period to all
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of Bishops, Deans and Chapters, and Archdeacons,
whatsoever.

And even before that Act, of 17. Car. 1. that Government which they exercised
was without; yea, contrary to Law. For, whereas by the Statute of 1. Edw. 6.2.
it was Enacted that all Summons and Citations, or other process Ecclesiastical,
in all Suits and Causes, etc. should from the first day of July thence next
following be made in the name, and with the style of the King, as it is in
Writs Original, or Judicial at the Common Law. And that the Test thereof be in
the name of the Archbishop, or Bishop, or other having Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, who has the Commission and grant of the Ecclesiastical Authority
immediately from the Kings Highness. And that his Commissary, Official, or
Substitute exercising jurisdiction under him, shall put his name in the
Citation, or Process, after the Test. And that they, in all Seals of their
Office shall have the Kings Highness Arms, decently set, with certain
Characters under the Arms, for the knowledge of the Diocese, and shall use no
other Seal of Jurisdiction, etc. upon pain of his Majesty's displeasure, and
imprisonment during his Majesty's pleasure So also it is Enacted 1. Edw. 6.12.
that they should make their Process and Writings in the Ks. name, and not under
their own names; and that their Seals should be the Kings Arms.
.

In which Act nevertheless, they were allowed to use their own Seals, in
admission and ordering all their own Officers, in all Certificates, in all
Collations, Presentations, Institutions, and Inductions of Benefices, Letters
of Orders, or Dimissories, as formerly was accustomed.

But, under color of this last Toleration, they have used their own Names, and
Seals only, in all Ecclesiastical Jurisdictions, for many years last past,
without taking the least notice of King or Queen, or taking any special
Commission from them, for ought has appeared in any of their pretendedly
juridical proceedings, which are therefore apprehended to be all void in Law,
albeit they had obtained, in secret, Letters, Patents so to act as they have
done. For that Statute being repealed in 1. Mar. 2. was again, in general terms
revived and re-established in 1. Eliz. 1. and never since made void.

And whereas our Bishops and Archbishops in England and Wales, are in all but
twenty six in number, which being far too few to be able to execute the Office
of Bishops, as by the Word of God they are bound to do, there was in the 26th
year of Hen. 8. cap. 14. an Act of Parliament made for adding six and twenty
Suffragan Bishops more unto them; which that Statute says, has been
accustomed to be had in this Realm. It was Enacted, that Th^tford, Ipswich,
Colchester, Dover, Gilford, Southhampton, Taunton, Shaftsbury, Molton,
Marleborough, Bedford, Leicester, Gloucester, Shrewsbury, Bristol, Penreth,
Bridgwater, Notingham, Grantham, Hull, Huntington, Cambridge, and the Town of
Pereth, and Barwick, St. Germans in Cornwall, and the Isle of Wight shall be
taken and accepted for Sees of Bishops Suffragans to be made in this Realm.
These to be chosen thus: Every Archbishop and Bishop that would have
Suffragans, must for each place nominate two persons to the King, whereof the
King to choose one, and to give him the name, title, and dignity of Bishop of
such of the Sees aforesaid, as he should be nominated unto, and he to be called
Bishop Suffragan of that See. And the King by his Letters Patents, is to
present him to the Archbishop of the Province, where this Suffragan is to be;
requiring the Archbishop (with two Bishops or Suffragans more, to be procured
by the Bishop that names him) to Consecrate the said person, to the same name,
title, style and dignity of Bishop, as to the Office of a Bishop Suffragan
appertains: and then to execute such power and authority as by the
Archbishop, or Bishop within whose Diocese he is to be, he shall be
Commissionated to do, but no other, under pain of a Praemunire; but not to
partake any of the Profits of the Bishopric of the Diocese.

But our Bishops like none of this, although heretofore used: which Act, being
repealed by Queen Mary, was revived in 1. Eliz. 1. by name, and is still in
force. Therefore, in stead of twenty six Bishops, to desire fifty two, is no
Puritanical request, but a legal and just demand. For there are so many allowed
by Law already. Yea, if two hundred Bishops should be settled in England, they
would be too few to execute all the duties which, by the Word, are incumbent on
a Bishop. And verily, we are persuaded in Conscience, that this must be done,
if there be any due care of Souls, by such as have power to do it, if
Episcopacy be again set up in England. And we speak thus, because we apprehend,
that by Act of Parliament all their power and jurisdiction is absolutely taken
away; and therefore, by consequent, the Office it self, although the Ordinance
of both Houses of Parliament of October 9. 1646. had never been. For when their
power of Jurisdiction is gone for ever, what, of the Office of a Bishop, as
such, remains? This was the sense of both Houses of Parliament, as appears by
that Ordinance which makes all their Grants since 17. Car. 1. to be null and
void, because their Office then expired.

If it shall be thought fit to set up Episcopacy again, We most humbly pray,
that it may be no other but that Primitive Episcopacy, agreeable to the
Apostles rules, in that form, method and power mentioned in the Book of
Reduction of Episcopacy, composed and published in the year 1641. by Dr. James
Usher late Archbishop of Armagh: always provided, that there be such a
competent number of Bishops set up, as may be able faithfully and profitably to
discharge the Office of a Bishop according to the mind of Christ expressed in
his Word.

If the late Episcopal Party shall pretend and plead, that unless Bishops be
restored to all their power and pomp they arrogated before 17. Car. they shall
not be able to do his Majesty that service which otherwise they might, if so
restored. To this it is answered, 1. That if they mean thereby, that they
cannot do his Majesty service in Parliament, unless they be restored to their
Lordships again, and readmitted to the House of Peers; we cannot think, but
that there be Noble Lords enough left in that Honorable House, who are far more
able to do his Majesty service, then the Bishops can do there. 2. Whereas the
Bishops and Clergy obtained a Command and Charter from William 1. to exclude
the Sheriff and the rest of the Laity from meddling with matters Ecclesiastical,
in their Courts (as was before showed) we see no reason why Bishops (excluded
in 17. Car. 1. his reign) should be again admitted to intermeddle in the
Supreme Court and Judicatory of the Realm, in Civil Affairs. 3. If they be
confined to the Apostolic Constitution, and more Bishops made, they will be
in a capacity of doing God, and his Majesty more and better service, in a more
diligent and circumspect Government of the Church, then ever yet they have
done, or were able to do. By all which it appears, that if they labor to
recover their former power, the pretense of doing his Majesty better service,
is but to make way to their own Greatness, and to render them less able to
serve God or the King, as in that Office they ought. Nor will his Majesty's
interest in the Clergy be diminished by making more Bishops (without an
election by a Dean and Chapter) but much increased, if by Act of Parliament the
same Course be taken for the election of all Bishops, which by the Statute of
26. H. 8.14. is appointed for the constituting of Bishops Suffragan: and their
power of Jurisdiction set out unto them by the King and Parliament, as it was
in 1. Eliz. at what time, the Articles to be ministered in all their
Vis^tations, were set forth by the Queen, etc. are yet extant, with her
Injunctions. Hereby also his Majesty would be sure to have a far greater
influence into all the Clergy of note, by how much the more the number of
Bishops is increased, and more learned men, made capable of such preferments;
which a quarter of them cannot be, if Episcopacy be confined to twenty six
Bishops.

III. Of DISCIPLINE.
HAving spoken of the Subject, or Persons in whom the Power of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, by the Laws of the Realm, resided; we proceed to offer somewhat
touching the Rules or Laws for execution thereof, under this Head of
Discipline, which contains the Canons, or Rules, to wit, the Kings
Ecclesiastical Laws, by which alone all persons trusted with Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, have been enabled to exercise that Government.

How that Discipline is bounded, appears in and by the Acts of Parliament
still in force, in 25. H. 8.19. and 1. Eliz. 1. which bounds, a great Sciolist
is pleased to call sad restrictions and limitations D. Heylin, Certam. Epistol.
page 89. which shows how they like the Laws, and how far, they would go, in
making Laws, if they durst.
. The bounds in the former Act are these. 1. That none of the Clergy should
from thence forth, presume to attempt, allege, claim, or put in ure any
Constitutions, or Ordinances Provincial, or Synodals, or any other Canons; Nor,
shall enact, promulge, or execute any such Canons, Constitutions, or Ordinances
Provincial, by whatsoever name, or names they may be called in their
Convocations, in time coming (which always shall be assembled by Authority of
the Kings Writ) unless the same Clergy may have the Kings most Royal Assent,
and License, to make, promulge, and execute such Canons, Constitutions, and
Ordinances Provincial, or Synodal, upon pain of every one of the said Clergy,
doing contrary to this Act; and being thereof convict, to suffer imprisonment,
and make Fine at the Kings Will. It is true, that, at the suit of the then
Clergy, diverse Constitutions, Ordinances, and Canons Provincial, or Synodal,
which heretofore had been Enacted, and then thought to be not only much
prejudicial to the Kings Prerogative royal, and repugnant to the Laws and
Statutes of this Realm, but also overmuch onerous to his Highness Subjects: by
that Act, the King was to choose thirty two Persons, to review, approve, or
reject the same; which being begun, but not perfected by the time limited, so
as to get the Royal Assent thereunto, 3.4. Edw. 6. cap. 11.
that Act revived in 3.4. Edw. 6. authorizing him to choose thirty two Persons,
to perfect that work. The persons were chosen, they did the work, compiled a
Book entitled Reformatio Legum Ecclesiasticarum, yet extant: but for lack of
the Royal Assent thereunto, within the time prefixed, that Act expired, and,
their Book of Reformation, with it: which was never since renewed.

In the Act of 25. H. 8.19. it is provided, that such Canons, Constitutions,
Ordinances, and Synodals Provincial being already made, 1 El. 1.
which be not contrariant, nor repugnant to the Laws, Statutes and Customs of
this Realm; nor to the damage or hurt of the Kings Prerogative-Royal, shall now
still be used and executed as they were before the making of this Act, till
such time as they be viewed, searched, or otherwise ordered and determined by
the said thirty two persons, or the more part of them, according to the tenor,
form and effect of this present Act.

By occasion hereof, Dr. Heylin Ubi supra.
affirms, that so much of the Popes Canon Law, (first intended for the Church
in general) as is not contrary to the Laws, Customs, etc. of the Land, is still
in force, in our Courts Ecclesiastical, as the Civil or Imperial Laws are, in
our Courts of Admiralty, and Prerogative, for probate of Wills. But we humbly
conceive this cannot be so, because however the Civil Law is still in use in
maritine, and Testamentary Affairs, in regard that Forrainers, as well as
Natives, are, or may be therein concerned; and so those Civil Laws are
permitted; not, in relation to the Emperor, but as the Law of Nations, which
never was by any Act of Parliament, in those eases, prohibited in England. The
Popes Canon Law, on the contrary, is ever since disabled by the Statute of 24.
H. 8.12. and by that Act beforementioned, is wholly abrogated, and null. For,
if his power be renounced, can his Laws (which are the chief part of a
Lawgivers power) be still in force; especially, where no Canons, but such as
have the Royal Assent, may be used in England? And if that might be admitted,
yet that very Proviso, in the Statute of 25. H. 8.19. puts a period to it,
after the time the thirty two persons, or major part of them, did view and
search them, and drew up a Body of Ecclesiastical Laws to be used here, (which
the same Doctor confesses they did) although the want of the Kings Assent,
made it not valid in Law. For, the Proviso does not say, the old Canons shall
be used till the King Assent; but, only till such time as they be viewed,
searched; or, otherwise ordered and determined by them, or the more part of
them. Nor does that Act in any Clause, mention any other Canons or
Constitutions, but such as are Provincial, or called by other names, always
presumed, and mentioned to be made in Convocations in England; not in the Popes
Conclave.

And to the end it may yet further appear, that he who so confidently takes
upon him to improve his knowledge to whom he wrote that Epistle, has
misinformed him, and wrested the Laws also; take notice, that the Canon-Laws
of England, are only such as are, or have been made in England. These are of
two sorts; legatine, or Provincial. The Legatine were, 77 Canons and
Constitutions; whereof, 26 were made by Otho the Popes Legate, President of a
Synod here in England; the other, 51. in another Synod, after holden under
Othobone, Legate of the Pope in 32. Hen. 3. An. 1248. The Provincial
Constitutions were such as, in several places of England, were made under the
Archbishops of Canterbury: in all, 212. whereof the first 48. were made under
Stephen Langhton, in the reign of King John; and the last three, were made
under Henry Chichley, in the reign of Hen. 5. These Provincial Constitutions,
about the year 1422. were digested into a Body by William Lindwood, who also
wrote a Commentary upon them; the other, by Johannes de Aton, Canon of Lincoln,
who likewise Commented upon them: all which, are yet extant.

Now, we must understand, the Act of 25. H. 8.19. speaks only of Canons,
Constitutions, Ordinances Provincial, or other, or by whatsoever name they be
called in their CONVOCATION. These, and no other, were to be reviewed; and, out
of these, such as by the thirty two persons chosen by Hen. 8. or Edw. 6. should
be viewed, ordered, and determined to stand, were only to be in force, as is
evident to every impartial eye that shall consult the Statute. And these,
having been in 4. Edw. 6. viewed; and, thereupon, by Gualter Haddon, under
Archbishop Cranmer, and four Classes into which the said thirty two persons
were divided, that Book, called, Reformatio Legum Ecclesiasticarum, (says the
Preface thereunto) were compiled. And these being so composed, and published,
that all might object what they could (if they had ought) against them, before
Confirmation; the King died before his Royal Assent was given; and so, they
never were confirmed. But yet, the very viewing, ordering, and determining of
those old Constitutions, (be they what they could) were, by the closing Proviso
forementioned, in 25. H. 8. all void, and of none effect.

And, albeit diverse Canons, or Constitutions, were made in Q. Elizabeth's reign,
(beside those Injunctions, and Articles for Visitations, in her first year) yet
none of them being (for ought we know) confirmed by the Royal Assent, under the
Great Seal, are now, by any, reputed Obligatory. It be then only the
Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical, treated upon by the Bishop of London,
President of the Convocation for the Province of Canterbury, and the rest of
the Bishops and Clergy of the said Province; and, agreed upon with the Kings
Majesty's license in that Synod begun at London, An. Dom. 1603. in the first
year of King James his reign over England; and, after published by his said
Majesty's Authority, under the Great Seal of England: which can now be so much
as pretended to be of any force.

And here, we shall not dispute their validity, after that Kings death' they
being not after re-established by King Charles the first: but, we shall only
speak to the Legality of them, as they were once ratified; and as they are any
of them contrariant and repugnant to the Laws or Customs of the Land. As for
Customs, (which the Statute of 25. H. 8.19. refers to, as well as to the
Laws) we shall say little, because this is more proper for Lawyers, upon
Prohibitions, granted out of his Majesty's Civil Courts, to confider, and
debate. We therefore consider of the Canons, or such of them only as are
repugnant to any of the Laws in force.

This is a large Field: Those Canons being no less than 141. in number, which
are more then heretofore were ever made in any three Synods (by whomsoever
held) in England. We shall therefore keep only to such as we find most
contrariant to those Laws, which we are in duty bound chiefly to take notice
of. As for instance.

Of those twelve Canons, under the first Head or Title, viz. Of the Church of
England, there be eleven of them, the breach of any of which, is to be punished
with Excommunication ipso facto, not to be revoked till such as break them,
after repent, and publicly revoke their wicked errors. The persons to be
excommunicated, are, I. Impugners of the Kings Supremacy: Can. 2. II. All that
affirm the Church of England is not a true and Apostolical Church, teaching and
maintaining the Doctrine of the Apostles: Can. 3. where, it is not defined what
the Church of England is. III. Impugners of the public Worship of God,
established: Can. 4. which few know to be established. IV. Impugners of the
Articles of Religion, agreed upon, 1562. Can. 5. the establishment whereof, is
doubtful. V. Impugners of the Rites and Ceremonies established, Can. 6. of
which there is no certainty. VI. Impugners of the Government of the Church of
England, by Archbishops, Bishops, etc. Can. 7. there being none such. VII.
Impugners of the form of consecrating and ordering Archbishops, Bishops, etc.
or that any thing in it is repugnant to the Word of God, Can. 8. there being in
the form no such Words as ordering of Archbishops and Bishops: and it having
been made out that there be contradictions in it; one of which, is repugnant to
the Word. VIII. Authors of Schism: Can. 9. IX. Maintainers of (such as the
Canons call) Schismatics: that is, who affirm such Ministers as refuse to
subscribe to the Book of Common Prayer, etc. Can. 10. which is hard to prove.
X. Maintainers of Conventicles: Can. 11. that is, of such as maintain that
there are in England, other Meetings, Assemblies, or Congregations of the Kings
born Subjects, then such as by the Laws are allowed, which may rightly claim
the name of true and lawful Churches. XI. Maintainers of Constitutions made in
Conventicles, without the Kings Authority; and, submit to them: Can. 12. So all
the Rules confirmed by Parliament, for Church Government, make the Parliament
liable to Excommunication; and the Assemby too, and all the Presbyterians in
England.

Besides these, there is, Can. 59. for excommunicating Ministers refusing to
Catechize every Sunday, after a third offense herein complained of. So, Can.
68. decrees Ministers refusing to Christen, or Bury, to be excommunicated
Majori Excommunicatione. And Canon 72. ordains that if a Minister, without
License from the Bishop, under his hand and seal, appoint or keep fasts, or be
present at them, either publicly, or in any private Houses, other then such
as by Law, are, or by public Authority shall be appointed, he shall for the
first offense be suspended; for the second, excommunicated; and, for the third,
deposed from the Ministry. Lastly, the 73. Canon, excommunicateth ipso facto,
all Ministers and others meeting in any private house, or elsewhere What, if in
Parliament; or, in Convocation?
, to consult upon any matter or course to be taken by them, or upon their
motion or direction by any other, which may any way tend to the impeaching or
depraving of the Doctrine of the Church of England, or of the Book of
Common Prayer, or of any part of the discipline now established. What is that?

Now, this sentence of Excommunication, being to be pronounced by a Minister
only, and, after to be publicly denounced by other Ministers; and the
persons excommunicated upon the 2, 3, 4, 5, 9, and 11th Canons, not to be
restored but by the Archbishop; and every such person (not restored) is liable
to the Writ De excommunicato capiendo; (or else the excommunication signifies
nothing) we appeal to all whether these Canons (if executed) be not against the
Stat. of 5. Eliz. 23. which Enacteth, that if, in the Significavit (of the
Ordinary) for obtaining a Writ de excom. capiend. it be not contained, that the
excommunication does proceed upon some cause or contempt of some original
matter of Heresy, or refusing to have his or their child baptized, or to
receive the holy Communion as it is now commonly used to be received in the
Church of England, or to come to Divine-service now commonly used in the said
Church of England, or Error in matters of Religion, or Doctrine now received
or allowed in the Church of England, Incontinency, Usury, Simony, Perjury in
the Ecclesiastical Court, or Idolatry; Then all such Writs, and Significavits
to be void in Law. And whether such Ministers as in Court, or in Churches,
pronounce, or publish such excommunications; or, for nonappearance,
non-payment of Fees, etc. (too too commonly practiced in those late Courts,) be
not liable to be punished, by an Action at Law, for doing such illegal Acts, as
are not justifiable by the Laws of the Land: Or, if such a Writ will lie
against any man for Heresy, (not declared such by Parliament according to 1.
Eliz. 1.) for not receiving the Communion, kneeling; or, for not coming to the
Common Prayer; as now used (it being already made out that it is not
established by Law;) or, for dissenting from any of the Articles of Religion of
An. 1562. (when it has been showed that some of them are doubtful, some
defective, and disagreeing from one another, etc.) is it not high time to
Reform these things; especially, when by the Canons, not kneeling, not coming
to Common Prayer, are declared to be Schism; and any dissent from those
Articles, being adjudged error in doctrine, the party shall be punished with
excommunication; yea, with imprisonment, by Writ out of Chancery; and not be
absolved, but by the Archbishop, (Can. 5.) nor, by him, till he shall have
repented, and openly revoked that his dissent, as a wicked error; how just,
and necessary soever such dissent was?

Again, the 14th Canon appoints Divine service to be said, not only on the
Holy Days appointed by the Book of Common Prayer, but on their Eves. Which
observation of Eves, is taken away by the Books of Common Prayer; and so this
Canon is herein contrary to the Act of 1. Eliz. 2. Moreover, the same Canon
enjoyneth Ministers to observe the Orders, Rites, and Ceremonies prescribed in
the Book of Common Prayer, which by referring to these in 2. Edw. 6. admits of
a Surplice only, so does that of 5.6. Edw. 6. yet this enterferes with the 58.
Canon; of which, before. And whereas that 14th Canon forbids diminishing any
part of Common Prayer, in regard of preaching, or in any other respect, or
adding any thing in the matter or form thereof; the Book of Common Prayer it
self, does warrant us to diminish, that is, to omit all that men now call the
second Service; when there is no Communion, as has been also showed.

The 17th Canon enjoyneth all Fellows, Scholars, and Students (though Boys) as
well as Masters of Colleges and Halls, upon Sundays, Holy Days and their Eves,
to wear Surplices at Divine service, pretending for it, the Order of the Church
of England: and Graduates to wear the Hoods of their degrees. Whereas the Order
in the Liturgy enjoins Surplices only to Ministers in the times of their
Ministration: not to others. And this of Boys wearing Surplices, does
countenance that fond conceit so much cried up in Popery, that all once entered
into Colleges, ought to receive primam tonsuram, and therefore to wear
Surplices Ham. le Strange in Affin. of Div. Serve.
.

The 24 Canon enjoyneth Copes: which are forbidden in the Rubric before
Common Prayer, in 5.6. Edw. 6. of which, before. The 27th Canon, requires
Ministers not to administer the Communion to any but such as kneel, under pain
of Suspension; whereas, we have before demonstrated out of 2. Edw. 6. that
kneeling is left arbitrary. And, if any person not kneeling, be refused the
Communion, with what justice can he be punished with Excommunication (which may
end in imprisonment upon a Writ De excom. cap. by virtue of the forementioned
Statute of 5. Eliz. 23.) even when he desires to communicate with that Liberty
in gesture which the Law allows him? Yet, both Minister, Churchwardens and
Quest-men (the Office and duty of which last, in Ecclesiasticals, we know not)
must take notice whether every Parishioner come so often to the Communion as
the Law requires, Can. 28. which if he do not, he is to be presented, etc.
which makes way to Excommunication, and imprisonment, as aforesaid, albeit it
be not his fault that he received not: unless it be an offense, to claim, and
make use of the liberty which the Law affords him.

The Explanation of the lawful use of the Cross in Baptism, undertaken in Can.
30. is very defective: for, whereas it undertakes to remove all scruples of
Conscience therein, it produces not one Scripture, nor Father to that end: but
only indefinitely talks of both; which, without better arguments and more
distinct proofs, can never, in common reason, quiet (much less satisfy) any
man's Conscience that makes scruple thereof. Nor can we submit thereto, till we
see it proved, as well as affirmed.

The 31. Canon forbids the making of any Deacons, or Ministers, save only on
the four Sundays after the Ember-Weeks, appointed for prayer and fasting, and
so continued in England (by what Law, when the Stat. of 5.6. Edw. 6.3. declares
the contrary?) and this to be done in the Cathedral, or Parish Church where the
Bishop resideth, in presence not only of the Archdeacon, but of the Dean and
two Prebendaries at least (if not by any lawful cause let, or hindered) or, of
four other learned and grave Persons, Masters of Art at the least, and allowed
for public Preachers. What Law, for confining Ordination to four times a
year? If there be a Law, do Bishops now observe it? Is it not usual to ordain
in other men's Diocesses: which they can no more legally do, then a Sheriff
execute his Office, when he is out of his County? How often do Deans and
Prebendaries assist at Ordinations? And why must all other Assistants be
Masters of Arts at least? What Law, or Rule for any of these things; unless,
for being Assistants to, and Co-ordainers with the Bishop; which, this Canon
does tacitly deny, when it says, such and such shall be present: but, not a
word of their Laying on of Hands, according to the Book of Ordination?

And whereas by the 36th Canon, Subscription is enjoined to the Books of
Common Prayer, and of Ordination, not only upon all Ordinations, and
Institutions to Benefices, etc. which, by Can. 37. is required also of all
Lecturers, Catechists, Readers; yea, (by Can. 77.) of all Schoolmasters too,
(unless to the last clause of Art. 2. touching using the book of Common Prayer)
whereas the Statute of 13. Eliz. 12. requires no subscription but to the 39.
Articles: nor that, save only of such as are to be instituted to a Benefice:
not at Ordination, or at taking Licenses to Preach only. The 38th Canon
touching Revolters after Subscription, has been spoken to before.

The 40th Canon enjoining an Oath against Simony, is necessary; yet, against
Law; and particularly, against the Petition of Right. This therefore we say no
more of, but humbly pray, such an Oath may be imposed by Law. But, whereas the
49th Canon prohibiteth Ministers not to expound Scripture, etc. if not Licensed
by the Bishop; this is expressly contrary to Law (8. Eliz. 1.) which confirms
the Book of Ordination, in and by which every one ordained a Presbyter, has
the Bible delivered into his hand by the Bishop, with these Words, Take thou
Authority to preach the Word of God, etc. Yet, must every such ordained
Minister be compelled to be at the charge of taking out a further License from
the same Bishop, at the same time, to preach in the same place; or else, not to
perform that duty, which he promised solemnly to the Bishop, and by him was
authorized to perform, at his Ordination. Nor may any Ministers be suffered (by
the 51. Canon) to preach in any other Church, without showing such License,
although otherwise well known to be sufficiently authorized thereunto. And
whereas the 62. Canon allows Ministers to celebrate Matrimony between other
persons, without asking the Bannes in Churches, if he have a License for doing
of it from the Bishop, Archdeacon, or their Officicals; this is expressly
contradictory to the Book of Common Prayer, Rubric 1. before the form of
Matrimony: and so, contrary to Law, of 1. Eliz. 2. if that Book be confirmed
thereby.

There be sundry other Exceptions justly to be taken to the Book of Canons, (as
namely, to such Ecclesiastical Offices, besides Bishops and Presbyters, as be
admitted to bear a share in Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; albeit they be
Laymen; while yet they abominate Lay Elders in the Presbyterian Government,
beside many other) all which, we at present, forbear; not, as approving of
them, but, as hoping for a Reformation of that as well as of other things. We
therefore shall now only with all humility, propound a few Queries, very
necessary, as we conceive, to be seriously considered.

1 Quere: Whether, if there be any thing of substance altered in, or added to
the Articles of Religion, or Books of Common Prayer, or Ordination; and, those
Alterations, or Additions not expressly mentioned, and confirmed by Parliament:
this does not make those Books to be void in Law, if pleaded at Law? The
Grounds of this Quere, are, the Acts of 13. Eliz. 12. as touching the Articles:
that, of 1. Eliz. 2. as to the Book of Common Prayer: and, the Statute of Eliz.
8.1. and of 5.6. Edw. 6.1. as to Ordination. Which last named Act, says, that
the Books therein mentioned were annexed to the said Statute; yet are they not
to be found enrolled therewith: no more is the other Book of Articles, in 13.
Eliz. enrolled with that Act.

2 Quere: Whether the Statutes which are said to confirm any of the things
named in the former Quere, mentioning only the Titles, but not reciting the
matter of the Books themselves, do make those Books, or the things contained in
them, (which have been several times altered) although never so much as said to
be enrolled, nor found so to be; do make those things to be established and
good in Law, because now commonly reputed, received, and generally used as
ratified by Law? The Ground of this Quere, is, that clause in 1. Eliz. 2. which
after mentioning some Alterations (but not particularly naming them) in the
Common Prayer Book, prohibiteth all other Alterations, saying, [And none other,
or otherwise.]

3 Quere: If any man be indicted, or sued at Law, upon the Statute of 1. Eliz.
2. for not reading of, or coming to hear the Book of Common Prayer; or, upon
the Stat. of 13. Eliz. 12. for not reading the Articles of 1562: and, the
Defendant plead Not guilty, and deny these Books to be those confirmed by those
Laws, till the Plaintiff prove them to be of Record; whether is not the
Plaintiff bound to prove that, and in the mean time, the Defendant not
punishable by those Statutes? The Grounds of this Quere, are, first, that there
are no Records, of these to be found: secondly, the Books have been several
times altered since those Acts: and thirdly, many punished upon the said Acts,
because those Books have been generally received and used as established by Law.

4 Quere: Whether, notwithstanding the Royal License before, and Assent after;
any Canons made in Convocation, be valid in Law, before they be ratified by Act
of Parliament, as the Service Book, and Articles of Religion were said to be?
and, whether, by consequent, the Canons of 1603. be now binding? The grounds
hereof, are, first, that all other Constitutions, are, or are reputed to be,
ratified in Parliament. Secondly, the Statute of 1. Eliz. 2. which gives power
to the Queen, her Heirs and Successors, to grant License to Commissioners,
Bishops, and others, to exercise Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, when it speaks of
withdrawing, or altering any Rites and Ceremonies; or, adding new; the power is
there given to the Queen alone, without mention of Heirs and Successors. And
when any thing is ordered, or authorized by the King, although under the Great
Seal: yet the enforcing thereof (before ratification by Parliament) is held to
be contrary to the Petition of Right.

We shall now close up all with this humble Advertisement; that, whereas it is
pleaded by some, that Liturgies (and, among them, the substance of ours) are
ancienter then the Popish Mass-Books by many hundreds of years (whence they
infer the weakness and folly of their Objections, who say, that all, or most,
or any of the things contained in our Service Book, are taken out of the
Mass Book, and so are Popish, and upon that account would have them abolished:)
and, for that purpose, produce some passages out of Ignatius, Clem:
Alexandrinus, Justin Martyr, Tertullian, Cyprian, Chrysostom, etc. wherein
sundry things in use among us, are found mentioned in them; and, by some, the
Liturgy of St. James, Peter, etc. are also urged, although by many Learned men,
censured as supposititious. Yet none of these Authors do mention any Public
Form, (the same for substance with ours;) although they speak of Public
Prayers made in the Congregation, which none ever denied. Public Prayer is one
thing; a Public Form, another. Nor are we against all Liturgies, but only
against that which is liable to such material Exceptions as necessitate us to
desire a new Form. And albeit some of the Rites and Ceremonies now in use may
be mentioned in sundry of the Fathers within the first 600 years after Christ;
yet, the mentioning of them, is no evidence of the lawfulness of them; or, that
they are not Popish, (although of latter times, espoused by that Synagogue of
Rome) for as much as Popery was in the Egg, and the mystery of iniquity began
to work, (although under disguises, and other names) even in the time of St.
Paul himself, 2 These. 2.7. Yea, some of those very Fathers have sundry passages
in them, which condemn those very things which are now cried up upon the very
authority of their venerable names. We shall, for brevity, give but one
instance, which every Reader may find in the Preface touching Ceremonies,
before the Book of Common Prayer; which, albeit it has been before alleged,
we here briefly touch upon again, for better satisfaction of such as cannot
consult the Author himself. The particular mentioned in that Preface, is a
passage out of St. Augustine; who was so far from approving such a number of
Ceremonies, (yet, not to be compared with the multitude, in aftertimes) that
he complained that hereby, Christians were in worse case then were the Jews,
and therefore counseled to take off that yoke and burden, so soon as it might
quietly be done. And this was one of the Grounds and Reasons there alleged, of
the cutting off of so many superstitious Ceremonies, in the first Reformation,
under that blessed King, Edward the sixth: which, of late, our Arminians and
Grotian Divines and Prelates have sought to recall under the color and guise of
Antiquity: for which they produce only some bits and scraps of Fathers, to
prove their Antiquity; but, no solid Arguments to make out their lawfulness and
convenience; and yet seek to impose them on those who hold themselves bound to
hate the garments spotted with the flesh, as well as the flesh, that is, the
corruption it self. We therefore conclude, That it is not bare Antiquity, but
Divine Verity that must be the only Rule and Standard of all Doctrine,
Worship, Rites and Ceremonies, Ordination, Jurisdiction and Discipline, among
all that intend Conformity to the Mind of Christ.

FINIS.
Page 2. line 7. read 4 Car. p. 7. l. 4. r. them in print) p. 34. l. 18. r.
that, and another. p. 43. l. 26. r. Presbyteris. l. 30. r. qui.


