HABAKKVKS PRAYER Applied to the Churches present occasions, on Hab. 3. 2.

AND CHRIST'S COUNSEL To the Church of Philadelphia, on Rev. 3. 11.

Preached before the Provincial Assembly of London. By that late Reverend and
faithful Minister of Jesus Christ Mr. SAMUEL BALMFORD, Pastor of Albons
Woodstreet.

Jer. 30. 7. Alas, for that day is great, so that none is like it; It is even
the time of Jacobs trouble. But he shall be saved out of it.

London, Printed by E. M. for Adoniram Byfield at the three Bibles in Corn-hil
near Popeshead-Alley. 1659.

Judicious READER,
FOr such the works of this holy man of God Mr. Samuel Balmford (now with the
Lord) require and deserve: Here is represented to thee a Forlorn-hope, or two
Scouts, being a small parcel of those many excellent pieces intended for the
press; sent before ad vada tentanda, not as if these (...) were of higher
stature in worth then others their fellows, and therefore fitter for it: Among
all Superlatives, Comparisons are excluded: Pharez and Zara strove with equal
strength for precedence of birth; but this piece to satisfy the importunity of
friends has broken forth first. The Author was a person of eminent Orthodoxy
of Word and Life, by both which, as a burning and shining light, he was an
exact and powerful Teacher; the observant eye of impartial conversers with him
finding the Transcript of his Sermons in his life, his actions being living,
walking Sermons. He was a man of a meek and modest spirit, clothed with
humility; lowly in heart, but high and eminent for gifts and graces in the
esteem when living, and honoring remembrance now dead, of those that are best
able to judge of real worth. An excellent husbander of time, a painful
Student, of great diligence and faithfulness in all Trusts and Relations, of
much Candor, affability, communicativeness, and condescension in matters
capable of it, but immovable where sense of duty obliged him. Not forward to
speak, and therefore his words were more savoury by lying long in the falt of a
deliberate mind, and administering more grace to the hearers. A man of a
public spirit, pitying souls, mourning for the sins of others, and deeply
laying to heart the afflictions of the people of God abroad, and their
dissentions at home, as these ensuing Sermons do abundantly testify. For his
labors in the Ministry, he was one would not do the work of the Lord
negligently, nor offer unto God what cost him nothing, or a corrupt thing, when
as indeed he (if any) had a male in the flock, and was a workman that needed
not be ashamed. He thought the delivery of Embassies from God to man, most
needed and best deserved careful preparation, and therefore chose rather to
approve himself to his Master, and the always smaller number of judicious
hearers by an industrious searching the Scriptures, and digging to the bottom
of that excellent Mine, than to spare himself and please the most by taking up
with the nearest, uppermost, and less precious parcels of Ore: he hung not
forth Alchimy lace that a little wearing by judicious meditation would have
changed the color of, but of such true and pure metal as would wear brighter
and brighter. When some through injudiciousnesse and possibly prejudice (the
Lord give such repentance to life) accounted his bodily presence, (as they
Paul's) weak and contemptible, and felt not the evidence and demonstration of
the spirit in his words, others more judicious and candid hearers, Christians
and Ministers have had their souls hanging on his lips, and heard him with joy
and delight to their great profiting. Though he well knew the distempered
palate of these diseased times, yet would not this fisher of men bait the
ground to draw multitudes about him with curious enquiries and speculations,
unprofitable though pleasing notions, quarum inventarum solus fructus est,
invenisse) nor talking impertinencies without book, or filling up vacuities by
most insipid and nauseous tautologies. He did not by strength and strain of
lungs, comic actions, peculiar modes of carriage, (having more of affectation
than affection in them) make up defect of matter, nor cloud wisdom with words
without knowledge, wrapping up mysterious nonsense in silken phrases, nor
dress up sober truths in the meretricious garb of enticing words of man's
wisdom: nor yet did he prostitute the Word to the contempt of the worldly-wise,
or disadvantage it to better-minded, more judicious hearers by flatnesse or
rudeness of style, but sought out acceptable words, those (...) making words
still servants to matter, neither going before vainly, nor yet following at too
great a distance negligently. He did not leap into his matter without trying
and showing the ground he went upon, but accurately weighed the Original,
carefully consulted with expositors, solidly stated the subject of his
discourse, and then excellently divided the Word of Truth by exact natural
Method, and faithful application to the different conditions of souls, therein
not venting his passions, nor concealing Gods truth. He was every way such, as
not to have known him was an unhappiness; to have indeed known him and not
honored him, an impossibility: Of him the world was not worthy, he therefore
is taken away from the evil to come.

These things I freely testify from the full knowledge I had of him, having by
him been allowed the happiness of a free converse and intimate acquaintance
with him, by which I must acknowledge my self to have been much and often
profited.

Thomas Parson.

THe Reverend and Learned Author of these ensuing Sermons, (very seasonable and
useful for these times) was a Minister of Christ endued with very good
abilities, a workman that needed not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word
of truth; full of piety, modesty, humility, and integrity; Sound in the Faith,
immovable in the Truth, painful in his Ministerial employment, and one who has
left a precious name behind him among stall those who thoroughly knew him. And
therefore unto the testimony given of him by my Reverend Brother, I do freely,
cheerfully, and most heartily subscribe,

Edm. Calamy.

Errata.
Page 1. in the Text, for receive, r. revive, for people r. years, p. 2. l. 21.
for open r. opine, p. 5. l. 15. dele and mercy, page 6. line 9. for use r.
verse, page 13. line 10. for Psalm. r. Isai. p. 15. l. 4. for favor r. wrath, p.
34. l. 21. for know r. known, p. 41. l. 2. dele experienced and appeared, p.
53. l. 4. for of r. by, p. 66. l. 26. for keep r. kept, p. 72. l. 11. for
Christ r. Christians, p. 78. l. 8. for usual r. useful, p. 84. l. 9. for
apprehension r. approach.

Habakkuks Prayer applied to the Churches present occasions.
Habakkuk 3. 2. O Lord, I have heard thy speech, and was afraid: O Lord,
receive thy work in the midst of thy people, in the midst of the year make
known: in wrath remember mercy.
THe Prophecy of this holy Prophet is termed a Burden, especially in regard of
the sad and heavy threatenings and curses which are denounced against several
sorts of persons in it. When it was that he saw this burden, that is, when he
received it from the Lord in a Prophetick-Vision, or when he held it forth to
be seen of the people of God, by a Prophetic publication, is not precisely
certain; No doubt it was not long before the captivity of the Jews by the
Chaldeans, and so either in, or after the reign of Manasseh, but more probably
a good while after it, than under it; yea to me it seems not improbable that it
was about the beginning of Zedekiahs reign, after the So Danaeus.
Jews had tasted somewhat of the bitterness and hastiness of the Chaldeans in
carrying away Jehoiakim toward Babylon, though they had not yet gone through
the breadths of the Land, nor completed the captivity of the Jews, as they
did, not many years after. But let this be left indifferent to the Learned to
open at pleasure.

The Contents of this Book are held forth mainly in three parcels, according to
the division of it into three Chapters.

In the first we find the sad condition of the Jews, (their perverse
disobediences and present impunity seeming burdenous to the Prophet himself:)
(the people of God at that time, though much degenerated) laid down partly by
way of complaint made to God, partly by way of menacing from God, that he would
in a strange manner bring them under the power of the Chaldeans; And then, upon
the Prophets Deprecation that God would not utterly destroy his people, but
chastise them in measure, especially, since he took those whom God was about to
make as the rod in his hand, and the instrument of scourging, to be worse then
they who were to be scourged.

In the second Chapter, after the Prophets professed standing upon his watch to
hear what the Lord will answer him, we find he had an answer by way of vision,
tending to the comfort of Gods people, but such as they were to wait for till
the appointed time that the vision was to speak, that is, till it should be
manifested effectually; For all that are just and upright before God are to
live by faith, and that faith to show it self in a waiting, tarrying patience.
And that excellent Principle, The just shall live by faith, we may find three
times alleged in the New Testament, viz. Romans 1. 17. Gal. 3. 11. Heb. 10. 38.

Now the Contents of that comfortable Vision, concerned the downfall and ruin
of the Chaldeans, the wicked enemies of Gods people, and that for their
unsatiable pride, and ambition, and covetousness, and cruelty, and drunkenness,
and Idolatry. But beloved, God looks to be sought unto for the fulfilling of
all his praedictions in behalf of his Church and people. Therefore

In this third Chapter we find the holy Prophet framing a Prayer in the behalf
of the Church, and for the use of the Church doubtless in aftertimes. And
accordingly Luther notes it as a Prayer or Song (for it is metrical in the
Hebrew, and set for Musical Instruments) which has been [in quotidiano usu per
omnia passim templa] in daily use almost in all Churches; though (says he)
most commonly as Nunns read the Psalter without understanding. Now the Contents
of this Prayer lies summarily in Petitions concerning the Church of God, and in
grounds of those Petitions, taken chiefly from former demonstrations of Gods
power and mercy, and mercy toward his Church, and in professed confidences and
rejoycings upon those assuring grounds. Therefore

I shall not spend time in a punctual Analysis of it, nor speak any thing of
the Inscription of it in the first verse; only, this we may note, that as it
was set or composed according to variable tunes in the Hebrew called Shigionoth
(as our Learned Translators gloss it) so may it be made use of on various
occasions by Gods people. And as this Prophet sealed up the Doctrine of the
life of Faith in this Prayer by the exercise and demonstration of it, so should
we do in making any accommodation of it unto the Churches present occasions.

Sect. This second Use which I have taken for my present subject matter to
treat of, holds forth the grand request of the Prophet, and which he most
intended in this Prayer, and that indeed which all that follows in it referrs
unto, either in the nature of argument that it should be granted, or of
consequent upon the supposed grant of it. The whole verse contains

1. A preparative of ^ear in the way of address to God, [O Lord, I have heard
thy speech, and was afraid,]

2. A Prayer of Faith; and this Prayer brancheth it self into two or three
Petitions.

1. O Lord, revive thy work in the midst of the years; 2. In the midst of the
years make known. 3. In wrath remember mercy.
Petitions that are of near affinity one to the other, and full of Emphasis in
the expressions: For the first is the chief and primary; The second may be
taken to be but an enforcement of the first, by a Rhetorical Anadiplosis or
(...) taking up again these terms [In the midst of the years] and adding only
[make known] somewhat abruptly, yet so as by an easy reference we may gather
his meaning to be, Make known thy reviving, or revived work; And the third
implies the same thing; only involves an Argument from the nature of God, to
urge the forementioned, as we may hear in the Sequel.

Sect. Begin we with the Preparative of Fear. [O Lord, I have head thy speech,
and was afraid.] What speech means he? Not the speech, or fame, or report that
is of thee, (though the Original word Sual so signifies) but the speech that
has been spoken by thee; And that as partly concerning the Calamities thou
have threatened to bring upon the Jews, and partly concerning the destruction
thou have threatened to the Chaldeans: And hearing this, I was afraid; What?
(you may say) afraid of the judgments of God denounced against the Chaldeans
the enemies of the people of God? Its even of them, Ne Judaeos etiam in
Babylone captivos involvat clades Chaldaeorum and omnino deleat, (says A
Lapide) Lest the Jews also should be wrapped in the same bundle of destruction
with the Chaldeans, being found resident among them, and so be utterly ruined
together with them. Now touching his Fear, after what manner he was affected,
we may gather by what was said after at verse 16. where he makes recognition of
his temper before he had prayed, and gathered strength and confidence upon the
remembrance of Gods wonderful workings. Therefore when I heard, (lo) my belly
trembled, my lips quivered at the voice, rottenness entered into my bones. The
passions he was struck into were very great, and the trouble of his Spirit, and
the Symptoms of it upon him were very terrible, though all tending to good,
etc. Well,

Obs. We have here to observe, that The best of Gods servants are, and ought to
be affected with fear and trembling at the denunciation of Gods judgments, and
especially at the Prognostics and signals of dangers and miseries hanging over
the Church and people of God. My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am
afraid of thy judgments; so David, Psalm. 119. 120. Good King Jehoshaphat
having certain intelligence of grear Forces of combined Enemies preparing
against him* and Gods people, he feared, 2 Chr. 20. 3. And Jehoshaphat feared,
and set himself to seek the Lord, and proclaimed a fast throughout all Judah.
And such a fear well tempered ought to be found in them, upon such occasion,
and that most rationally; For consider with me, I beseech you.

1. The speech, and voice of God when it is but preceptive only, and in the
way of commanding, is enough to strike his people with fear, as it may be
presented to them in a Majestic manner; So it did at Mount Sinai, when God
delivered his Law to his people, though then they stood upon good terms with
him; For there is a dreadfulness ever in the Sovereign Majestique Presence of
God. See Psalm. 89. 7. God is greatly to be feared in the assembly of the
Saints, and to be had in reverence of all them that are about him. Much rather
then when he utters himself in the way of threatenings of judgments, which are
most fit to beget fears in the soul.

2. We know that the very goodness of God, and his pardoning mercy, should
work the soul about by the way of love unto a Reverential and Cautionary Fear
of offending him, Psalm. 130. 4. But there is forgiveness with thee, that thou
may be feared. How much more properly then may the severity of God, and his
menaced judgments cause a trembling fear in them whom they concern?

3. We find God offended at men, and those of his own people, not only for
formal sinful matters of provocation, but even for not fearing as they should,
and not trembling before him in the way of his judgments. So with Judah; I saw
(says he) when for all the causes whereby backsliding Israel committed
adultery, I had put her away, and given her a bill of divorce, yet her
treacherous sister Judah feared not, etc. Jer. 3. 8. So with the remnant of
Judah during the Captivity in Babylon, who went down into Egypt; For God
threatened them for having forgotten the wickedness of their Fathers, and for
not being humbled at that day, nor having feared, etc. Jer. 44. 9, 10.

4. And on the contrary we find God in a just expectal of this fearful
trembling disposition at the voice of his threatenings and judgments, and well
pleased with it; The Lion has roared, who will not fear? Amos 3. 8. Shall a
Trumpet be blown in the City, and the people not be afraid? Jude ver. 6. To
this man will I look, says God, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite
spirit, and trembles at my word, Isa. 66. 2.

Quest. But what manner of fear and trembling at Gods threatenings may this be
which is required? Does not the Scripture say that The righteous man shall not
be afraid of evil tidings, because his heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord?
Psalm. 112. 7. And does not the Scripture diverse times forbid, and reprove the
people of God for their fear of enemies, and oppressors, and a sad, and
calamitous condition under them? Who art thou (says God) that art afraid of a
man that shall dye, and of the son of man that shall be made as grass, etc? and
that have feared continually because of the fury of the oppressor, as if he
were ready to destroy, etc. Psalm. 51. 12, 13.

Answ. It must be granted there is a great deal of fear that the poor people
of God are subject unto in this life, which is, and may most justly be
interdicted, and forbidden to them, and checked in them by the Spirit of God,
as being inordinate, and sinful in sundry respects; and yet it must be held
that there is a fear of threatened judgments from God, which is not only
indulged to them, but falls under duty. There is a great deal of base slavish
fear in the ground of it, and of excessive fear in the degree of it, and of
either preposterous, or otherwise unseasonable fear in the time of it, as it
then works unseasonably when God after a time of long public trial, and
affliction, discovers himself by sundry tokens, and evidences ready to comfort
his people. And so in that place mentioned in Isa. 51, 12, 13. [See the Context
thereabout] But while God speaks terrible things unto his his people, they
ought to fear; Provided that their fear be thus qualified.

1. It must be a Fear that has the great God properly for its Object, and not
the Creature. I take it to be generally observable in the holy Scripture, that
God finds not fault with his people, or any other for fearing him; no, not
merely in regard of his power and wrath, as King of Nations; See Jer. 10. 7.
Who would not fear thee, O King of Nations? for to thee does it appertain:
forasmuch as among all the wise men of the Nations, and in all their Kingdoms,
there is none like unto thee. And Psalm. 90. 11. Who knows the power of thine
anger? even according to thy fear, so is thy favor. Isa. 19. 16. In that day
shall Egypt be like unto women: and it shall be afraid and fear because of the
shaking of the hand of the Lord of Hosts, which he shakes over it. But for
fearing the Creature, suppose the instrument he uses of his wrath, or
punishing displeasure, is that werein the base degeneration of humane fear
lies, that men look not at, or consider not the chief Efficient and
Meritorious causes of judgment threatened, but the matter of it, and the
Instruments of it only; And so, not at the hand of God in it, and his
displeasure stirred up by sin, but at the hand of man, or other Creatures
executing it, and the matter of loss or smart in it; Their fear is not before
the Name of God (Mal. 2. 5.) but before the names and faces of men. Now this is
base, and quite contrary to the temper that God requires, who in case of
judgments, or dangers, would not have sensual, but spiritual considerations
taken on; for they that know Gods Name aright, should learn (by an holy
Chimistry, as it were) to abstract a spiritual fear of the Creator from the
carnal fear of Creatures, and preserve that fear by them.

2. It must be a Fear that rises not only out of Self-love, as apprehensive
only of personal dangers: But a fear that arises from true brotherly charity
born toward the community of Gods People, and apprehensive of Divine anger
kindled against them, and of dangers toward them. This Prophet feared in the
behalf of the people, and prayed in behalf of the people of God, and not of
himself, either only, or chiefly. Public respects should outweigh private, in
all that would be accepted of God in their addresses to him. Yea indeed the
regard of the public Interest should swallow up the regard of private
Interest in all those that would find good acceptance with God; as it did in
Moses when God threatened. See Exodus 32. 9. etc. And the Lord said unto Moses, I
have seen this people, and behold, it is a stiffenecked people. Deuteronomy. 9. 18,
19. etc. And I fell down before the Lord, as at the first forty days and forty
nights; I did neither eat bread, nor drink water, because of all your sins
which ye sinned, in doing wickedly in the sight of the Lord, to provoke him to
anger. (For I was afraid of the anger, and hot displeasure wherewith the Lord
was wroth against you to destroy you.) But the Lord hearkened unto me at that
time also. And in David, 2 Samuel 24. 17. And David spoke unto the Lord when he
saw the Angel that smote the people, and said, Lo; I have sinned, and I have
done wickedly: but these sheep, what have they done? Let thine hand, I pray
thee, be against me, and against my Fathers house. For affection toward Gods
people may be supposed as wrapping under it some respect also to the Name and
Honor of God, lest it should suffer in their ruin and destruction; [Note for
this some of Moses his expressions, etc.]

3. It must be a Fear that is troubled as well at the sins which are the causes
of Gods threatenings, as at the threatenings themselves, and so it must be a holy
Fear, as was this Prophets, witness the beginning of his Prophecy. For as the
sting of death is sin, so the sting of every punishment and affliction is sin
to such as have a right feeling.

4. It must be a Fear that does not drive away from God, but carry the party
possessed with it to God; Not a fear filled with diffidence and despair, but
with hope of Divine mercy. And so, not a fear according to the stamp of the
first Adam, who, when he had sinned, hearing the voice of the Lord in the
Garden was afraid, and hid himself, (Genesis 3. 19.) but a fear well beseeming the
followers of the second Adam Principled in Faith, and so inclining to seek to
God by Prayer; as knowing there is no way to flee from God, but to God; from
his wrath, but to his mercy. And this operation we find here this fear had in
the Prophet.

Applic. All the use of this Point that I commend unto you, Beloved, shall be
by way of Exhortation.

First, To consider if we have not at this day such a voice or speech of God in
our ears as may make us afraid. True; we have no such Prophets among us as
Habakkuk (for ought I know) to see burdens in way of extraordinary Vision, and
to declare them; But, know we that God threatens really as well as verbally,
and menaces may be gathered from his Providence as well as from his
Prophesies; And those sad threatenings which are denounced primarily and
directly but to one Nation, or People, are appliable in some proportion, to
other Nations or People of like condition for guiltiness. Briefly then take we
a review whether ought of the Prophets speech before to God, or of Gods speech
by him be applicable to the people we relate unto, that we may perceive whether
we have cause to be afraid.

1. Look we into the first complaint of the Prophet touching the sins of the
people He complains that spoiling and violence are before him, and there are
that raise up strife and contention (Chap. 1. 3.) that the Law is slacked, and
judgment goes not forth, but wrong judgment proceeds, verse 4. And is
there nothing of like complaint that may be made among us?

2. Look next unto the threatened sad condition of the Jews under the prevailing
power of the Chaldeans, (beginning at ver. 5.) and consider whether (I will not
say any such things have been brought in upon us, but) whether we may not
justly for our sins have such brought in upon us; May we not justly fear to
hear of such a work wrought in our days, as to move all to regard and wonder
marvellously, as scarcely to be believed though it be told us? May we not
justly fear to hear of some bitter and hasty Nation marching through the
breadth of the Land, to possess the dwelling places that are not theirs? And
may we not fear to hear of such as are described, Chap. 1. ver. 8. 9, 10, 11.
Their horses also are swifter than the Leopards, and are more fierce than the
evening wolves: and their horsemen shall spread themselves, and their horsemen
shall come from far, they shall fly as the Eagle that hastes to eat. They
shall come all for violence: their faces shall sup up as the East wind, and
they shall gather the captivity as the sand. And they shall scoff at the
Kings, and the Princes shall be a scorn unto them: they shall deride every
strong hold: for they shall heap dust and take it. Then shall his mind change,
and he shall pass over, and offend, imputing this his power unto his God.

3. Look again into the second complaint of the Prophet, beginning at verse 12.
of the first Chapter (where the Prophet expostulates with God, why the wicked
devoureth the man that is more righteous than himself, etc.) and may we not
justly fear to find men made as the fishes of the Sea, and as the creeping
things that have no Ruler over them? to find men catching others with the
Angle, and with the Drag, and then sacrificing to their Nets, and burning
incense to their Drag? etc.

4. Look lastly upon the judgments denounced upon the enemies of Gods people,
and consider for what causes, and withal whether we have not cause to fear
being among some that commit such sins; A woe is denounced against the Chaldean
because he enlarged his desire as Hell, and could not be satisfied, but
increased that which was not his, and how long? It is threatened that they
should rise up suddenly that should bite him? and awake that should vex him,
etc? that the remnant of the people should spoil him, because he had spoiled
many, etc. Chap. 2. 6, 7, 8. A woe is denounced against him that coveteth an
evil covetousness to his house, that he may set his nest on high, and be
delivered from the power of evil. Ibid. ver. 9. Woes also are denounced
against bloody builders, and against ranting drunkards, as well as
superstitious foolish Idolaters afterward in that Chap, and may we not fear
sitting among such persons as are under such woes? Have not we cause to fear
the voice of the rod, (Micah 6. 9.) as well as of the Word? I suppose ye grant
it.

2. Therefore in the next place I exhort you to examine whether ye fear as ye
should, and to take on such a fear and trembling at the words, and working of
the great God as is meet; Even such a fear as may draw toward God, and drive
on to prayer; such a fear as may be the beginning of wisdom, in this respect,
that it makes us fly unto the Name of our God, as unto a strong Tower, either
to keep us from, or to defend us in the midst of Dangers, and bring us with
safety, and comfort out of them. And so make fear, not an obstacle, or
impediment to duty, but a preparative unto duty. As *it is said, Noah being
warned of God, moved with fear, pepared an Ark, etc. (Heb. 11. 7.) so let godly
fear in us set us a preparing somewhat that may tend to the securing of the
remnant of Gods people, at least in way of Prayer, as does the Prophet in our
Text. To whose Prayer of Faith I now pass over.

[O Lord, revive thy work in the midst of the years, etc. Here are diverse terms
to be opened before we can well pitch upon matter of Instruction. As

1. What is the [work] of God. 2. What Gods [reviving] of his work. 3. What
[the midst of the years] in which he is prayed to revive it. 4. What is [making
known] in the midst of years.
I know there is another reading of part of these words by the Greek
Septuagint; For that clause [in the midst of years make known] they read to
this sense, [in the midst of two living Creatures thou shall be known] and much
descant there is among Expositors, Ancient and Modern, upon that passage so
rendered; generally they understand Christ for the party to be known: but who
the two living Creatures should be in the midst of whom he was to be known,
they vary much in opinion; Tertullian has his apprehension, and Origin his,
and later Writers theirs; but because that is a reading not approved by
judicious, either Protestant, or Pontifician Expositors, I will not spend time
in any particular recital of different opinions.

There is another reading of the first clause of this Prayer in the Old English
Translation, varying from our New (which it may be some of you find in the
Books you use) it runs thus, [Revive thy work in the midst of the people] but
why they should render the same Hebrew word [(...)] so differently in the two
clauses, especially since it signifies [years] and not [people] for ought I
have found, I cannot find any satisfactory reason. Taking therefore our last
Translation to be most consonant to the Original, I keep to it, and so come to
the opening of the words. Wherein my chief regard shall be unto that litteral
sense which the consideration of the Context leads us unto.

First then, what work of God may here be meant?

I propound it to you in a double notion, but hardly separable; take we it
partly for the people of God themselves: For his Covenanted people are his
special work, or a special piece of his workmanship, and he has ever accounted
his Church his peculiar above the generality of mankind, in and upon whom he
has given proofs and evidences of his most excellent virtues and Attributes.
Ask of me (says he) things concerning my sons, and concerning the work of my
hands command ye me, Isa. 45. 11. See also Isa. 60. 21. and 61. 3. There sons
and the work of Gods hands are made Synonyma. The Lord will perfect that which
concerns me; forsake not the work of thine own hands, says David, Psalm. 138.
8. Accounting himself in special manner the work of Gods hands; Consonant to
this the Apostle speaking of the Church of Believers under the New Testament
says, We are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, etc.
Ephesians. 2. 10.

But again, take we this work partly for the work of Gods gracious Providence
in behalf of his people, Status populi, vel Ecclesiae, as Calvin speaks; And
signally here in our Text is the deliverance and freedom of his people from
under the power and captivity of the Chaldeans and Babylonians looked at; As is
manifested by the Context.

Secondly, What may this reviving of the work of God be?

It may be reduced unto two heads also;

One is, The preserving alive of the work of God, (for the Hebrew word (...) in
Piel, as it is here used, signifies simpl. Vivum conservare, as Psalm. 22. 29)
All they that be fat upon earth shall eat and worship: all they that go down to
the dust shall bow before him, and none can keep alive his own soul. And thus
it refers to Gods work in the first sense, not in respect of the life of
individual persons of the Church, so much as in respect of the generality or
community of the Church, q. d. preserve thy Church alive, conserve a body of
people to thy self alive, let not that whole workmanship of thine perish: nor
the work of grace in thy people, (that may be also understood) for people do
not live as Gods people, or as his Church, unless the life of grace and
holiness be preserved alive in them.)

But another thing is, The restoring of the state of the people of God, (for so
the Hebrew word also signifies, as in 1 Chro. 11. 8. Nehem. 4. 2.) and thus it
refers unto the work of God in the second acception, q. d. Restore thy people
again to their former state of livelihood, or a liveliness wherein they were
before; They shall be but as in state of civil death while they lie in thraldom
and servitude under the Chaldeans, and thou have intimated by the Vision of
grace which I have seen, that thy people shall not die, but shall live by
faith, and that their enemies and opposers lie under thy woes and curses, and
so shall come to ruin and destruction; and therefore be pleased to put life
and vigor into that work of thine, in behalf of thy people, or as some others
gloss it, Effice, suscita, adimple, effectuate it, rear it up, accomplish it.
Opus enim dum non impletur, quasi mortuum censetur, and oblivione sepultum.
Sanctius. And it is usual with the Hebrews, as we all may perceive by the
tenor of Scripture, to attribute life Metaphorically unto things properly
without life, and to call their restitution and reflourishing again, from a
weak, decayed, broken estate, a reviving, etc. But now for the time,

Thirdly, What may [the midst of years] be, that he thus iterates?

Beloved, there is such variety of Expositions given of this circumstance among
the Learned, that I should ill husband my time to enumerate them, unless it
would be to better purpose. This only I shall do; first, touch briefly upon
some that I cannot close with, and why, and then lay before you that only which
I take to be intended chiefly by the Prophet.

First, I take not this Phrase barely to signify [Intra annos praefinitos and
destinatos a Deo] within the compass of the years appointed by God (as some
note medium to be taken Physice, and vulgariter, as in Genesis 2 9. and Exodus 3.
2.) for I conceive, that though this be a truth, that God did, and will fulfill
his determined work within his appointed time for them, or in plenitudine
temporis, in the fullness of time determined yet this is a sense that falls too
short of the Emphasis of the doubling of this Phrase in our Text, which may
seem to import more than so.

Yet secondly, neither do I take the midst here (Geometrice and precise) for
the midst according to a precise measure, as some do; For they that think he
prays that this reviving work of God might be wrought either about the middle
of the years of the worlds duration, presuming it shall last 6000. years, or
just between Samuels Prophesying, and Christ his coming, or suffering,
(supposing just 490. years between that Prophet and the Captivity in Babylon,
and as many between the Captivity and Christ) they build upon uncertainties,
and that in the judgment of our latest English Annotators, etc.

What construction then may we make of this expression? The meaning may be
taken up, as I conceive As the Psalmist prayed for himself, or rather in behalf
of the Church, Ps. 102. 23, 24.
with those whom I account most judicious, in these two particulars.

1. In the midst of the years, i. e. In the middle course of thy Church or
people, while yet they are not grown up to a maturity or ripeness of age,
suffer them not to perish, but hold them up in life. Now that ancient people of
God (says Calvin, and our Genevian Annotators after him) came not to their
fullness of age till Christ, and therefore should they not have been held up in
a Church frame till then, they had sunk as it were in the flower, or middle of
their age, therefore he prays thus, etc.

2. In the midst of years, i. e. illorum calamitosorum and infaelicium dierum,
etc.] of those calamitous and unhappy days or years, when thy people shall be
under the Chaldean bondage, when they shall be tumbled headlong into miseries,
and be even overwhelmed with the waves of afflictions rushing in upon them, and
over them, then do thou revive thy work, thy work of promised grace and
goodness on their behalf. [Etiamsi videmur destinati esse morti, tamen nos
rest^t^e, so Calvin] And this I take to be the most genuine sense of this
expression; This midst of years, being as emphatical as David's midst of
troubles, Psalm. 138. 7. or the mountains being carried into the midst of the
Seas Psalm. 46. 2, etc. But to proceed to the last Quere.

Fourthly, what means that abrupt speeh [make known] in the midst of etc. what
would he have made known? Truly it is very easy to gather both what, and how,
by referring to the foregoing words, viz. Make known thy reviving, and revived
work, etc. Let it be actually seen that it is thy work, that such people are
thine, and that such works of Providence for them are thine; let them, and all
the world about take notice of it; And withal in so doing, make know what a
God thou art, as for wisdom, and truth, and power, and other excellencies, so
for mercy, in wrath remembering mercy, as follows in the last clause; Of which
excellent and comfortable sentence I shall be able to speak but briefly, and
that as a ground only of that one point I shall speak unto for our
instruction, which I gather up out of this branch of the Use, thus

Obs. There be good grounds for the people of God to build their faith and
prayers upon, that God will preserve his Church, and restore it unto a
comfortable condition in the midst of the greatest dangers or miseries they can
fall into in this life. Or thus, Gods people may rely on him for reviving grace
amidst their most perplexed, desperate, and (according to man) deadest
condition. When there is otherwise no hope of recovery, they may hopefully
apply themselves unto him. I take the Observation in this frame, bcause I find
the Prophet praying to this purpose; and all warrantable prayers are grounded
upon Principles of Faith; and this Prayer was intended for the use of Gods
people, and not for the Prophet himself only, as if the Spirit of God from
heaven had showed them how God was to be sought unto. And therefore we might
state the Point thus, That it is the duty of Gods people to pray unto him to
revive his work in the midst of most unlikely years. So Calvin.

Sect. Now that in the depth of distresses, the people of God have good ground
of reliance on him for reviving grace, I will first show by way of Instance,
and then of Reason.

By way of Instance, to make it appear that God has revived his work in the
midst of calamitous and disastrous times, besides those of the Babylonish
Captivity; I will mind you but of two most memorable cases Instances.
out of the Scriptures. We are not to omit that reviving was granted, for which
most directly this Prayer was made; In that God has preserved life of grace in
his people druing the Captivity, refreshing and confirming them by his servants
the Prophets, as Ezekiel, Daniel and others, lest they should despair, and
utterly sink with grief; and restored them, etc. witness Haggie, and Zachary
following.

One before that Captivity, viz. Gods deliverance of his people out of Egypt;
For in the midst of the years of their bondage there under Pharaoh, while they
were groaning heavily under it, and felt their pressures, tasks, and burdens
multiplied upon them; then God sent them reviving comfort by Moses, and wrought
their deliverance wonderfully, when according to man they were out of all hope
of any such thing. And this is that case which this Prophet most of all
commends to their Posterity in this Prayer, as a ground of Faith by way of
president; Though there be some mixed references in it to some other writings
vouchsafed them in languishing and fainting cases while they were in the Land
of Canaan; Among other verses, see the 13, 14, 15, etc.

Another after the Babylonish Captivity, viz. The redemption of his people
wrought by Christ. For in the midst of years of sad and mournful condition,
when his people were much degenerated and corrupted, though they had the second
Temple standing amongst them, yet much polluted in worship, as well as in other
sinful courses, and thereupon left destitute of Prophets for a time, and
deprived of the Royal dignity among them, being subdued by Romans: then was
Christ sent into the world, and when the hearts of the best were troubled with
longing expextation of a Messiah; Venit Christus cum morbus creverit ad summum
paroxysmum; Then Christ came (as a great Physician) when the disease was grown
to the highest and sharpest fit of it, then came he to work the Patients most
necessary spiritual deliverance; And this is that reviving act which diverse,
Pontificial Expositors at least make the Allegorical sense of our Text, and
think it most intended by the Spirit in this place. But it may suffice to take
knowledge of it as an instance for proof of a reviving work of God, and surely
the most eminent of all other to spiritual consideration; For certainly look
how much their deliverance out of Babylon surpassed that out of Egypt, so much,
and more, does this spiritual deliverance by Christ surpass that out of
Babylon. Jer. 16. 14 15. and 23. 6, 7, 8. Therefore behold the days come,
says the Lord, that it shall no more be said; The Lord lives that brought up
the Children of Israel out of the land of Egypt: But, The Lord lives, that
brought up the Children of Israel from the Land of the North, and from all the
Lands whither he had driven them: and I will bring them again into their Land,
that I gave unto their Fathers. In his days Judah shull be saved, and Israel
shall dwell safely; and this is his Name whereby he shall be called THE LORD
OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS. Therefore behold, the days come, says the Lord, that they
shall no more say, The Lord lives, which brought up the Children of Israel out
of the Land of Egypt: But, The Lord lives, which brought up, and which led the
seed of the house of Israel out of the North Country, and from all Countries
whither I had driven them, and they shall dwell in their own Land. And this is
intimated to be so strange and wonderful, that the former should not be
remembered in comparison. Isa. 43. 18, 19. Remember not the former things,
neither consider the things of old. Behold, I will do a new thing: now it shall
spring forth, shall ye not know it; I will even make a way in the wilderness,
and rivers in the desert. And this is the Grandmother and groundwork of such
special deliverances of the people of God in sundry quarters since experienced
as appeared, and of which it might be said as of the threatened punishment of
his people before, Chap. 1. 5. Behold ye, and regard, and wonder marvellously;
for God works such a work in your days, which ye will not believe, though it
be told you, etc.

Sect. But from Instances come we to Reasons, and there are so many insinuated
in our Text, as we need not at present look further for more.

1. God may be relied on for reviving grace in a dead condition, because he is
the Lord Jehovah, Almighty, to give a being unto what he pleases, as the being
of beings; and therefore able, as to give a being unto his threatenings, to
actuate them, as the just ground of fear (before) so to give a being unto his
promises and speeches of grace, as the ground of hope. We say sometimes of men
that they are good to help at a dead lift (yet find them often failing our
greatest expectations) but that can be said of none in comparison of God. And
therefore we may believe, because this makes for the glory of his power. This
was Abraham's ground of believing he should have a child by Sarah: He being
fully persuaded that what God had promised he was able to perform, therefore he
considered not his own body now dead, when he was about an hundred years old,
neither yet the deadness of Sarah's womb, nor staggered at Gods promise, but
was strong in faith, giving glory to God, Romans 4. 18, 19, 20, 21.

2. Because the work here supposed to be revived, is Gods own work (as we
heard) Now it stands upon the glory of his wisdom to preserve, and sustain
his own special work, and not to let it fall and die under his hand, and not to
leave it in the midst unfitted, unfurnished. Therefore was that Prayer of the
Psalmist, Psalm. 138. 8. The Lord will perfect that which concerns me: thy
mercy, O Lord, endures for ever: forsake not the works of thine own hands. And
therefore is that application made to God by the Prophet, Jer. 14. 8, 9. Oh the
hope of Israel, the Savior thereof in the time of trouble, wherefore should
thou be a stranger in the Land? Why as a man astonished? Yet thou, O Lord, art in
the midst of us, and we are called by thy Name, (thy work) leave us not. Apply
that other also in Isa. 26. 12. Lord, thou will ordain peace for us, for thou
have wrought all our works in us, etc.

3. Because it concerns the glory of Gods goodness and mercy; And it is his
most excellent nature, in the the midst of wrath to remember mercy, (as we
find in the last clause of our Text.)

By the way enquire we, Is there any wrath, or furious indignation in God
properly? No; He is not subject to such passions as man is; Fury is not in him,
Isa. 27. 4. The just and severe execution of punishments is called his wrath,
etc. Then why is his wrath said to be somewhat stirred up against his people?

We answer, Gods wrath relates rather to the sins than to the persons of his
people; The opposition rising in him is not properly against his own work or
people, but against Satan's work in them, or their own evil works.

And secondly, the stirring of his wrath or anger argues rather their
apprehension and sense, (who feel smart and affliction) than his affection
stirred up against them, who does but as a Chirurgian, or a Father, handle
roughly, and correct his own for their good.

Now hence we may the better conceive how it is said in way of Petition, Lord,
in wrath remember mercy; And this we are to conceive as an eminent excellency
in God above the Creature, that in wrath he can and will remember mercy toward
his own workmanship, his Church, his people. How, remember? By a merciful
change of his work of Providence, and so giving real arguments of a merciful
remembrance. Now this the poor impotent creature cannot do when it is in
passion; Man is subject to forget himself, and forget mercy in his wrath and
fury, nor can he stop and cease suddenly in his hot executions, and turn his
course, because he has not his passions at such a check or command; but God
can never forget himself, and he can easily hold up his severest executions;
See Exodus 32. 11. to 14. And Moses besought the Lord his God, and said, Lord,
Why does thy wrath wax hot against thy people, which thou have brought forth
out of the Land of Egypt, with great power, and with a mighty hand? Wherefore
should the Egyptians speak, and say, For mischief did he bring them out, to
slay them in the mountains, and to consume them from the face of the earth:
Turn from thy fierce wrath, and repent of this evil against thy people.
Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel thy servants, to whom thou swarest by thine
own self, and said unto them, I will multiply your seed as the stars of
Heaven: and all this Land that I have spoken of, will I give unto your seed,
and they shall inherit it for ever. Numb. 16. 46, 47, 48. And Moses said unto
Aaron, Take a censer, and put fire therein from off the Altar, and put on
incense, and go quickly unto the Congregation, and make an atonement for them:
for there is wrath gone out from the Lord; the plague is begun. And Aaron took
as Moses commanded, and ran into the midst of the Congregation: and behold, the
plague was begun among the people, and he put on incense, and made an atonement
for the people. And he stood between the dead and the living, and the plague
was stayed. Psalm. 30. 5. For his anger endures but for a moment; in his favor
is life: weeping may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning and 138.
7. Though I walk in the midst of trouble, thou will revive me, thou shall
stretch forth thine hand against the wrath of mine enemies, and thy right hand
shall save me. And therefore in the midst of the years of the afflictive sense
of Gods anger, there may be expectation of a merciful reviving; therefore in
the midst of the cords and bonds of servitude, there may be expectation of a
merciful breaking of them; Et ubi funis tenacissimus fuerit, rumpitur; Where
the cord is stiffest, and strongest, there it is broken suddenly (says Luther)
when God is pleased to show mercy.

Use 1. This Point serves first to stir us upto a comfortable exercise of
Faith, that God would be pleased to revive his work in the midst of these
years, etc. Why? what years are they? I cannot say they are years of Gods
peoples servitude or captivity under the Chaldeans or Egyptians, (blessed be
God for those freedoms and liberties which are yet left unto us) But we are in
the midst of years of dissentions even among brethren; of divisions and
distractions of hearts and ways; of wars, and bloody hostilities between the
professed Members of the Church of Christ, of various concussions and shakings
of Foundations; of confusions of tongues, tenants, and practices, of eruptions,
and overflowings of errors and blasphemies; of contempts cast upon Gods
Ministers and Ordinances; and dissentions or shatterings in pieces of Church
Assemblies in manifold places; In a word, we are in the midst of these years
wherein it seems to me God has dealt, or is dealing with our Nation, as he
threatened to deal with Jerusalem, in 2 Kin. 21. 13. (when withal he threatened
to make that people a prey, and spoil to their enemies) I will wipe Jerusalem
(said he) as a man wipeth a dish, wiping it, and turning it upside down; God
has been wiping us, and wiping us, and in an overly way of cleansing and
purging us, but is he not so doing it as he is turning us upside down? Surely
then beloved, we are in the midst of those years wherein we need to pray that
God would revive his work and make it known, and in wrath remember mercy.

True it is, we know not what periods God has determined to such years as we
are in; we see not our signs; we have not any foretelling Prophets, as the
Psalmist complained, Psalm. 74. ^. We see not our signs, there is no more any
Prophet, neither is there among us any that knows how long. It is not
therefore with us as with the Jews, Jer. 25. 12. And it shall come to pass
when seventy years are accomplished, that I will punish the King of Babylon,
and that Nation says the Lord for their iniquity, and the Land of the
Chaldeans, and will make it perpetual desolations. And 29. 10. For thus says
the Lord, That after seventy years be accomplished at Babylon, I will visit
you, and perform my good word toward you, in causing you to return to this
place. Nor have we like grounds of duty as Daniel had, Dan. 9. 2, 3. In the
first year of his reign, I Daniel understood by Books the number of the years,
whereof the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah the Prophet, that he would
accomplish seventy years in the desolations of Jerusalem. And I set my face
unto the Lord God to seek by prayer, and supplications, with fasting, and
sackcloth, and ashes. Yet this we may, and ought to do.

1. Hold to the general grounds and principles of faith. 1. Believe that God
has revived his people in the midst of far sadder years than we have yet seen,
according to foregoing instances, and others that might be given. And 2.
Believe (and therefore the rather) that God can revive his work in the most
seeming difficult cases. And 3. Believe that God will not forsake his own work
to leave it to ruin, or under imperfection and a languishing condition
continually; And 4. Believe that God is of such infinite mercy, that in wrath
he will remember it, etc. But I commend that of Bernard to consideration as an
approved truth, Deus olcum misericordiae ponit in vase fiduciae. But then

2. We must not fail to do, what we in this Congregation are solemnly in doing
this day, viz. we must ply God by prayers; For we know that whatever God
determines to his people, though they know he has determined it, yet he
requires and expects his people should seek unto him concerning it. See Ezekiel.
36. 37. therefore did Daniel so pray, etc. Much more ought we, in cases wherein
we have no circumstantial grounds of assurance, etc. that we may obtain at
length assurance and establishment.

2. This may serve more specially to stir up to seek God for a reviving of his
work of Reformation in the Church, in the midst of these years of disturbance
and hinderance of it. For my part, I take that to have been the work of God
which was set afoot some years since in this Nation for a Reformation in our
Doctrine, Worship, Government, and Discipline; But how has it now, and that
for a good while lien still almost, and how has it been cast back! How have
close counter-workers undermined it! and open enemies opposed it! how miserably
is it defaced! How do some Deformations outface it! And how do scoffers mock
at it, like those Samaritans, Nehem. 4. 2. will these few Jews revive the
stones out of the the heaps of the rubbish, etc? And we could point at the
causes of all this; Mainly, The not countenancing and furthering of the work of
Civil Authority; But beloved, if it be Gods work begun for his people (as many
of us here, I presume, doubt not but it is) we may believe it shall be revived,
and perfected sooner or later against all unlikelihoods; And accordingly we may
pray that in the midst of the years of unlikelihood it may be revived; that
instead of having our Land darkened over us in the clear day, and our Sun set at
noon, (a curse denounced Amos 8. 9.) light may arise unto the Church in the
midst of obscurity, etc. (Isa. 58. 10.) and so strength be raised in the midst
of weakness, and liveliness spring up in the midst of dying languishings. We
may use that argument in respect of this work, which the people of God And the
work has had but a little reviving, as Ezra 9. 8.
used, or was used for them in respect of their Land, (Isa. 63. 17, 18.) The
people of thy holiness have enjoyed it but a while, and in a small scantling,
etc. But to draw to a conclusion.

3. Would we have God revive this work for his people? Then we must pray also
that God would revive his work in his people, and with it his people
themselves; and each of us is to look that it be revived in himself. What work
is this?

First, The life of Faith in the main. Remember, The just shall live by Faith
(Chap. 2. 4.) that is, Faith shall be a principle of life exercising many
lively acts in them: and they shall attain to the life of Restoration and
Comfort by believing Gods promises; And therefore we are not to lie down in any
dejections* or despondences of mind through distrust of Gods power or promises
in any case that may conduce most to his glory in his peoples good.

Secondly, The Spirit of prayer for the reparation of Zion, the spiritual
restorement of the Church; for when the Lord shall stir up his servants more
generally and heartily to pray with melting compassionate affections toward the
spiritual dilapidations, and deformities of his Churches, it will be a good
sign that the set time to favor his Zion is come. See Psalm. 102* 13, 14. Thou
shall arise, and have mercy upon Zion: for the time to favor her, yea the set
time is come. For thy servants take pleasure in her stones, and favor the dust
thereof.

3ly. Resolutions for best endeavors in behalf of the work of Reformation;
This concerns you all, beloved, in your several places; and therefore to be far
from being obstructors of it* through worldly and carnal ends, instead of being
its promoters and advancers; and they that have pretended to build with Gods
people, when they have intended to hinder (as they in Ezra 4. 2, 3.) God will
discover them. But more especially this concerns you, my reverend and much
respected Brethren of the Provincial Assembly, to look that you put forth
revived spirits toward this work. If that were true, (sano sensu) Jupiter, quos
servare vult, suscitat; then it is as true, -- eos, per quos servare vult, etc.
If God quicken up those whom he will save, then those by whom he will save
others instrumentally. O let us therefore through grace, [(...)] stir up the
gifts and graces of God in us, let us quicken up our selves to use all counsels
and endeavors for the furtherance of Gods Church-work; and jointly attend
upon, and prosecute all those good means according to our trust undertaken,
whereby it may be carried on forward, waiting on God for the issues of all our
prayers, and all our endeavors, which shall seem best to his heavenly wisdom.
However events shall fall out to us in our time, resolve as our Prophet does
infer, ver. 17, 18. Although the figtree shall not blossom, neither shall
fruit be in the vines: the labor of the Olive shall fail; and the fields
shall yield no meat, the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall
be no herd in the stalls: Yet I will rejoice in the Lord: I will joy in the God
of my salvation.

FINIS.
Christ's counsel to the Church of Philadelphia.
Rev. 3. 11. Hold that fast which thou have, that no man take thy crown.
THese are a parcel of the words of Christ immediately directed unto the Angel
of the Church in Philadelphia; but mediately to that whole Church, and every
Member of it; yea intended for the good of other Churches also, and therefore
of ours; For he that has an ear, let him hear what the spirit says unto the
Churches; It is the common Epiphonema which our Lord subjoyns to all his
Epistles unto those Asian Churches, written according to the dictate of his
spirit, by the pen of his Apostle John, in the second and third Chapters of
this Book. He would have every one that has an hearing ear, to lend his
attention to that which is spoken by his spirit to what Church soever, in that
such is the general nature of all Churches, and Church Members, as either they
do, or may stand in need of all such divine admonitions as are addressed
occasionally to any of them.

Now whether those seven particular Churches written unto by our Lord in this
Context, were Types of several Churches of several constitutions, and
temperaments and conditions to follow in aftertimes by divine providence, I
will forbear to assert positively, though I cannot but say what I think, that
the invention of one of our own Worthies was very bright and clear in finding
out those suitable correspondencies between these seven, and others succeeding
down to this present age respectively.

Now for that Church in Philadelphia (to which my Text is part of that which
was written) this is remarkable concerning it, that it and that of Smyrna were
the only Churches of all the seven which our Lord Christ openly reproved not at
all, whereas he found something reproveable in all the rest; as on the other
side, it is remarkable concerning that of the Laodiceans, that it was the only
Church of the seven which Christ commended not at all, whereas he took notice
of something commendable in all the rest; and why this? not because there was
nothing faulty or imperfect in those of Smyrna and Philadelphia, but to show
how much the Lord favors humble modesty: nor because there was nothing good
in that of Leodicea, but to show how much the Lord disliketh proud vainglory.
But I wave such general Observations.

I draw nigh to the words read unto Sect.
you; And not to take up any of our time with an exact Analysis of Christ his
Epistle to Philadelphia, because. I shall go near to draw all the lines from
the utmost circumstance of it into the center of my Text, know only that after
he had given testimony to the present good that was in her (ver. 8.) and
assurance of after goodness he would show to her (ver. 9, 10.) both in subduing
disguised Adversaries, and in preserving her under temptations, he comes in the
words I have hinted upon, to exhort her unto duty upon a double motive.

The duty is, To to hold fast that which she had. Brevis est hortatio, sed
Emphatica valde. Pareus.

The first motive (which is placed in the front) is taken from the speediness
of Christ his coming [behold, I come quickly.]

The second (which follows in the rear) is from the possibility of danger upon
neglect of that duty (that no man take thy Crown.)

First of the duty. Touching which, take up this Observation, that

It concerns the best of Gods Obser.
Churches and people to hold fast that which they have.

I purpose to handle this Point (which is the principal in the Use) so as ye
shall perceive it reaches not only Church Officers, but also Church Members,
and those of what condition soever, this duty being of universal concernment to
all Gods*people, though I may interlace something that will bear respect to
Church-Angels, and Officers. For the opening of this, consider we

1. What it is which the Churches and people of God respectively are to hold
fast, since every thing that every one has is not worthy to be held fast.

2. How they are to hold that fast, or what their fast holding is in way of
duty.

First, That which Philadelphia, (and so other approved Churches of Christ) had
worthy to be held fast, was,

1. The Word of God, and the Name of God; thou have kept my Word, and have not
denied my Name, (said Christ, ver. 8.) Under this Word, and Name of God, etc.
is to be understood that whole truth whereby God in Christ had revealed and
manifested himself and his will unto his Church; whereby his Church knows what
he is, and what he has done, and what he has willed and commanded his people
to believe and do. Hence it was said to the Church of Sardis (ver. 3.) Remember
how thou have received, and heard, and hold fast, etc. Part of which truth
Philadelphia is minded of ver. 7. in that description of Christ, from his 1.
Holiness, 2. Truth, and 3. Having the key of David: (which three Branches
point at his three Offices, Priestly, Prophetical, Kingly, as some judiciously
learned think.)

2. The Ordinances of God for Gospel worship, and Church Administrations are
insinuated in this context as enjoyed by Philadelphia: For (mark it) Christ
remembers her that he had set before her an open door, and no man could shut
it, (ver. 8.) i. e. He had given her fair opportunities, and open and large
means for the propagating of the Gospel, and advancing of Gospel-work, many
bars of obstruction and hindrance being removed out of the way; So that
Gospel-Administrations had free course or passage among them, as it is said it
had among the Thessalonians, (2 These. 3. 1.) Yea, we may gather from part of
his Title which he purposely takes up in writing to her, (viz. He that has the
key of David) that he had not only used his key for opening to her, but
likewise given her the keys both of Doctrine and Discipline Ministerial under
himself to open and shut unto others. And no doubt this Church was not wanting
to that (according to her power) which was commended in that of Ephesus, (cap.
2. 2.) viz. in not bearing with those that were evil, but trying them which
said they were Apostles, and finding them liars, etc.

3. Good works or practice according to the Word and Ordinances of God. For
it is the first part of Christ his testimony given to her, that He knew, (i. e.
approved) her works (at the beginning of v. 8.) And what might her works be?
Doubtless of as good account as any of her sisters; works of charity, and
service, and faith, and patience, as were her sisters of Thyatira, (cap. 2.
19.) And for patience it is expressed here (ver. 10.) that she keep the word of
his patience, i. e. she exercised patience according to Christ his word and
prescription. So that (to sum up all, and according to the tenor of other
Scriptures compared with this,) if the people of God be considered in the
general notion, All that which they are to hold fast, is, 1. soundness of
Doctrine, and 2. Holiness of life and conversation, which are mentioned
together in 1 Timothy 1. 19. Holding faith and a good conscience, etc. To hold
faith there, is to hold the Doctrine of faith, or to hold fast the form of
sound words; as it is phrased, 2 Timothy 1. 13. And to hold a good conscience, is
to hold such a practice according to that rule of faith, as an enlightened
conscience may witness to be good, or to be rightly conscientious in walking
and working according to that rule.

Again, if the people of God be considered collectively, as embodied together
in a Church frame and order, that which they are to hold fast, is, those
Church-Ordinances which Christ has given them, whether about duties of worship
to God, or government among themselves, or about the enjoyment of those
liberties, or privileges or powers which he has granted them. In reference to
which under-Ordinances, the most judicious understand the Apostle speaking thus
to Timothy, I charge thee in the sight of God (etc.) that thou keep this
Commandment, (i. e. that body or rule of Commandment laid down in the premises)
without spot, unrebukeable, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy, 6. 13. 14. This for the object that is to be held fast.

Sect. Next for the manner of holding fast, what is it? The Holy Ghost uses
sundry words in several places, which are all of them sometimes rendered by our
Translators into these terms of holding fast, yet of somewhat different
importment. But by collection of them together we may more fully take up the
nature of this duty. When St. Paul bids Timothy, 2 Timothy 1. 13. Hold fast the
form of sound words, he says (...); i. e. hold them as having and retaining
them by thee in possession; But there is more than that barely in this duty.
For when Christ bids the Church of Sardis (supra ver. 3.) Remember what thou
have received, and heard, and hold fast, (etc.) his word is [(...)] i. e. hold,
or keep, or observe with all diligence, as that which is committed to ones
careful custody; But yet there is more imported in this duty; For when Christ
bids the Church in Thyatira, That which ye have already, hold fast till I come,
(cap. 2. 25.) his word is (...), and the same word radically is used here in
our Text, (...), i. e. hold fast strongly; use not only a careful eye in
keeping, but put to they utmost strength in holding fast that which thou have,
that keeping it vigorously, thou may keep it also perseverantly and
constantly to the end. And a perseverant holding fast is here intended by
Christ (as well as cap. 2. 25.) as may be gathered from the annexed Motives.
Now unto this strong and vigorous holding fast of Truth and Holiness, Faith
and good Conscience, there is requisite,

1. Firm purpose of heart, and steadfast resolution of will to persevere in the
profession of sound faith and Doctrine, and in the execution of Gods commands,
according to place and power, and in the practice of holiness, etc. If there
be not first strength in the will and resolution, there will be none found in
external practice and exercise. The vigor of the heart conduces much to the
vigor of the hand or foot; Hence it was that good man, and full of the holy
Ghost, exhorted the Christians at Antioch, that with purpose of heart If there
be weakness in the spirits, there will be weakness in the joints; if weakness
in the heart, weakness in hands and limbs.
they would cleave unto the Lord, Act. 11. 23. And the Apostle Paul calls upon
us to hold fast the profession of our hope without wavering, (without declining
or tottering any way) therefore in a fixed and firmly settled manner, Heb. 10.
23.

2. Vigorous putting forth of strength in the way of contestation with others,
for the maintenance and defense of Truth, and Purity of Doctrine and Worship,
and holy Government and practice, so far as is warrantable in a regular way;
We are to contend earnestly for the faith which was once delivered to the
Saints, Jude 3. and to stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us
free, that we be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage, Gal. 5. 1.

Quest. But what need is there of such strong actings to hold fast Truth and
Holiness?

Answ. There is need of some strength in a double respect.

1. To hold up against inward faintings and languishings; We know that every
thing is ready to fall and drop out of our hands when our natural spirits fail
within us; and we are feign to take Cordials sometimes to strengthen our
stomachs to retain what is taken down, which otherwise either through
nauseousness or other weakness would be quickly cast up again. So it is too
often in the case of the failing of gracious spirits in Christians through
spiritual faintings, they are too ready to let fall diverse truths of God, and
to stick in the profession of them, and to let fall practical exercise of
holiness, and (...) let dissolve away the regular assemblings of themselves
together. And all this either through a nauseating weariness of such things by
the great gathering of ill humors, or through some causeless fearful
pusillanimous apprehensions; And therefore said Christ to the Church at Sardis,
(ver. 2.) strengthen the things that remain, which are ready to dye. The
remaining good things in a Church of Christ, are sometimes through the
weakness of inward Principles ready to languish and dye away, and therefore
need be strengthened.

Again, there is need of strength 2ly, To retain against external violences, or
forcible attempts of others to wring from Christ what they hold of good, or to
make them fling it away, or shake it off from them. Robore hic opus esse
judicat, quia plurima sunt quae fidelibus haec dona excutere possunt, nisi
tenere omnibus modis contendant, (says Pareus in locum) We might be encouraged
by many examples of Martyrs, yea some Heathen may be alluded to, as that of
Attilius the Roman, who fighting for a Ship at Sea, held fast on her with one
hand after another till both were cut off: Valor. Max. another whose hands were
off, held fast with his teeth; so christians should mordicus tenere. But I
shall have occasion to speak more of this point by and by, under one of the
Motives in the Context.

Quest. But it may be asked again, What need the people of God be charged with
care of duty of this nature, since there be such precious promises made unto
them that the Lord will keep them, and preserve them, and his graces in them,
so that they shall never depart, or fall away from him, nor ever be plucked out
of his hand; but be kept, by the power of God through faith unto salvation? See
Jer. 32. 40. Joh. 10. 28, 29. 1 Pet. 1. 5. They that belong to the Lord, shall
retain that which shall bring them, or suffice to accompany them to
everlasting glory and happiness; and why then need they be solicitous about
holding fast that which they have?

Answ. We have to answer diverse things.

First, For particular persons, even such as are elect, and called, and
persuaded too of their interest in such precious promises, they notwithstanding
these promises, are obliged by command from God to look to their own
self-spiritual preservation, and that in a subserviency to Gods providence for
the accomplishment of his promises. It was not said ungroundedly by that
Ancient, (so it be rightly understood) Qui creavit te sine te, non servabit te
sine te, etc. God has ordered most wisely and justly, that the first spark of
grace which he gives to his beloved ones, should be employed and improved
instrumentally under his own supreme agency for both their preservation, and
advance of their happy condition; Therefore (mark it) the fear which he puts
into their hearts, that is, that holy circumspect fear, (not secure
presumption) is made a preservative for their not departing away from him, in
that Jer. 32. 40. And though he keep them by his own power, yet it it is
through the continued acting and exercising of their faith that he keeps them
unto salvation; In that 1 Pet. 1. 5.

Secondly, For particular Churches gathered in visible communion and frame of
Government, there be no promises made unto any of them, (for ought I have
heard, and remember) nor ever were, that they should be perpetually preserved
either without decay, or without dissolution; and therefore there is no cause
why Church Members should be remiss and negligent in holding fast those
Church-Ordinances, Liberties, and Privileges which they enjoy at present, if
they regard the good of that collective body whereof they are, because they
have no ground of promise to pretend for security against a sudden change and
alteration.

Yea thirdly, suppose a promise made to a particular Church for its
preservation for a time, yet the Lord will not have that Church slacken her
care, and endeavor of preserving her self, no not during that season. My proof
by way of instance is near at hand: Christ made a promise to this Church at
Philadelphia (in the verse before my Text) that he would keep her from the hour
of temptation that should come upon all the world, to try them that do dwell
upon the earth, and yet presently he forewarns her to hold that fast which she
had; This is very observable; She might not expostulate, Lord, since thou will
keep me, what need I take any care of keeping my self? No; Churches as Churches
must learn to serve under Gods promises and providence for their own good as
well as particular Christians: And Gods known purposed indulgences should not
occasion his servants negligences. How much more cause then have those Churches
to take this warning, which have no such special promises made unto them, as
none of the particular Churches of Christ (for ought I know) have at this day?

These things being in some sort cleared, I shall pesent you with what I have
further to say in the way of usual improvement of the Doctrine delivered.

Use 1. First, I beseech you to make use of this Point by ^^y of Caution in
reference to the Object. We have heard what it is which the servants and
Churches of Christ respectively are to hold fast. Now because there is a
tenacity, a disposition to hold fast something or other in every one, and yet
every thing which one has is not worth holding fast, therefore let us try what
it is only that we have; be sure to hold fast that which is good: ye know well
the Apostles Precept, 1 These. 5. 21. Prove all things, hold fast that which is
good: we have found the things in kind, that single Christians, and conjoined
Christians in Church Fellowship are to hold fast respectively: viz. matter of
Doctrine, and of Religious and Moral practice, and of Church-administration;
Now all these are to be proved, and then so far as found good steadfastly
retained. Here diverse things might be spoken touching the business of proving
and trying.

Touching the course taken for proving; what, would the Apostle have Christians
wander up and down into every Conventicle, or every corner to hear the
broachers of all sorts of Opinions? or, would he have Christians adventure to
travel into all Countries, and to intermingle in all sorts of companies, to
get information what all men hold, and all men practice? O no; Beloved, woeful
experience in our times, shows that a number of lightheaded, curious gadders,
and travelers, having no ballast of weighty judgment in them, are so tossed
up and down with the various kinds of Opinions and waves of men's practices,
clashing and breaking one upon another, that they scarce ever come to side at
Anchor at Sea, much less put in at any safe Harbor, but still fluctuate as
Scepticks in Opion, and Antinomists in practice, and half Atheists at least in
both; We need not wander up and down for variety to bring under trial; for we
may find too much brought home to us to our own places, to exercise our
judgments if we have any, and if not, to distract and disquiet us.

A great part of Solomon's curious scarch experimentally was so unnecessary and
unseemly, as we may suppose it cost him a great deal of repentance afterward.
I say no more of this.

But then again, for what is necessarily brought under our eye for proving,
remember that our only true test, or touchstone, or rule for proving, is the
written Word of God. And yet here we need beg of God sound wisdom how to make
a right use of this proving touchstone; for surely it is most grossly abused,
and wrested, and perverted among our people at this day, what through want of
Learning, what through want of humility, because they would be dogmatizing. And
I fear there be crept in among them a number of Popish and profane wits, who
though secret scoffers at the Scriptures, are leaders into manifold Errors by
counterfeiting very greatly a reverence to Scripture Authority, and urging the
letter of it, and express commands, and examples from it, while in the mean
time they aim at both the disparagement of Scriptures, and the confusion of
their silly self-conceited followers. The Lord direct us all to a right esteem
and use of holy Writ; for it is possible there may be such found like those of
old who melted, and molded their golden earings (of precious Doctrines, if
right used) into Idolatrous Images; And such as can turn a brazen Serpent from
a divine institution, to become a superstitious Idol.

Thus having considered well what course we take in the way of Trial, let us,
(as was said) hold fast only that which is good; Only pure and holy Doctrine,
only approvable, gracious practice suitable to such Doctrine; and in
Church-respects, whether as Pastors and Teachers or other Ecclesiastic
Officers, only such administrations, and ways of Government as may be found
agreeable to the mind and word of our Lord Jesus.

It is observable, that duty of this nature in our Text, viz. to hold what was
had already, is either expressly, or implicitly charged upon every one of those
Asian Churches written to by Christ, except that of Laodicea; for all the rest
had somewhat commended in them, but she nothing, as if she had nothing worthy
to hold fast; But why this? Had she not much precious Doctrine retained by her?
Grant it, yet it seems while she held her lukewarm temper in point of
Government and Discipline, all her Doctrine was as if it were not; O Beloved,
that we had not yet amongst us a number of old Laodiceans obstructing what they
can, all proceeding in way of a right* wise, and sober Reformation, and zealous
only to damp the zeal of people that way, and stiffly to hold fast humane
superstitious inventions, and their proud vainglorious conceits of them. The
Lord soften and bend their spirits.

Use 2. A second Use of this Point let be by way of Exhortation, or Incitation
to the act* O that we would all stir up our selves to all care and diligence
to hold fast what good we have, and let us all be stirred up thereunto at
present.

Surely there are very strong Motives hereunto, which may easily be perceived,
if we look about us. I shall only press a little those two, which lie on either
hand the duty in our Text, or what is equivalent thereunto.

The first is in the beginning of the verse, [Behold, I come quickly] says the
Lord Jesus; A Motive taken from his quick apprehension unto them. Now that
speedy coming of his needs not to be understood merely of a personal visible
coming, but of his coming in such ways of providence, as wherein he was to be
understood as vertually and effectually present for the mannaging of them, and
so we must needs understand the phrase, Chap. 2. 5, 16. Remember therefore from
whence thou art fallen* and repent, and do the first works, or else I will come
unto thee quickly, and will remove thy candlestick out of his place, except
thou repent. Repent, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will fight
against them with the sword of my mouth. Where his quick coming was doubtless
in a way of punishment, or chastisement, etc. But how are we here to understand
Christ his quick coming?

First, In a way of Trial. He had intimated immediately before, that there was
an hour of tentation coming upon all the world, to try them that dwelt upon the
earth: and he is to be thought to be in that trial, professing himself to be
the (searcher of the reins and heart, Chap. 2. 23.) and here as referring unto
it, he says, Behold, [take notice] I come quickly, viz. to try you among other
in that hour of temptation; what hour was that? Immediately it signified (as
some Expositors think with good consent) that persecution which soon after
followed upon the Churches under the reign of Trajanus the Emperor, and in
which persecution Philadelphia was tried as well as other. Strabo the
Geographer writes that Philadelphia was [terrae motibus crebro concussa] often
shaken with Earthquakes; Well, whatever natural, or proper Earthquakes, she as
a City with the region thereabout was subject unto, certainly as she was a
Church, both she and others in those Primitive times, were often shaken with
Political Earthquakes, shaking violences and assaults by Adversaries,
threatening their ruin and destruction. And lest this consideration should not
seem to reach us at this day, take notice, that in the judgment of many godly
learned, there is now an hour of temptation drawing on upon the present
reformed Churches of Christ which sweetly answer to Philadelphia, (to say no
more) wherein they are likely to be extremely shaken, and so tried to the
purpose; Nay, be there not some symptoms that such an hour is already entered
upon some of them? Is there not an horrible tempest already risen among the
poor reformed Churches in Piedmont, which has already shaken diverse of them in
pieces, and scattered them among the Mountains, and some other neighboring
places where they may hope for no shelter? Now how soon, and how far the like
Earthquakes may shake other Churches and places, the Lord only knows; but the
probability of a time of shaking trial to pass over all, may be sufficient
ground of warning to hold fast what good we have; Never are men more in danger
to let go what they have, than when they are terribly shaken: never were the
Disciples in more danger of taking scandal at Christ, and letting go their hold
of him, than when Satan desired to sift, and winnow them as wheat, (Luke 22.
31.) Therefore in apprehension of such a time, that the reformed Churches
abroad, and we together with them may hold fast that we have, They that seem to
be as pillars in the house of God, (Gal. 2. 9.) (though they be not used as
that prophetical Simeon did those Material Pillars before an Earthquake, yet)
need such a warning as he gave them, Stand fast, for we shall be shaken.

2ly, understand here Christ his coming quickly in a way of mercy to moderate
the trial, and to deliver from the power of temptation, q. d. I come quickly to
restore thee; Thy troubles and trials shall not last long; The trials of the
Church of Smyrna were measured by days, and were called tribulations of ten
days; (suppose years to be understood by days, as usually in this book, that
was no long time) But here the Churches time of temptation is measured, (I
cannot say by hours, but) only by an hour; it is foretold only to be an hour,
that is, a very short time of temptation, And truly Beloved, such short trials
it is conceived and hoped will be the remaining trials of the reformed Churches,
how sharp soever they may be for the while; But whatever their duration may be,
ye know what the Apostle said, that our (the Churches) afflictions are but for
a moment, (2 Cor. 4. 17.) Now therefore as Christ said to his Disciples, what?
Could ye not watch with me one hour? So I say, shall we not hold fast what we
have one hour, not one moment, after which all hard trials shall be over? O
let this persuade us! Especially, since we are to understand Christ his coming
quickly.

Thirdly, In a way of judicature, to call men to an account, and to distribute
rewards according to their works; To show himself gracious and bountiful to
such as do hold fast the good they have till he come, and severe toward others.
See Chap. 22. 12. And behold, I come quickly, and my reward is with me, to give
to every man according as his work shall be. Heb. 10. 37. For yet a little
while, and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry. James 5. 8. Be ye
also patient; stablish your hearts: for the coming of the Lord draws nigh.
But the meditation of this will carry me into the second Motive following the
duty in the latter part of this verse; pass we therefore over unto it.

[That no man take thy Crown, 2. Motive.
(...)] i. e. that no man take away thy Crown, or that thy Crown be not taken
away from thee? (...) hic idem est quod (...), Matthew. 5. 40. (Brightman) And
doubtless want of good hold fast has lost many a Crown. It is an argument
taken from the danger of losing her Crown if she did not hold fast: But withal
insinuating a Crown assured unto her keeping fast her hold. Well,

Our first enquiry here may be, what means he by her Crown? It is taken two
ways.

First, for that Crown she had in some sort already, viz. That honor which
this Church had partly gotten, and was further to get by that holy Spiritual
grave manner of administration, and observation of Gods Ordinances which
carried that luster of excellency and Authority in it, as convinced the minds,
and affected the spirits even of Adversaries, so that they which were formerly
of the Synagogue of Satan, which said they were Jews, (i. e. true worshippers
of God, and of the only Church of God) but were not, should come and worship
before the face of that Church, and acknowledge her beloved of God, and
honorable, ver. 9. And in some such respect as this, did the Apostle Paul call
the Philippians and Thessalonians his Joy, and his Crown, Phil. 4. 1. 1 These.
2. 19. For how came he to esteem them so? In that God was pleased by his
Ministry to translate them out of darkness into the kingdom of Christ Jesus,
and to make his Ministry instrumentally powerful to bring them under the yoke
of Christ and to lay down their former pride, and professedly to subject
themselves to the Gospel of Christ, (2 Cor. 9. 13.) yea, when persons convinced
shall be ready to fall down upon their face, and worship God, and confess that
God is in his servants (and Ordinances) of a truth, 1 Cor. 14. 25.

Secondly, For that superexcellent Crown, or highest honor and dignity in
Heaven which God has promised out of his free grace, to bestow upon those who
persevere in Faith and obedience to the end; that which is called the Crown of
life, Chap. 2. 10. the Crown of righteousness, 2 Timothy 4. 8. a Crown of glory
that fades not away, 1 Pet. 5. 4. Now Beloved, for the Argument;

In respect of the former Crown it stands thus. If thou do not hold fast what
thou have, thou art like to lose the glory of Gospel-Ministery, and the due
reverence and authority which it has had hitherto more or less in the hearts
of men, and may yet further have if thou be not wanting unto thy self, and
negligent to retain and keep those Ordinances and Privileges which make for
thy spiritual honor; And it is possible for a particular Church in time to
lose its Ecclesiastic Crown here below, as it fared long since with that
Church of Philadelphia.

Again, In respect of the other Crown of life and glory never fading, the
Argument stands thus. Thou had need use all thy prudence, and diligence,
and fortitude to hold fast what thou have, and to persevere unto the end, lest
being at a loss of grace, thou be also at a loss of glory. Thou stand by
Faith, be not high-minded but fear, said the Apostle, Rom 11. 20. And look we
to our selves that we lose not those things which we have wrought, but that we
receive a full reward, says the Apostle John, (2 John 8.)

Quest. But does not the employed danger and caveat upon it in this sense
infringe the certainty of the perseverance, and salvation of the Saints?

Answ. No, it does not. For in the community of a visible Church there is a
mixture of Hypocrites with sincere Professors; Now Hypocrites may lose the
Crown of glory, because they never had really either true Faith, or holiness,
but only seemed to have them, and therefore though they lose that Crown which
was proposed to them to run, and strive and labor for, yet is not the tenure
of divine Election in the least weakened by their failing, because though they
were called externally, yet not elected, and never had the faith or grace of
the Elect. And for sincere Christians, who only are elected, though they shall
not lose the Crown prepared and reserved for them, yet they have need of such
caveats as this.

Partly to mind them, though they be kept by the power of God to salvation yet
in themselves there is a Principle of defection and Apostasy, and were they
left unto themselves they should let go all grace, and lose all glory, and
therefore need be the more wary.

Partly to keep them from looseness, and defection; for Exhortations and
Admonitions from the mouth of God, and set on by the Spirit of God, are
instrumental in Gods hand to stir them up to duty, and hold them in
^erseverance. The premises considered, O Beloved, how should we be
strengthened in our resolutions, and actuated in our strongest endeavors to
stand fast, and hold fast that truth, that grace, and all those spiritual
liberties and privileges bestowed upon us.

Use 3. A third Use of this point may be to give and take some Directions for
the more effectual practice of this Rule, since it is a thing both of so much
difficulty, and of so great consequence to observe it. In the way of hopeful
means therefore be pleased to take notice of these few particulars.

1. Would we hold fast what good we have personally, and Ecclesiastically? Then
take an humble recognition of our own weakness respectively. It is said of
this Church of Philadelphia a little before, at ver. 8. that she had [(...)] a
little strength; (and, indeed this duty of holdfast is directed neither to
livelesse persons, nor mere impotent persons in spiritual respects) but it was
but a little strength. So it was with her that was one of the best of the
sisters; we are then to be humbly apprehensive of the smalnesse of our own
strength, even when we are at the best; And then besides, we may reflect back,
and consider whether in some particulars we have not slipped back with Ephesus
and fallen from our first love, and whether we are not in some particulars in a
languishing condition as Sardis, and so need to strengthen the things which
remain that are ready to dye; But I say we are to be humbly sensible of our
little strength at the best, and that will dispose us to more care to hold fast
what we have, etc.

2. Take we, and keep we fast hold on God by Faith, and in the frequent
exercise of Prayer, imitating Jacob in not letting of him go. He looks that his
people should do so; even to take hold of him and his strength, (in a good
sense) Isa. 27. 5. not in a way of presumptuous contest with him, but for our
own support by him Stir up our selves to lay hold on him, Isa 64 7. For why?
Qui habet habentem omnia, habet omnia: so Qui retinet, etc. In his own might
shall no man (no Church) be strong: but we may be able to do all things through
Christ strengthening us, and therefore we are always to walk and act in the
strength of the Lord, (Psalm. 71. 16.) Maintain sound Doctrine in the strength
of the Lord; keep the way of holiness in the strength of the Lord; perform all
Church-duties in the strength of the Lord, etc.

3. Let it be our holy covetous aim to be getting more of that good which we
are to hold fast. Men of the world are ready to think that in external things,
if they be not on the increasing hand, they are on the diminishing; And what
shall we think of our condition in Spirituals? If we look into the Evangelical
Parable of the servants that had Talents, or Pounds committed to their usance,
we may find the evil servant there keeping his Talent, and wrapping it up in
a napkin (and did he not then hold it fast?) but that proved neither pleasing
to his Master, nor comfortable to himself, because he should have been
employing and improving it, which because he was not, therefore he was said not
to have, and sentenced to have that taken from him which he only seemed to
have. For without some improvement a stock cannot long be kept entire together.
Wherefore in spiritual things, beloved, if we would with Philadelphia hold fast
what we have, we must affect the commendation of Thyatira, (Chap. 2. 19) to
have our last works more than our first, to advance in solid knowledge, in true
and sincere holiness, and if it be possible, to have our after
Church-Ministery, Church Assemblies, Church-Administrations better than our
former. This I say must still be our aim, or otherwise we shall be soon cast
backward; when men are in a broad wheel, either to crane up things from the
earth, or to draw up baskets out of the water, they are still steping forward,
or else they could not stay in the same place and circumstances of posture
where they are, (as it is also with Birds in a turning bellcage:) And so when
Christians or Church Members are set into such a frame, as the wheel of
occurrents is still turning upon them, either they must be still stepping
forward, or else they cannot keep the same sight of their station, but be
driven backward and overturned.

4. We must be industrious, and zealous in all the affairs which make for the
preservation and improvement of what we have: I commend that cluster of
Apostolical precepts unto you in Romans 12. 11. Be not sloathfull in business,
(but) fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord. And these are connexed, and
subordinate one to the other; First, Not sloathfull, i. e. neither altogether
idle, nor remiss, or careless how we do what we pretend to be doing, how
slowly, how seldom, how slightly; For he that is sloathfull in his work, is
brother to him that is a great waster, (Prove. 18. 9.) so far will he prove
from a holder fast of what he has; For the sloathful gets nothing, as the
waster spends all; and so in their emptiness and needinesse they come to shake
hands together.

Again, If we would not be sloathfull, we must be fervent in Spirit; for
sloathfulnesse is from coldness of temper corporally, or spiritually: and
activity is from heat and fervency; so that unless one be somewhat zealous, he
cannot be constantly laborious. As the light is gone in a manner, when the
flame of a candle is extinguished, and the fire will quickly die out of the
snuff: so is it in Spiritual cases; unless we be somewhat fervent for truth
and holiness, for Church-Ordinances and Discipline, we shall quickly leave
acting for them, and be at a loss of them. Therefore be fervent in Spirit: And
to direct our aims and intentions in it, know, lastly, (according to that
Scripture) that we must look at the Lords service, as serving the Lord, we must
be fervent in Spirit, and not sloathful in business. The Apostle bids ordinary
servants do their Masters service, not as looking to them only, but to the
Lord, (Ephesians. 6. 7. Col. 3. 23.) How much more then should they approve
themselves to the Lord with all fervency of Spirit, whose service and business
is about the matters of God and his house! These considerations surely may be
helpful to Church Officers and Members to hold fast what they have.

5. If we be resolved for constancy in holding fast what good we have, then let
us show our selves lovers and observers of all good Orders; Enemies to Order
are Enemies to Constancy; Both together avail much for great issues and
achievements; But pervert or disturb the former, and you subvert or break the
latter: cryers down of all Forms are [monstra informia] unshapen Monsters, as
opposite to God in their endeavors as may be; for whereas God brought a
bountiful Creation out of a Chao's, They would reduce all into a Chao's again,
might they have their will, or wishes, for ought appears by their words.
Plainly therefore, would we retain either soundness of Doctrine, or holiness
of life? we must pray, and endeavor to keep good order in all
Church-Administrations. Mark that of the Apostle in Colos. 2. 5. Rejoicing
(says he) and beholding your order, and the steadfastness of your faith in
Christ. He joins Order with steadfastness, and puts Order (though the less)
before steadfastness of faith, (though the greater) because Order conduces
much unto stedfastness. And wherefore is there so much unstedfastnesse this day
among our people, even about the most important points of Faith, but because
they are all out of Order? No Rule held over them, their Traces cut, the Reins
cast upon their necks, and the communalty of them unskilful to rule themselves;
I speak in reference to Spirituals: They wander from one Church unto another,
now they are in one Conventicle or Assembly, and then in another; In one place
they meet with some good Principles (it may be) but in another with bad, and
gather matter of corruption of mind, and practice one piece after another, and
how then should they hold fast what good they had? How much then does it
concern us all in our several places, to keep Order and Rules of Government?
And would to God our Rulers at length would powerfully help us all to keep such
as may be sound, undoubtedly approveable.

6 Exercise patience (as this Church did ver. 10. keeping the word of Christ's
patience, not only the rule prescribing patience, but patience it self
prescribed by that rule.) For patience is necessary unto perseverance in a good
profession, in a good practice, whether publicly or privately. The impatient
person does not possess his own soul, (see Luke 21. 19.) he has not an hold
fast of him self, and therefore what else can he hold fast? If we would like
good plants retain our moisture, our sustenance, and bring forth fruit to
perfection, it must be with patience, Luke 8. 15. If we would do the will of
God (according to our places) thoroughly, and constantly, so as to receive the
promises, we have need of patience, Hebr. 10. 36. Wherefore do so many depart
from God, and turn from his truth, and will, and way, but because they are
impatient, and will not wait Gods leisure, till he vindicate his own cause, or
means effectually for the clearing up of Controversies, and reforming of things
amiss, and so falling a mourning that things are carried cross unto their
former Principles, and persuasions, they fling out and are carried headily any
way that may give them most present contentment, whatever it may do afterward.
But not to tire your patience too long:

7. Approve we our selves right Philadelphians, that is, (according to the
Etymon of the word) Brotherly lovers, and lovers of the Brethren. See 1 These.
4. 9. But as touching brotherly love, ye need not that I write unto you: for ye
your selves are taught of God to love one another. Heb. 13. 1. Let brotherly
love continue. Without this we cannot keep long in any good order: nor keep in
patience long, etc. Nor (which is the main) keep long in the possession and
practice of truth and holiness. Mark that Context, Ephesians. 12, 3. Forbearing one
another in love. Endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of
peace. If we break in point of love, we quickly break the bond of peace, and
love being broken, we cannot long keep the unity of the Spirit; what is that?
Unity in the disposition of our spirits, in judgments and affections: But
there must be more then that, viz. 2. Unity of our spirits in assent and
adherence to Gods Spirit, his Doctrines, his Principles, his Ordinances; that
so our unity may be evidenced to be 3. Unitiy wrought by the Holy Spirit of
God, knitting us together as Members of one Mystical body, after a Spiritual
and Mystical manner. To the keeping of this, I say, brotherly love is
requisite. No marvel therefore if we hold not fast what we had, (I speak of the
common hold fast) since there is such want of brotherly love among us, since
our people are fallen into so many Divisions and breaches; A condition with
tears of blood to be lamented; And O that all Sardenses and Laodiceans about us
would transire in castra, or rather in tentoria Philadelphensium. Then might we
see happy times, and God can bring them on when he pleases.

Mean while, let us Beloved show our selves right Philadelphians, of an humble,
meek, loving, gentle, yet a courageous, and tenacious spirit to hold fast true
Doctrine and Discipline, holiness of life and conversation. Our love one
toward another will strengthen the hearts and hands one of another, and the
failing of it as much weaken us, etc. Let Angels, and Officers of Churches
think of this in the first place, who are to be Lights and Guides to others in
the ways of Love, and Peace: But then all the Members of our Churches in their
several places.

And (to close all) Let us show our selves Philadelphians in our sympathetical
affections in love toward our Brethren of the reformed Churches beyond the
Seas, and of neighboring Nations, because we all profess to hold the same good
things of God, both for Doctrine and Discipline for the main substance of it:
More specially sympathize with them who are now in an hour of temptation to try
them. Pray that though they could not hold fast what they had in Houses, Lands,
and other outward possessions, nor Ministers, nor Churches, nor their nearest
relations (many of them) yet they may hold fast true faith and good consciences
to the end (as many of those that have been massacred already, did to the end)
as diverse of their Ancestors also did see many foregoing Generations; And
contribute also toward them in love* for the relief of their necessities, as we
shall be shortly called upon to do in our respective places.

Now who so in the use of such means, shall hold fast that which he has of
Truth, and Grace, and persevering overcome, Christ promises him in the verse
following, that he will make him pillar in the Temple of his God, and he shall
go no more out. A verse very well worthy our attendance unto a further
explanation of it; but the time now cuts me off, etc.

FINIS.

