For the Soldiers, and all the Officers of England, Scotland and Ireland, a
warning from the Lord, that they forget not his kindness, but call to mind his
mercies, and their own promises.
ALL ye Governers, Captains, Officers and Soldiers, to you all am I moved to
write, and clear my Conscience, and declare the word of the Lord; The mercies
of the Lord have been great toward you, by his power has he subdued your
enemies in the Nations before you, and given you victory over them. Now to that
in all your Consciences I do speak; Consider how you walk answerable in
obedience to the Lord, from whom you have had power to overcome your enemies;
consider if you be not requiting the Lord evil for all his mercies? O I am
pressed to consider and see! what seeking of your selves? and what exaltation
of your selves is amongst you? O what pride and high-mindedness, and lusts of
the flesh is to be seen in you? O what vain and wanton minds, and careless
spirits does appear from you? Dreadful will the appearance of the Lord of
Hoasts be unto you in requiring his mercies, and how you have improved them,
which you have received from him; O the righteous seed of God is oppressed in
you, and the just lies slain under the powers of the man of sin, which rules in
many of you, above all that is called God; you have well n^gh forgotten the
mercies of the Lord, which gave you power over your enemies, and your hearts
are overcome with pride, and seeking the honor, and treasure, and glory of this
world, and even with Jesurum you are waxed fat, and kick against the Lord; some
are pulled down, others are set up; but the same nature stands still, which is
at enmity with God, and the same Laws stand still, by which the Lords people
(for conscience sake) do suffer, and the same false Prophets stand still, which
deceive the Nations, and by corrupt Laws (which you have pretended to fight
against) are they upholden, and the spirit of the Lords people limited, and the
same oppressing Lawyers stand still, which grinds the face of the poor. O
consider, and perform your Covenant to the Lord, which you made to him in the
day of your distress, when you were little in your own eyes; lest the wrath of
the Almighty come upon you, and you be scattered and driven away before the
power of the Lord, as your enemies have been before you. Liberty to tender
consciences, and to take away the oppressing Laws was your pretense; But how
little is it yet accomplished? For great is and has been the sufferings of the
^ords People in the North parts of England, under corrupt Laws, even by such as
were made in Queen Mary's days, to uphold Popery; for the Testimony of a pure
conscience, has and does many suffer by such Laws, and under such men which
have been your open enemies; even such men which have been in actual Arms
against you, are now exalted, and put in Authority, and with Tyranny Rule over
the Lords people, which have been faithful and serviceable to you; and for the
good of the Nations to establish them in Righteousness; Consider, its time to
weigh these things, you are at ease in your lusts and pleasures, and many of
you are woefully fallen from that zeal for truth, which once was really in you,
and now forget to perform the Covenant of the Lord, and liberty to the pure
Conscience you have not yet attained; but you walk in the liberty of your
Wills, and Lusts, and Desires, and that nature keeps in bondage in you, that
which should set free the Conscience to serve the Lord; and many of those whom
it has pleased the Lord by his power to set free that in their Conscience, to
serve and worship him, are now oppressed and suffer under corrupt Laws, which
is acted by the corrupt wills of corrupt men, and liberty of Conscience is not,
nor can be attained by the power of an outward sword, but by the light of Jesus
Christ, which is the sword which cuts down the man of sin, and power of
darkness, which keeps in bondage that in the Conscience which would bring it to
Liberty. And though it be not in your power, nor in the power of man to perform
what you have promised; yet such a work, and so much power has the Lord
entrusted in your hands, which you neglect, and do not improve; for which the
Lord of Hoasts will plead with you, and bring misery and condemnation upon you;
He has said it, who will perform his word. And now has the Lord God of power
drawn his sword, and a new open war is proclaimed in the North parts of
England, even betwixt Michael our Prince, and the Dragon; The Trumpet of the
Lord is sounding, and he is appearing in his power for the deliverance of Sion,
which has long lain in Captivity; and he will gather his flock out of the
mouths of all dumb shepherds, which has for many Generations made a prey upon
them; the Lord has set up his standard to gather his men of war together, to
fight his Battle against the enemies of Sion, the deceivers of the Nations, and
the Lord will by his own power accomplish that which you have not been able:
Woe, woe and misery, lamentation, and howling, a voice of war and rumor is coming
upon the Beast and the false Prophet, and upon corrupt Laws and Rulers, the
decree of the Lord of Hoasts is gone forth against all the Deceivers, both of
Rulers, Teachers and People; and he will make their shame, and their whoredoms
and witchcrafts appear in the eyes of all his people, and will set his people
to Triumph over their heads, and to rejoice in their downfall, the hand of the
Lord is stretched out against them, to make a destruction among them, and woe
unto them which takes their part to uphold them; they that help, and they that
are helped shall both sall together: for the Lord has a controversy with
them, and with them will he plead by his terrible judgments; The Teachers have
devoured souls for dishonest gain, and made a trade upon the holy Scriptures,
and walked in the footsteps of their ^orefathers, the false Prophets of Israel;
and the Rulers, and Lawyers have done violence, and oppressed the innocent, and
trodden the poor underfoot: Therefore ye Soldiers take warning, this is the
Word of the Lord to you all; Uphold them nor, lest with them you fall before
the power of the Lord, which is making it self manifest in the Saints, to cut
them down Branch and Root; to that in all your Consciences I do speak; all ye
Officers and Soldiers, fear the living God, and Repent of your Pride and
self-exaltation, and hard-heartedness, and prize the mercies of the Lord, which
you have received, and all the honest-hearted wait upon the Lord, in the light
wherewith Jesus Christ has lightened every one of you; the light in your
Consciences, (according to its measure) shows you what is according to the will
of God, and what is contrary to his will, and bears witness to what I say, it
Judges you in secret, for your actions which are contrary to a pure Conscience;
So turn your minds inward to the light, and wait to be taught of the Lord, that
as his power has appeared for you, in giving you Victory over your enemies
without you; so his power may be made manifest in you, to give you victory over
the man of sin (which leads you into pride, and to seek your selves) which is
your enemy within you; the Lord has a seed amongst you, which he will set free
and deliver to serve his name; So be you all warned, for to you all I have
cleared my Conscience, and spoke the word of the Lord, whether you will hear or
forbear, and when that witness of God in your Consciences does arise, eternally
shall it witness me; And let you see that I have spoken the truth, and that you
are guilty of Covenant Breaking.

This was I moved to write to the English Army in England, Scotland and
Ireland; and to them all it is the word of the Lord. My name in the flesh is
Edward Borough, one of them whom the world calls Quakers.


