THE THIRD And FOURTH BOOK, ON MATTHEW 11.

VIZ

I. Christ the Humble Teacher of those that come to Him. II. The Only Easy Way
to Heaven.
Wherein is showed, 1 What Humility or Lowliness is Not. 2 What that Lowliness
of Heart is that Christ would have us to Learn of Him. 3 Arguments from the
Lowliness of Christ to work Lowliness of spirit in us. 4 The properties of an
humble heart toward God. 5 The properties of an Humble and Lowly heart in
respect of our selves 6 The properties of Humility in respect of others, 1. It
is fearful of giving or taking offense. 2. It gives due honor to all. 3. It is
tender to others. 4. It Is not needlessly singular from them. 7 The Excellencies
of Humility. 8 Humility brings REST unto the soul. 9 Means to get Humility.


In the only Easy Way to Heaven,

Is showed, 1 The Way to Heaven that Jesus Christ teaches, is an Easy way.
Six Evidences thereof. 2 The Difference between the EASE a Carnal heart has,
and the EASE a gracious soul has in Religion. 3 The Reason why some gracious
souls complain of difficulty in Gods ways. 4 What it is that makes the Ways
of God so Easy. 5 Consequences from the Easiness of Gods ways. 6 Directions
how we may make the Ways of God Easy.


By JEREMIAH BUROUGHS, Preacher of the Gospel at Stepney, and Cripple-Gate,
London.

London: Printed by Peter Cole, Printer and Book seller, at the Sign of the
Printing-press in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1659.

MR Buroughs Easy way to Heaven.

THE CONTENTS OF The Third and Fourth Book On Math 11.
CHAP. 119. Lowliness what: Negatively in Five Particulars. 1 Not in Poverty. 2
Nor in Words only. 3 Nor Carriage. 4 Nor Habit. 5 Nor Baseness of Spirit. Page
477 Chap. 120 Lowliness of heart what it is positively, and what it is in
Christ in six particulars. 1 He became Mediator. 2 Man* 3 Born of a poor
Virgin. 4 A Servant. 5 A Curse: Yea, Sin. 6 He was lowly in his carriage to
men. 490 Chap. 121 Six Arguments from the Lowliness of Christ to work Lowliness
of spirit in our hearts. 1 It was one special end of his coming into the world.
2 His Humility makes pride in man a desperate Evil. 3 The greatest excellency
stands with the greatest Humility. 4 His Lowliness stands with the greatest
Wisdom. 5 It is infinitely pleasing to God, 6 It may stand with doing of great
things. 505 Chap. 122. The ground of Humility. A knowledge and sense of our own
vileness. 513 Chap. 123. Of the behavior of humility before God in ten
Particulars. 1 It acknowledges the infinite distance between God and a Sinner.
2 It has a trembling Heart before God. 3 A relenting Spirit 4 It makes Gods
will its Rule. 5 It is willing God should choose its condition. 6 It is willing
God should be advanced in all his ways. 7 It admires the least mercy. 8 It is
willing to be put in a mean and hard employment. 9 It is willing to wait upon
God. 10 It is willing to do what it can to honor God 521 Chap. 124. Twelve
Properties of a Lowly heart in respect of it self. 1 It is very suspicious of
it self. 2 It is willing to know the worst of it self. 3 It is willing to look
to his beginning. 4 It is ashamed of it self. 5 It loathes it self. 6 It judges
it self unworthy. 7 It denies it self. 8. It keeps down it self. 9. It hides it
self. 10 Goes out of it self. 11 Bemoans it self. 12 Afflicts it self 541 Chap.
125. Three Consequences from the former Point 556 Chap. 126 The first Property
of Humility in respect of others, is that it thinks better of others then it
self, Which is laid open in diverse Particular answers unto several doubts and
Objections 558 Chap. 127 A second Property of Humility in respect of others is,
To be fearful of giving offense. 570 Chap. 128. Other Properties of Humility in
respect of others. 3 It gives due Honor to all with whom it does converse. 4 It
rejoices in their good. 5 It is willing to receive good from them. 6 It is
tender toward others. 7 It is not needlessly singular from them 576 Chap. 129.
The excellency of Humility in thirteen particulars. 1 God prizeth it. 2 It is a
convincing Grace. 3 By it we walk worthy of the Gospel. 4 It is an Evidence of
Election. 5 Better than Sacrifices. 6 It serves for the prevailing of Prayer.
7 It is a tried heart. 8 It is fit for great Services. 9 It is the Ornament of
all graces. 10. It preserves all Graces. 11 It makes all Duties and Crosses
easy. 12 It makes the life comfortable. 13 It is most useful to give God the
Glory of the new Covenant. 586 Chap. 130. Humility brings Rest unto the Soul in
Eight Particulars. 1. It ventures upon nothing before it sees Gods call. 2 The
Heart of such, is lower than their condition. 3 He is never disappointed in the
World. 4. He would have God have his Glory. 5 It freeth from opposition, or
makes the Heart yield to it. 6 It makes the Heart rejoice in the property of
others. 7 It is under many promises. 8 All Crosses are small to an humble Heart
605 Chap. 131. Exhortation to Humility with five several means to get it. 1
Labor to see the excellency of it. 2 Convince the Soul of its emptiness. 3 Get
the knowledge of God. 4 Of Christ. 5 Of our selves 609 Chap. 132. The knowledge
of our selves further prosecuted, with Six Means to get it. 1. Consider what
once we were. 2. What we might have been. 3. What it cost God to bring us out
of that condition. 4 What we are. 5. What we would be if God should leave us a
little to our selves. 6 In what case we shall certainly be in one day 624
THE Contents of the Fourth Book, on Matthew. 11. 30. VIZ. The only Easy Way to
Heaven.
CHAP. 133. The words in the 30. verse Opened and Explained Page 633 Chap. 134.
Doct. The way of the Gospel that brings to Heaven, is an easy way. This
confirmed and explained in six particulars. 637 Chap. 135. Six Evidences of the
former Doctrine in the last Chapter. 1. Because the word that injoyns these
ways is Sweet. 2. A Gracious Soul counts his Duties his privileges. 3* He
would rather come under any other Burden, than cast off the Yoke of Christ. 4
Because Christ whose Yoke it is, is Gentle. 5 Never any that truly put their
neck under this Yoke, would willingly take it out again. 6 The Experience of
all the Saints of God prove the Point 641 Chap. 136. The Second Particular
mentioned, Is opened in two differences between a Carnal heart, and a Gracious
Soul, in the ways of God. 1 The Hypocrite finds ease in the ways of God and
Sin both. 2 The Hypocrite has some ease, because he mistakes the Yoke of
Christ, contenting himself with the outward form of Godliness, but the
believers ease comes from the power of it. 649 Chap. 137. Contains a third
and fourth Difference between the ease of an Hypocrite, and true Believer in
the ways of God. For, 1. They are easy even to the Corruptions of an
Hypocrite. 2. He takes up the ways of God partially 658 Chap. 138. Contains
Six differences more of the former Point. 5 A Carnal heart can take up and lay
down duties when he will. 6 He has ease in the remissness of his Spirit. 7 His
ease is al alike. 8 The more ease he has, the more sluggish he is. 9 He has
but one principle in the heart that acts him both in the ways of God, and
the ways of the world. 10 His ease comes from the performance of duties in his
own Strength 663 Chap. 139. Diverse Objections answered. The easiness of the
ways of Christ; which is the third particular mentioned in Chap. 139. 672
Chap. 140 Shows the Reasons of the Discipline and Government of Christ, and
Objections against the same are answered 687 Chap. 141. Of the easiness of the
Yoke of Afflictions for the Name of Christ 698 Chap. 142* What the things are
that makes the ways of Christ easy (which is the fourth point in Chap. 139.)
opened in five particulars. 1 They are such as a gracious Soul will impose upon
himself. 2 He comes freely off to them. 3 The ways of Christ are even, and not
contrary one to another. 4 They bring Strength with them. 5 In them all there
is good Success. 6 In them a gracious heart is always receiving his wages. 7
He has all the passages of Gods providence to help him. 8 They bring ease to
the Conscience. 9 They free the Soul from cares. 10 They make all other things
easy 703 Chap. 143. The Yoke of Christ easier than the Yoke of the Law: For,
1. The Ceremonial Law required abstinence from the comforts of the Creature. 2
Its Service was chargeable. 3 The Ceremonies were beggarly Rudiments 719 Chap.
144. The Yoke of Christ easier than the Yoke of Sin, and Antichrist 726 Chap.
145 Eight Consequences from the former Doctrine, 1. The world is mistaken about
the service of Christ. 2 A great sin to reject Christ. 3 Bless God for this
easy Yoke. 4. Bring not an evil report upon the ways of Christ. 5. Christ will
expect much Service, it being so easy. 6. Make not the Yoke of Christ hard. 7
We should give up our Selves to Christ. 8. It is an accursed thing to be an
Apostat 737 Chap. 146. The means to make the ways of Christ easy to our
selves. 1 Our obedience must be Evangelical. 2 Keep the heart in a readiness to
every duty. 3 Get the heart in love to the duty. 4 Lose not your
encouragements. 5 Continue not in the guilt of any sin. 6 Order the duties of
your Condition. 7 Leave the Success wholly to God. 8 Bind not your self to what
Christ does not. 9 Lay hold upon al opportunities. 10 Preserve all experiences.
11 Beware of disturbing passions. 12 Entertain communion with the Saints. 13
Exercise much faith. 14 Get strength of Grace 750
THE THIRD AND FOURTH BOOK On Math. 11. VIZ I. Christ the Humble Teacher of
those that come to him. II. The only Easy way to Heaven.

CHAP. CXIX.
Lowliness what, Negatively in Five Particulars. 1. Not in Poverty. 2. Nor in
Words only. 3. Nor Carriage. 4. Nor Habit. 5. Nor Baseness of Spirit.

WE have Finished that great and excellent Doctrine of Meekness, we are now to
come to the next lesson that we are to Learn of Christ, Lowliness of Heart, and
this of a lowly Heart, is of very near affinity unto a meek heart yea the truth
is, a lowly Heart is the Mother of Meekness, though Meekness is set before in
my Text, yet in some other Scriptures, where we have Meekness and Humility
joined together, we have Meekness set after, and Humility, and Lowliness set
before, as in Coloss. 3. 12. Put on therefore as the Elect of God, Holy and
beloved, Bowels of Mercy, Kindness, Humbleness of mind, Meekness, Humbleness of
mind, Meekness, there Humbleness is set before, and that is indeed the true
Christian Meekness, that does come from Lowliness, Lowly in heart, The word
here Lowly (in the Greek (...)) it signifies one even lying upon the ground
ready to be Trodden on, as some Learned observe, Lowly in Heart. In 2 Cor. 7.
6. There you have this word here Translated Lowly, Cast down, one Cast down.
Nevertheless God that comfort those that are Cast down, (...) the same word
that is here Translated in my Text Lowly, is there Cast down, such whose Heart
is Cast down. And in 2 Cor. 10. and the first. Now I Paul my self beseech you,
by the meekness and gentleness of Christ, who in presence am Base among you,
Who am Lowly or Base, so you have the signification of the word, and what it
is, in other Scriptures, Lowly.

But Lowly in Heart, Learn of me, for I am Lowly in Heart.

First, Not in a low condition, I do not require of you that you should be in
the low condition of Poverty, and the like, as I am, some falsely would imitate
Christ to be in such a low condition, because that he had possessed nothing in
the world, therefore they would not, and so ground their superstitious vows of
a voluntary poverty. Indeed, the word Translated, in Heart, signifies sometimes
the low condition of a man. As in 1 James, 9. Let the Brother of Low degree,
Rejoice in that he is Exalted, That is, in a Low condition. But many men are in
a low condition, and yet far from being Lowly in Heart, There may be a very low
condition, and yet a very high, proud Heart; there may be Humiliation where
there is no Humility, Humiliation, and Humility are two several things, a man
or Woman may be Humbled, and yet not at all Humble; Many people, that are very
low in their condition, Yet, Oh! the pride of their Heart in their low
condition, what vexing and fretting of Heart is there against the ways of Gods
providence toward them, and disposing of them? Now thou art in a low
condition, and thy Heart vexing and froward, thy heart is not a whit low by thy
condition. Many men that heretofore have been in a high condition, and God has
brought their estates lower, but not their hearts a whit, Oh, Happy, happy were
it for those Men and Women if he had brought their hearts low; this is the way
to make Gods bringing them low in condition to be a great blessing to them. You
that are mariners, when you meet with storms and tempests, you would think it
a very absurd and foolish thing to have your top Gallent, and top sails
spreading to the full all open in a storm, No, now you narrow your Sails, and
take them all in, and take them down when the storm is up. Now this is a
foolish condition of many that God pleases to bring into a low condition, that
when God causes storms and tempests to be upon a Soul, they keep up their
sails still, it is just indeed that they should be drowned that will not pull
down their Sails when the Lord causes a grievous storm to come upon them, how
many that are in very low estate, and yet have extreme stubborn hearts, and
stout Spirits, as stout and stubborn as ever before they were, they have
envious Spirits at those that are above them, because others are not as low as
themselves, and have sullen Spirits, and sinking Spirits, and froward Spirits
in their low condition, all these argues a great deal of pride, that though
their condition is low, yet their hearts are not low, the Devils themselves,
they are low enough, they are cast down to Hell it self, and yet the proudest
creatures that are, none so proud as the Devils are, and their pride appears
much in their discontentedness, they are proud and discontented, and the most
discontented spirit is the proudest Spirit; so that a man may be of a low
condition, and yet not lowly in Heart, Learn of me, for I am Lowly in Heart, it
is the Lowliness of Heart that Christ would have us Learn of him.

Secondly, A man may be Lowly in words, submissive in words, and yet far from
Lowliness in Heart, in Isai. 29. 4. There you may see what some afflictions may
work to make us Lowly in words, in expressions, And thou shall be brought down;
and shall speak out of the ground, and thy speech shall be low out of the Dust,
and thy voice shall be as of one that has a Familiar Spirit, out of the ground,
and thy speech shall Whisper out of the dust, I will bring thee down says God.
Whereas in the time of men's prosperity, they speak swelling words, as the
Apostle Jude, 16. Speaks, Great words, high Words, when they are in the ruff
of their pride, and the height of their prosperitty, but you shall have many of
these brave spirits, that have such swelling words when they are in their
jollity and prosperity, yet when God brings them down upon their sick Beds, Oh,
then they Whisper and speak low, as one out of the dust, and then Oh! their
words are very submissive and yiedling, and will hearken to any thing that you
say, I but yet for all this, their hearts are not brought down, their Hearts
remain as stiff as before, which appears by this that as soon as ever the hand
of God is off from them, they are as stout and stubborn as ever before. So that
there may be Lowliness in expressions, where there is not Lowliness in heart.

And again, many may be Low in Expressions of words in discommending
themselves, and yet be proud in heart, either in accusing themselves of such
things, as they hope others will not believe them, or denying such things as
they hope others will contradict them in, you shall have many people that will
have a seeming kind of humility, and be ready to speak very hard things of
themselves, and say, they are very poor weak people, and have but little
strength in them, and not fit for such and such employments, and it is fit that
others should be chosen in those employments rather than themselves, and they
have wretched, and vile hearts, and when they come amongst others they speak of
their vile wretched heart, and they cannot do thus and thus, and very large
they will be in speaking very ill of themselves, and deny that they have any
excellency as others have; and yet their hearts extremely proud, which appears
in this, because if any body else should be of their mind, they would be
extremely discontented, if any others should say, O! God has given you great
Gifts, this pleases them, whereas if others that are in Company and hear them
charge themselves to have such vile and wretched hearts, and to say, they
cannot do thus and thus. Suppose they should be of the same mind, and they
should say, I think it is so, that you are a poor silly Creature, an ignorant
Creature, and you have a very hard heart, and a proud and stubborn heart, now
if any should be of their mind, they would be angry with them and be
displeased. Does not this argue a great deal of pride of heart? I remember
Bernard has such an expression in his Books, says he, if another should
accuse me as I accuse my self, I were not able to bear it, he confessed this
pride of his heart, though he did accuse himself, yet if another should say the
same thing of him he were not able to bear it, and I am confident it would be
fo with abundance of people, when they come in company and speak thus of
themselves, it is but to fetch out commendations from them, that others might
commend them, and they would be mightily displeased if others should say of
them that which they say of themselves, in Prove. 17. 7. Excellent speech
becomes not a Fool, much less do lying lips a Prince. Now the words that are
thus read in your Books, you may in another way read them, they seem to carry
another expression than is carried here, the word signifies Dignity; So Arius
Montanus, The lips of Dignity becomes not a Fool, that is, it is not fit for
one that is a Fool to speak of excellent things, as if he had any excellent
things in him, much less do lying lips a Prince, it is here, but the word does
not only signify a Prince, but an Ingenious Man, a man that has an
excellency, and worth, so you may turn it, as a Lip of Dignity becomes not a
Fool, so neither do lying Lips become one that has an Excellency in him, one
that is of an ingenious spirit, it is not for him to dissemble, it is a very
unseemly thing for one that God has given an excellency unto to dissemble. In
Job 13. 7. It is said there, What will you lie for God? will you speak that which
is false even for God himself? will you speak wickedly for God, and talk
deceitfully for him? We are not to walk deceitfully, no, not for God, not for
the Glory of God, though we should think there might come the greatest good
from it, yet we must not do it, and therefore certainly not for our own praise,
to fish out praise for our selves, this is to be lowly in words, but not in
heart.

Sometimes we do not only discommend our selves in a feigned manner to others,
but even to God also. How do we in prayer tell God how wretched and vile we are?
and deserve to be cast into the nether most Hell, and what a wonderful mercy
it is, that we have the least crumb of bread, and unworthy of the least crumb
of bread and drop of water, thus we speak very lowly before God; and yet in the
mean time have very proud, and stubborn hearts, this is not to be lowly in
heart. Learn of me, not lowly words, not lowly speeches so much, but learn of
me to be lowly in heart.

Thirdly: There may be a lowly carriage where there is not a lowly heart, many
that have very proud and haughty spirits, yet will in their carriages seem to
be very affable, and courteous, and very sweet, and very submissive, and very
yiedling: so that those that are of weak spirits, they conclude, Oh, surely
this man is a very humble man, he must needs be a very lowly man, mighty lowly,
how sweet, and affable, and courteous, and submissive is his carriage? It is
true, for to have lowliness in words and carriage is good, and where there is a
lowly heart, there will be these in some measure or other, but yet these may be
much without a lowly heart, there may seem to be an excellency in these, and
yet no lowliness in heart: there may be a complementing to the ground, a man
may be ready to put his hands upon your feet, and yet have a very haughty
spirit. I will give you these Sriptures for it. In 2 Samuel 15. It is the example
there of Absalom, Absalom we know, was a most desperate proud spirited man, and
he aspired to the Kingdom, and was so set upon pride, that he did plot the very
death of his own Father, of David, that he might get up to the Kingdom, and yet
mark this Absalom at verse 5. And it was so, says the Text, that when any man
came nigh to him, to do him obeisance, he put forth his hand, and took him, and
kissed him, any man, the meanest man that came nigh to him to do him obeisance,
he would put forth his hand, and take him, and kiss him, so at verse 6. So
Absalom stole away the hearts of the men of Israel. A man by his deceitfulness
this way, may steal away the hearts of simple people. Certainly, the men of
Israel thought Absalom a very humble and lowly man, and thought: O! might we
but have this man Absalom to be our King, how happy should we be? and yet at
this very time, the very heart of a Devil in him for pride. And another
Scripture is that in Psalm. 10. 10. He croucheth, and humbles himself, that
the poor may fall by his strong ones. Who is that He? mark, it is the same that
is spoke of in verse 2. The wicked in his pride persecutes the poor. And again
at verse 4. The wicked through the pride of his countenance will not seek after
God. And ye^ at ver. 10. He croucheth and humbles himself. He will seek for his
own Glory, and that his own ends may be brought about, he will crouch so low as
you will have him, submit to any thing though never so base and vile, rhat he
may accomplish his own ends. And therefore all those that will submit to very
low things, you must not think presently they a^e lowly in heart, a man may
seem to be very lowly in words, and submit to very low things for his own ends,
but then he will be proud enough when once he has got into the saddle, he will
rule you then, he will tell you, he will do any thing in the w^rld you would
have him to do, till once he gets power over you, and then is the time for the
manifestation of the pride of his heart. But there may be lowly carriage, and
not lowliness in heart.

Now those that carry themselves courteoussy and lowly in carriage, and yet
have proud hearts, you may judge of them.

First: Their lowly carriage is to them that are at some distance from them,
such as they have not very much to do withal, you shall have many, that when
they come abroad, and come into company with such as they have not very much to
deal withal, they will be very lowly in their carriage to them, but may be in
their Family they will be dogged enough, perverse enough, haughty enough,
sullen and surly enough, though very courteous and yeildable to any thing, and
very sweet unto others that are at a distance from them.

Secondly: They are lowly to Servants, or to those that have not had any
occasion to cross them, Oh! how sweet is their carriage there, to people that
never crossed them: But now come to any that cross them, you shall find them as
haughty, surly, and proud toward them, as any man whatsoever, if once they be
crossed, try but such as seem to be many times so sweet in their carriage to you.
I do not mean to cross them wilfully, but observe them when they are crossed, and
see what a difference there is between the affableness and sweetness of
carriage that is in them when all things please them, and when they come to be
crossed.

Thirdly: Their carriage is to those that they may accomplish their own ends by
something or other that they would accomplish, but if they have to deal with
such as no way can further any ends of theirs, they shall have no such carriage
from them, this is but to show the distemper of the heart, there may be
lowliness in carriage and not in heart: But do not think that I seem in the
least manner to discommend lowliness in carriage, it is comely in Christians to
be gentle one toward another.

Fourthly: There may be lowliness in habit, and yet not in heart, some will
please themselves in this, in going very meanly clad, and in all their outward
Garb are very mean, and they think they will not be so proud as others are, so
high and brave as others. It is true, there is a great deal of pride to be seen
in outward habits, but also there may be a great deal of pride seen in
lowliness of habit, as well as in brave habits. As there is a great deal of
pride in following every vain fashion, so certainly there may be much pride in
a sullen resolution, that they will never wear any thing but thus and thus, in
a fantastical singularity from other kind of people of their own rank, though
never so holy* yet they will have a singular Garb of their own; this is out of
fullenness, as no question there is in many a ^ullenness of resolution, or a
fantastical singularity, a ridiculous conceitedness, and stubbornness of
spirit, that they will not alter their minds, that others must do as they do,
and if every one do not wear the same Garb as they do, then they are proud, and
themselves only are humble. Now there may be in the fullenness of others an
extreme vanity of spirit and pride, and many of these think to honor
Christianity, whereas they do^hshonor it hereby, if thou be so weak as thou
do not know what liberty thou have in the use of the Creature; Will thou judge
others that do know? You must take heed of Pride, and singularity in those
things which you think to deny your selves. It was a speech that Socrates had
concerning Antisthenes, says he, I see the arrogance of Antisthenes through
the holes of his Coat, he would go ragged, and with holes in his Coat, but
says he, I see the very arrogance and pride of Antisthenes through the holes
of his Coat. And so when Diogenes came to Plato and he had a rich Bed, and
Diogenes in his Cinickness and pride, tramples upon Platoes rich Bed, saying, I
tread and trample upon the pride of Plato, I says Plato, but it is with thy
pride, it is pride that tramples upon this pride, it was the pride of his heart
that did so disdain that another should have that he had not himself. There may
be much vanity, and pride, and height of spirit, in lowliness of Garb and
outward habit. But yet still we shall come further to open the nature of
Humility and the evil of pride that is contrary to it, and we shall come to
discover the pride in Habits, and speech, and the like, but only now to make
way to what we shall come to, now to get in a little into the point that we may
not mistake what Christ would have us learn of him, when he says, he would
have us learn to be lowly in heart.

Fifthly: There may be a kind of lowliness of spirit which Christ disavows, and
which Christ would not have us learn of him, not only a lowliness of words and
habit, but a lowliness of heart, that they must take heed of a base fordid
spirit, that is as uncomely for a Christian as any thing in the world. A
Christian, though he must have the lowliness of the heart of Christ, yet there
is the lowliness of a base fordid spirit that is infinitely unbecoming the
excellency of a Christian. What is that base drossy, low spirit of many people?

First thus: It is a base fordid spirit to employ themselves in things beneath
their Condition in which God has set them: As for instance, suppose a
Magistrate, or a Minister, should fill a Dung-cart, and he should plead thus,
it is true, others are so proud they will not do it, but I am content to do the
meanest thing, Is this a lowly heart? No, it is a base fordid heart, for men
that are of any quality to mingle themselves with poor mean things, to be in
the Ditches, in places that are beneath them, to employ themselves in things
that are beneath the condition that God has set them in, this is not Humility
but fordid and base spiritedness.

And then, when men likewise, shall seek low and mean things, and bless
themselves in things that are very low, and mean, and allow themselves in them,
as if so be they were enough to make them happy, when they shall feed upon
others, as the Scripture speaks of that Idolatry: And so wicked men when they
shall feed upon ashes, this is a base thing, for a man to have his belly cleave
to the earth, to seek to scrape for a little of the world, and bless himself in
this, and think himself a happy man if he can get a little money, and if he
have a little applause in the world, this is that he places his happiness in,
and seeks after no higher good, and this he would be content should be his
portion, if he can get a little money together, and have House and Lands; this
is a low spirit, for one that professes himself a Child of God, for him to
seek after the things of the world, and satisfy himself in them, it is as if
a Prince should leave the Throne of his Father, and go and scrape in the
Kennels, Will you say, it is the Humility of a Prince? Were it the Humility of a
Prince, to leave the Court, and all the Glory there, and those excellent
employments about State affairs, and scrape in the Kennels? Were this the
lowliness of a Prince? No, it were a base spirit. As I have heard of some great
Heirs, when they have been young, and stolen by Beggars, afterward when they
have been taken away from Beggars and put into good Clothes, yet they have got
such a base spirit, that they would leave off all to put on Rags again, and go
a begging. Thus the greatest men, that seem to be lofty in their aims and
designs, they have low spirits, for they do but scrape Kennels in this world,
and with the Prodigal feed upon Husks and Swil: whereas the People of God,
though they are to be lowly in heart, yet do aim at high things, to seek after
eternity of Glory, to seek after a Crown, after Heaven, to seek after God
himself, to live for ever with God in Glory, and though they are to acknowledge
themselves unworthy of the least crumb of Bread, yet they are not to be
satisfied with all the world for their portion, they are to have such high
Spirits, as not to satisfy themselves with all the world for their portion.
You will say, here is a high Spirit indeed, thus it is, nothing will satisfy
him except he have the infinite God to be his portion. Your proud men, that are
esteemed to be the highest spirited, they will be satisfied with a little Muck
in the world, but the Child of God has such a generous Spirit; that if God
should offer him the possession of Heaven and Earth for his portion, he wou^d
count a little pittance, and he would say, Lord, there are higher things that I
look for to be my portion; and God is very well pleased that his people should
have such high Spirits in that sense, to seek after a Kingdom, to seek after
Glory, and to think themselves too good for a Lust, for sin to rule over them
to think themselves in a higher Condition, than that these poor, mean things
should be enough to be their portion, and their happiness.

Thus I have only showed you the Negative, what it is that Christ does not
mean, when he says, Learn of me, for I am Meek, and lowly in heart, he means
none of these five things.

CHAP. CXX.
Lowliness of heart what it is positively, and what it is in Christ in six
particulars. 1. He became Mediator. 2. Man. 3. Born of a poor Virgin. 4. A
Servant. 5. A Curse: Yea, Sin. 6. He was lowly in his carriage to men.

QUEST.
YOU will say, What is the lowliness of heart that Christ would have us learn
of him.

Answ. It is to be considered two ways.

The first is this, That disposition of spirit whereby one that is in a high,
and excellent condition, yet is content to become low for God, and for the good
of his Brethren; though he be in an excellent estate, yet is content to be in a
Lovv condition, so it be for God, and the good of others; and this is that
Lovvliness that belongs only to Christ himself, he was thus Lowly. And also
God the Father is lowly, that God is of a Lowly Spirit, thus to be content to
be lovv for his own Glory, and for the good of others. Ye have it in Psalm.
113. 5. and 6. Who is like unto thee, Lord our God, who dwells on high, who
humbles himself to behold the things that are in Heaven, and in the Earth, God
is on high and yet God humbles himself to behold, to have regard to things
that are in Heaven and Earth. Observe the Phrase, I beseech you, it is Gods
humbling himself, if it be but to behold the things that are in Heaven, God is
so high, that if he does but vouchsafe to look upon the things in Heaven, he
does humble himself, he b^ings himself Lovv to behold them, much more upon the
things in Earth, Oh! How does God humble himself then to regard the things on
Earth as he has done. And so Christ, that was from all eternity infinitely
blessed, with the Father, yet for the Salvation of mankind, was vvilling to
bring himself into a Lovv condition, and so Lovvliness belongs to the Father,
and Jesus Christ.

But the lowlines that is most proper unto us, that we may yet learn of Christ,
that we may gather from Christ's Example arguments to further it in our own
hearts, I would describe it thus. It is that grace, whereby the Soul does
behave it self toward God, and toward it self, and toward others,
according, or answerable unto that right esteem and sense that he has of his
own vileness, and meanness. Formally this was not in Christ, but only thus far,
Christ being once willing to take upon him that low condition, of being a
Mediator for mankind, so there was a meanness that was in Jesus Christ, and
Christ's demeanor of himself, walking answerably unto God, and to others,
suitable unto that mean condition that he knew himself was in* through his
willingness to be a Mediator for mankind* that was Christ's lowliness, though
Christ as the second person in the Trinity, cannot have the Rule of his Low
liness to be the esteem of his own meanness, and so of God; and therefore I
gave you such a description of Lowliness, that may belong to the Father and the
Son; but now this only belongs to Christ as Mediator, and that Lowliness that
should be in our hearts, that we may gather abundance of Arguments from
Christ's low condition to further it in our own Soul. The measure of our
humility, it does consist in the right esteem of our own meanness, when a man
or Woman has a right esteem, that is, come to know themselves in that mean
condition that they are in, and to be truly sensible of that mean condition
that they are in, and accordingly come to behave themselves toward God, and
toward themselves, and toward others; these are such as indeed have lowly
hearts. Now in this description that I have made of Lowliness, or of humility,
you will find (when we come to open it, and to show the workings of an humble
heart that ought to be in Christians) there will be very much discovered that
nearly concerns us, but all that I shall do now is, to show how Jesus Christ was
lowly in heart himself. And then what Arguments may be drawn from the Lowliness
of Christ, for the furtherance of Lowliness in our hearts. There is one thing
in the Point that I am spared from speaking off, to handle this Lowliness of
Chirst, as Christ is a Teacher, that we have spoken of.

Learn of me, for I am Meek and Lowly, That is, be willing to Learn of me, for
I am a Meek Teacher, and a Lowly Teacher, and therefore be willing to be my
Scholars, Now that I have already spoke of, when I spoke of being taught by
Jesus Christ, and showed you what a fit Teacher he was, and I think this has
reference unto him, that he is not scornful, but he will Teach the meanest; and
suite himself to all, but now we are to speak of what Lowliness was in Christ,
and how we should Learn to be Lowly as he was.

Now for the Lowliness of Christ, that you have in diverse Scriptures, in Psalm.
22. is a Prophetical Scripture concerning Christ, and mark what is said of
Christ there, verse, 6. But I am a Worm, and no man, a Reproach of Men, and
despised of the people. But I am a Worm, They are even the speeches of Christ
concerning himself, it is apparent it is a prophetical Psalm, concerning
Christ, In the beginning of the Psalm you have the very same words that Christ
spoke upon the Cross, My God, My God why have thou forsaken me, And here I am a
Worm, and no Man, Oh! How Lowly was Christ, that was God blessed for ever, it
were lowly enough, one would think, to be a Man, but to be a Worm, and no Man
in his own apprehension, Oh, what Lowliness was this? And then in Isai, 53. 2.
There you may see the Lowliness of Christ, that likewise is prophetical
concerning Christ, that he should grow up before him as a tender plant, and as
a Root out of a dry ground he has no form nor comeliness, and when we shall see
him, there is no Beauty that we should desire him, he is despised and rejected
of men, a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief, and we hid as it were our
Faces from hi^ he was despised, and we esteemed him not. I y^ will say, this
shows the Lowness of his condition, but how does this argue the Lowliness of
his Heart? For you told us even now, that a man may be in a low condition that
is not Lowly in Heart. For Answer, Christ was not compelled to it, but freely
took upon him to be in this condition, for the Glory of his Father, and the
good of Poor S^uls, surely, it is a lowly heart that was willing to be put into
such a condition as this was.

But above all Scriptures, that is remarkable to this purpose, in Phillip. 2.
5. Let this mind be in you, which also was in Jesus Christ, What mind was that?
There is not only the condition of Christ, but the mind of Christ, a lowly
Heart, and let that Lowly heart be in you, What was that? verse, 6. Who being
in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God, but made
himself of no Reputation: He made himself, he did e^pty himself, (as the word
has it in the original) empty himself of the Excellency that was in him, And
took upon him the form of a Servant, and made himself in the likeness of men,
and being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient
unto Death, even the Death of the Cross. Here is the Lowliness of the Heart of
Christ set out unto us, and that as a pattern unto al Christians, to have the
same mind that was in Christ. Now to stand upon things largely, to open the
Lovvliness of Christ, that vvil not be needful, but to speak generally of it,
for that is necessary, forvve cannot bring it home with power to our Point,
if we do not open it in general, for it would ask many exercises to open the
Lovvliness of Heart that was in Jesus Christ. You know in opening his
Meekness we shevved you, what Meekness was in him, And now for Lovvliness.
As thus,

First, There was Lowliness in him to undertake to be Mediator between God, and
mankind, it was a great Lowening of himself, as we may speak after the manner
of men.

Secondly, If he would undertake to be Mediator, then God ^els him he must
become a man, and take Human Nature upon him, and that in a personal union,
that Christ the infinite glorious Son of God, should be content to be made a
Man, that it should be said of him, this person is a man, this is a mighty
lowening of himself. In Hebrews, 2. 16. He did not take the Nature of Angels*
But the Nature of Man, The Seed of Abraham It had not been so much Lowening of
himself, if he had taken upon him the Nature of Angels, No says God, if you
will be Mediator for man, you must take the Nature of Man, This Poor Wretched
Creature; says Christ, I will do it rather then man should Perish.

Thirdly, When he takes the Nature of Man, one would think he would be Born of
the greatest Queen upon the Earth, if Christ must come, and take the Nature of
man, and be Born in the Womb, it would be of the greatest Empress, No, of a
poor Woman, a Poor Virgin, a Poor Maid, and therefore she says, in Luke. 1.
48. For he has regarded the Low Estate of his Hand-Maiden, It is not there
Lowliness, as noting Humility, but the Low condition of his Handmaid, The Lord
regarded the Lew condition of his Handmaid. Of purpose, to that end, to
encourage those that are in a Low condition, that Christ should pass by all the
Princesses, and Emperesses in the World, and be willing to be born of a poor
Maid, for she was not a Rich Maid, nor had great things, that appears by the
offering that she made for Her Purification, in Luke, 2. 22. and the 24.
verses. When the days of her Purification, according to the Law of Moses, were
accomplished they brought him to Jerusalem to present him to the Lord, and to
offer a Sacrifice according to that which is said in the Law of the Lord, a
pair of Turtle Doves or two young Pigeons. Her Sacrifice was a pair of Turtle
Doves, or two young Pigeons, but mark, it is said according to the Law of the
Lord, do but compare this Text, with the Law of God that required an Offering
of every Male that opens the Womb, in Levit. 12. 6. When the days of Her
purifying are fulfilled, for a Son or for a Daughter, she shall bring a Lamb of
the first year for a Burnt offering, and a young Pidgeon or a Turtle Dove for a
sin offering unto the Door of the Tabernacle of the congregation, she shall
bring a Lamb, here is no Lamb brought, for so indeed, the Law did so far
indulge, that if they were poor, the Lamb might be spared, as in another Law,
so that in this her offering, that she did not bring the Lamb, the Lamb that
the Law did appoint, it was merely from the indulgence of her Poverty, because
she was a poor Maid, Noting, that if there be a poverty, and we do what we can,
the Lord will not stand so much for great offerings, when we do what we are
able, so the Virgin Mary, she had not Money to buy a Lamb, but she brings a
pair of Turtle Doves, or two Pigeons, And this is that which is accepted. And
then his Low condition was not only in being born of her, but in being born in
one of the meanest Villages, and places, not in the Metropolis Jerusalem, but
in BETHELEM. And then it was in an Inn, you know he had no stately House, or
Country House, or brave place for to be in, but it was in an Inn, and it was in
her Journey. Great Women, when they are with Child, will not be traveling in
Journies, but will take state upon them, and will not go forth a long while,
but she was in her Journey, I, and when she was in an Inn, she could have never
a Room, Surely she must be in a Low condition. If a beggar Woman should be
ready to cry out, if there were a poor Room that had but a Chimney in it* they
would grant it to her, but she was in a stable to be brought to Bed in a
stable, your Vagrants and Rogues that go up and down cannot be worse then this,
and she had no provision it seems, but was fain to lay her Child in the Manger;
this infinite God, and Lord of Heaven and Earth, behold him lie in a Stable and
a Manger. And besides he was willing to be in this condition, he chose this
condition, surely he had a Lowly Heart.

Fourthly: And further Observe, It may be said, but if he does come as a man,
and come into the world in a Low condition yet he may be some body in time,
Nay, but he must be a Servant in the world he might have had possession of the
world, and might have had the honor to have been a King, but he must live as a
Servant. So the Scripture says, in Philip. 2. In the Form of a Servant. Nay,
he was not only in the Form of a Servant, but in the Form of an evil Servant, a
Servant to be beaten, that is a Low condition to be in the state of a Servant,
but to be in the state of an Evil Servant, to be beaten, that is a Low
condition indeed, so was Christ.

Fifthly: Yea, not only to be a Servant that was beaten* but to be made a
curse, so in Galath. 3. 13. not only Cursed, but a Curse, in the abstract. Yea,
more then this, not only to be a Servant, and to be beaten, and made a curse,
but to be made Sin, that that is lower, So in 2 Corinthians. 5. 2. He that knew no
Sin, was made Sin for us: we will not stand to open these Particulars, only so
far is expressed the Low condition that Christ was in, how Lowly in Heart
Christ was. And all the way as we go, you cannot but see, that there will be a
great many Arguments to work Lowliness of Heart in all that profess Christ.
After he came into the World, and was put into such a condition, he was fain to
fly for his Life, to fly into Egypt to save his Life, and being delivered,
then he lives Thirty years in a Low, Poor, Mean condition. He is reputed Low in
his parentage, his Father a Poor Carpenter, and his Mother a poor Woman, not
able to live in the world, and yet he lives Thirty years together in subjection
to this poor Father and Mother, to live in obed^ence to them, and seeks to live
upon his Trade, to live as a Carpenter, Hewing of Timber, for this is the
Reason they call him the Carpenters Son, he lived not Idly. And when he came to
be manifested the Redeemer of the World, even then the Devil himself had some
power over him, he was in some kind under him as you may Read in Matthew. 4. He
was carried by the Devil, and Set upon the Pinnacle of the Temple. It is a great
matter for the Devil to carry any of our Bodies up and down, for Christ to be
carried by the Devil, this was very Low. And when he enters upon his office, he
wanted bread Forty days together, thus he was brought low and all this was
free. And then in the constant way of his Poverty, you know what he said of
himself. Matthew. 8. 20. The Foxes have Holes, and the Birds of the Air have
Nests, but the Son of man has not wherein to put his Head, Christ had not so
much as Birds, and Foxes, No little Cottage. Many of you think it hard that you
are fain to live in a poor Smoakey hole, a poor Cottage; you have more then
Christ had, Christ had not so much as a Gave to hide his Head, though he was
possesser of all the world, he was brought in such a Low condition and all for
thee, and to teach thee. And when he came to choose his Disciples, See the
lowliness of his spirit there, he did not choose the great ones, Emperors, and
Kings, and high ones of the world, but chose a company of illiterate men,
Publicans and sinners, Illiterate and despised men Christ chose, and Galileans,
yea, Men of Galilee, the worst place in all the Country, Can any good come out
of Galilee? And for the other Disciples that should follow. Who were they? When
Christ came to his own they rejected him: For a man to be rejected when he
shall come out of another Country, and come home: Suppose one of you should
have a Friend come out of another Country, and when he comes home, all h^s
Friend; should reject him, cast him out, that he should ^ot have a nights
lodging amongst all; Thus it was with Christ, his own cast him out, and his
Kindred laid hand; on him. And those that did regard him, Who were they? Not
the Scribes and Pharisees, not the great ones, not the learned ones of the
world, But this Multitude, a cursed Generation, a company of poor Wretches, a
company of Women that were with Christ, and poor Creatures that did follow him;
How loathsome were they in the Eyes of all those that did behold Christ. And
when he wrought Miracles, there was not many Miracles that he wrought at
Jerusalem, but his Miracles was for the most part wrought in obscure Villages.
When he was transfigured in his Glory, many must not see him, he carries only
those to see him in his Glory that must suffer for him, those that saw him in
his Agony, and he charges them not to tell any man at all, which shows the
lowliness of his Spirit: And not only so but he goes yet further, and he
humbles himself as the Scripture says, to Death, a painful Cursed Death, as
he did upon the Cross, to be first despised, spit upon: They spate upon his
face before, and scorned him, and put Thorns upon his Head, and Buffetted him.
Yea, his own Disciples forsake him in his sufferings. And then he must die
among Thieves, and a Murderer must be chose, before he must be chose, and the^e
he must hang, and he is scorned: we seldom will scorn Malefactors upon the
Gallows, we pity Malefactors when they go to be hanged: but now to see one
upon the Cross, to be hanged there, and Crucified, and yet to be scorned and
contemned then, and dying the Death as if he had been the greatest Malefactor
upon the face of the Earth. And then he was put into the Grave, and there his
Humility was seen: and then what his Spirit felt then, was more than all.
Certainly, when he cried, If it be possible let this Cup pass, and My God My
God why have thou forsaken me? Oh! the Spirit of Christ was in a low condition
at that time: Now that Christ should be content to put himself into this
condition, Surely, the heart of Christ was very low. Not to speak of the lowly
carriage of Christ in his life, and his tenderness toward those he met
withal, that we showed in opening the Meekness of Christ, but all this you
have in the Story of his life.

Sixthly: But further consider what kind of lowliness it was, to omit the
consideration of his Person, who he was, that was hinted in speaking of his
Lowliness, for that is indeed the greatest consideration of all to set forth
the Lowliness of Christ that such a Person, that is the Brightness of the
Father, the Character and engraven Image of his Person to be in such a low
condition, it is ten thousand times more, then if all the Kings, Princes, and
Emperors in the world, should have been Dogs and Toads, they should not have
been so much humbled as Christ was humbled, in being made man for man's sin. But
now besides the Person, Consider further this, That his Lowliness in all his
carriage was not only toward his Father, but toward men, when he was a man,
yet he carries himself as if he were under man; there is many my Brethren will
carry themselves lowly unto God, and when they come into Gods presence they
will have low thoughts, but toward man they cannot, Christ was lowly toward
men: You may observe in the spirits of men, many will be very crouching and
submissive to those that are above them, but unto those that are under them, of
the most domineering spirits that are. I have observed of others, that when
they are to deal with those that are Noble men, and above them, they will
crouch, and be very submissive and hukmble toward them, but when they come to
those that are under them, those that are poor Servants, or Children, they will
be as Tyrannical as can be. But Now Christ was low toward man, as well as
toward God, low toward his Inferiors, as well as toward his Superiors. And
that is observable: Christ was low when he was to have Honor and Glory; as when
you know they would have come and by force have made him a King, they would
have compelled Christ at one time to be a King, and laid hand^ upon him, but he
would by no means regard it, and he continues in this lowliness: And so the
Devil showed him all the Glory in the world, and says, All this will I give
thee, but it was nothing to him. And there was another time that is very
observable for the lowliness of Christ Person, as observable as any time, that
in Luke 23. 8, 9, 10. It was the time when Christ was brought to Herod, the
Text says, When Herod saw Jesus, he was exceeding glad, for he was destrous to
see him of a long season, because he had heard many things of him, and he hoped
to have seen some Miracles done by him. Herod had a very high esteem of Jesus
Christ, he had heard great fame of Jesus Christ, that he had wrought many
Miracles, and when he came to him, he made account surely, I shall see some
great Miracles done by him, and therefore Herod is preparing to Honor Christ,
but Mark: because Herod was a vile, and a base man, he would not answer him a
word, at verse 9. Then he questioned with him in many words, but he answered
him nothing, And the chief Priests, and Scribes stood, and vehemently accused
him, and Herod with his men of war set him at naught and mocked him, and
arrayed him in a gorgeous Robe, and sent him again to Pilate. As if Herod
should say, What a poor silly man do you bring before me, I had thought you
would have brought me a man that would have wrought Miracles, but I see he is a
poor silly Fellow? Now Christ he was tempted to have sought Glory at Herod's
Court, and of men, Christ might have showed himself to have had that excellency
in him, that Herod should have had more regard to him than to the Scribes and
Pharisees, but Christ would not do this, but suffered himself to be accounted a
poor, slight, mean, Person, and to be scoffed and mocked at, and puts up all.

But further, That that I would observe for the lowliness of Christ's Spirit, it
was when he was among Proud Ones, many men will seem lowly when they are among
Christians that are lowly: When they are amongst a company of Christians that
are broken in heart, their hearts will be broken too, and when a company of
Christians are bemoaning their condition, and lamenting their state; they vvil
do so too, this is nothing, but to be of a lowly, self denying, yiedling
Spirit, when a man is among proud ones, when a man converseth with those that
are proud in the world, than still to manifest lowliness, this is to be like
Christ.

Yea, and further, that is another circumstance that is very observable, to be
lowly and humble when our lowliness and humility shall be contemned, it is an
ordinary thing for Men and Women to manifest humility, when their Humility
shall bring credit to them, for there is a great deal of humility that brings
credit to them, and they know it well enough, and therefore they will seem to
be humble when they are among them that will honor them, and prize them the
more for that humility; but if they be in a place, where the more humble they
appear, the more they shall be scorned, and they shall not be honored for their
humility, not esteemed the better for it, this is the trial of thy Grace, and
of others Grace, to manifest Grace in such a place, and among such company that
no body will take notice of it, so as to prize it, and prize you for it; but on
the contrary will contemn you, and contemn you for it, you shall be scorned the
more because you are humble, yet than to be humble at that time, and in that
Company, Here is the Glory of a Christian indeed: In these three or four things
especially consists Humility, To be humble toward our Inferiors, and when you
are tempted to the contrary, many are humble many times when they have no
temptation, but set a Beggar a Horse back, if he have any temptation, and then
they will not be humble, Christ had the greatest temptation and yet was humble.
And then to be in company where they will scorn you, and contemn you for your
Humility, and yet to be Humble consists in this Humility. And all this in the
constant course of your Life, to be humble at a fit, and a start, there is but
few men and Women in the world, but take them in some fit or start, and they
will be humble, but at other fits they will be proud; but Christ had a constant
Lowliness of Spirit, what ever the variety of his condition was that he was put
into, yet still his Heart was low, if the people did cry Hosanna to him, yet he
carried himself with a Lowly Spirit: so for a man or Woman to have such a
strength of Spirit, that though they be put into varieties of conditions,
sometimes one way, and sometimes another way, yet to keep a constant Lowliness of
heart in all conditions, this is to Learn of Christ, and this is but to set
forth the Lowliness of Christ's Spirit, Learn of me, for I am Meek and Lowly,
Well, may Christ say of himself, that he was Lowly in Heart.

Yea and to add this one more.

He was lowly for others, Christ was lowly for the good of others, we may be
lowly and crouch perhaps for some design of our own: but Christ's Lowliness, His
Emptying of himself was for the advantage of others, and therefore, as for
himself in John 17. the beginning, says Christ there unto his father in his
prayer, Father Glorify me with the Glory that I had with thee before the
beginning of the world. It seems Christ is content with the same Glory he had
before the world was, What should become of all that Glory that he had
purchased by his lovvliness, It is as if Christ should say? Let my people have
all that, whatever Glory is purchased by my lovvliness, by my humbling of my
self I am content that they should have that Glory, but as for me, Father, The
hour is come, Glorify thy Son, I have Glorified thee on Earth, O Father
Glorify me with thine own self, with the Glory I had with thee before the
world was, I will be content with the same Glory I had from thee before the
world was, Surely there should be a great deal of Glory purchased by his
Humility, yet says he, Let me but have that, and as for the other Let my
people have that, thus Christ is lowly, for us, to teach us to be lowly, and
deny our selves for others as well as for our selves. But of this more when we
come to show how we should be lowly as Christ was in the opening of our
Lovvliness.

CHAP. CXXI.
Six Arguments from the Lowliness of Christ to work Lowliness of spirit in our
hearts. 1. It was one special end of his coming into the world. 2. His
Humility makes pride in man a desperate Evil. 3. The greatest Excellency
stands with the greatest Humility. 4. His Lowliness stands with the greatest
Wisdom. 5. It is infinitely pleasing to God. 6. It may stand with doing of great
things.

BUt now to show what Arguments might be drawn from the lovvliness of
Christ's Spirit so as to work Lowlines in our hearts. Austin has a Speech
concerning the Lowliness of Christ, says he, Are ye ashamed to imitate an
humble Man? Imitate then an humble God, Imitate God that was content to be
Humble: but take these three or four things.

First: Consider in this, As if Christ should call upon you, Learn of me for I
am Lowly, I am sent by God the Father into the world, this is one special end
that I am sent into the world for, to hold forth unto all the world a pattern
of humility, there were these two things that were the errand of Christ: First
he was sent into the world to be made a Sacrifice and satisfaction to Gods
Justice; And then to be made a Pattern of Holiness, and especially of this
Grace of Holin^ss, namely of Humility, I am appointed as a great Ordinance of
God the Father to hold forth this: God the Father does show three things in
Christ so demonstratively, as we cannot conceive that an infinite Wisdom was
able to devise a way to show them forth more than in them.

1. The Vileness of Man's sin, and the desert of it, is such an Argument, that
we would not Imagine an infinite Wisdom could devise more, as if God should
say, I have such an Argument to show the vileness of man's sin, and the desert
of it, as infinite Wisdom could not devise a geater.

2. And then the Second thing God would show that he would manifest infinite
Wisdom, he would show his love to mankind; says God, I have such an Argument
of my love to mankind, that infinite Wisdom could not devise a greater, and
that is, sending of Christ into the World.

3. And the Third Argument of humility and self denial, God would have the
Children of men to have low hearts before him, this was the great design of
Gods sending Christ into the world, Well, says God, I give many precepts in my
word for men to deny themselves, and if they look into themselves, the low
condition they are in, they may have many Arguments to be low, I but, I have an
Argument beyond all Arguments in the world, and that is, I send my Son into the
world, and he shall manifest such Lowliness in his carriage and Conversation,
that it will be the greatest Argument in all the world that an infinite Wisdom
could devise. Now has he sent us such a pattern, then he teaches us to
follow, and to be sure to Learn of him that was of such a lowly heart, to Learn
of him, so as to be lowly in Heart as he was.

Secondly, The second thing is, That this pattern of humility it makes pride in
man a desperate evil, it aggravates the pride of man, with what indignation
shall God look upon a wretched worm, that shall be proud when his own Son was so
Lowly? Bernard in a Sermon of his upon the Nativity of Christ, says, What more
unworthy? What more despicable? What more vile to be punished then this? That
thou see even the God of Heaven to be made a little one, made Low, yet thou
being a man, Magnifiest thy self, when God is made Low, it is most intolerable
impudency, says he, Whereas he emptyed himself, when Majesty indeed has
emptied himself, That is his word, that a worm should swel, when Majesty has
emptied himself, what intolerable impudency is this? Oh! it vvil be that which
will cause God to come in a horrible rage, when he shall say, What? Shall my Son
thus deny himself, and be thus Low? And what! Shall thou be proud? What! Shall
be willing that my Son should be Low, and deny himself, and shall not thou a
Worm deny thy self? Nothing argues more the Lowliness of Christ, then this
emptying of himself and denying of himself.

Thirdly, Consider this, In the Example of Christ's Lowliness, we may see Tha^
the greatest humility, and the highest Excellency may be both together in one:
Humility may stand with the greatest Nobleness of Spirit it that possibly can
be. Many men and Women, they would not be Lowly and Humble, because they
think it would note too mean and too abject a Spirit, they think it an
excellent thing to have a brave Spirit, a Noble Heroical Spirit, but to deny
themselves and to be Lowly, they think it is to have too Mean a Spirit, and
cannot stand with excellency and nobility, but now we see by the Example of
Christ, that the highest excellency, and the greatest humility may stand both
together, for never was there such a Noble, Heroical Spirit as Christ had, and
yet never such a Lowly Spirit, the truth is, a proud Spirit is a base and mean
Spirit, but an humble Spirit is a raised Spirit, as we shall hear afterward,
only now we see in Christ's Example, that nobleness, and braveness of spirit,
and yet lowliness of heart may stand together, I confess this is one of the
greatest Mysteries of Godliness, and yet those that are taught in the Mysteries
of Godliness do understand this.

Fourthly, And Further, in this Example of lowliness there is this more: for in
this we may see that lowliness and Wisdom, yea the very height of Wisdom may
stand together: many are not willing to deny themselves to be of lowly Hearts,
because they think it is Folly, it is Foolishness for them to deny themselves:
but in Christ we may see, that the highest Wisdom, and the lowest humility in
denying our selves may stand together, Christ the Wisdom of the Father, and yet
he is of a lowly Spirit, indeed, pride is the greatest folly, as will appear
afterward.

Fifthly, And further, Another force of the Argument of Christ's Example to
Teach us lowliness is this, we may in Christ's Example see, what it is that is
infinitely pleasing unto God the Father, Christ did please his Father infinitely,
in whatsoever Christ was most eminent, in that he did most eminently please the
Father. Now of any virtue that the Scripture notes, Christ was most eminent in
the virtue of humility, that is a principal one, and therefore it must needs
be, that in that Jesus Christ did eminently please the Father. Now, as if
Christ should say, Learn of me, for I am Meek and Lowly. Would you know what it
is that would please my Father most, that would make you most acceptable unto
my Father? Look upon my Example, I please my Father my Father delights in me,
he professes that in me his soul is well pleased, Now I know what would please
him, namely, for me to be willing to deny my self so far for his Glory, and for
the good of others, for me to be willing to be in such a low condition, as I
was willing to be in, I know that this would Please him, now look upon my
Example, if you would know what would please my Father, follow me in my steps,
be you Lowly in heart.

Sixthly, Another is this, here we may see in this Example, that great things
may be done where there is a Lowly heart, that lowliness of heart, and doing
very great thing may stand together. Many men think that if they should be of
lowly Spirits, they should not be able to do great things in the world, and
therefore they think they must have their hearts up, and their spirits up: Now
God did greater things, being humbled, then ever he did before he was humbled,
to speak after the manner of men. Gods infinite power did not do such great
things before, as in his being humbled, for the work that Christ did in his
humility, by being humbled for man's sin, it was a greater work then the
creation of the world; now his Exaltation is made but a fruit of his humiliat
on, God by his infinite power creati^g the world, did no^ do so great a thing,
as Christ did in the humbling of himself to be as a w^rm, and no man, as the
Scripture speaks, therefore the greatest thing that ever was done by God
himself, it was by being brought into a low condition, Now therefore, lowl^ness
of spirit, and doing great things may stand together, Yea, We shall* further
clear it to you, that no man is so fit to be regarded in great services, as
that man that has the most lowly spirit, and God does not delight to use any
man in great works so much as that man that is of a lowly spirit. Well
therefore, Christ's Example is to be set before us; to be lowly as he was Lowly.
And further, there is this also in Christ's Example to work lowliness in us,
Christ was lowly for us, and therefore why should not we be lowly for him? I
was lowly for you, and therefore why will not you be lowly for me? There is a
great deal more Reason that you should be Lowly for me, then that I should be
lowly for you. And if we consider the difference between Christ's lowliness,
wherein he was lowly for us, and what he requires of us to be lowly for him; we
shall see the Reason very strong, As now, Christ was made lower for us, then he
does require of us to be made for him. As for instance, Christ was made sin for
us, God does not require that we should be made sin for him. It is lower for
Christ to be made sin for us, Then for us to endure all the afflictions in the
world for him. The utmost that God requires of us in our lowliness is* that we
should be willing to bear afflictions, and troubles, and deny our selves in our
comforts, and the like; but to be made sin, God never put his creature to this,
to be in such a low condition for him, that the creature should be willing to
be made sin, No, not for the Glory of God, he never put that to us, that he did
put Christ to, God never put us to this, that we should be willing to take the
guilt of any man's sin upon us, to stand before the Lord to answer for the sin
of another man, but this was put upon Christ, he must take the guilt of all the
sins in the world upon him, of the Elect, the world of Elect upon him, and must
stand charged withal and that before his Father, here is a low condition.

Again God does not require that of us that he did of him, that is, that we
should be willing to bear the wrath of God, that we should be willing that the
Lord should forsake us, and we should stand under his wrath: but this was
required of Christ, and Christ was vvilling for our sakes to be put into this
lovv condition, but the Lord never required this at our Hands, to be put into
such a lovv condition as this is.

Yea* Further, Christ had God the Father vvithdravving himself from him, and
forsaking of him, when he was lovv, and when God puts us into a lovv
condition we have usually the presence of God more comfortably, and more
glorious with us then ever, and we may expect it, at that time, when we are
put into the lowest condition for God, that we should have the most glorious
presence of God with us, and God would encourage us to be lowly upon that
ground, because the spirit of God, and Glory should then rest most upon us. But
now Christ, he knevv that when he should be put into the lowest condition,
that then God the Father would withdraw himself from him, that then he should
have least of his presence, that then God would Leave him in that low
condition, we are not put upon this: Yea, the least thing that Christ suffered
was a thousand thousand times more then the greatest thing that we can suffer,
yet Christ was called to be in a lower condition, (and was willing to be so)
then ever God calls us to be, now is there not a great strength in this
Argument? If it were only thus, if Christ should say, there is Reason you
should be as I was, low as I was low, As we read of Rebecca, when she was
coming unto Isaac, and she sees him walking in the Field, and asked the Servant
who it was, and he said it was his Masters Son, presently Rebecca lighted down,
and goes on her Feet, she would be as he was, he walked, and Rebecca lights off
her beast that she Rode upon. And there is a great deal of Reason the Spouse of
Christ should be low as Christ is, if Christ should but say, I am lowly thus
and thus, be you content to be as I was, I but Christ never required that, I
was low indeed, and I expect that you should be low, as I was, but not so low,
I will never put you to be made so low as I was, be but content to be low as I
was, in some little thing, but for the great things wherein I was made low, I
will never put you to this, now there is a great strength of Argument in this,
when as Christ propounds to us his Example, that in that Example he does not
require we should be so lovv as he was.

CHAP. CXXII.
The ground of Humility. A knowledge and sense of our own vileness.

WEll then, having shevved the lovvliness of Christ, and the force of his
Example: Let us now come to show how we should be lowly in Heart, and that
according to the description that we gave of Lovvliness of heart, that
concerns us, for there is something indeed wherein we are to be lowly
otherwise then Christ was capable of, according to the description, It is
that virtue whereby the heart behaves it self toward God, and it self, and
others, according to the right low esteem it has of it self, and the sense of
its own vileness. That is the Description of Humility as it concerns us* Now
then here observe, First, What rule an Humble Heart goes by, And then Secondly,
The behavior of an Humble Spirit according to those three Objects, God himself,
and others, the rules that an humble heart goes by, it is the right esteem of
its own meanness, and sense of its own vileness, That is the first thing that
is in humility, a right knovving our selves, not knovving our own
excellencies, as men are too too ready to know their own excellencies. We use
to say of a man, ^uch a one has excellent parts, and he knovvs it himself; but
the knowledge of our selves that way may puff up, but this knowledge of our
selves, to know our own meanness and vileness, and vvretchedness, this is
that that humbles us; and so an humble Heart makes that to be the rule of his
behavior, according to what he shall have made known to him of his own
meanness, and vileness. This knowledge of our selves is that that the Heathen
did commend, to know thy self, it was a great Maxim of theirs, a great point
of Wisdom for them to know themselves, but certainly, they meant especially
their own excellencies, but a Christian that knovvs himself, it is especially
to know thine own vileness, and thine own vvretchedness, and because
humility does order the heart according to this knowledge, therefore the
Scripture speaks of humbleness of mind, in Collos. 3. 12. To be low in our
mind, First the mind must be lovv before the Heart be lovv, in the judging of
our selves, we must judge of our selves right before the heart can lie lovv,
we must judge of our selves by the right rule, by no false rule, but by
examining of our selves according unto the word, according to what the word
of God does reveal concerning us after Serious, Faithful, and strict
examination of our selves, then follows the work of Humiliation a right
judging of our selves first. A Heathen Philosopher being asked What is the
hardest thing in the World? He answers. Noscere teipsum; to know thy self,
the bravest thing in the World for a man to know himself, and indeed we that
profess our selves to be Christians, we may find it by experience to be so,
the hardest thing in the World to know our selves, The heart of man is
deceitful above all things, and who can know it? The heart of man is, Grande
profundum, a very great depth, there is not one of ten thousand that knovvs
himself, there is a great Art, and Skill in being able to know ones self, and
that is the reason that there is so little Humility in the World because we do
not know our selves, every proud man is a Fool, a Fool in this, Because he
knovvs not himself, he does not give a right judgment of himself.

Now for the way of knowing our selves, and what the word of God does help us
to know our selves in, that we shall not speak of in this place, but only to
show the ground of Humility, it is the knowledge of our own vileness, and the
judging of our selves, according to what we know of our selves, not according
to what others think of us. A humble man does not much go according to what any
body else knows of him, or esteems of him, but according to what he knows and
esteems of himself. It was a Speech of another Heathen, Do not believe others
of thy self, more than thy self of thy self, It is a Foolish thing for any man
to go by the esteem that others have of him, and not by the esteem that he has
of himself upon right examination, it may be other men may in Charity judge that
thou have this, and this, such and such Graces, and such excellencies, while in
the mean time thou mai'st know thy self to be a vile, mean, wretched, base
Creature; Now a proud heart will rather go according to what others think of
him, than indeed according to what he knovvs of himself, it may be other men
that live with thee, that see but the outside, they give a good report of
thee: But what report does thy own Conscience give of thee? What do thou
know of thy self? That thou should look most after. While our friends do
rejoice in those excellencies they esteem us to have, in the mean time thou
mai'st see the cause to be confounded in thine own thoughts, and to be ashamed
before the Lord, and to have such thoughts of thy self, that if the Lord should
discover unto thy friends, that now esteem highly of thee, what thou know of
thy self, thou would think that they would kick and spurn thee out of their
Company, and be ready to spit in thy face. I make no question but those that
look into their own hearts, and observe the workings of their own spirit, those
that know what is within, and are acquainted with themselves, many times when
others have high esteems of them, they see cause to look upon themselves with
such shame, as to believe that if others should but see the inside, if God
should turn their insides outward, all their friends that have such esteems of
them now, would be ready to abhor them, and be ready to loath them, if they did
but know what they are of themselves. And indeed it is a great Argument for to
make those that have any acquaintance with their own hearts to be humble, to
suffer any outward meanness, to be willing to suffer any thing that might make
them low outwardly, Why? Because of the great mercy of God to conceal from men
what evil is in them. Thou art loath to suffer some outward affliction, but if
God should discover to all the world all that evil that is in thee, and that
thou art conscious to thy self of: Yea, take the best Man and Woman that is, if
all the evil that they themselves are conscious to themselves of, were
discovered, it would make them more vile than any mean condition that ever God
put them into, Yea, than any outward affliction can possibly put them into. God
rather does esteem of us, and will rather judge us according to what we esteem of
our selves, than according to what others think of us; And therefore in 1 John
3. 20. that place that is well known, If our Consciences condemn us, God is
greater than our Consciences, and knows all things. It is no matter what
others say, others may justify us, others may think we have excellent Gifts,
and exccellent Graces, and we perform duties in an excellent manner, but in the
mean time our own Consciences may condemn us. Now the behavior of a proud
heart, is rather according at what others think of him, then what he thinks of
himself, though he knows never such vileness in his own heart, as now in Duty,
he joins with us in Prayer, perhaps he has excellent expressions in Duty, in
Prayer, that the hearts of those that are with him, are taken with him, and
bless God for the Gift of God in him, and what Graces he exercises in Prayer,
and so others are blessing God for him and highly esteeming of him, and
themselves happy that they join with him, now upon that he has a proud heart,
and blesses himself in that and rejoices in that, while in the mean time his
Conscience tells him, that he has a base heart, a proud spirit, an empty heart,
and a dead heart, and that all this while there has been a mighty
unsutableness between his heart, and the expressions: Now if his heart be
humble, he will not look what others speak of him in this kind, but be ashamed
and confounded in his own spirit, because of what he knovvs of himself,
Certainly we may see some ground why others should think well of us, and ye^
we may be most vvretched, and abominable, and loathsome in the eyes of God at
that present when other Godly people have high thoughts of us, Do not rest in
that, not only others, but wise men, and Godly men have high thoughts of us,
and yet in the mean time we may be wretched and abominable in the sight of God,
and our own Consciences may condemn us. We read of the spirit of Man in Prove.
20. 27. it is said of the spirit of Man, That it is the Candle of the Lord,
searching all the the inward parts of the Belly. Now you know that by a Candle,
if you bring a Candle into a Room, you may search in corners, secret corners,
under every bench hole, and see fil^h in many places, that perhaps the light of
the Sun may not come to, the light of the Sun may not come into some secret
places in a House where is a great deal of filth, but a Candle may discover it,
Now the Spirit of man is the Candle of the Lord, That is, a man by the help of
his own Spirit, may be able to search into the secret corners of his own Heart,
but no other light can discover it, we are to labor to look into our selves,
and to make use of our own Spirits, as a Candle, to be searching into every
corner of our own hearts, that we may know our own meanness, our own
wretchedness, a man that has a proud spirit, is satisfied that others have a
high esteem of him, though he knows himself to be vile. As mark the difference
between an humble Spirit, and a proud spirit in this, one that ^s a proud man,
he is dejected, if others think ill of him, whereas an humble heart takes
advantage from the vile thoughts that others have of him to make himself more
vile, and thinks thus, Lord, do I thus, and thus to make others think vilely of
me, Oh! What a deal of filth do I see more then they see: and so likewise takes
an advantage the more he finds that others honor him, and respect him, to be
the more low in his own Eyes, because he sees such a difference between what he
knows of himself and what others know of him.

Yea, And further, because a proud heart rather cares for the credit he has by
what others think of him then takes care to make g^od what others think of him:
but an humble heart rather ingageth himself to make good what others think of
him then look after the credit he has by what others think of him, Oh! Let me
labor to attain unto it, that they may not be deceived in the esteem they have
of me, this is the work of an humble heart, not to rest in it, but according to
what esteem he has of himself, a right esteem he has of his own meanness, and
sense of his own vileness, but that must be added too, not only Esteem but
sense of his own vileness. There must be such a clear light, as must convince
him what a wretched creature he is in himself, notwithstanding all the
excellencies that God bestows upon him, and al gifts and parts, yet still he
keeps a right esteem of what he is in himself, and he has the sense of al, he
does feel the Load, burden, and weight of this, and his Heart is willing to
acknowledge this, for so it comes beyond the understanding, it comes to the
Heart, that the Heart is willing to own it, as I am convinced that my Heart is
vile and mean, so Lord, I am willing to acknowledge this in wh^t ever way thou
would have it discovered. It is true, I am not bound to discover my own
vileness and wretchedness to every one, except in such a way as God may have
glory, and others may receive good, but still an humble Heart keeps this
principle, that though God does not yet call me forth to discover my own
vileness, yet I have this in my heart, I am willing to do it when God calls me
to it, if God may have glory, and good may be done to others, I am willing to
have all opened before men, as well as opened before God. Many are willing to
open all their vileness before God in Prayer, what abundance can they speak in
the presence of God of their own vileness; but to be willing as well that it
should be opened before men, so as it should be for the glory of God, the heart
to be willing to this, I judge my self to be thus, and I am willing to be dealt
with as a Creature that thus judges it self to be, though few come to have a
right judgment of their own vileness, but for a man to lie under this judgment,
and that willingly, not to oppose it, but let the truth of God that discovers
my vileness, let that have rule, and c^mmand, and shine more, and more, I will
not turn away mine Eyes from it, but I will look to it, and take it and apply
it to my self in what I can, and I will be content to be dealt withal according
to what vileness I see in my self, here is a sense of his own vileness. For
there are many that know much evil of themselves, and yet have proud hearts,
Why? Because they have not the sense of their own vileness that they are
conscious to themselves of, it may be said to them in this case as Daniel spoke
to Belshazar in Dan. 5. 22. And thou Oh Belshazar, have not humbled thy Heart,
though thou knew all this. These words may be very well applied to many men,
and Women, God knows, and thy conscience knows, a great deal of vileness in thy
self, that that might make thee Low, and humble thy Heart before the Lord, but
this may be said of thee, That thou have not humbled thy self before the Lord,
though thou know all this, though thou know all this wretchedness, and
vileness, of thy self, that might have abased thee to the very dust, yet thou
have not humbled thy self before the Lord, therefore there must be those two.

CHAP. CXXIII.
Of the behavior of humility before God in ten Particulars. 1. It acknowledges
the infinite distance between God and a sinner. 2. It has a trembling Heart
before God. 3. A Relenting Spirit. 4. It makes Gods will its Rule. 5. It is
willing God should choose its condition. 6. It is willing God should be
advanced in all his ways. 7. It admires the least mercy. 8. It is willing to
be put in a mean and bard employment. 9. It is willing to wait upon God. 10.
It is willing to do what it can to honor God.

NOw these two being laid as the ground of Humility, the proportion upon which
an humble Soul goes. Let us come to the Particulars. It is that virtue whereby
the Heart behaves it self, toward God, and it self, and others, according to
the right low esteem that it has of it self, and the sense of its own
vileness. Having laid that first as the ground, The right low esteem of it
self, and sense of its own vileness. Now let us come to open the behavior of
this humble Heart. You will say, it is a behavior answerable to this: It is
First, in respect of God: Secondly, It self: Thirdly, Others.

First, I should show you what is in an humble Heart in this respect, and then
come to show the great excellencies of a Lowly Heart.

First, In regard of God, as God has a special Eye to a Lowly Heart, so a
Lowly Heart has a special Eye to God, there is no object that God Eyes more
then an humble heart, and there is no object that an humble heart Eyes more
then God.

Now the behavior of an humble heart toward God is especially in these
Particulars.

1. An Humble Heart does acknowledge the infinite distance that there is between
God and it self, and from this infinite distance that he sees between God and
himself he comes to be more, and more vile, no man or woman in the world is
humble, except they have a knowledge of God, they cannot be vile in their own
Eyes in a Christian way, except God has made himself known to them, but when
the Lord does acquaint the Soul with himself, and the Soul comes to see and
acknowledge the infinite distance between God and it, and upon that comes to
have high thoughts of God, and low thoughts of it self, this is the first work
of an humble Spirit in respect of God. You know that in Job, 42. 4, 5. I have
heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, but now mine Eye sees thee,
therefore do I abhor my self in dust and ashes, Here was Jobs Humility, Oh,
Lord, I have a sight of thee, I see an infinite distance between thee and me,
and it is this that makes me have such high thoughts of thee, and low thoughts
of my self, and therefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes: It may
be, many of you, when you are put into an affliction, perhaps God takes away
your estate that makes you dejected, God lays an affliction upon your body,
your Wife, or Husband, and that dejects you, Oh, but the right dejection of the
Spirit is this, I see an infinite distance between God and me, and that is it
that lowens my spirit more then any thing in the world. I appeal unto you* has
God beaten this upon your spirits, the infinite distance between God and you,
and upon that you have layen low. There is a notable Scripture in Prove. 30. and
the beginning, The words of Agur the Son of Jakeh, even the Prophecy, the man
spoke unto Ithiell, even unto Ithiell, and Ucal, Surely I am more brutish then
any man, and have not the understanding of a man, he spoke to Ithiell even unto
Ithiell, and Ucal. Now there is a great variety of interpretations of this
place, but I find the most carry it, Ithiel, and Vcal, being two Names of
Christ that Agur makes use of, and so he speaks unto Christ as God, for so
Ithiel is, God with me, and it is suitable to that name of Christ that you have
in the first of Matthew, the 23. Christ is there called Emmanuel, God with us,
and here his name is Ithiel, God with me, that is the difference between those
two Names of Christ, Ithiel and Emmanuel, Immanuel is to signify Christ being
God and Man in general for the good of mankind, God with us, but Ithiel, is
that name of Christ whereby a Believer applies Christ to himself particularly,
not only is the Savior of the Elect, the Savior of all Believers, is God with
all Believers, but Ithiel, he is God with me, my Soul, I apply him particularly
to my own Soul, he is God with me, I look upon Christ as God to all Believers,
and to all Believers for their good, but looking upon Christ as applying him to
my own Soul, So I look upon Christ as Ithiel, God with me, and therefore he
repeats this twice, The man spoke unto Ithiel, even unto Ithiel, Oh! he loves
to look upon Jesus Christ as God with him, particularly with him. And then
Vcal, Vcal signifies, I shall be able to prevail, and so it is the name of
Christ, noting that the confidence of a Gracious heart is, to prevail in the
strength of Christ against temptation, against sin, against corruption, against
all trouble whatsoever, though I look upon my self as weak, vile, yet I look
upon Christ as one in whom I shall prevail, and so I call him Vcal, I shall be
able in him, I shall prevail in him, that is the meaning of these two words,
Ithiel and Vcal, The man spoke unto Ithiel, even unto Ithiel and Vcal, that is,
spoke to Jesus Christ, God in me, and God in whom I shall prevail, though I be
weak in my self, and now mark how he came to be low in his own eyes upon this,
Surely, I am more brutish than any man, and have not the understanding of a man
in me, I neither learned wisdom, nor have the knowledge of the Holy; and so he
goes on, he is hereupon very vile in his own eyes, and yet mark, before he does
express himself so vile, he can look upon Christ as his Christ, and he in whom
he has confidence to prevail, so that Faith and Humility may go both together,
and the truth is, one furthers the other, the more faith and confidence we have
in God, the more we come to be vile in our own Eyes, that is the first thing.

Secondly, Upon this follows, That an humble heart in behavior toward God,
has a trembling heart, walks with God in a trembling way, fears this great
God that he has such high thoughts of, and reverenceth before him. In Isai.
66. 4. There those two are put together, The poor Contrite Spirit, and one that
trembles at his Word, Herein the Soul shows it self to be a poor, contrite, low
Spirit, in that it trembles at any thing of God, at any manifestation of God,
not in a slavish way, but in a reverentiall way, having this fear struck into
him, because of the greatness of that God that I see so infinitely above me,
and I see my self so low under this God, and this makes me fear before him,
especially when he co^es into the presence of God, this makes him fear before
him, thro^gh the apprehension of his own meanness. So Abraham, when he speaks
to God, Genesis 16. 27, 28. Dust and ashes has begun to speak to thee, O Lord:
This is the Reason of the reverentiall behavior of the Saints of God in the
presence of God; because of the fear of God: Whereas a proud heart is bold
before the Lord, and presumptuous before the Lord, and stands it out against
God, stands ou^ against what is manifested in the Word, that might make him
tremble, but the least word makes the humble heart to tremble. As we go along
we may examine our Humility, whether your behavior be the behavior of an humble
heart before God? Do you find this? That as heretofore your hearts were bold in
the presence of God, you could walk in a daring way before God, now you can
tremble at Gods word, tremble in his peresence in a reverentiall way?

Thirdly: An humble heart in the presence of God, has a relenting spirit,
humility of spirit manifests it self in walking toward God in this
disposition, that it relents and melts in Gods presence at any manifestation of
Gods displeasure against him. And this is likewise clear in Scripture, that
Famous Example of Josiab in 2 Kings 22. 19. Because thine heart was tender, or
because it did Melt, for so some Books has it, And thou did humble thy self
before the Lord, Mark how these two are put together, a melting heart, and an
humble heart, whereas if Josiah had had a proud heart, he would have contemned
the reading of those papers that was brought unto him, as his Son afterward
did, he took a Penknife, cut them, and threw them into the fire, the Son of
this Josiah, but Josiah being a man of a very lowly heart, though a King, upon
reading of the Law of God that was found in a corner of the Temple, his heart
did tremble presently. And hence in Matthew. 5. those two are put together,
Blessed are the poor in spirit, and blessed are those that mourn, so that one
that is of a poor and low spirit, I mean, low in a gracious manner, not in a
base way, is one that mourns, is not of a hard heart. It is said of Belshazzar
that he did harden his heart in pride, Pride had hardened his heart in Dan. 5.
20. But when his heart was lifted up, and his mind hardened in pride etc.
Certainly, a hard heart is a proud heart: So far as a heart is hard, it is
proud, and it is proud against God, and that is the worst pride in the world,
for a Creature to be proud in its behavior before God. When you come to hear
the Word, now you come near to him, and ^he Lord reveals his displeasure
against you, and expects your heart should melt before him, and you harden your
heart, you gather those thoughts together that may harden your hearts, Oh! this
is the pride of thy Heart, the Lord looks upon thee as a desperate proud heart,
that shall thus harden thy Heart, but now if upon the least manifestation of
Gods displeasure to thee thy heart melts, here is an humble heart now, that
according to the esteem of its own meanness, and sense of its vileness behaves
it self thus.

4. It makes the will of God to be the rule of its will, it is emptied of its
own will, and makes God^ will the rule of his Will, Not my will be done, but thy
will be done, says Christ, and in this the lowliness of the Heart of Christ is
discovered as much as in any one thing. Not my will* but thy will, shall Jesus
Christ say thus, that had no evil in his will? Is there not infinite more cause
that thou should say so, not my will, but thy will be done? For thy will is
a crooked will, a perverse ungodly, wicked will, and there is abundance of
wickedness in thy will, for indeed, the will is the seat of all kind of
abominable wickedness, and therefore there is infinite, cause when thou come
once to know thine own vileness, and to be sensible of thy own wretched, and
mean condition, when thou come before the Lord, that thou should say,
Lord, Not my will, but thy will be done. A wilful man and Woman is ever a proud
man and Woman, especially when it comes to God, ^hen you are set to have your
wills, I will have this, and I will have that, if one come and give you but a
place of Scripture, you will presently yield if you be humble, but now if men
be wilful against God himself, these are the desperate proud hearts. You think
there is pride in fine Clothes, and vanity of spirit, it is true, there may be
vanity in outward things. but here lies the desperateness of the proud heart of
man, that thou art proud against God, and when any thing of Gods will is
revealed to order thy conversation, yet thou will follow thine own will, the
language of thy actions is but thus much* Lord, here is thy will, and my will,
but Lord, my will must be regarded before thine, my will must be lifted up before
thy will. I will give you a Scripture for this in Jeremiah, 44. 10. They are
not humbled unto this day, neither have they feared, nor walked in my Law, nor
in my statutes that I set before you, and before your Fathers. Here is a proof
of their not fearing God, and setting up the will of God, they are not Humbled
to this day, How does that appear? Neither walked in my Laws n^r in my
statutes, For so it appears that it was their own wills that they set up. In
Jeremiah, 43. 2. All proud men came to Jeremiah, saying, thou speak falsely,
the Lord our God has not sent thee to say, go not into Egypt to sojourn there.
The proud men, they came and opposed what Jeremiah had spoken* and they did
confess afterward, that what was spoken of Jeremiah, for their own parts, they
were convinced of the word that was spoken to him, as at the 16. verse, As for
the word which thou have spoken to us in the Name of the Lord, we will not
hearken unto thee. First, That pride of Heart got them to an acknowledging of
the word of the Lord, but afterward they came to this pass, As for the word of
the Lord that thou have spoken, we will not hearken to it, And so the Lord
charge them with this, that they did not humble themselves to walk in his
Statutes and Commandments. A Stoutness and stubborness of Heart against God,
that is the great pride of heart. And another text you have in John, 5. 30.
Christ's Lowliness of heart in submitting to the will of his Father, says he, I
can of my own self do nothing, as I hear I judge, and my Judgment is just,
because I seek not mine own will but the will of the Father which sent me; Oh,
That we were but able to say so! that we were but Lowly in heart as Christ
manifests himself to be lowly in heart, that we could say, Lord, thou that
know all things, thou know, that it is not mine own will that I seek, but
thine own will, and what is our wills that they should be regarded more then the
will of Christ? He could deny his own will, what art thou that thou should
not deny thine own will?

5. An humble heart, it is willing that God should choose his condition let it
be what it will be, to be put into what condition God himself will put him into,
he will not be his own carver, to carve out his own condition, but let God do
with me what he will, as I am willing to do what God will, his will shall be the
rule of my actions, so I am willing to be done withal as God pleases, it is
fit that I should be at Gods disposing who am Gods Creature, and have all from
God, and wha^ever I have besides Hell, is a mercy, and therefore (...) I should
be at Gods dispose. An humble Spirit, if God change and alter the condition of
such a one, upon the apprehension of its own meaness and vileness, and what it
deserves, it is willing to ^e at Gods dispose, and to accept of what he shall
choose for us, God shall choose the inheritance of an humble heart, Lord, we will
not choose our inheritance, our own portion what it shall be, but, O Lord, thou
shall choose our inheritance, thou shall lay out our lot and our portion, that
is the behavior of an humble spirit in respect of God.

Yea, And whatever befalls* it, it looks upon God rather then the thing it self,
and that is the thing I speak of now, whatever befalls it, it looks upon God,
and its own meanness, and so makes it willing that God should order al things:
There is nothing wherein the pride of a man's heart appears more then in this,
that he would fain be his own disposer and orderer of himself, would fain put
himself into what rank he pleases, and order his own actions and ways, this
is as much as to say, I would fain be in Gods place, that God would come down,
and let me be in his Throne, and let me order things that concern my self thou
do not think that there is so much evil in thy discontentedness, it is as
much as if thou should say, Lord, do thou come down, and let me come into
thy place, into thy Throne, and order and dispose of things that do concern my
self. One said to the King of Spain, one that was a Scholar, and had great
skill in Arts and Sciences, a great Philosopher, he had this Blasphemous speech;
That if he had been at the making of the world, he would have disposed of
things better then they are now, any one would shake at such a Speech, such a
thought as this; but yet in a discontented Spirit there is this language, if I
had the ordering of my affairs and condition, I could dispose of them better
than they are a great deal, yea, there is this in those that do believe that
God loves them too, and yet they cannot submit to the dispose of God, they
cannot say in the truth of their heart, Lord, thou shall choose an inheritance
for me.

6. The behavior of an humble Soul is in this, and this mainly, That it is
willing that God should be advanced in all, and that in his own way, and the
latter branch has most dependence upon this, it is willing that God should be
advanced above all, and in his own way.

First, an humble Spirit is willing that God should be advanced, and above all,
it is willing that God should be advanced as the highest of all, the first
cause of all, I look upon my self as nothing, but look upon God as the first
cause of all; and therefore I being nothing, and having nothing, and am worthy
of nothing, it is fit that God should have all Glory, though I have no share;
many would be content that God should have Glory, so they might have some
share, I but an humble heart is content that God should have all Glory alone,
being willing to lift up Gods Name, and advance him above all. Here is the
right temper of an humble heart: Let him increase, though I decrease, as John
says, Joh. 3. 27. he rejoiced that he should increase, though himself
decreased, so says an humble heart, le^ God be magnified, though I be mean,
God has given me many mercies, but the Glory of all he reserves to himself,
the rent penny he reserves to himself: and now an humble heart is willing to
this, Oh, blessed be God that I may share in the comfort and blessing, though I
do not share in the Glory. Now a proud heart would not only have the comfort
and blessing, but the Glory too, an humble heart says thus, Oh, it is mercy
that God will employ me in any thing, it is a wonder that God will use me in
his service, when he has used me, there is infinite cause that what is done he
should have the Glory of all after it is once done: So if I be made a Vessel of
mercy that I may retain that, if I am not made a Vessel of Glory to retain
that; indeed, we are Vessels of Gods mercies, that we may keep them: but we are
Vessels of Gods Glory that may run through us, and we should satisfy our
selves thus, that we may be Vessels of Gods mercy to keep them in us, and to be
Vessels of Gods Glory to have that run through us. Not unto us, not unto us,
says the Psalmist, Psalm. 115. 1. and least it should arise, not unto us, not
unto us, not unto us, the third time, but unto thy Name be praise, reflects all
upon the Lord. I remember, Gulielmus Parisiensis has this expression
concerning the Grace of Humility, concerning Praise, says he, Get you unto
God, unto Praise, I repel you and I transmit you unto that God whose proper
Propriety you are. Thus an humble heart would be, when there would be any
pranking of it self in what he has, or is, or does, he should with an holy
indignation repel the Glory to God, Get you away to God, as a man would send
away a Run-way Servant, Away, get you gone to your Master, and you are your
Masters, you do not follow your work; it were an evil thing, you would say, in
any to entertain a Runaway Servant, though you should not inveigle him away:
So we should still repel and cast it upon God, that is the way. As I remember
the same learned man, speaking of applause, says he, it is like unto the Wind,
now if a man turn his back to the Wind, it will help him to go his Journey, but
if he go against the Wind it will hinder him: So in applause, if he turn his
back it will help him in his Journey, but if he think to take it to himself, it
will hinder him and make him go slower: but let all return to that God to whom
it is due. The example of Joab is very Famous to this purpose, in 2 Samuel 12.
18. Joab was there sent to fight against the City, he sends to David, at verse
27* and said, I have fought against Rabbah, and have taken the City of waters,
I have as good as taken the City that thou sentest me against: Now therefore
gather the rest of the People together, and encamp against the City, and take
it, least I take the City and it be called after my Name. Here Joab showed
himself a faithful Servant to David, he had almost taken the City, and he
thought the City should be called by his Name, and David should have no part in
it, now Joab having endured the hardship of the work, he was content to have
David his Master to have the Glory of it, and therefore he says, come and you
shall have the Glory, Least I take the City and it be called after my Name.
Here what a faithful Servant was Joab, though an excellent Warrier, and yet
generally it is questioned, whether he had Godliness in him or no, though some
think there was some Godliness in him, he was of an excellent Spirit, and Joab
he regarded more to do a worthy work, than to have the Glory and the Name
afterward. Now if Joab shall do this for his Master, how much more should we
do for God? when God sets us about a work, let us be suspicious least God
should not have the Glory, we should lift up Gods Name; as one that lifts up
another upon the wall, he that is lifted up sees, but the other sees not, so we
should lift up God so as God should be alone seen, though we be hidden our
selves, and if at any time there should any pride arise to take part of the
Glory from him, (for we will be ready to be fingring and filching of the glory
of God from him) then humility takes an advantage by pride, as sometimes pride
will take the rise from humility, a man may be proud of his own humility, so
humility will take the rise from pride, a gracious heart will be humble for his
pride, and for this we have a notable example too, in 2 Chronicles. 32. 25. It is
the Example of Hezekiah, But Hezekiah rendered not according to the benefit done
unto him, for his heart was lifted up. verse, 26. Notwithstanding Hezekiah
humbled himself for the pride of his Heart, If at any time an humble gracious
Heart, whom God is pleased to employ in any great Service, shall find his heart
rising up, to be filching any of Gods glory from him, presently it beats down
it self so much the lower, and nothing will more humble him then to consider
the vileness of his heart that would r^b God of his Glory.

I but this is not al, to be humble to have the Lord advanced, every one will
say so, but this makes the behavior of an humble heart indeed, to be willing
that God should be advanced his own way, for God to choose his own way to be
advanced, this goes hard, we would fain have God advanced in our liberty, in
our comfort, and our blessings. But what if God will have al our comforts? Will
have himself advanced by our estates, and by our liberty? What if God will have
al our comforts and al we have to be but as a footstool to get up unto his
glory. And indeed an humble spirit, appears not only in this, because he
submits to what is Gods due, but if the Lord at any time cross him in any
thing, yet an humble heart will think al his crosses is made up in this that
God may have any glory by it, here is the genuine humble Spirit, there is such
and such a thing that I am crossed in, that I have a mind unto, yet it yields
to this now, that though I am crossed yet God has Glory, and I can see this that
God has glory in my affliction. Now when I can account that my afflicton is
made up, if any glory can come to God hereby, here is the true Genuine and
humble spirit, when a man is called to any hard Service, it may be he finds the
Service harder then he thought of, I but says he, God is glorified in this
Service, and whatever hardship I endure it matters not, I account al is made up
in Gods glory, and now God is glorified by me in this way, let God be advanced
his own way. Sometimes you think if you should be put into such and such a
condition, God may have more glory, if you had more in largement, and more
comfort, but what if God will choose to glorify himself in your affliction,
your low condition? An humble heart will be content that God should advance
himself in his own own way.

7. Another form of an humble spirit is this, that it admires ^t the least
mercy that it is so much, and wonders at the greatest affliction that it is no
more, I will give you one Scripture for it, because it has reference to what I
named Last and this both together, and it is a notable Scripture to show the
form of an humble Spirit, it is that of David in Sam. 2. 7. in this Chapter God
promises mercy to David, and the first that I will observe is, that which
concerns the former, of advancing of God in whatsoever we have, if you read
this Chapter you shall find, how God promises that he should be magnified, and
his name and house Magnified, but now we find David, he is more affected with
Gods name being magnified than his own, as if he should say, Lord, I bless thee
for what thou have done for me, but this is that that rejoices me more that
thy name is magnified. Now is it thus with thee? Art thou sollicitous that Gods
name should be Magnified, then rejoycest that thy Name is magnified? I put this
to thee, when God bestows great things upon thee art thou Sollicitous that Gods
name should be glorified rather then thine own.

And then for the other, he admires Gods mercies, that we have likewise in
David, in 2 Samuel 7. 18, 19. When the Lord tells him what great things he would
do. Then went David in and sat before the Lord, and said, who am I, O! Lord
God, and what is my House that thou have brought me hitherto? And this was yet
a small thing in thy sight. O Lord God, but thou have spoken also of thy
Servants House for a great while to come, and is this the manner of man O Lord
God. What am I? I bring this Scripture to this end, to show, that the mercies
of God will humble an humble Heart, the more God bestows any mercy upon an
humble heart, the more low will it grow, in admiring that God should deal thus
and thus with it. Whereas a proud heart, when God bestows mercies, presently
his heart swells, but now if the higher that God raises you in your estates or
otherwise, the lovver you are, here is true humility. Let the Brother of high
degree be so much the lower in Heart, Because his degree is made higher, So it
was with David, and Lord, says David, Who am I? That thou should do these
things. And so Jacob, you have him admiring Gods mercy to him in Genesis, 32.
9, 10. There you have the good man, when the Lord had manifested his goodness
to him in his journey, I am not worthy, says he, of the least of all thy
mercies, and of all the truth that thou have showed unto thy Servant, for with
my staff, I passed over this Jordan, and now I am become two bands, I am not
worthy of the least of all the mercies that thou have showed to thy Servant, He
stands admiring at the mercies of God toward him, and does look upon himself
as vile, because Gods mercies were so great. There is nothing more proper to
Christian humility then this, therefore to look upon our selves as vile,
because God bestows great mercies upon us. Many men, they seem to be low in
time of affliction, O then they are humble and low, but when God raisth them in
prosperity then their hearts are high, now a Christian in affliction he is low
too, but in prosperity he is more humble, humility takes as much advantage upon
Gods mercies to be humble as in affliction, and when it is thus with you, then
you have Christian humility in your hearts. Humility does not say of any mercy
as Hieram of the Cities that Solomon gave him, what are these my Brother? But
what am I that I should have such a mercy? Many because they have not what they
would have, they reject what they have, as thus, because they have not full
assurance of saving grace, though God be putting them into the way that he
uses to lead them that he purposes to save, this is nothing, all is nothing,
Now thou should say, Lord, Who am I, that I should have the least mercy from
thee? This is the work of an humble spirit. And if any affliction befall thee,
to be so far from thinking thy affliction great, to say, never any had such
affliction as I, Oh that is from the pride of thy heart, it is because of thy
pride that the affliction is so great, were thy heart humbled the affliction
would not seem so great, but the mercy of God would seem great unto thee. As
now put a ball into a great Vessel and it seems to be nothing, but put it into
a little vessel and it will seem greater, so when the heart is little by
humility, then Gods mercy seems great, and the truth is the less the heart is,
the mercy of God will seem the greater, and the affliction seem the lesser, it
is because we are not sensible of our own vilenss, and wretchedness, and of
what our condition might be, that our afflictions are so great in our eyes as
they are. That is the next thing of an humble Spirit, that it admires at the
least mercy that it is so much, and wonders at the greatest affliction that it
is no more, I am less then the least of all thy mercies.

8. An humble spirit it is willing that God should put him into mean
employment, and into hard employment, and into employment that it can see no
Reason for but only the will of God, Yea, if the Lord should put him into the
lowest work that ever creature was put into, an humble spirit submits and
thinks, it is well if I may be in any service at al, Let me be but as the hired
Servant, says an humble Spirit, As it was with the Gibeonites, they were
content that they might be but as Hewers of Wood, and Drawers of Water, So they
might but live. The very Angels show themselves humble in this kind, to be
willing to be Ministering Spirits, to the poorest Saint in the world, the
poorest Saint in the world has a guard of Angels about him night and day, this
shows the Lowliness of Angels, and therefore we should be willing to be
serviceable from their example in the lowest work for God, and not think that
my parts and my Spirit is fit to be employed in higher ways, As a Servant to
think, why am not I a Governor? I but to think that it is the condition God has
put me into, this is his Duty. And so for Services hard to Flesh and Blood, Yet
an humble Spirit will go on, and the truth is, humility in the behavior of the
Spirit toward God appears in this, to be content to obey God in what I see no
Reason for in the world, I know it is the mind of God, and though I can see no
Reason for it, yet I will be content to do it, here is subjection of the heart
to God, not stand wrangling, Why should I perform Duties? And why should I do
so and so? No, but this is that that shall sway my Reason and all, because God
cammands it. Now these are the main frames of an humble heart toward God, and
as long as we go along, Oh, that we would examine how far short we come of
Lowly hearts, it may b^ we were taught before that we ought to be lowly,
but here we may that we find come short, and there we may find matter of
humiliation in our Prayers.

9. An Humble Spirit and one Lowly in heart, is willing to wait upon God his
own time, and in whatever way or means God shall please to work in; it is fit
that I should wait upon God for any thing I have who am so unworthy of any
mercy, and the Lord being so high above me, between whom and my self there is
such an infinite distance in Isa. 27. 8. says the Church there humbling it
self before the Lord, they do manifest their Humility thus, Yea, in the way of
thy judgments O! Lord, have we waited, it is easy to wait upon God in the way
of his Mercy, but not so easy to wait upon him in the way of his judgments,
but an humble Spirit is willing to wait upon God even in the way of his
judgments. So in Lament. 3. 26. It is good that a man should both hope and
quietly wait for the Salvation of the Lord, It is good for a man to bear the
yoke in his youth. An humble heart is willing to wait upon God in the ways of
his judgments, as well as in the way of his mercies.

10. The behavior of an humble heart in respect of God is this, That it is
resolved to do what it can to honor God whatever God does with it, though God
destroy me, and that everlastingly yet I desire to keep this resolution in my
heart, I will do what I can to Honor Him. Many that are afflicted and troubled
in Conscience, they have some kind of Humiliation wrought, but their Spirits
have some kind of bitterness and sowrness against God, and because they think
sometimes God will cast them off, therefore they are ready to cast off Duty too,
now that is an evident sign the heart is not thoroughly humbled, so far as thou
find thy heart work thus: when thou art afraid that God will cast thee off;
therefore thou think that it is best for thee to cast off Duty, and to do no
more* Here is an Argument that thy heart is not humbled. But now when thy heart
is wrought to this, that even at that t^me, when thou art afraid that God will
cast thee off for ever, thou shall resolve let God do with me what he will,
though I perish for ever yet I am resolved I will do what I can to Honor Him:
this is one that has a lowly heart, now the heart is brought low indeed, such
a heart is prepared for Gods mercies when it is in such a condition as this,
and this is that God expects from us, we must not indent with God, we must not
thus stand upon our Terms with God; as many in time of trouble of Conscience
when we speak to them to wait upon Him, I, they will say, they would be content
to wait never so long, if they might be sure at last that God would grant Mercy
to them: But will thou not be willing except thou may be sure? Thou must wait
though thou art not sure; it is thy Duty to wait though God do not for the
present assure thee of Mercy. Indeed, if God were so much bound to thee as thou
art bound to him, then thou might stand upon thy terms: But know that thou
art infinitely bound to God, and God is not at all bound to thee, and therefore
if thy heart be brought humble before the Lord, thou will resolve whatever God
does with thee, yet thou will do what thou Can to Honor Him. And these are
the principal things of the behavior of an humble heart toward God, and indeed
the special work of Humility, it is the work of the heart toward God, which
people little look upon: People look upon pride in respect of others habit, in
their carriage toward others, in their vanity of Clothes, and outward
demeanors, but the main work of Pride is in the behavior of the heart toward
God, and then we Sanctify the name of God, when we Sanctify our hearts in an
humble manner, and the Reason why the hearts of sinners are not lowly before
the Lord, it is because they know not this God, they know not that infinite
distance that there is between the Lord and their Souls, and here is the Reason
why the Spirit of bondage lies so long many times upon sinners, Why the Lord
does terrify their Consciences; It is, that he might bring their hearts to be
low before him, that there might be the right behavior of a lowly Spirit before
God himself.

CHAP. CXXIIII.
Twelve Properties of a Lowly heart in respect of it self. 1. It is very
suspicious of it self. 2. It is willing to know the worst of it self. 3. It is
willing to look to his beginning. 4. It is ashamed of it self. 5. It loathes it
self. 6. It judges it self unworthy. 7. It denies it self. 8. It keeps down it
self. 9. It hides it self. 10. Goes out of it self. 11. Bemoans it self. 12.
Afflicts it self.

BUt now the second thing that has been propounded is, The behavior of a Lowly
and Humble heart, in respect of it self, and there are many things in this, and
they are of very great use for us, for the ordering of our conversations before
the Lord, and the ordering of the behavior of our spirits in respect of our
selves. As,

1. An Humble heart is very suspicious of it self, I speak of that Humility
that may concern our present condition here, it is afraid lest there should be
some secret evil in it self that yet it does not know, it is very fearful of
the deceitfulness of its own heart, though it does not know for the present
much evil by it self, yet still fears there is much lies hid that is not yet
discovered: It is a good thing for us to be jealous of our selves, knowing how
deceitful our hearts are* the proud heart is ready to run away with all, is
content, and thinks it self better than it is, whereas the humble heart fears
the worst of it self, if it sees an evil in another Man or Woman, it begins to
reflect upon it self, and is not this my heart too? I am afraid that this evil
is in my heart. It is reported of Plato, that when he saw other men doing
evil, he would say to himself, Nonne ego talis? And am not I such a one? have
not I that evil in my heart? So it is repor^ed of Bradford, that when he saw
others commit sin, he would fall a weeping, and a lamenting, because he was
afraid that there was that evil in himself that he saw in others, though it
did not break forth. An humble heart, when it hears the threatenings of the
word against any sin, it begins to think thus, And does not this belong to me?
I am afraid that it may belong to me as well as to any others, very suspicious
and jealous of it self. That is the first.

2. An humble heart is unfeignedly vvilling to know the vvorst of it self; and
therefore it makes much of any truth that comes the nearest to its heart, and
that discovers it self unto it self, it is glad of those truths, when there is
a truth comes home to it, to discover any evil that it did not see before, it
is glad of those truths, and blesses God that it comes to know any thing of it
self more than formerly; whereas a proud heart vvil rather vex when any truth
comes to discover any evil that it did not see before, As some being deformed,
are not vvilling to have a Glass to present their true Image to them, but an
humble heart cries to God, Lord try me, Lord discover to me what evil is in my
heart. And an humble heart loves that Company that vvil help it to see what
evil there is in it self, or any way may discover what evil there is in it,
and it vvil be meditating upon those things that may further discover it self,
unfeignedly waiting to know the vvorst of it self: for want of this many a
Soul goes on in an unsound false way, and miscarries to all eternity, because
it is not willing to know the vvorst of it self. That is the second.

3. An humble Spirit does often look back to its poor beginnings, it loves to
do it, one that is lowly in heart, does love to be often looking back to its
poor beginnings, what once he was. If God has made an alteration in my
condition, let me consider what once I was, what a vile wretch once I was,
loves to be often meditating upon that, and so to be working upon it self to
humble its own heart with such thoughts as those are, Oh! what a poor
condition! was I not long since in, both in regard of my outward condition, and
my inward spiritual condition: An humble heart is not unwilling to be put in
mind of both. If God has raised him from the Dunghill to a higher condition, he
puts himself in mind of what he was once, is not willing to have the record of
his own Parentage to be razed out, but is willing to have it known what he was,
what poor breeding he had, my Father a poor Man, and my Mother a poor Woman,
and how poorly they lived notwithstanding God has raised my estate, he is
willing to put himself in mind of it* that he may get his proud heart to be
humbled. Agathacles, that was raised to be a Prince, he would be served in
Earthen Vessels, to put him in mind of his low condition that once he was in.
And that is very famous that we have of Jacob in Genesis 32. 10. I am not worthy
of the least of all the Mercies and of all the truth which thou have showed
unto thy Servant, for with my staff have I passed over this Jordan, and now I
am become two bands, I had nothing but even the poor Staff to pass over this
Jordan withal, but now I am become two bands; so for men that perhaps came up
to the City, and that are come to live well, they were poor Boys, and had
little at first, and God has blessed their Estates, and they are not unwilling
to look back to what they were, it may be some of you, were poor ship Boys,
and God has in some Voyages raised you up to what you are, Do you look back to
what you were? and that in the presence of God, and to that end that your
hearts may be humble and low, Do you make that use of what your poor condition
was? Or rather do not you forget your poor condition, and now your mind is puffed
up, this is an evil sight. And another example for this you have likewife in
David, David was exceeding willing to be put in mind of the mean condition in
which he was as that in 2 Samuel 2. when Nathan came to him when he would have
built an House to God, in 2 Samuel 7. the Lord bids Nathan go to him and say to
him, I have taken thee from the Sheepfold verse 8. Thus says the Lord of
hosts, I took thee from the Sheep-cote, from following the sheep, to be Ruler
over my People, over Israel. Now David was not offended at this, but he blessed
God at verse 18. He went in and sat before the Lord, and he said, Who am I, O
Lord God, and what is my House that thou have brought me hitherto? stands a
wondering at Gods mercy, that God had brought him so far as he had done, unto
such a comfortable condition, as indeed the Lord had brought him to. And so
Paul in 1 Timothy 1. 13. he looks back to what he once was, says he, who was
before a Blasphemer, and a Persecutor, and injurious, but I obtained mercy*
because I did it ignorantly in unbelief, and the Grace of our Lord was
exceeding abundant, with Faith and Love which is in Christ Jesus, who was
before a Blaspemer and a Persecutor. And so he says of himself, that he was
the least of all (which afterward we shall further make use of) the least of
the Saints. Thus one that is lowly in heart, is willing to rip up his former
life, and consider what a poor wretch once I was, what an Ignorant sottish
Creature I was, knew nothing of God, nor Christ, nor the things of eternity, I
was not able to open my heart to God in Prayer any further than I had learned
it, and could look upon a Book. What a mercy of God is it, in that God has
showed himself further to me; and so the heart works upon the low condition
that once it was in. And so in Ezekiel. 16. when the Lord would humble his
People, there the greatest part of the Chapter is spent in showing what they
were. Thy Father was an Amorite, and thy Mother an Hitite, showing thereby,
that the Lord would have us look back to what once we were, that thereby our
hearts may be kept low. And indeed by this means an humble heart sees how
strange the workings of God was toward it, and what it might have been at
present, had it not been for the mere mercy of God. This is the thing, wherein
the frame of an humble heart consists in respect to it self, it looks back to
the poor mean condition that once it was in.

4. In the midst of all the excellencies that God does give unto an humble
heart, yet he is ashamed of himself, or rather thus: An humble heart is ashamed
of it self, yea, even when God bestovvs the greatest excellencies of all upon
him, In Ezra 9. when Ezra was humbling himself before the Lord together with
the Church, he says thus, We are ashamed of our selves and confounded because
of this. And in Jerem. 31. 19. Ephraim humbles himself and smiting upon his
Thigh he confesses that he was ashamed. And so the Church speaks in Jerem. 3.
25. We lie down in our shame. An humble spirit is ashamed of himself; whatever
others think of him, yet such a one is conscious of so much evil in himself,
that he is humbled when he looks upon his black Legs: though others may think,
O! such a one has excellent abilities, and the like; yet an humble spirit has
such thoughts of it self, as makes it ashamed of it self. And so, in Ezra 9. it
was the time when God began to bring them from Captivity, and yet that was the
time when they were ashamed of themselves, and were shaming themselves.

5. One that is of a lowly heart, the behavior of it self is to loath and abhor
it self, in Ezekiel. 6. 9. there says the Prophet. And they that escape of you
shall remember me among the Nations whither they shall be carried Captives,
because I am broken with their whorish heart, which has departed from me, and
with their Eyes which go a whoring after their Idols, and they shall loath
themselves for the evils which they have committed in all their abominations,
It is an excellent Scripture this, I am broken with your whorish heart, and
they shall see this how their sins they have broken the very heart of God, we
have not such an expression that I know in Scripture that might humble the
heart of a sinner more than this, What! have I by my sins broken the heart of
God? what cause is there that my heart should be broken? and when they shall
see this, they shall loath themselves. An humble heart when it sees what it
has done toward God, does loath it self, looks upon it self with abhorring.
So you have it likewise in Ezekiel. 20. 4. And there you shall remember your ways,
and all your doings, wherein ye have been defiled, and you shall loath your
selves in your own sight, for all your evil that you have committed. And the
like expression you have in Ezekiel. 36. 31. Then shall ye remember your own evil
ways, and your doings that were not good, and shall loath your selves in your
own sight for your iniquity and for your abominations, and this was in a time
of mercy, that is observable, it was in a time when the Lord promised mercy,
and did show mercy to them, even then they shall loath themselves. Many men
they may be brought down so low upon their sick beds, with some loathsome
Disease that may be upon them, that may force them to loath themselves; but
here is the property of an humble Spirit when the Lord shows the greatest
mercy, when it is in the greatest prosperity, then an humble heart loathes it
self before the Lord. And that is a notable Scripture that we have likewise in
Job for this purpose in Job 9. 21. Though I were perfect, yet would I not know
my Soul, I would despise my life though I were perfect, I would even despise
and loath my self, that is, though he were not so polluted as others charge him
withal, yea, though he were not able to see nothing in himself; yet because of
^he infinite distance between God and him, and because of his mean condition
that he was in as a Creature, because of what he had been, or what he might be
without the Grace of God, if God should withdraw his Grace from him; therefore
says he, though I were perfect, yet would I not know my Soul, I would despise
my life, How much more Cause have we to despise and loath our selves, when we
are conscious to our selves of so much evil. And so that other place in Job
that I named about the Souls behavior before God, when he saw the Glory of God,
In Job 42. 5. I have h^ard of thee by the hearing of the Ear, but now mine Eyes
see thee, wherefore I abhor my self in dust and ashes, this is the work of an
humble heart, to loath and abhor it self before the Lord.

6. The behavior of a Lowly heart in respect of it self, it is to judge it
self, judges it self.

First, Unworthy of any employment, unworthy of any service that ever God
should employ him in. So you have it in that of Gideon, in Judges 6. 15. when
the Lord had revealed to Gideon what employment he would use him in, Who am I
says he, or my Fathers House? He judges himself unworthy of any such
employment, one lowly in Heart does think it a great mercy of God to be
employed in any work, it judges it self unworthy of such a mercy as this. May
be you may think that God should be beholding to you to employ you in any work
or service for him, but if your heart were Lowly, you would judge your selves
unworthy to be employed in any work of God.

Secondly, It judges it self unworthy of the least of the Creatures of God, I
am less then the least of all thy mercies, says Jacob, unworthy of the to
bread that it Eats, and the Air that it breathes in* it does not think much
that it has not what others have, but judges it self before God unworthy of
what it has, acknowledging that it has forfeited all the comforts that God
has vouchsafed to it.

Yea, Thirdly, It is ready to charge it self with any evil, even that which
comes in sometimes by temptation; an humble heart is ready charge it self to be
the only cause of it: as other men, Hipocrites, they are ready to charge
temptation with what comes from their own corruption; So an humble heart rather
charge its own corruption with what comes from temptation. You shall have
vain and carnal Spirits, think to excuse the evil that comes from them with
this, the Devil tempted them, this was a temptation, the strength and violence
of a temptation, and they were led to it by the Devil, and so judge the Devil
for it, and not themselves, whereas the truth is, it was not thy temptation so
much as thy corruption, the heart that is lowly and humble charge himself
with all; this is my corruption, this is my wretched and wicked heart, it is
true, the Devil might tempt me, but were it not for my corruption the Devil
could never prevail.

Yea, Lastly, It judges it self worthy to be destroyed. So that place in Ezekiel.
36 31. Whereas some Books have it You shall loath your selves* The old
Translation has it, And shall judge your selves worthy to be destroyed, A Lowly
heart is willing to pass sentence upon it self, to accuse it self before the
Lord, and therefore passes the sentence of eternal death upon it self, so as
to justify God, God is clear when he judges, whatever the judgment of God is
against the sin that I have committed, I join with it, I close with the
judgment, and I judge my self as God does judge in his word, it takes the
sentence of Gods word and lays it to it self, and judges it self. If you judge
your selves, you shall not be judged, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11. 32. This is
the work of a Lowly Spirit, it judges it self before the Lord. That is the
Sixth.

Seventhly, An Humble Spirit denies it self.

First, It denies its own Reason, if the truth of God be revealed in his word,
he will not set his own Reason against the evidence of the truth, but though I
cannot see a Reason of what is in the word, it is fit that I should yield to
what the Lord reveals in his wodr, it is willing to deny his Reason in matters
of Faith, and there is a great deal in this, and a special ground why the Lord
batters the Heart of sinners many times, it is to bring them down to deny their
own reason. So I remember Luther has a speech concerning Reason in matters of
Faith, Reason it is a most bitter enemy to God, and of Faith, he means
unsanctified Reason, now an humble heart can deny its own Reason.

Yea, Secondly: He is much in denial of his own will, though my will be set
strong to have such and such a thing, yet what great matter is it, says a
Lowly heart, for the will of such a wretched Creature as I am to be crossed?
What if my will be crossed, and that for ever? I that have been guilty of
crossing God so much, an humble heart never thinks much to have its will to be
crossed: whereas there is nothing more todious and grievous to a proud Spirit,
then to have its will crossed, but now when we can get that power over our
selves, as to be willing to deny our own wills, then our hearts are indeed
broken, and we are brought to be lowly in heart before the Lord, the heart of a
sinner is never broken and humble til it can deny its own will, many of you
would know when you are humble enough, if you find this, that whereas before
you thought it very much to have your wills crossed, you find now that it is a
very little matter to you to have your wills crossed, this is a sign that your
heart is humble.

And Thirdly, An Humble spirit can deny his own ends, whatever my ends were
wont to be, what plottings, contrivings, what designs I was wont to aim at;
now I find I can deny them, I can renounce mine own ends, and am not for my
self, an humble Spirit is not a selfish Spirit, not aiming at his own ends.

Yea, Further: An humble heart can deny its own lawful contentments for God,
even those things that are in themselves lawful contentments, that it might
have much liberty in, yet if I see that God may have more honor by my being
abridged of such lawful contentments, and my Brethren may have more good, I am
willing to deny my self in them, to let them go, it is not fit I should look
after my self, such a wretched Creature as I am, that might have been in Hell
long ago, it is not so much for me to look at my self, but if God may have any
Glory, and my Brethren any good, I am willing to deny my own lawful
contentments: so that an humble Spirit denies, not only its sinful self, but
its lawful self, denies all its own excellencies whatever they be, willing that
they should be buried, denies his own honor, cares not for his own disgrace, I
have been perhaps of such an opinion, and if I should alter I should be
dishonored and disgraced, but if the truth of God may come up, let my honor lie
in the dust, let the truth of God be advanced, he is willing to deny himself.
This is the behavior of a lowly Spirit in regard of it self, it does deny it
self, and that is the Lesson that Christ would have us indeed learn. Come, if
you would be my Disciples, you must deny your self, and take up my Cross. The
word in the Greek is more than deny your selves, you must thoroughly deny your
self, deny your self to purpose indeed, if you will be the Disciples of Christ,
and indeed, this Humility is the proper Christian Humility. Your Heathens, they
were altogether for men to know their own excellencies, and to seek themselves
altogether, but for such a Lesson as this, to deny themselves, you never read
of any such thing in Heathen Authors, never such a Lesson that they would teach
them, that they would deny themselves.

8. An humble heart keeps down it self: that is, he would be no higher except
he be worthier, one that has a vain, proud Spirit, still would fain be higher
and higher, and is not so solicitous to be worthier of a higher place; but one
that is humble thinks thus, I am unworthy of what place I am in, and I would
not be higher except I be worthier, I would not be in a higher condition except
God give me a heart to improve that condition that he shall put me into, and
though God keep me in a low condition in respect of outward, yet the truth is,
I have as much as I have Grace to manage, and therefore when there is any
rising thoughts within it about a higher condition, an humble heart is willing
to beat down it self, and is ready to speak to it self, as Jeremy to Baruch in
Jerem. 45. Do thou seek great things for thy self? Seek them not: So says an
humble Spirit to it self, What! art thou rising in thy Spirit, and seek
great things for thy self? Seek them not, it is well thou have thy life for a
prey, it is well thy Soul may be saved in the day of Jesus Christ. And so David
it is said of him in Psalm. 131. As a weaned Child he quieted himself, and
behaved himself, restraining himself, and keeping down himself; whereas his
Spirit would have been froward against God, he did keep down his Spirit that
was ready even to rise against God. One that has a lowly heart, yet whilst it
remains in this world, has much to do to keep down it self.

9. An humble lowly Spirit hides it self, is vvilling to hide it self, and
does much hide it self, it does therefore good in secret more than in public,
though such a one, when God calls him to public service, is vvilling to serve
God publicly, yet especially is vvilling to do good in secret, where none
knows what it does, and where none is conscious to it self but it self, and
God. The full ears of Corn hang down whereas the blasted ears vvil stand bolt
upright: So it is with a heart that is humble, the more excellency it has the
more it hangs down it self and is lovv, whereas the blasted Spirits of Men
and women that have a little in them, they stand bolt upright. Or rather as the
Violet, the Violet does hide it self with its own Leaves, So the Fig Tree; and
the Violet grows low in the ground, you can hardly perceive it, but only it
discovers it self by its sweet smell, you may many times smell it before you can
see it, it grows so low, and the discovery of it is from the sweet savor of it:
and so it is with an humble heart, the discovery of the excellency that is in
an humble heart is from the sweet savor it has, rather than from any
comendations of it self by speaking of it self, No, it is that which is
abhorred by a lowly humble heart to be speaking high things of it self: and it
does not love to hear others commending of it, and does not deny them in a
modesty, because they would have them to confirm it the more strongly, as many
others will do, but unfeignedly is willing to have them hidden, any futher than
God is pleased to draw them forth. It does a great deal of good when no body
can know it, as it was the similitude of an Ancient, says he, An humble heart
in this is like to the Lightening, that may work strong effects on a sudden,
and goes away and no body takes notice of it, sometimes it may be melts the
Sword in the Scabbard, and is gone and no body knows who did it: So it is with
an humble heart, it will not make a noise in what it does; whereas a proud heart
will be brought to no good exercise except every one take notice of what it
does, an humble Spirit is willing to hide it self when God may nay have Glory
by an action, though I may have disgrace, yet I am content.

10. An humble Spirit goes out of it self, being conscious of its own weakness,
I say, it goes out of it self for a principle to act by, and for strength, for
assistance, for help, it goes out of it self, and empties it self; we may put
both together, it is unbottomed of it self, is one that is willing to live upon
Alms, upon Gods Alms continually, upon a continued influence of the Grace of
God, being sensible of its own weakness, i^ goes out to catch hold of strength
without it self; Like the Vine, though a fruitful Creature, yet a weak
Creature, therefore God in nature has made it full of little strings, to catch
hold of any thing that is next it, to support it self: So it is with an humble
Spirit, though very fruitful yet weak, and therefore is catching hold of
strength without it self, supports it self upon God, and therefore it dares not
go forth in its own strength ^n any business that God sets it about, but is
unbotomed of it self, depends upon a strength beyond its self and looks for
assistance in all actions that it does from another, it lives upon a principle
that is without it self continually, whereas a proud heart lives altogether
upon its own principles: But there is nothing more discovers our humilty than
this, than to live upon nothing in our selves, but to go out to strength
without our selves.

11 This is the true behavior of an humble Spirit in respect of it self, a
lowly and humble Spirit is often bemoaning it self alone, for its own
wretchedness and vileness, in Jerem. 31. 13. I have heard of Ephraim bemoaning
himself before the Lord, I have heard him bemoaning himself. Is not Ephraim my
dear Child? says God, Oh! how frequently does the Lord hear lowly hearts
bemoaning of themselves before the Lord. It may be it does not pine so much
before others in complaints, but gets into the presence of the Lord, and there
it is often bemoaning it self, and pouring forth it self before the Lord.

12. The last is this* an humble heart does afflict it self, is willing to
afflict it self, you know that the Lord requires (in the day of a Fast
especially) that there should be an afflicting of our selves, In Levit. 23. 26.
The Text says, That every Soul should afflict it self, and that Soul that does
not afflict it self in the day of a fast shouldbe cut off. Now an humble Soul
is an afflicted soul, is willing to afflict it self before the Lord, it is not
so much sollicitous of comfort, and is altogether for comfort, would fain have
comfort: and comfort, no, but is willing to afflict it self, and to burden it
self with its own sin, and to beat down it self, as we read of Paul 1 Cor. 9.
27. the Text says, He beat down his body, least after he had Preached unto
others, he himself should be a Reprobate: Not to afflict our selves as Papists,
to be whipping our selves, and to do those things that God never aequired at
our hands, but so far as any way God shall require it, such a one is willing to
afflict it self before the Lord, the main work of the heart in this thing is,
that it is not sollicitous so much for comfort, as to be willing to be
afflicted before the Lord, so far as God would have it afflicted.

So now put all these together, and you may see the behavior of a lowly heart
in respect of it self* 1. It is suspicious of it self jealous least the^e
should be some secret evil in the heart that it does nor know of. 2. It is
willing to know the worst of it self. 3. It looks often to its poor beginnings.
4. It is ashamed of it self, and that in the midst of its own excellencies, 5.
It loathes and abhors it self before the Lord. 6. It judges it self. 7. It
denies it self. 8. It keeps down it self. 9. It hid^^ it self. 10. It goes out
of it self, and empties it self* 11. It bemoans it self. And lastly it afflicts
it self so that your hearts now having these workings in them in reference to
your selves, you may by this examine whether you have humble and* lowly hearts
yea or no.

CHAP. CXXV.
Three Consequences from the former Point.

ANd from all these things there are these three Consequences.

Consequence 1.
First: Here you may see, how to examine your own hearts in respect of
Humility, whether you find these workings of an humble spirit in respect of
your selves, lay these and your hearts Level, examine and call your hearts to
an account when you get alone, By these twelve foregoing Particulars, Ask thy
self as in the presence of God: Is my heart thus? Have I this lowly heart?
Christ would have me of a lowly heart, Thus if you cannot find these, charge
your selves with the want of them, and take an advantage even from the want of
them to humble your hearts before the Lord, because you have not these things
that are the genuine and natural workings of an humble Spirit, for so they
are. if you can find your hearts coming off in in these Particulars, in a
natural way, from a renewed nature, you may have abundance of comfort that this
Grace of Humility, of Lowliness that Christ would have you learn, is wrought in
your Souls: you have been a Proficient in Christ's School, but many may have
cause upon the hearing of this, to charge themselves with this, that they
scarce have begun to learn in the School of Christ, to learn Humility.

Consequence. 2.
Secondly, Another Consequence is this, upon the consideration of these several
workings of Humility in respect of our selves we may see, That the work of a
Christian is very much inward, it is a work of reflection upon our selves, if
there were nothing to do in a Christians life but that that is external, to
perform some outward Duties, to come and hear the word, and speak good things,
and pray, and make an outward profession. The Life of a Christian were a great
deal more easy, but from this that you hear, from the working of this one
Grace of Humility, you may see, that the work of a Christian lies much within
doors, that Christians should be very busy within their hearts, there are many
workings within rather then without, and therefore if you would profess your
selves to be Christians, and would indeed have the power of Godliness in your
Hearts, you must work ^uch inwardly, there must be much reflection upon your
own Hearts.

Consequence. 3.
Thirdly, And Lastly, Another Consequence is this, by this that you have heard,
what the working of an humble Heart in respect of it self is, we may take
notice of the great power of Jesus Christ in the heart of a Christian,
wheresoever Grace is wrought, Jesus Christ is very powerful and very strong in
that Heart, Certainly, these things could never be in the Heart of a poor
wretched sinner, Yea, in a heart that is Naturally very proud, (for so we are
all) and were not the Grace of Christ very powerful in the heart of a Christian
these things could never be, wherefore when you hear that these things are in a
heart working thus, we may conclude, surely the power of Jesus Christ is very
mighty and very strong. Well, thus you have the Grace of Humility presented to
you, toward God and your selves, let us Learn to be of Lowly Hearts, and be
not at rest until you find these kinds of workings in your Spirits.

CHAP. CXXVI.
The First Property of Humility in respect of others, is that it thinks better
of others then it self, Which is laid open in diverse Particular answers unto
several doubts and Objections.

THere is yet one of these three things to be spoken unto in this Grace of
Humility, which is the third Particular, what the behavior of an humble heart
is in reference unto others. For Humility much appears in that, though the
principal work in humility is, in the carriage of the Soul in reference unto
God, and in reference unto it self, yet there is very much in this grace of
humility, in the carriage of the Soul in reference unto our Brethren. Now then
the First thing wherein the behavior of an humble heart is in reference unto
others, and a principal thing, it is of very great concernment, and that is
this.

First, It thinks better of others then it self, this great work of humility
(that has very much in it as I shall show in opening of it) is held forth* unto
you in 2 of Phillipians, 3 verse. Let Nothing be done through strife, or Vain
Glory, but in Lowliness of mind, let each esteem others better then themselves.
Mark, This is the Work of a Lowly mind, Learn of me for I am Lowly in Heart,
You must be of lowly Hearts, of Lowly minds, what is that? Says the Apostle
Let each esteem others better then themselves. You will say, this indeed upon
the very hearing of it, does make us judge it to be a great work of the Grace of
God in the heart, to esteem others better then themselves, and ^ow that should
be, that I shall speak unto by and by in the opening of it, but I shall first
show some Examples of it, of esteeming others better then themselves. That
which Paul did Exhort the Phillipians to, he did himself, he did not preach to
others, that they should esteem others better then themselves, and yet he would
lift up himself above others; No, see it in himself, In 1 Corin. 15. 9, For I
am the least of the Apostles, that am not meet to be called an Apostle, because
I persecuted the the Church of God. I am the least of the Apostles, Says Paul;
and yet (as sometimes I have said upon other occasions) there was no man since
the beginning of the world that ever did God more Service then Paul, We may
safely say it, no man upon the Face of the Earth, that was a mere man, that
ever did God more service then this man did, and yet he was the least of the
Apostles. Well, But though he may be the least of the Apostles, yet he may have
high thoughts of himself enough, Mark then the 1 of Tim. 1. 15. This is a
Faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the
world to save Sinners, of whom I am chief, The least of the Apostles. but chief
of Sinners, he looks upon himself as Chief of Sinners. Yea, yet one diminution,
to be the chiefest of sinners, it shows he was low in his own Eyes, and that
is in Ephesians. 3. 8. Unto me who am less then the least of all Saints, Mark, to
be the least of the Apostles was somewhat, but to be the Least of Saints is
more, but to be less then the least of al Saints, here Paul would Teach
Gramarians a new Grammar Lesson, Gramarians know but three degrees of
Comparison, but Paul had a fourth here, he had one beyond the superlative, the
least Minimus, it is the superlative you know, to be the least of al, but here
beyond the superlative, less then the least, or I am the worst. So it is in the
Greek. Now (...), that is the superlative in the Greek Tongue, but here is a
comparison beyond the superlative, less then the least, less then the least of
all Saints: thus you see it was with Paul, one that did God more Service then
thousands, and ten thousands of the best that we know, and never are like to do
God that Service as this Paul, and yet he is the least of all Saints, in his
own Eyes, here is a lowly heart. In Judges, 8. 2. We have Gideon likewise an
example of Lowliness of Spirit in his own Eyes, (we might name a great many
others) when some were provoked and Angry with him, he said unto them, what
have I done now in comparison of you, is not the gleaning of the Grapes of
Ephraim better then the vintage of Abiezer? By this means he pacified his angry
Brethren, says he, we account our selves but as the Gleanings of the Grapes of
Ephraim to the vintage of Abiezer. And by that means he quieted his Brethren
that were provoked. Well, but for the opening of this, the Lowly heart does
judge others better then himself.

First, If so be that there appear any evil in others, if the evil be not
apparent in other men, a Lowly heart will be ready to judge the best of any one,
and think there is more good secretly. If there appear but a little good, yet
it will be ready to think that others have more good in secret then he has
himself, I know how little good I have in secret in mine own heart, says a
lowly Soul, Well, but I do not know but such and such may have a great deal
more good in secret then I have, their thoughts may be more holy, more
spiritual then mine, not so wandering in Duties as mine are, I have no Reason to
think any in the world have so many wandering thoughts, and such uncleanness and
filthiness in their thoughts as I have. It is ready to think, that the
affections of others are a great deal more clean then his, and more Heavenly
and spiritual, and prepared more for holy duties, and that their hearts are in
a better temper in holy Duties then his is. And if so be that there be any good
done by others, he is ready to think, that surely there is in them better
principles, that acts better in their minds then there is in me, they do such
and such good things, I and their hearts are more sincere, and are carried on
by divine principles in what they do, I am conscious to my self of a great many
of base and vile principles that act in me, I know no such evil in others, and
therefore I am to hope that there is not the like in them as there is in me. If
he sees any good in another, a lowly heart is ready to think that there are
other things correspondent to the good that does appear unto him, as there
appears such a good thing, so there is all other things answerable unto that
good that does appear, but as for it self it says, I find though I do
something that is good, Yet I am conscious to my self that there is a great deal
of non-correspondency in me, that though there be such and such particular good
things yet other things are not answerable unto that that does appear. Thus
because one that is lowly knows much evil of it self, and knows more evil of it
self then it does of any other, therefore it sees cause to judge of others
better then it self, I do not know that such have such secret evils as my self,
I do not know that they have such base principles that act them as in my self,
that there is such a non-correspondency to good as in my self, upon this
ground, because it knows more evil of it self then others know, therefore it is
ready to think better of others then of it self.

Object. I but you will say, Suppose I see a great deal of Evil in others that I
know, and am conscious to my self that I am not guilty of, shall I think better
of others then of my self then? Answ. I Answer still, for all this I am to think
of others better then my self.

First, Because, though I see others outwardly evil, yet I do not know whether
there be such inward evil in them as in my self, it is true, they do break into
outward evils more then I do, I but there may be swarms of evils within me
that I know I am guilty of, now because I know more evil inwardly in my self,
then I can know in any in the world, therefore I am bound to judge of others
better then of my self.

Secondly, And further, Though I see some evil in others that I am not guilty
of, yet how do I know what temptations they have, and how can I tell, but that
if I had as great temptations as they I might commit as great evils and greater
then they; and therefore, though they do commit greater evils then I do, yet I
am bound to judge of them better then my self, because I do not know but if I
had as strong temptations as they, I might commit greater evils.

Yea Thirdly, Though they do commit evils greater then I do, yet I know that it
is the restraining hand of God upon me, and that if God should but leave me to
my self a little, as he leaves such a one, I should be as vile as such a one,
and it may be viler: so that though the Saints of God must not wrong the grace
of God, must not (if they see one live in notorious wickedness) think that his
condition is better then mine, but yet he may be better then I, considering my
self merely in my self, I have no cause to lift up my self above him, if I be
better it is no thanks to me, it is not because I am better in my self, for I
have that evil in my self, that if God should take off his hand, and leave me
to my self as he leaves such and such, I should be as bad as they; you are to
look upon your selves, that there is not any vile wretch in the Town or Family
where you live though they be the worst of men, that are more vile and wretched
then you are. Yea, And for ought you know viler, that is, if you should be left
to your self, you may be viler then they are, and so an humble heart is willing
thus to judge of others better then it self.

Object. I, But you will say, For those that are notoriously profane, and
ungodly, for us to judge them better then our selves* how can we do this without
being false? And does not the Scripture say, The Righteouss is better then his
Neighbor. Answ. I Answer, Yet we are to look upon others better then our selves
in these respects.

First: They had not such education as you had they had not such droppings in
of God as I had when I was young, they lived in a wicked Family, and had wicked
Parents, but I had Godly Parents, had they had such Godly Parents and good
education as I, they might have been better, and done better, it may be they
have been cast among those that have given them wicked examples to provoke to
sin, but I have had Gracious examples, it may be they never lived under such
means as I have, had such precious truths, such heart melting truths been
presented before others, as has been presented before me, they might have
wrought upon the heart of the vilest in the world more than they have upon my
heart, it may be they have not had the awakings of Conscience, God never darted
that light into their Consciences as into mine, they never had the terrors in
their Spirits as I have had, God never made them know what sin meant as he has
done me, had God enlightened them as he has done me, and awakened their
Consciences, and terrified them as he has done me, Surely, there would not
have remained such evil in them as is in me, they never had such drawings of
Gods spirit (it may be) as I have had, O! the allurements of Gods Spirit that I
have had, to have drawn me away from sin, and to have drawn me to that that is
good, and yet how did I keep back? Do I wonder to see them drawn by vain and
wicked Company? What great wonder is it when they have nothing else to draw
them back? But had they the drawings of the Holy Ghost, and those words of
love, and those stirrings of the Spirit of God in them as I have had, and as I
have daily, how would they be as ready to be drawn to good as they are to evil?
I wonder that they are not moved more by the word, I but my heart is not moved
by the drawings of Gods Spirit, had they but tasted how sweet God is, they
never tasted the sweetness of the word, nor the sweetness that there is in the
ways of God as I have done, had they tasted what I have tasted, and felt what
I have felt, it would have been better with them than it is with me. And so
many such Considerations being put into the balance, though others be very
vile and wicked, yet we have good reason to look upon others better than our
selves, at least to look upon our selves as vile as any in the world; yea
viler, because (I say) we cannot know what helps others have had, nor what
inward good is in others, as we may of our selves.

Secondly: And further, We have cause to judge of others better than our selves,
though profane and wicked, for their si^s do not do so much hurt as our sins
do; though the^ be wicked outwardly, yet all the sins of all the profane
people in a Town, do not do a quarter so much hurt as the sins of a few
professors of Religion* thy Lightness, thy Wantonness, thy Pride and
Covetousness, does more hurt than the open sins of others, the Covetousness of
a Profesior of Religion, does more hurt than the theft of another if another
should rob and steal, it does not dishonor God, and pollute Gods name, so much
as the Covetousness of a Professor of Religion: the Swearings of other men do
not dishonor God so much as thy passion does. You think those notorious
wretches, that take Gods name in vain, and swear, but I say thou pollutest Gods
name more by thy Passion, and it may be put off many from Religion more by
thy froward carriage than Swearing does in another man; for it is true, they
sin against God, but what hurt does it do, there is nothing expected from them;
but this thing is expected from thee, it may be thou may be a means to
convert thy Husband, or Wife, and thou hardenest them by this means, now what
reason have thou to judge others worse than thy self, when thou do God as much
dishonor as others? Now such considerations and many others that might be
named, shows ground enough why we should judge of others better than our selves.

And by the way therefore let this Consideration teach those that are wicked,
let it inform them likewise in a mistake of theirs, They think those that
profess religion do judge of others worse than themselves, now by this that you
hear you may know that it is quite otherwise, had you but a Window opened into
their bosom, into their heart you would find that they look upon none living
so vile as themselves.

Object. I but you will say, They think others are wicked, and that others shall
go to Hell, and that they shall go to Heaven.

Answ. This must be granted indeed, and this would wrong the Grace of God, if
they should not think their condition better than others, if they should think
that they were in as dangerous a condition as the wicked and ungodly, No, they
bless God for the condition that they are in, that God has opened their Eyes,
and showed them the evilness of their hearts and lives, and they would not for
a thousand worlds venture their condition with theirs: Certainly, one that
knows the difference between a converted estate, and an unconverted, would not
for a thousand worlds venture for a quarter of an hour to be in their
condition, yet this does not hinder, but that they look upon themselves, as in
themselves, as vile and as wretched as any; and for one time that thou do
condemn thy self before God, they do it a hundred times it may be a thousand
times, and God knows they judge of themselves worse than thou do of thy self;
thou go on merrily, and think thy self in a good condition, but they are
daily judging of themselves and humbling themselves before God, and admiring
Gods goodness that they are out of Hell, but thou do not so, and therefore
they may look upon themselves as more vile, and so be more humble.

Object, But you will say, If the best should judge of others better than
themselves; this may be well then for others, for they may say, then our
condition is not so bad, if the best of all may be as bad as we.

Now to that I answer.

Though they are to judge of themselves worse than others, yet if thou would
look into thine own heart, thou mai'st see a great deal more evil in thy heart
than is in theirs, it may be they may judge themselves to be worse than thee, so
far as they see into themselves, but thou may see more evil in thy heart than
is in theirs.

Object. But then may not this make wicked men secure and say, Well, we may
find mercy and be saved as well as the best, for the best may know so much
evil of themselves, that they may judge themselves worse than others.

To that I answer,

For Mercy, I grant you, it is possible thou may have as much mercy as they,
it is possible thou may come into as good a condition as they, and therefore
thou may make this use of it, and much good it may do thee, that is to say,
well, it is then possible that my Soul may be saved, and find mercy as well as
the best of them all, I but do not say it may be so, and thou remainest as bad
as thou art, there must be then that change in thee that is in them.

Well, but then this may not be abused that we speak of: Know this, that Gods
Grace is free, God may let them be saved and yet damn thee.

And yet Lastly, I would have thee raise thy meditations upon this, What! Are
they as vile as I of themselves, and yet do I continue in an unconverted
estate? Oh! How fearful is my condition then, that God has manifested that he
has chosen some as vile as I, and has left me, has taken others that are as
vile as I, and may be worse than I, and leaves me to go in the common road of
death and destruction? Oh! the sad condition that that man is in! the truth is,
it is a very daunting consideration, for a man to think thus, there are such
and such that are as bad as I, and have as bad hearts as I, and yet God for the
present has left me unchosen, and has chose them, this should daunt the heart
of any man. Have thou not known some wicked Companion of thine own, some wicked
Woman or Sister that God has been pleased to dart light into them, and humbled
and converted them, and has left thee that art not so vile? Oh! thou should
tremble and fear at the thoughts of this! What am I? though I lived more
civilly than they did, yet shall God choose them and leave me? What a dangerous
sign is this that I am not one that God will choose? though I do not know what
God may do hereafter, but for the present (I say) thou have cause to be
humbled, and not to rest in this condition. Well, That is the first thing. The
behavior of an humble Spirit in respect of others is, To judge of others better
than themselves, Oh! what a great deal of mischief would (...) hinder in the
world? What a great deal of hurt is there in the world for want of this humble
heart? What quiet lives might Men and Women live amongst themselves? How would
they enjoy this Promise in the Text? Learn of me for I am meek and lowly in
heart, and you shall find rest unto your Souls. It would keep us from
censoriousness which makes a great deal of disturbance in the world, Oh, the
disturbance, that censoriousness makes in the world; the giving rigid censures
of others, keeps many from professing Religion, and makes them complain of
those that profess Religion, you complain that when you profess Religion you
are so hated of others, and you think it is only because the world loves only
their own, therefore because you are of the world therefore the world hates
you; Nay, it may be it is because of the Pride of your hearts, and
censoriousness of others, had you an humble heart to look upon your own
Spirits, and judge of others better than your selves, you might live more quiet
lives, and have more respects from others that you converse withal, and sooner
convince them, and draw them to the love of Godliness, for one that has an
humble Spirit will be willing to take notice of any good in others; now because
there is not so much good in others as in you, therefore you take no notice of
others, but an humble Spirit takes notice of any good in others, and if his
judgment fails in any thing, it shall be in this, that he will judge others
better than himself, that is the first.

CHAP. CXXVII.
A second Property of Humility in respect of others is, To be fearful of
giving Offense-

SEcondly: Another thing in the behavior of an humble Spirit in respect of
others is this, It is very fearful of giving offense to others, and not very
ready to take offense from others. I will put both together. It will not give
offense to others, and that you have very frequently in Scripture in Romans 14.
10. But why do thou judge thy Brother? or why do thou set at naught thy
Brother? We shall all stand before the judgment seat of Christ. Now this is in
case of giving offense to others, that is the plain scope of this place, the
Argument that is driven at in this 14. of the Romans, it is the Argument of
giving offense to our Brethren, and here you may perceive in this place the
Reason why men do not care what offense they give unto others, why they set at
naught their Brethren, and judge them. Why do thou set at naught thy Brother?
Why do thou make thy Brother as no body to thee? so the Greek, one that has
a proud heart, if he think he has liberty himself for such and such things,
what cares he for others? Others are offended and grieved, but what cares he
for others? they are no body to him, he makes nothing of them: For that is the
word, Why do thou set at naught thy Brother, in being careless in giving
offense unto thy Brother? Oh, this is the pride of thy heart, a gracious heart
is loath to grieve any body in the world, so in the 15. verse of this Chap. But
if thy brother be grieved with thy meat, now walk thou not Charitably,
destroy not him with thy meat for whom Christ dyed. There the Apostle shows,
that he was loath, and so he would have all the Romans to be loath so much as
to grieve their brother. O! this is a very gracious Lowly spirit indeed, that
is so tender of others that he is not willing to grieve any one in the world,
he is so with others, as he is afraid to be a grief to others; here is a Spirit
that Jesus Christ shall have a great deal of Glory from, that lives so, as that
he is careful and very tender of grieving the spirits of others. It was a
Speech once of a great Captain, a Roman, when others commended the great
Exploits he did, I but says he, I Bless God never any one wore a Mourning
Garment for my sake, Oh, It is a blessed thing, for a man or woman to go out of
the world so, that every one can say, never any wore a mourning Garment for
such a man or woman. In Phillip. 2. 3. Let nothing be done through strife, or
vain glory, but in Lowliness of mind, let each esteem others better then
themselves. Verse, 4 Look not every man on his own things, but every man also
on the things of others, let this mind be in you which was also in Jesus
Christ, who being in the form of God etc. Do not look upon your own things but
upon the things of others, And be careful not to be offensive to any body
living, not to be occasion of grief to any body. And so in Romans 15. 2. Let
every one of us please his Neighbor for his good to Edification, for even
Christ pleased not himself, but as it is written, the reproaches of them that
reproached thee fell upon me. We should be careful not to please our selves but
our Neighbor from the Example of Christ, now what is his Example? But that here
in the Text, Learn of me for I am Lowly. Christ, though he were so great, that
he stood in no need of any body he was God blessed for ever in himself, yet he
did not seek to please himself but others, for the Text says, for even Christ
pleased not himself, but as it is written, the reproaches of them that
reproached thee fell on me. Now still this is in deference to the case of
offense, for so you see in the beginning of the Chapter, We then that are
strong, ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please our
selves, Let every one please his Neighbor, not please our self, but every one
please our Neighbor, And that according to the example of Jesus Christ, in this
Lowliness of heart. To see Men and Women to walk so, as not to care to give
content to any body but themselves in the Family, they must have all the content
and no body else pleased: And so among their Neighbors, societies, and
companies, they expect that every body in the Company should speak so as to
please them, but they care not to speak so as to please others: but here is the
guise of a Lowly spirit, to be careful not so much to please it self, as to
please others, is careful not to offend others though it may not please it
self, is solicitous and studious how he may give content to others, and no way
to offend them, that he may no way be an offense unto another, and if they hear
any thing that is offensive indeed unto another, and is a grief to the Soul of
another, they are much in the denial of themselves in the thing they require,
that they may give content to them; here is the guise of an humble Spirit, it
is afraid to offend others. So in 1 Cor. 10. 32. 33. Give none offense,
neither to the Jews, nor to the Genteles, nor to the Church of God, even as I
please al men in all things, not seeking mine own profit, but the profit of
many, that they may be saved.

You will say, We must be careful to give no offense to the Saints and Church
of God; Nay, says he, give not offense only to them, but to the Jew, the
Gentiles and all that live about you, be careful to please them for good in all
that you can, here is the Lowliness of the heart of Paul. So in 2 Cor. 6. 3.
There you have another expression of the gracious Lowliness of the heart of the
Apostle, Giving no offense in any thing, that the ministry be not blamed, This
he speaks especially as a minister, but it is true in all, but mark what
principle it was that carried him, to make him so careful not to give offense,
verse, 4. But in all things approving our selves as the ministers of God, in
much patience, in necessities, in afflictions, in distresses, and so he goes on
in verse, 8. By Honor and dishonor, by evil report and good report, as deceived
and yet true, As if he should say, we are willing to bear any thing in the
World, rather then to give offense, we are willing to bear reproach, and to be
accounted dishonorable in the World, we are willing to bow down our Necks, to
bow down our backs to any thing; this should be the frame of Godly men and
Women, of godly Christians. Not as soon as ever any thing crosses them,
presently to fling off all, and regard nothing any more, No, but to submit to
every condition, rather then to be any ways offensive unto others.

And then likewise you must take that in too, that an Humble Heart is not ready
to take offense from others, as it is Pride of Spirit for one not to be careful
of others whether they be offended or not offended, so on the other side it is
Pride of Spirit to be ready to take offense from others, and by this means
through their weakness they prove to be very burdensome to others, the ground
of their offense is only this, because they think that every body must do as
they themselves, and because they think that such a thing is better, therefore
others must do it, and if they do not it, then they are lofty, and then they
are proud, and stout, and you shall many times have people that are very weak in
pleading with others, if they cannot bring them to yield to what they would
have, they will break out into very unseemly speeches, that manifest that it is
not only through weakness, and tenderness, but through the pride of their
hearts, because they would have every body do as they do. Now an humble spirit
Reasons thus, it is true, such and such do so and so* and indeed I do not see
Reason why he does so, but he or she sees more then I do, and therefore though
I do not do that that they do, or dare not do that they dare do, yet because
they keep close to God, and seek to know the mind of God, and are more able to
search into the mind of God then I am, and God has revealed to them more then
he has to me, why should I be offended at my brother, upon that Reason I may
not be offended. This is an Argument of an humble Spirit. Indeed it is true,
God does give you leave, if the matter be of Consequence, (if any one should
walk in a way that you should take upon you in your conscience that it is a
just offense to you) to desire and you may demand a Reason of them, and they
are bound to give you a Reason (for we are bound to give a Reason of our Faith)
if you come merely in humility to ask a reason of any of our ways, so as that
you might not be offended, and we see that it is through Tenderness of Spirit
that you are offended, we ought to give account to any that we walk with, I do
not speak of any one in any society only that should demand a Reason, but if
any man living upon the Earth should come in an humble way, not in a
peremptory, proud, and contentious way, to know, and desire to know the grounds
and Reasons of our actions, because they fear our actions are not according to
God, we are bound to do it upon that in Paul, Give no offense neither to Jew,
nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God: If we must give no offense, then
certainly we are bound to give an account of our ^ctions, so as to satisfy
those that are offended, now though you may require a Reason for satisfaction,
yet when you have a Reason, (unless it be very apparent to the contrary)
suppose you your selves be not satisfied, yet if you see such and such do walk
close with God otherwise, then you are rather to judge and think that God has
revealed more to them then he has to you; and so rather to leave them to God
then to be ready to be offended, or still continue to be offended, because they
do not do as you do, and do not judge what you do to be right, there is a great
deal of difference between the natural complections of some. As for example,
some have not their Spirits so taken with the things of Religion as others
have, and yet are very faithful to God, and keep close to God. Truths they come
in by degrees one after another, and therefore it is a notorious and abominable
pride in men, to judge of others that they shut their Eyes against the light,
and that they sin against their conscience because they do not the things that
they do. That is the second thing in the behavior of an humble spirit in
respect of others, it is afraid of giving offense to others, and it is not
ready to take offense from others.

CHAP. CXXVIII.
Other Properties of Humility in respect of others. 3. It gives due Honor to
all with whom it does converse. 4. It rejoices in their good. 5. It is willing
to receive good from them. 6. It is tender toward others. 7. It is not
needlessly singular from them.

THirdly, Another thing in an humble Spirit in reference unto others is this,
he gives due honor, and due respect unto all living that he does any way
converse with, in Rom, 12. 10. Be kindly affected one to another with brotherly
Love* in hon^r preferring one another, Strive who shall give most honor to one
another, Oh, this is a gracious temper, to strive who shall give most honor, not
who shall get most honor, who shall be most honorable and greater then another,
But in honor preferring one another every man should strive who should give
most honor to one another, my Brother strives to give respect and honor unto
me, and I should strive to give more respect and honor to him, if I should be
above my Brother in any thing, I should strive to give more respect to him then
he does to me, quite contrary to the common course of the world, how hard is it
for men to acknowledge that others have more Grace then they, merely because
they would not give more honor to others then to themselves, now an humble
heart does this. Men should give to men due honor, if God has lifted a man up
above me in Estate, or in civil respects, it may be you think him not so
gracious a man as you, What then? You are to give him honor according to the
place that God has set him in. And so in another Relation, as now the Wife to
the Husband: For the Husband, apparently the Scripture shows that God sets the
Husband above the Wife, perhaps the parentage of the Wife is better then the
Husbands, perhaps the Estate of the Wife is better then the Husbands, perhaps
the gifts of the Wife may be more then the Husbands, the Wife may have more
understanding in Religion then the Husband has, yet she must Honor her Husband
above al, as one that God has set above her. And so Servants to Honor their
Governors, though they are of greater parentage, may be better then your Master
or Mistress, yet God having set them over you, you are to give due honor and
respect to them, this an humble Heart will do, and an humble Heart gives
respect unto all. In Romans 12. 16. Be of the same mind one toward another, Mind
not high things, but condescend to men of Low Estate, Here is a lowly heart, he
gives honor to those that are above them, and due respect to all men in the
world, a man, as a man is worthy of some respect, but then according to any
Relation he stands in, any one that God has given any place unto above
others, so we are to give him due respect. Perhaps they are meaner in estate,
lower then thou art in the world, yet mark what the Apostle says, Condescend
to men of low Estate. You must be affable in your carriage to men and women,
you must not scorn, not look with disdain upon any though they be never so
much under you, has God placed you above them, given you a higher place in
estate, given you more Riches, better parts, better employments then they have,
yet you must condescend to the lowest, and think with your selves, who has
made the difference? I might have been as low in condition and parts as they,
and therefore you must condescend to them, not look above them, not despise to
look upon them, what art thou more then they? Are ye not of the same Mould? Are
ye not made of the same Clay? If you be made of a little more fine Clay then
others, If you have a little more painting of fine Clothes upon your Clay then
others, what is that? All outward things make but a little difference between
man and man; I confess Grace makes a great deal of difference between man and
man, but the ordinary way whereby men lift themselves up above their Brethren,
it is because they have finer Clothes then others, and better Estates then
others, and better parts then others Alas! If thou have wit, and understanding,
let God but touch thy brain a little with a few humors, with a little too much
heat, or cold, or moisture, or drawing a few ill Vapors out of thy Stomach,
thou may go like a Fool or a mad man. I remember one Albertus Magnus, who
was one of the greatest scorners in the world, yet was many years before he
died a very Fool, the parts of a man are very poor things to lift up any man,
considering how they depend upon a little temper of the brain, and a little
sickness may make thee as mad a man as any in Bedlam, therefore there is no
Reason to look upon thy self above others in that respect.

Fourthly, Another thing in an humble Spirit in reference unto others is this,
which is somewhat more then the other, he not only gives respect, but rejoices
in the good of others, in whatever excellency God has bestowed upon others, in
what success God gives to others, what esteem God has of others, an humble
heart will rejoice in all, you know, Paul, he rejoiced that the Gospel was
Preached, though he was nothing. There are two Cases in which we are to rejoice
in respect of others, to be glad that others are above us: As first, If God
raises any in spiritual Grace: Does God give any spiritual Grace more than
to thee; I say, thou art bound not only to be content but to rejoice in it, and
it is a wickedness in the hearts of Men and Women, that because their Glory
shall be somewhat eclipsed by the Graces of others, they could even almost wish
that they did somewhat to darken their Graces, because then they should not
shine so bright, and they should be some body as well as they, if there be this
wickedness in thy heart, know, that this is as cursed a wickedness as the heart
of man is capable of in the world, next to the sin against the Holy Ghost,
there is as cursed an evil in this distemper of thine, as can almost be
imagined to be in the heart of a man or woman, What! shall thy eye be evil
because thy Brothers is good? because thy name must suffer a little, what is
thy name, or thy Glory in comparison of the Glory that God may have by the
Grace of thy Brother? And so for the gifts of others, not only the Graces, but
the gifts of others, the Scripture says, When the wicked are exalted, the
People mourn, and may not we mourn because the wicked are lifted up? Therefore
that is the second case, when God gives any gifts, so as to make another more
isntrumental for good than he does our selves, we are to rejoice in that
though it be not true Grace, yet if he give any gifts whereby they come to be
more instrumental for God and his Glory than our selves, we are bound to
rejoice in this, and to bless God for it, this many times comes very near the
hearts of men, and yet there is infinite reason, for what is my name, my
credit, my estate, in comparison of the work that is done for God? If I be
sincere for God, certainly, if the work do go on, though not by me, I may
rejoice, if my heart be upright, and be not damnable proud, I am bound to
rejoice in it, and bless God, though I can do but little for God, yet blessed
be God that there be any can do more than I can, this indeed would be a great
deal of comfort in your hearts, you complain of your own weakness, O! you say,
you cannot pray, when you go to prayer you have a dead heart, I but can you
say, though I have a strait heart, and cannot pray, Oh, I bless God that others
have a heart enlarged in prayer, you are not (I hope) wishing that others had
as straightened hearts as you, And so thou have a weak memory, and can not
remember good things, I but blessed be God that has given gifts to others,
that they can remember, and that God has a great deal of Glory by them, and
thus when I am in secret, in my Closet, to be blessing of God that he has
given gifts to others, whereby he has more Glory than by my self. And so I
might name many particulars that are to be objects of an envious heart, but
humility rejoices in other respects, and if there be any lifted up above me,
God sees that he is like to do him more service than I, if I should be lifted
up as they are, God sees that I am not able to bear it. It is the speech of old
Mr. Dod, he wished himself to be the worst Preacher in all the world, I would to
God (says he) that I were the worst Preacher in all the Kingdom, not that he
thought himself worse than he was, but this, that he would have all in the
Kingdom better than he. You know Moses when they told him of Eldad and Medad
that prophesied in the Camp, he answered, Why do thou envy them for my sake?
I would to God all the Lords People were so, An humble heart never is troubled
that any credit is gotten from him so God may have Gloty. When as God chose
Moses to go to the People of Israel, he would have Aaron to be ^he mouth, but
Moses should be the chief, Exodus 4. 14. Behold Aaron he comes forth to meet
thee, and when he sees thee, he will be glad in his heart, no question but God
made known to Aaron what his work should be that made him glad at the heart,
and though Aaron knew Moses should be above him, and Aaron was the elder
brother, yet when he met with Moses he was glad at the heart: As if he should
say, blessed be God, though he be my younger Brother, yet I am willing to
further the service that God has called my younger Brother to; So though thou
may think thou have other gifts, than other men have, and act above other
men, yet if Gods Glory goes on, thou should bless God that his Glory comes
about by any others. I remember Plutarch tells of one Philertus that was in
election for a place, and it was a place that three hundred were in nomination,
and were chosen before him, he should have been but one of them, and he goes
away rejoicing, and was glad with this expression, I am glad that there is
three hundred in this City better deserving than my self, not fretting and
fuming, but was glad that there was three hundred better than himself fit for
such a place: So should we, knowing how God casts things in providence, rejoice
upon this, that others are found better than our selves.

Fifthly: An humble Spirit in reference unto others, is willing to receive good
from the meanest, i^ there be any one, though never so mean, yet he is willing
to receive good from him, he does not scorn it because it comes from a mean
man, but on the contrary says, Has God bestowed any Grace upon others, though
not so much as upon me, yet I may get some good by them? it may be they have
not so great gifts as I, I but I may get some good by the meanest, and the
weakest, as I have said sometimes, little Chips will kindle great Logs, so an
humble heart will get something from the meanest, he will go away blessing God
for the comfort he has by the company of those that are meaner than himself.
Mark Paul; says he, in Jesus Christ that you would strive together with God
for me. What! this Apostle, that was so much above them, for them to strive
together with God for him: Yes, thus it is with a true gracious heart. I
remember I have read of a German Divine, when he lay sick and some of his
friends came to him, and would be speaking to him, and they thought it would be
grievous to him, because he was so weak, Oh, says he (though they were but
those that you call Lay People) if so be that when I die I shall learn any thing
of any body, I should account my departure more sweet to me. And so it was the
Speech of Oecolampadius, If a truth come, though by a Child, by the meanest, we
must not refuse: But know sometimes, that God may speak by a poor body, when he
does deny to speak by those of greater abilities, and therefore we do not know
what we lose by contemning those that are under us, for God (I say) many times
may speak that to our hearts by those that are beneath us, when he denies to
speak it by those that are above us. Now an humble Spirit is willing to learn
of every body, of the meanest, Oh, if there were such a temper in the hearts of
Men and Women, what abundance of sweetness and peace might we have? Now by that
we have said, you may see how the promise may be fulfilled, if we had but an
humble heart, there would be abundance of rest that we should have in this, Oh,
the abundance of peaceableness that there would be in the world, were it not
for this pride of heart; it is Pride of heart that makes all this ado and
combustion in the world, and were we thus carrying our selves lowly in heart
one toward another, Oh! the rest that there would be in the world, and in our
own Spirits!

Sixthly: Another is this, An humble heart is a tender heart toward others, a
lowly heart is a melting heart, In Colos. 3. 12. you have those two put
together, Put on therefore, as the elect of God, Holy and beloved, bowels of
mercies and kindness humbleness of mind, Bowels of mercies and humbleness of
mind are put together, an humble Spirit is merciful toward others, is of a
tender heart, either to forgive others, or to give unto others, he readily
passes by the offenses done by others, he forgives others, he reasons with
himself, What am I, that I should think it so great a matter for me to be
offended, that has sinned so much against God as I have done? Who am I, to
take so much upon me against my Brother that has offended, when I deserve to
be roaring and yelling in Hell? I that have so many talents forgiven me, Why
should not I forgive to others? And then for giving unto others, he considers,
Who has made the difference between me and others? Why is it that I should be
able to give, and not to have need of others? Why should my Brother be in such
a poor condition and I have such accomodations? An humble hear^ loves such
reasoning, has his bowels yern toward the necessities of his Brethren,
whereas a proud Spir^t thinks all is for himself, Shall I give my bread, and my
flesh* and my Beer that I have provided for my Servants? (says Nabal) but an
humble heart thinks all that he has is mercy, and therefore gives to others.
That which makes men and women stand so much upon it, that they will not
forgive wrongs, and makes them so merciless toward others in misery, it is
from the pide of their Spirits; an humble heart, is a heart tender and melting
toward others.

Seventhly: And then the last that I shall name is this: That an humble heart
is not needlessly singular from others; abundance of pride appears in
singularity: there is a singularity that is of necessity, that is, we must do
our Duty, what Conscience requires in Duty toward God, though none in the
world should do the like: So we should be singular, What singular thing do you?
but I say, an humble heart is not needlessly singular from others, and that you
have in Romans 12. 16. it is a notable Scripture for this, Be of the same mind
one toward another, mind not high things, but condescend to men of low estate.
Now the words I confess as they are in your Books do not seem to hold forth
that I bring it for, yet if it be examined as the learned know in the original
it is thus (...), So it is translated, Go the same way with those that are of a
low estate, go on in the same way together with them. Do not go in a singular
way by your selves, there is the danger of Pride, for men to go in the way of
those that are not mean, they will go on in the way of those that have credit
and esteem in the world, they will not be singular from them, here is the Pride
of singularity for men to be singular from poor, Godly, Gracious People, thou
Professest thy self to be a Christian, and thou can comply with men that are
full of Pomp, and Glory of the world, and wilt not be singular from them: but
thou will be singular from those that are mean, Godly and gracious souls, that
is Pride, we must go on in the way with those that are most Godly, and most
Holy, and most Gracious. Now there is a great deal of Pride in singularity, in
going in ways from them that are Holy and Godly in matter of things that are
indifferent, and you your selves acknowledge it, and yet you must have a
peculiar Garb by your selves, as some have a singular tone of speech, and an
affected gate, and strange kind of fashion, and a sullen kind of way of keeping
what they have had heretofore many years, though there be no body else have the
same thing, yet they think it is humility, when indeed there is a sullenness of
Spirit, and a proud singularity in it, and wilfulness, when they will go in a
different way, even from the way of Godly, Holy, and Gracious Christians, and
would have somewhat peculiar to themselves. For any man to affect singularity,
in things wherein he may lawfully suit himself with others, this is Pride
wherever it is, and especially those that are Godly, they should suit
themselves with others wherein they can, because there is something wherein
their Conscience will not give them leave to suit with others, being bound in
Conscience, they have not that liberty that other men have to do this or that,
to go this way or that way that other men can do, or go in for their own ends:
that which they apprehend to be according to the Rule, they must go on to the
utmost in every thing, whatever men do that they live amongst, but now because
in some things thou art bound up, having a tender Conscience, that you must go
according to the Rule, therefore it should be thy wisdom in all things wherein
thou can condescend, and suit thy self with other men lawfully, to do it,
because hereby thou shall convince the world that when thou do differ from
them, it is not out of proud singularity, but out of Conscience, they will
think that if thou could in thy Conscience suit with them thou would,
because in all things wherein thou can thou suitest with them, and indeed
those that are Christians, should in as much as they can be Servants to every
one, that is, yield to every one, and suit themselves with every one, upon this
ground, that they may by this convince all the world that where they are
different from other men, it is not out of honor and pride, but merely out of
obedience to Jesus Christ. Thus you have seen the behavior of an humble Spirit,
in reference to God, in reference to himself, and in reference to other men.

CHAP. CXXIX.
The excellency of Humility in thirteen particulars. 1. God prizeth it. 2. It
is a convincing Grace. 3. By it we walk worthy of the Gospel. 4. It is an
Evidence of election. 5. Better than Sacrifices. 6. It serves for the
prevailing of Prayer. 7. It is a tried heart. 8. It is fit for great Services.
9. It is the ornament of all Graces. 10. It preseves all Graces. 11. It makes
all Duties and Crosses easy. 12. It makes the life comfortable. 13. It is most
useful to give God the Glory of the new Covenant.

THe excellency of this Grace of Humilty, Learn of me, for I am meek and Lowly
in heart. This Grace is above all Graces, next to Faith it self, and mightily
extolled in Scripture, and it is proper indeed to Christianity, if you read in
Philosophers that speak of moral virtues, you shall find high commendations of
Justice, Virtue, and the like, and little or nothing said of Humility, No, it
is the Christian that counts Humility to have an Excellency in it, it is Christ
that is come from the Bosom of his father into the world, to be an example and
a pattern to hold forth the excellency and glory of this Grace before the
world, and that was one Reason why Christ came into the world, Namely, to hold
forth the Glory, and excellency of his Grace: Humility may say but little of
its own praise, God takes care for the Glory of it, it will discover it self by
the fragrancy of it self; as violets discover themselves by the sweetness of
them, though they be covered with Leaves, so the excellency of humility will
discover it self by its sweetness, and no man or Woman needs to take care for
the discovery of its excellency, and therefore it is abundant folly for a man
or woman to be proud of their humility, or to show themselves humble that
others may take notice of it, and so commend them for it, but true humility
shows forth it self, and it must not be forced but let it alone, and let it
appear in it self in a genuine way, and its excellency of its self will be best
discovered. Let us see the^ wherein the true excellency of a Lowly heart
appears, that we may be in Love with this Grace.

First, There is no grace in Scripture that God speaks more honorably of, that
the Lord has a more honorable esteem of. In Prove. 16. 19. See what the
Testimony of God is of an humble spirit, Better it is to be of an humble spirit
with the lowly, than to divide the Spoil with the proud.. Here is Gods
Testimony, here is two sorts of people compared one with another, the humble
spirit, and he that divides the Spoil with the proud, there is no time
wherein the heart of man is more lifted up, than when a man has overcome his
enemy, and is triumphing and dividing the spoil, Oh, Now his spirit is above,
Now (says God) you poor creatures, when you can get victory, and make a prey
of your enemies, then your hearts are lifted up, and you think such a man has
a brave conquest over his enemy, and now he is triumphing, Well, says God,
there is a poor humble contrite heart that the world takes no notice of, and I
count it better for one to be of an Humble Spirit with the Lowly, than to
divide the Spoil with the proud. Take men in their greatest jollity, and
height, and glory, and luster, that ever men were in the world, yet the poor
humble, Lowly spirited men, are more glorious in mine Eyes, I count a poor
S^ul, a Child, a Servant, that has gotten into a hole, humbling their Souls
before me, I look upon these as a more glorious object for me to behold, than
great Alexander, and Caesar, and the greatest conqueror in the world. We call
the proud happy, but the Lord calls the humble happy. And so in Isa. 66. That
Famous place, The Lord that dwells on high, be looks on him that i^ of an humble
and contrite spirit, As if there were no object for the Eye of God to feed
upon, to be pleased withal but the humble spirit, whereas the proud he looks
afar off upon them, Psalm. 138. 6. Though the Lord be high, yet he has respect
unto the Lowly, but the proud he knows afar off, The humble he looks upon; as
if God should say, there is nothing in all the world that is worth my looking
upon but an humble spirit yea, and God loves to be near to them, in Psalm. 34.
18. The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken heart, and saves such as
be of a contrite Spirit, He loves to be near one that is of an humble spirit,
Yea, and he loves to dwell with them. In Isai. 57. 15. Thus says the high and
lofty one, that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is holy, I dwell in the high and
holy place, with him also that is of a contrite and an humble spirit, God lifts
up himself, and says twice, first that he is high and lofty in himself, and
then that he dwells in the high and lofty place, and yet, faith he, I dwell in an
humble spirit, it may be an humble spirit is such a one as proud men scorn
their company, cannot endure their company, Well, but God loves to dwell in the
House where thou art, let it be never so poor a cottage, he loves to dwell
there, God has but two Houses, he has the highest Heavens, and the lowest
heart, those are the two Houses God dwells in, the Heavens above, and the heart
that is low, and the lower the heart is, the more the Lord loves to dwell there.

Secondly, The excellency of an humble spirit appears in this, that it is a
grace that most convinces men, even a proud man sees a luster of humility in
others, one proud man hates another proud man, whereas one humble man loves
another humble man, humility is that that glaires in the Eyes of those that are
contrary to it, a proud man, if he sees one humble is mightily convinced of the
excellency of it, those are the Christians that live convincingly, which
manifest the lowliness of their hearts and humility in their carriage.

Thirdly, And further, It is that grace likewise whereby one walks worthy of
the Gospel, you may add this if you will to the former, and in that it is
convincing. I^ Ephesians. 4. 1, 2. I therefore the prisoner of the Lord, beseech
you, that you walk worthy of the vocation wherewith you are called, with all
lowliness and Meekness, When Lowliness of heart appears in your Demean or and
Carriage thus, here is walking now worthy of the vocation to which you are
called.

Fourthly, Yea and further, It is an evidence of Gods eternal election, and as
here Christ joins Low liness and Meekness together, so in Scripture they are
joined in this, in walking worthy of your calling, and a note of your election,
So in Colos. 3. 12. Put on therefore, as the Elect of God, Holy and beloved,
Bowels of mercies, Kindness, humbleness of mind, It is an Argument that God
has set his heart upon thee from al eternity, if he has given thee a Lowly
heart.

Fifthly, And further, Humility is a Grace that is beyond all kind of
Sacrifices acceptable to God, in Psalm. 51. The Sacrifices of God are a broken
spirit, But the place especially that I would fix this upon, it is that in Mic.
6. 6. and so on, There is the question asked, Wherewith shall I come before the
Lord, and bow my self before the high God? Shall I come before him with burnt
offerings, and Calves of a year Old? Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of
Rams, Or with ten thousand of Rivers of Oil? Shall I give my first born for my
Transgression, the fruit of my Body for the sin of my Soul? Here was great
things, shall I do all this? We are willing to do all this, Mark verse, 8. He
has showed thee, O man, what is good, and what does the Lord require of thee,
but to do justly, and to Love Mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? Here is a
Scripture that justifies what we said before, that an humble man is of a tender
heart; but now I note it only for this, that when they seem to promise such
great things to God, that they would offer if they were able thousands of Rams,
and ten thousand Rivers of Oil, that they would give the fruit of their body
for the sin of their Soul, says God, all this is nothing to me in comparison
of your walking humbly before me, walk humbly before God, and this is more to
God, then if you were able to show your respects unto him in offering thousands
of Rams, or ten thousand Rivers of Oil, or give the fruit of your body for the
sin of your Soul. You that are poor people, you are not able to give much to
God, you think, Oh, if I were able to do much service for God, to do great
things for God as others are, what an excellent thing were it? But I have
nothing; Well* but can thou walk humbly before the Lord? It is more then if
thou could give Kingdoms unto God, and therefore a great excellency appears
in this Grace of Humility.

Sixthly, And then humility it is a main ingredient to the prevalency in
prayer, God has a special Eye to the Humility of the Soul in seeking of him in
Prayer, I might give you diverse Scriptures for that, in 2 Chronicles. 7. 14. If my
people which are called by my name, shall humble themselves, and seek my Face,
and pray, I will hear them says God. And so again in Psalm. 9. 12. He forgets
not the cry of the Humble, If an humble man cry, Oh, it takes deep impression
in the heart of God, it will not go ^ut of his mind for a long time together,
as you know some things that are spoken that take the heart, are not easily
forgotten, as when you come to a Sermon, if you hear something that is spoken
that takes the heart, it will abide with you, it will not easily be forgotten,
so here, he will not forget the cry of the humble, as if he should say, Oh, the
cry of the humble does so take my heart, that I cannot forget it, it may be
sometimes when you go abroad, and hear the cries of some miserable people, you
cannot forget it, you say, O me thinks in the night, and whatever I am about, I
hear the cry of such a one, there is the cry of such a poor creature in mine
Ears; so says God, whatever I am about, me thinks the cry of the humble is in
mine Ears, I cannot forget it, and therefore says the Psalmist, in Psalm. 10.
12. Arise O Lord, O God lift up thy hand, forget not the Humble, He does not
instance in any other qualification but the humble, do not forget the Humble,
the Lord, he can pass by Kings, and Princes, and great ones, but he will not
forget the Humble. As I remember that Famous Mr. Fox, that wrote the book of
Martyrs, when a poor Woman came to beg of him his Prayers, well says he, I may
forget Kings and Princes, but I hope I shall never forget an humble, broken
Soul, this is Gods respect to the humble. And then in Psalm. 10. 17. Lord thou
have heard the desire of the humble, thou will prepare their heart, thou will
incline thine Ear to hear. An humble heart, if he have but a desire, presently
God hears it; Mark* thou have heard the desire of the humble, he does not say,
thou have heard the Prayer of the humble, but thou have heard the desire of the
humble, the very desire of an humble Soul cries aloud in Gods Ears. And
therefore (by the way) of all things in the world take heed of wronging those
that are humble, take heed of doing wrong to one that has a Lowly heart, if
such a one that has a broken heart goes and makes his moan to God, woe unto
thee, for no cry takes such mighty impression in Gods heart, as the cry of the
humble, if it be twenty years after he will not forget it, such an humble Soul
came and made its moan against such a Man or Woman, and I remember it; and
therefore in these times, when ye call for Prayer, and the Church calls for
Prayer, and our own necessity calls for Prayer, we had need be of humble
spirits, for this is a maine ingredient for the prevalency of Prayer, and
therefore there is an excellency in the Grace of humility.

Seventhly, Further, an humble heart is a tried heart, no man or woman knows
their own hearts but those that are humble, thou can not know thine own heart
till thou be humble. There is many afraid lest they should be deceived, they
cry out, O my heart is deceitful, and I may deceive my self and perrish at
last, would thou prevent this? would thou not be deceived in the matters
of eternity, and thy eternal estate? Then be very Lowly and humble, and then
thou will know thy heart; the reason why all Hipocrites go away with a formal
profession, and do not know their hearts, and have falsness lie at the bottom,
it is from the pride of their own hearts, because their hearts are not broken,
and are not humble, therefore mark what God says in Deuteronomy. 8. 2. Says God to
his people there when he would bring them into the wilderness, And thou shall
remember all the way which the Lord thy God led thee these forty years in the
Wilderness, What was it for? For to humble thee, and prove thee, and know what
was in thine Heart. Whether thou would keep his commandments or no, all
this was to humble thee, and prove thee, and to know what was in thy heart. Did
not God know what was in their heart before? Yes certainly but he would have
them know what was in their heart, and how would he do it? By humbling them,
and proving them, God humbles men by bringing their estates Low, and they come
to know what is in their hearts thereby, O! men that did prosper in outward
things, now in these times God has taken their estates from them, and they
come to know more what is in their own hearts then before, and in this God does
recompense their loss of Estate, that they come to know their own hearts more,
Says an humble soul, true, I have lost much of mine estate, but yet withal I
have come thereby to know more of mine own heart then ever I did before: then I
argue from the lesser to the greater, if the loosing of a man's estate will try
one, then certainly, the humbling of the heart will try one more, that is the
excellency of an humble heart, it is a tried heart, the Lord may trust such a
Soul, let God set them about what he will, to do or suffer, an humble heart is
fit for it.

Eighthly, And then the next thing is this, an humble heart is fit to be
employed in great Services, in any great thing for God, no man or woman is so
fit to be employed in great things as those that are humble, God himself did a
more glorious work in his low estate, then in his high estate, the work of
Redemption is a more glorious work, then the work of creation, and in what a
low estate was the Lord Jesus Christ in redeeming the world? Christ in dying,
and in being made a curse, in that he redeemes the world, and Christ never did
from all eternity greater things then when he was made a curse for man's sin, as
he was a God, Though he thought it no Robbery to be equal with God, As in
Pillip. ^. Yet he emptied himself as the word is* and became obedient unto the
death of the Cross, I say, there is a greater thing done by God there in that
low estate, then ever was done from all eternity before, And as God does
greater things in his low estate, then in his high estate, so it is with man
also, he does greater things in his low estate then when he is raised high, And
hence it is that those great instruments that God used for his honor were kept
but low, as Abraham, he wandered up and down a long time* and how was he tried,
and humbled? And so Joseph, and Daniel, that God intended to do such great
things by, and so all the worthies of God, that God made choice instruments for
his Glory, they must first be low. And Paul, that was the choicest instrument
that ever God had, next to Christ, how low was he? in Acts, 20. 19. He tells the
elders of Ephesus, He had served the Lord with all humility of mind, and with
many Tears and Temptations, And God fitted him to be a great instrument of his
Glory. In 2 Cor. 12. 9. You have a notable expression of Paul for this purpose,
the latter part of the verse, Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in mine
infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me, therefore I take
pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecution, in
distresses for Christ sake, for when I am weak then am I strong, Paul could
Glory in his infirmities, and he speaks of his infirmities that he would take
pleasure in, in reproaches, persecutions distresses for Christ's sake, but now
Mark these two expressions that follow upon this, first, That the power of
Christ might rest upon him, The power of Jesus Christ rests upon Paul when he
was brought into a low estate, and when he could humbly submit himself so far
to the hand of God, as to rejoice in his infirmities, Paul could never do such
great things for God as then. And then again, Says he, When I am weak, then am
I strongest, Oh, Humility is that that makes the Soul fit for any Service for
God, though humble men may lie hid for a while and be as it were under the
hatches for it, yet certainly. God intends great things for humble Hearts, and
what he does not now, he will reserve for them hereafter, and make them
instruments of his Glory in a more special manner, but at one time or other
every humble soul shall be a glorious instrument of the praise and honor of God,
this we may boldly affirm. You will say, they may live obscurely and die. I
grant it, but then God has another time to make them glorious instruments of
his praises hereafter, and to show forth himself in Glory upon them to
recompense what Glory they were willing to deny here in this world* and willing
to be deprived of as submitting to the will of God.

Ninthly: Further, Humility has this excellency in it, That it is that that
puts an ornament upon al Graces, it is as it were the Luster, Beauty, and
Ornament, the Varnish, Nay that is too mean a Phrase, it is the Glory and true
Beauty of every Grace in a man. I remember Chrysostom has such an expression
as this, Whatever a man does without Humility, though he should work Miracles,
he were but as a dead Dog, Let a man do never so much, yet there is no Beauty
in what he does where there is no humility, but Humility puts an Ornament and
Beauty upon all Graces. That place is known in 1 Pet. 5. 5. we have often had
occasion to make use of it, Be clothed with Humility, I have told you sometimes,
the propriety of the word signifies, the dressing with Ribbons, fine beautiful
Ornaments, Be clothed with Humility, it is the beautiful ornament of a
Christian, and of all the Graces of a Christian, it puts off Grace, and every
action with a Grace, as I may so say, And that some think to be the meaning of
the Promise that we shall speak unto afterward, In 1 Pet. 5. 5. God resists
the Proud and gives Grace to the Humble. It is true, (as we shall show
afterward) that God gives Grace, that is, the Graces of his Spirit, but there
is a further sense in it* God gives a Grace to that, God puts a Beauty and
Ornament upon the Humble, for Humility does so beautify a Christian, that
whatever they do they do it with a Grace, there is no Christian that does
things with such a Grace as the Humble, and it is that that does adorn all
Graces, Humility Graceth all Graces whatsoever.

Tenthly: And then it is that that preserves all Graces too, and so some take
the word there to come from a word that signifies a knot, because it ties all
Graces, as it were, with fast knots together, as I find some Interpreters carry
the word, it unites, and knits, and strengthens all Graces, Paul walked humbly
with God, walked constantly with him, whatever fell out, it did not hinder them
from serving God, As in Acts 20, the place I named before, when he called
together the Elders of Ephesus at verse 19. when they were come, he speaks to
them thus, Serving the Lord with all Humility of mind, and with many tears and
temptations which befell me by the lying in wait of the Jews, whatever
temptations did befall Paul, yet he was able to go through them, for he served
the Lord with all Humility, it is the proud swollen heart that is the
backsliding heart, but the humble heart is the heart that keeps constant with
God, it preserves all the Graces of the Spirit of God in vigor, and in
strength, uniting of them together, and uniting the Soul to the Fountain of all
Grace, it is the preservative of all Grace.

Eleventhly: And again, Humility it is that that makes all Duties and all
Afflictions to be easy, therefore this follows that I shall speak to
afterward, Learn of me and be lowly in heart, and then My Yoke is easy and my
Burden is light, it is an easy thing for a man to do any thing that God sets
him about if he be once humble, there is no difficulty that a man finds in the
service of God but it is through pride of heart. And so there is an ease in all
Afflictions in being humble, that that yields you know can bear opposition
without any great noise, indeed the tall Cedars are broken with winds, but the
poor shrubs below they do not suffer so much, but these two will fall more
seasonably in when we come to show how humility gives quiet and rest unto the
Soul.

Twelfthly: Again, There is nothing that makes the life of a man and woman more
joyful, and more comfortable, than Humility: You think the proud have the jolly
lives, and the comfortable lives, No, but the humble have most comfortableness,
because it makes them to prize the least mercy. Chrysostom, upon Acts 7. has
this expression. None says he, live so comfortably as the humble, and he gives
the reason for it, Because the least thing he enjoyes, he sets such a price
upon the mercy, and therefore rejoices in it, you shall observe it, come to a
poor Godly Family, and you hear nothing but blessing and praising of Gods
mercy, and wondering at Gods mercy, you that have great Houses, and great Tables
furnished, you are wrangling and snarling at this and the other thing, but an
humble heart is praising and blessing God for his mercy and enjoy more of the
mercies of Gods that they have than you do in all your abundance. If a man have
his flesh swollen, he will not be able to bear it, but it will be mighty
toublesome to him: So when the heart is swollen it will bring trouble to thee,
but this likewise will come more fully in, when we come to speak of the
Promise, I will give you rest. But now there is only one thing more for opening
the excellency of this Grace, and that is, the many gracious Promises in
Scripture that are made to humble hearts, as now to name a few, That God will
guide the humble in their way, Psalm. 25. 9. I confess your Books have it Meek,
and so I made use of it in opening Meekness, but the word in the Hebrew is,
Humble, and you may take it both ways, and therefore in Prove. 11. 2. you have
an excellent Scripture there. With the Lowly there is Wisdom, No man or woman
has that Wisdom for the guiding and governing of their ways, as the Lowly;
Proud men will run on upon their own heads rashly, because they be conceited of
their own ways, but the Lowly will examine, and wait, and suspect themselves,
they will try and examine their ways, and go in an humble way, With the Lowly
there is Wisdom. Oh! into what Labyrinths, straits, aed extremities, do proud
people hurry themselves, but now the Lowly they have the guidance of the Spirit
of God carrying them on in their way, and therefore they can quiet their
hearts, and listen to know what the mind of God is. And another Promise is,
That God will revive the Humble, the humble is ready to be trod under foot, but
in Isay 57. 15. The Lord says, he will revive the humble. And another is that
in Peter He will give Grace to the Humble. And that same Promise that you have
in Prove. 3. That he will give Grace to the Lowly. Thou would have more Grace
(it is taken for the Graces of Gods Spirit) you would fain have more Grace to
subdue your corruptions. Are you thankful for what you have? An humble heart
will take notice of every little it has and wait upon God for more. Make use
of this Promise, true Lord, I have not such Grace as I would have, but I have
my heart subdued to this condition, then here is the Promise, The Lord will
give Grace to the Humble. And then there is the Promise of Exaltation, in Prove.
15. 33. and Math. 23. 12. Those that do most abase themselves, shall be most
exalted by God. It was an Answer that a Philosopher gave to one, that asked
him. What God did in Heaven? he gives this Answer, He is beating down the
Proud, and lifting up the Humble, that is the thing that he is doing in Heaven;
and therefore those in Scripture that have been lowest, you see how afterward
God has exalted them. Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God, and he
shall exalt you in due time, in 1 Pet. 5. 6. speaking there of Humility, there
is but one word in the Greek there for due time, (...), the opportunity of
time, God will exalt you when a fit opportunity comes. And then there is the
Promise of safety also to the humble, in Job 22. 29. God makes a Promise there
to keep those that are humble in a safe condition, whatever danger is abroad,
the Lord will preserve them, When men are cast down, then thou shall say there
is a lifting up, and he shall save the humble Person, the Lord will save the
humble Person in time of trouble, He shall find mercy frrom God in troublesome
times. And so in Zeph. 3. 12. I will also leave in the midst of thee, an
afflicted and poor People, and they shall trust in the name of the Lord, it is
spoke of the times of Captivity, and great misery, that People should be in
times of trouble.

Yea, All outward needful things is promised to the humble, in Prove. 22. 4. By
Humility and the fear of the Lord is Riches, and Honor, and Life. You will say,
Humble people (may be) are poor, but they have more assurance of Riches than
any in the world have, they have Gods bond for Riches, but still ever to be
understood with the condition of the Cross, ever understood so, as may be
useful for the enriching of their Souls, God has promised to enrich their
outward estates. You think by the pride of your hearts, and your busseling in
the world, you may get much, but by walking humbly with God, you may expect
more blessing upon your estate than from any thing in the world.

But now that which is the main Promise of all, is, that in the Text, Learn of
me for I am Meek and Lowly in heart and you shall find rest for your Souls, and
there are no People in the world that have so much rest in their hearts, such
satisfaction in their Souls, as those that are of humble hearts, there is a
great deal of disquiet in the world and men complain that they cannot live at
quiet, and they have no rest at all in their Spirits, know, that is from that
proud Spirit of thine that there is no rest in thy bones and Spirit, but if God
come once to work this Grace of humility in thy Soul, thou will find rest unto
thy Soul in all thy ways, thou will walk with such a quiet, and contented
Spirit, that none in the world walks with. Would not any of you have this
Promise fulfi^led in such troublesome times as this, when there is no rest in
any thing in the world? Here is that Scripture that will show that though you
cannot have rest in any thing in the world, yet you shall have rest in your
Souls, it was in the former verse, when Christ did invite poor laden Sinners to
come to him, I will give you rest, there is the rest of the Gospel that comes
to the soul by Jesus Christ, I do not intend to look back to those things, all
that I intend in this Promise is, to show you how Humility brings rest unto the
Soul (I have showed before how Meekness brings rest unto the Soul,) and then we
shall come to the words following, the easiness of the Yoke of Jesus Christ to
those that are thus lowly as Christ would have them to be.

Thirteenthly: Humility is an excellent Grace, next unto that Grace that the
Scripture makes to be the condition of the new Covenant, Faith it is that Grace
that is most useful and necessary to give God the Glory of the new Covenant,
and that upon this ground: For God though he did intend Salvation to some
wretched and unworthy Creatures, yet he has so wrought in his Wisdom, that he
will save them in such a way as he shall have all the Glory and the Creature
shall be debased as much as can be. We cannot think how an infinite Wisdom
could find out a way to save mankind, and that in a way of Covenant too, to
save lost man in a way of a Covenant, wherein man that is saved should be
debased, and the name of God so much honored as that way is that God has done
in the Covenant of Grace, for it is this. God will save them in the way of a
Covenant, a Covenant you will say, that is somewhat, it is true, God will require
somewhat of man in the Covenant, I but yet in that manner, as man is as much
debased as possibly can be, for the condition is so, as man must be emptied of
al, be nothing in himself, he must go wholly out of himself for a principle of
life, yea, and when he has it, he must live upon that that is out of himself,
for so a Christian must do, not only go first in Jesus Christ for a principle
of life there, but this principle of life must depend upon Christ, it cannot be
with man now as it was with Adam, God gave Adam Grace and he was to live upon
that stock, but now we have grace from Christ, and we cannot live upon that
stock but we must still live upon him, still upon the life that is in him: So
that man is the most emptied, and debased, in that way that God has appointed
to save him by, he must deny himself in the greatest manner that a Creature can
be put to. We think this is a great deal of self denial, for a man to be
willing to be mean in the world, and to suffer much in the world for Christ, it
is a great deal of self denial I confess: but when the Soul goes to Christ in
the way of Faith, in the Covenant of Grace, there is the greatest self denial
of all, for there a man does not only deny his outward comforts here for the
present, but he denies his own Righteousness, his own abilities, his own gifts,
yea, and afterward when he comes to have Graces, he denies them too, and
wholly goes out of himself for justification, and reconciliation with God, and
all those things that are excellent in their own* nature, he does look upon as
Dross and Dung in comparison of what he finds in Jesus Christ, so that Faith is
that that carries with it as great a self denial as we can conceive a Creature
is capable of in this world, Faith makes one like Christ in that respect,
Christ, though he was glorious, yet he did empty himself, Faith makes one empty
ones self of all that is good, and therefore of all Graces, humility is the
most subservient and helpful to Faith, and pride is the greatest enemy to
Faith, and especially pride in those things that a man counts his greatest
excellency, some men indeed have a pride in their Clothes, and others in their
Estates, these are but poor things, but when a man comes to have pride in his
Duties, and graces, this is the pride of heart that is an enemy to Faith, And
therefore that place is very obseruable, in the Prophecy of Habakkuck, How
living by Faith, and pride are opposed to one Another. In Habakkuck, 2. 4.
Behold his Soul which is lifted up is not upright in him, but the just shall
live by his Faith, This Text will serve both for this I now bring it for, and
to confirm another thing that I spoke of even now, that is, how humility
preserves Grace, and keeps men and women from being Apostates, It is apparent
here, says he, Behold his Soul which is lifted up is not upright, in time of
trouble He will fall off, But the just shall live by his Faith, It is all one,
where there is no pride, there is humility, where the heart is emptyed of
pride, there the heart is fit to believe, and that is the Reason why many poor
Souls are so long under the Spirit of bondage, because God would be weakening
the pride of their hearts. You think that a poor Soul that has horror and
trouble of conscience has little pride in him, one that is ready to despair,
and to conclude of it self that it shall go to Hell, is that Soul proud?
Certainly, there is a great deal of pride in it then, you will say, how will
that appear that it is pride? Because it would fain find somewhat in it self to
present unto God for its mercy, though it do not think to merit, yet it would
present something to God for its mercy, and here is pride, the heart has not
denied it self thus as to venture it self upon Christ, though it have nothing
to present to God, it is not brought to this, to go to Jesus Christ as a mere
beggar that has nothing to live upon; now because the Soul is not brought to
this, therefore it is that the Soul is many months and years without comfort,
the Lord has not humbled and emptied the Soul yet, but now, when the Lord
comes to empty the Soul, perhaps by the work of his Spirit, though not by Gods
Sanctifying Grace, though there is not a Sanctifying principle put into the
Soul, yet it is that that is very like it, and it is that whereby the Soul does
act by, as it does when a principle of Sanctification is put into it, but this
Grace is very useful, for that is one special aim that God has in the
Covenant of grace, though he will glorify his creature, yet he will debase it in
such a way that the Creature shall have nothing to boast of, what should we
Boast of? Says Paul, if it were of works, then we might boast, but because it
is of Faith we have nothing to boast of. Thus much for the Excellency of the
grace of Humility.

CHAP. CXXX.
Humility brings Rest unto the Soul in Eight Particulars, 1. It ventures upon
nothing before it sees Gods call. 2. The Head of such, is lower then their
condition. 3. He is never disappointed in the World. 4. He would have God have
his Glory. 5. It freeth from opposition, o^ makes the Heart yield to it. 6. It
makes the Heart rejoice in the property of others. 7. It is under many
promises. 8. All Crosses are small to an Humble Heart.

BUt now we come to open the promise, and then we will apply altogether, the
promise here made to those that are lowly in Heart, I will give you Rest. Now I
shall not need to open the Rest that a Christians heart has that comes to
Christ, that has been done at large in the former verse, Come unto me all ye
that are weary and heavy Laden, and I will give you Rest. Therefore here I
shall only show, how Humility, and Lowliness of heart gives Rest unto the Soul,
There is, I confess, a great correspondency between those two Graces, and
therefore I shall speak the less now of the Rest of the Soul in humility,
because there is a great affinity between this and Meekness, now one that is
Lowly in heart must needs live at Rest.

First, Because such a one dares not venture upon any thing before he sees Gods
call, a bold spirit will venture upon any thing when he has not Gods call, and
there he meets with trouble, but now a Lowly Spirit thinks thus, is this Gods
way? Have I a word for it? And a call for it? If I have, Let me go on whatever
comes of it, if he meet with trouble in such a business, if he can say, I
undertook it thus, I had Gods call, what abundance of Rest has he? What is the
Reason that men are disquieted in the world, and troubled? It is because they
rush upon things without Gods call. When the Soul can appeal to God, Lord, I
would not undertake such a thing, nor such a thing, though I say, there might
be some preferment by it, and somewhat got by it, yet, Lord, thou see the
uprightness of my heart, that I would not venture upon it without thy call, and
then when I saw that, I ventured upon it, such a Soul must needs have a great
deal of quiet.

Secondly, One that is humble has Rest because he can never be in so low a
condition, but his heart is lower then his condition. This is an excellent
frame of Spirit, though my Estate is low, yet my heart is lower, if you be able
to say so, you that have low Estates* your care is how you can raise your
Estates* if I could raise my Estate as high as others. Then I should have a
great deal of Peace and comfort, No, thy way must be to lowen thy Heart, that
is the way to raise thy Estate. If a man's affliction be above his Heart, and
his heart beneath the affliction, if the fire he under the fuel then the fire
quickly catches the fuel, but now if the Fire be above the fuel, it will not
so soon kinkle it, so I say in a man's affliction, if a man's heart be above his
affliction I mean in a sinful way, he has lifted up his heart, and he would
have higher things then these things are, and these things are beneath his
spirit, he has a higher design and plot, and aims at greater things, and
these things are beneath what he would have, Oh! Then the affliction troubles
the Spirit, but when a man's spirit is beneath his afflictions then a man has a
great deal of Rest and quiet, he is lower then his afflictions and therefore he
is quiet.

Thirdly, Another thing in the Lowliness of heart that does bring quietness,
and has affinity with it, is this: One that is Lowly in heart, has never any
disappointments in the world; nothing is more troublesome, and disquieting to a
man's spirit then disappointment, now one that is Lowly in Heart, he expects no
great matters in this world, and therefore he cannot be much disappointed in
any thing that befalls, and so he is quiet; you that have great plots and
designs in your heads and make account of great things in the world, there
will follow many Crosses that will disappoint you, and how do they disquiet you,
you may account of such a voyage, and when it is lost, how unquiet are you?
Whereas one that is Lowly in heart, he is quiet, and goes on in obedience to
God, and that is that he looks to most, to go on in his calling in obedience to
God, and leaves the issue to God, and therefore if there be any thing coming
in, he receives it thankfully, because he is most unworthy, if he be crossed he
is not much disappointed, because he looks for no high things.

Fourthly, An humble heart must needs bring Rest, because this is the guise and
frame of it, it would have God to have his glory his own way; and this one
principle, Oh, What abundance of quiet, and Rest would it bring to a man's
spirit. That God should have his Glory, we all yield to that, I but that God
should be glorified in his own way, this is hard, now let this and the other
fall out, I but yet, says a Lowly heart, it is fit God should have his Glory
which way he pleases, and therefore he is not troubled.

Fifthly, Humility brings a great deal of quiet, because it freeth us from
opposition, or if it come, it makes us yield to the opposition, it freeth us
from opposition of men, for so I told you in the opening of it, an humble heart
is afraid to give any offense, and so it is not likely that others will offend
him, but if opposition do come, a Lowly heart yields to it, and when there is a
yiedling in time of opposition, when a blustering wind comes, yet if there be a
yiedling to it, it does no great hurt, and so the heart that yields to
opposition it has quiet and Rest.

Sixthly, Humility brings a great deal of quiet, because it makes us rejoice in
the prosperity of others, the great trouble and disquiet of the spirits of men
in the world is, that others are above them, now an humble heart blesses God
that any are above it.

Seventhly, An humble heart is under a great many of promises, and there must
needs be Rest and quiet to that Soul.

Eighthly, All crosses are small to an humble Soul, because he is small in his own
Eyes, according to what proportion a man bears to his own Eye, so his crosses
are, if his Crosses be great in his own eye, then they are great crosses to
him, and therefore you account your afflictions great, if you account your
affliction in your own Eye, I but now, if you were small in your own Eyes, you
would count your afflictions smaller. But we cannot open the particulars of
these, except we go further in the opening of the Grace of humility, and
therefore as ever you would have Rest and quiet in these troublesome and
restless times, labor for humble and quiet spirits.

CHAP. CXXXI.
Exhortation to humility with five several means to get it. 1. Labor to see the
Excellency of it. 2. Convince the Soul of its emptiness. 3. Get the knowledge of
God. 4. Of Christ. 5. Of our selves.

NOw then we come to the Use and Application, some time might be spent in
speaking about Examination, to show whether we are humble or not, and then to
show the difference between being humble, and humbled, many are humbled by
affliction, brought low, or by Terror Tormented, but their hearts are not
humble, there is a great deal of difference between Humiliation and Humility,
but I shall refer that as a seasonable point to be handled at another time,
Certainly God has made many people to be humbled, and yet not humble in their
Spirits.

And then another use may be, to humble our Souls for the want of humility, and
indeed that is a good Humiliation, to be humble for the want of humility, to be
humbled for our pride is an argument of the truth of humility as much as any
thing whatsoever, and certainly, if I should go back and open the Particulars
of the behavior of an humble Soul toward God, its self, and others, Certainly,
never a Man and Woman but may lay his hand upon his Mouth, and say, Lord, have
mercy upon me, how have I failed in the behavior of my spirit toward God, my
self, and others? Lord, my heart has not answered to that that has been
spoken in the word, the truth is, the best of us all have cause to be humbled
before God because they are not humble as they ought. To be proud of heart, one
compares it to an Onion, that if you pill off one part of it, there is another
pil afterward, pill off that and there is another still, and another, and
another til you come to the end; so when there is some pride, take off one, and
under that pride there lies more, take off that, and under it there lies more,
and take off that, and under it lies more, continually more and more pride
there lies in the heart of Men, and Women, and that man and woman that thinks
they have not proud hearts, I dare challenge them, in the Name of God, that
they have proud hearts, As John says, 1 John, 1. and last verse. If we say we
have not sin, we Lie, so if we say we have not pride, it is an evident Argument
we Lie, and it is an evident Argument we have pride. Pride is like the Garment,
the first that is put on, and the last that is put off, and it is that that the
heart sticks more in then any thing else, and therefore Christ says of his
Disciples that were humbled, they denied al for Christ, and yet mark what
Christ says concerning them, In Matthew. 18. There they inquired* who should be
greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven. Jesus takes a little Child, and sets him in
the midst of them, and says, Verily, Verily, I say unto you, except ye be
converted, and become as little Children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, Now, were not they become as little Children? Had not they humility?
They were gracious, and godly, I, but this is true of one that is gracious, and
humble, he has a great deal of pride still, and he had need be converted, and
become as little Children, to be humbled more and more. It is an excellent
frame of Spirit that we read of in Hezekiah, he had an humble Spirit, and yet
lifted up in Pride, yet mark what the Text says, in 2 Chronicles. 32. 25. 26.
Notwithstanding Hezekiah humbled himself for the Pride of his heart, it is said
in ver. 25. But Hezekiah rendered not according to the benefit done to him, for
his heart was lifted up, Notwithstanding Hezekiah humbled himself for the Pride
of his heart. It is true, the best of all have Pride in their hearts: But can
you say, I have humbled my self for the Pride of my heart? that you are jealous
of your own hearts? You are afraid of the Pride of your hearts, and you watch
over your hearts, that upon the first stirring of your heart, you labor to keep
it down, that you find your heart humbled for your Pride? if you have this, you
have that that an Hypocrite has not the least of, either to be jealous, over
his heart, or to keep down his heart, or to watch over his heart, or to observe
the stirrings of his heart: An Hypocrite has not the least of this. Now if you
find this, perhaps you find temptation prevails with you to commit a great sin,
for that you are humble; and to neglect your Duty, for that you are humble, I
but are you humbled for the Pride of your own hearts? when you can charge your
Souls for the Pride of your hearts between God and your Soul, when you can
search your heart, and find it out, and go and lament it in the bitterness of
your heart, this is a good sign. Perhaps when the pride of your heart breaks
out, and shames you before men, for that you are humbled, but when you can be
humbled for the first stirring of your heart toward pride, here is a sign of
Humility. But this I shall not stand upon, because I will take occasion to
handle this sin, and show the foulness of this sin more largely, and therefore
all I will now do shall be, to work this upon your hearts, that you may become
the Scholars of Christ, to be lowly as Christ was.

It is a Use of Exhortation, That we would all labor for Lowliness of heart:
Know, it is that that is necessary for us, all that we do else is nothing,
except we come to learn this of Christ we learn nothing of him, you cannot be
said to be a Christian, whatever your profession is, all your brave Duties, and
performances are nothing. I remember Chrysostom has such an expression, says
he, If a man be able to raise the dead, cure the Lame, cleanse the Leaper, yet
if he be not humble he is the most filthy thing in the world, this is the Grace
that we have constant need of upon every occasion, in what state soever. Does
God afflict you? then you have a great deal of need of this Grace to bear your
affliction patiently, if you be lifted up, then you have need of this Grace to
carry your self so, as you be not raised up against God, Oh! that you would
have care of that, when you find God coming in most upon you, that is the time
to keep your heart down most. As we read of the Devil to Christ, in Matthew. 3.
After Christ had that Testimony from Heaven, This is my beloved Son in whom I
am well pleased, and the Spirit of God came upon him like a Dove, the next
words in the beginning of Chap. 4. is. Then was Jesus led by the Spirit into
the wilderness to be tempted by the Devil, just then; thus it is with
Christians as it was with Christ, sometimes in Duties, in Prayer, they are
mightily enlarged, and have mighty comforts, and God comes in abundantly unto
them, and does even as it were say, this is my beloved Son, and my beloved
Daughter, I have chosen you to life, but expect the very next thing will be,
the Devil will take and set thee upon a Pinnacle of the Temple to tempt thee,
and tempt thee especially to Pride. If God employ you in any great service,
then you have need of Humility, it was the beginning of Christ's public work of
his Ministry that the Devil came to tempt him, then the Devil fell upon him:
So if God employ a man in public service, Oh! then the Devil will fall upon
him, and tempt him most of all then. I remember Luther, when God began to work
upon him, and he appeared to stand up in witnessing for God, it was one special
Prayer of his, Oh, that God would deliver me from Pride, and those that God
imploies in public works had need to pray for this. If God take a man off from
any service, he had need have much humility then; and so I might instance in all
kinds of things, that Humility must have an ingredient in them. I remember
Bernard has such an expression, That except it does come before, and
accompany, and follow, Pride does extort all out of our hands, and spoil all,
Humility is to come before any thing you do, to accompany any thing you do, and
it is to follow any thing you do or else all is spoiled

And in this Exhortation consider, that you cannot come all of you to be
eminent do what you can, you that are weak do all what you can, you shall never
come to have any great parts, you cannot have great Estates do what you can,
but it is possible for you to come to be humble. You would think it a great
matter, you that are weak, if one could show you how you should come to have
excellent parts, gifts, memory, and the like; and you that are poor to be rich
and eminent in the place where you live, and to be above others; Now God will
not grant you these things, but here I can show you how you can come to be as
humble as any man, and that is as much as if God gave you Ships, and they
brought home to you the Riches of the Indies, you may come all to be humble,
though you cannot come all to be eminent in the world.

Quest. You will say. How shall we come to get an humble heart.

Answ. First: Labor to set the excellency of this Grace before your Souls set
this Grace in the excellency of it much before you, and meditate on the beauty
and excellency of this Grace of Humility, so as to account your excellency to
be in Humility, that which a man accounts his excellency to be in, he is in a
good forwardness to get it especially in morals. Look upon Humility as your
excellency, as a glorious beautiful Grace, and set it before your Soul as that
that has a great deal of beauty and excellency in it, to be in love with this
Grace. As sin prevails in the heart by meditation, a corrupt heart by
meditating and plotting about a corruption or sinful distemper, comes to
defile it self with that corruption: So a gracious heart by meditation of the
sweetness and excellency of a Grace, comes to be adornd with that Grace: How
comes it that men fall into wickedness and sin, but at first this is the
beginning of it, they by meditation suck out the sweetness of sin into their
Souls, and look upon it as that which they may get so much good by, now by
delighting in the thoughts of a sin, they come to fall into a sin, therefore
take heed of delighting in the thoughts of sin, it is the way to come to fall
into a sin: So by delighting of our selves in the meditation of the excellency
of Grace, we may come to have that Grace.

Secondly: Labor to convince thy Soul of the emptiness and vanity of all those
outward excellencies that are the usual things that puff up the heart; it is
nothing but wind that puffs up any man's heart, if they had what is truly
excellent their hearts would not be puffed up, but that that puffs up the heart
is wind, Now consider all things in the world under these three Notions.

1. They are things beneath the true excellency of an immortal Soul, the way
to cure sinful pride, is to have a holy, gracious pride; Now a Holy pride is to
know what is the end of a rational Creature, what he is capable of, to enjoy
communion with Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, the knowledge of this will take off
the heart from all things below, look upon these things as Dogs meat, if you
could but take off your heart from al these things it would keep your hearts
Low.

2. Another Notion is this, Consider, That al these outward Excellencies make
no great difference between man and man, it may be you have more parts than
another, you have more Estate than another, you have more honor and esteem than
another, What great difference makes this between man and man? But now Grace
makes a great difference between man and man, one has Grace another has not,
this makes a mighty difference; one has Humility, and another not, this makes
a very great difference, there is not so much difference between the natural
excellency of an Angel of Heaven and a Worm upon the earth, as between an
humble Soul and the greatest Prince in the world that has not the Grace of
Humility, Were we but thoroughly principled in this one thing, we may hear it,
and confess it I suppose, but none of you when you go away will say this is
true, that Grace makes the great difference, except you be principled in this
thing, that it is not the having much and little that makes any great
difference between man and man.

Thirdly: Seriously work upon your hearts the meditation of the vanity of all
these things, how quickly all the beauty and excellency of these things will be
gone; what is become of all the great pomp and excellency of the world, when
death comes, what is the difference between one that was poor and contemptible,
and one that was rich and honorable? Death makes all even, The Glory of the
world passes away, and the luster of of it, every thing here is but as flesh
and grass that withers, by looking upon all these things that puff up the
heart to be but as wind, is the main thing to make the soul humble.

But the main thing is the setting God before us, and Christ before us, and the
right understanding of our selves, these are the three principal things that
are helps for the Lowliness of the heart.

3. The knowledge of God, and the setting God before us, is a principal thing to
make us humble, you know how it was with him, in Prove. 30. and the beginning,
The man spoke unto Ithiel and Ucal, I have opened the meaning of this to you at
another time, he spoke to Ithiel, God with me, Surely, I am more brutish than
any man, and have not the understanding of a man, Oh! how low was he in his own
eyes when he had to deal with God, the sight of God is that that humbles one
more than any thing in the world. And so that of Job, that famous place in Job
42. after God had made himself known to Job at verse 3, 4. I have heard of thee
by the hearing of the ear, says he, but now mine eye sees thee, wherefore I
abhor my self and repent in dust and ashes. What an humble heart, and a broken
heart had he? I set always God before me. And so Isay when he had the vision
of God, and the Seraphims cry Holy, Holy, Holy, the whole earth is full of thy
Glory, woe to me, says he, I am undone, because he had seen God. Thus all the
Servants of God that did converse much with God, were very humble, Jesus Christ
himself that had a lowly heart, he conversing much with God, and knowing so
much of the divine nature, having such interest in him, therefore there was
never such an example of a Lowly Spirit as Christ's example was, whenas we come
to know God, the infinite distance that is between God and us, then what is all
the excellencies in the world, when thou come to know the infinite excellency
of God? What is the glimerings of a Glo-worm when we come to see all the Glory
of Heaven?

And then also, we come to see the infinite dependence we have upon God, I
wonder not to see men in the world that do not know God, to have bold and
presumptuous Spirits, and see men that have knowledge, that they are humble,
though the others have their spirits lifted up in vanity: But for the soul that
ever had any sight of God, it is a wonder that such a Soul should have any
rising of Spirit, that any sinful height of Spirit should be in that Soul that
knows what an infinite God it has to deal with. Oh, converse much with God,
and then you will have humble Souls, that Soul that never goes from Duty but
has much converse with God, that Soul is very humble, As Bernard said, Lord I
never go from thee without thee, I carry thee out in my heart when I am in thy
presence. Now an Hypocrite converseth not with God, you that converse with men,
you would be higher than your Neighbors, and live better than your Neighbors,
O! this is the fruit of converse with men, but now true Humility comes from
converse with God, nothing has that excellency in it as that which comes from
conversing with God, and upon the sight of his excellency. May be God lays
affliction upon you, takes away a Child, or some of your Estate, and this (may
be) may humble you, but true humility comes from conversing with God and the
sight of his excellency.

4. Another is from the right knowledge of Jesus Christ, says he, Learn of me,
for I am meek and lowly in heart: There is no such means of Humility, as
conversing much with Christ, for there was never such an example of Humility as
Christ, and it was one of Gods ends to send his Son for an example into the
world, to honor this Grace of Humility, and therefore they that know Christ
much, and the way of Salvation, cannot but have empty hearts. It is a speech of
Austin; says he, It may be thou will be ashamed to imitate an humble man, such
a one as is humble to make him thy pattern, thou think thou have more
excellency in thee than him: I, but be not ashamed to imitate an humble God. Do
but consider how willing Christ was to have that Glory and excellency of his to
be eclipsed and darkened for so many years, though he was one that the Angels
adored, and he might have let out that Glory to have filled all the whole world,
and have made the world astonished with his Luster, yet he was content for
thirty two or thirty three years together to go up and down in the world as a
man without form and comeliness, to be despised, contemned, and spit upon. If
you have a little excellency, you show it presently, in Clothes, in Speeches,
and the like, Christ shows you by this what vanity this is, what an excellency
and Glory was upon him, and yet he was up and down in the world without form
and comeliness.

And when we look upon Christ: Consider that he was not only humble, but humble
for us, to fatisfie for thy sin, without which thou must have gone to Hell
eternally; to be humble for thy sin, there lies the power and efficacy of
Christ's example, in Christ's example thou see what a mean thing any outward
excellency of the world is, What did he care for any outward excellency? When
they would have made him a King, he cared not for it; look up higher, God has
made mankind for higher things than these below, I that had the divine nature
hypostatically joined to the humane nature, I that was one that God intended to
make use of for the greatest purposes that ever he did in the world, I did not
enjoy the world, I had no honor in the world, I had no honor nor esteem among
men, I had no riches, no hole to hide my head, and yet I have that that has
more excellency than all the things in the world, and therefore, Children of
men you may see by this, that God intends humane nature for higher things than
these below; and therefore it should humble thee that the Son of God should be
so low, and thou so lifted up.

And for this example, take this one thing that is of great use to help us to
lowliness of heart; Do but consider the way of God toward Jesus Christ, and
how Jesus Christ submitted himself unto the way of God toward him, as in this
one thing especially; when God manifested himself in the fullest way to him,
yet Jesus Christ presently comes into a low condition, as in that famous
example in Math. 3. 4. when God manifested so much of his Glory, then presently
Jesus Christ was content to be low, to come down. And I will give you another
tha^ is as famous as this, and that is in the transfiguration that you heard
lately opened to you, in Math. 17. there his Glory was let forth, His face did
shine like the Sun, and it came through his raiment, a great deal of Glory
appeared, but now observe, presently upon this Jesus Christ is not lifted up,
but begins to talk of his Sufferings, and Death, that he must die, and suffer,
and fall into the hands of men, of sinners, see twice this, Moses and Elias
talked with him, and his Disciples being afraid, he comes to them at the 7.
verse, and said, arise and be not afraid, and when they had lift^d up their
Eyes, they saw no man but Jesus only, and as he came down from the Mountain,
Jesus charged them saying, tell the Vision to no man til the Son of man be risen
again from the dead, and his Disciples asked him saying, why then say the
Scribes that Elias must first come? He speaks of his Death, and they wondered
why Elias must first come, Jesus Answered at the 11. verse, And said unto them,
Elias truly shall first come, and restore all things, But I say unto you, that
Elias is come already, and they knew him not, but have done unto him whatsoever
they listed, likewise shall also the Son of man suffer of of them, as they did
to Elias, so the Son of man shall suffer of them, They will deal with me as they
did with him, presently he talks with his disciples of his sufferings, The Son
of man must suffer. And further at verse, 22. And while they abode in Galilee
Jesus said unto them the Son of man shall be betrayed into the hands of men,
and they shall kill him, Presently you find the discourse of Christ was about
his low condition after any glory put upon him; you, when you have any glory
put upon you, and God has lifted you up more then your brethren, you talk of
that, and live upon that, but Christ when he had been transfigured, he talked
of his sufferings, and if we did but know what Christ is, and his sufferings,
that such a one being so high, yet was brought so low, it would make us to be
humble; But now compare this with that you have in Mark, 14. And there you
shall find, that when Christ was in an Agony, and when he was in trouble of
Spirit, then in his Agony in the Garden when the hand of his Father was upon
his spirit who did Christ take with him into the Garden? Only these three,
Peter, James, and John, at verse, 33. And he takes with him Peter, and James,
and John, and began to be sore amazed, and to be very heavy, and says unto
them, my Soul is exceeding sorrowful unto Death. Now the thing I would note
from hence is this, the Reason why Christ would take only those three that had
seen him in his glory to see him in his Agony it was, because they were the
fittest of all those that saw Christ in his Glory to see him in his Agony, they
would make the best use of this more then any. If the other disciples had seen
him only in his Agony, and not in his Glory, they might have been offended, to
have seen their master so when he came to die to be so amazed, they might say,
Lord, is this he we have trusted so long unto, that now when he comes to die he
sweats blood, I but these that saw him in his Glory, they would rather think,
Oh, How willing should we be to suffer for Jesus Christ, that he that is so
glorious as we saw him but the other day, now we see him in such a case; if God
should alter our condition, and bring us never so low, we have cause to humble
our selves because he was so Low: And that he might prepare their hearts also
to suffer, for James was the first of the Apostles that suffered for him,
Steven indeed suffered before, but of the Apostles James was the first, and
Peter, you know what he was to suffer, and John he was the beloved disciple,
and one of an humble Spirit, and of a loving spirit, therefore he was taken in,
now the sight of these two together was a special means to help the humility of
the spirits of these three Disciples that they saw him in his glory and Agony:
And so for us to meditate first on his Glory, and then of his condition in his
Agony, it is a mighty means to humble our spirits.

5. But now the last thing is: The right knowledge of our selves, this is
another Means to make us humble, now, the right knowledge of our selves is that
which should bring our hearts low; it was that that the Heathen did admire,
Sotrates was accounted the famous man for this sentence, I know nothing,
because I know my self, you may conclude it, a man or woman that is lifted up
in pride, it is a sign thou do not know thy self, if thou knew all the
Mysteries in nature, the nature of the Sun, Moon and Stars, and Arts and
Sciences, all is nothing to the knowing of thine own heart: Do thou know
thine own heart, prize this as a choice thing, it is such a thing thou
should spend much time to read* many of you perhaps cannot read in a book, I
but you must be learned in the books of your own heart, read that well, and you
will know enough there:

Further, For the knowledge of our selves, take pains in frequent examining, and
observing of thy heart, and examine it by the holiness and justice of God, set
Gods infinite holiness and justice, even with thine own heart, and that will
make thee know thy heart.

And if you would know your selves, you must not judge of your selves by what
you are in a fit, at a time, but what you are in a constant way, those that are
the vilest of all, yet they have some good moods and fits, sometimes stirred by
the word, and when they are above some good motions, and yet be vile and
abominable for all this, but you must judge what the frame of your Spirits are
in reference to God, and especially what you are in time of temptation, how you
find your hearts work ordinarily in times of temptation, when you are put to
it. There is many a man when there is no temptation, he seems to be as fair,
and as humble a man, as lowly a man as can be, but when temptation comes then
he flies out. And so many men and women think they trust in God, and have Faith
in God, but when temptation comes, then they find such distrust and such
shifting unto unlawful means to help themselves; Thus you must see what you
are in an ordinary way; I do not say, that a man should judge his condition or
his heart for any particular, but what he is in an ordinary way, as thus: you
may know you have a froward Spirit, if you are froward in an ordinary way. When
a temptation comes you may know you are unclean and sensual, though you are
not unclean, and drunk every week, but when a temptation comes in an ordinary
way, and when a temptation comes and you fall upon that which is evil, and it is
not the trouble of your spirit, but you say, it is the strength of temptation,
and we are all sinners* and you can pass it over so: Take these two
Considerations with you: First, If that in an ordinary way when temptation
comes you find your heart taken. And Secondly, If that you can pass over a sin
without any trouble in Spirit, I say then, what you are in your temptation,
that you are in the sight of God, and not what you are in some good mood and
some good fit, but there is the guise and the frame of your heart, that that
does appear then, were you otherwise in your temptation then you would complain
of your heart, and you would say, O! here is a temptation, and that makes me
see that corruption I never saw before, and Oh! how does this trouble you? but
if you vent your corruption in a temptation, then you are to judge of your
selves, according to what you find your selves in a temptation, and God will so
judge you, if there be not an alteration, and if men must come to judge of
themselves this way, Oh! what abundance of filth, and vileness, and matter is
there, that men may come to know themselves by, that they may loath themselves
in their own eyes for ever? Oh! it is a wonder that we should have any high
thoughts of our selves at all, when we consider what we are in our selves.

CHAP. CXXXII.
The knowledge of our selves further prosecuted, with Six Means to get it. 1.
Consider what once we were. 2. What we might have been. 3. What it cost God to
bring us out of that condition. 4. What we are. 5. What we would be if God
should leave us a little to our selves. 6. In what case we shall certainly be
in one day.

FIrst: Consider what ye were once, I speak to those that are best of all of
the Disciples of Christ consider what once you were.

Secondly: What you might have been.

Thirdly: What great cost God was at in bringing you out of that condition.

Fourthly: What now you are.

Fifthly: What you would be if God should but leave you a little to your selves.

Sixthly: In what case ye all one day shall certainly be in.

These are the Heads to meditate upon to know your own vileness, and so to
humble your selves before God, these are the meditations that may serve to
prick the bladders of Pride, and beat down the heart when it is lifted up.

As First: Meditate what once you were, consider that there is never a one of
you whatever your condition is now, but you were a Child of wrath, and that as
well as others, as well as the vilest, basest wretch in the world, as you were
by nature you you were such as lost God, had departed from him, were deprived
of the Image of God, your excellency was departed from you, you were under the
curse of the Law, you were enemies unto God, your life was a continual enmity
unto God, all your days you did nothing else but fight against him, you were
guilty, condemned Creatures, you were full of sin, of the Seeds of all kinds of
sin, there is no sin in Hell it self but the Seeds of it were in your hearts,
your hearts and lives were full of sin, all the faculties of your Souls were
full of sin, and all the members of your bodies instruments of sin, all the
good things you had was defiled, Soul and Body was polluted, and al loathsome*
you were even cast out in your blood, and even lived in filthiness, for all the
time of your natural condition, all the Creatures that you had use of you
defiled with sin, and all Ordinances were polluted, all things were unclean to
you: Now these are some certain Heads to meditate upon, to work upon us the
knowledge of our selves, what we were in that natural state.

Besides add to this, you were succorless, helpless, shiftless in your selves,
you could never deliver your selves, you were wandering from God, and would have
wandered eternally if God had not looked upon you in mercy, you were in such a
condition, that all the Angels in Heaven, and all the Creatures in the world
could not have helped you, there was such a dreadful breach between God and
your Souls, that if all the Angels in Heaven, and men on earth would have been
content to have died to have made up our breach, it could not have been, this
is your condition. Is there not cause then you should be low in your own eyes?
look back to this condition, you see many vile Creatures going on in ways of
wickedness, provoking the infinite wrath of God against them, and hanging over
the pit of Hell by a twined Thread, and every moment are ready to be plunged
into the bottomless Gulf, you were once thus, you were in as vile a condition
as they.

And consider further, What you might have been, you that are now in such a
condition, that have perhaps excellent parts, I have spoken now only of our
condition in regard of our spiritual Estate, you may consider of your
condition in your rise and beginning, that what you find your selves made of
was but Dust, what poor matter you were made of at first and so many of you
have great estates that now you are proud of, but you were low enough, look
back to what you were. So the Holy Ghost in Ezekiel. 16. when he would humble the
People, he bids them look back to what they were, Your Father an Amorite, and
your Mother an Hitite, and you were cast out into the Streets. These things if
we intended to speak of them largely, they would take up a great deal of time
to show them, only now to hint the heads of some meditations to you to humble
your selves.

But Secondly: Consider what you might have been if the Lord had taken
advantage of you, you are now in a comfortable condition, now you come among
the People of God into the assembly of the Saints, but you might have been
among the damned Reprobates, you might have been roaring in Hell, and sweltring
under the wrath of the infinite God; when others* of Gods people were assembled
to pray and hear the word, you might have been roaring under the wrath of God
in those everlasting flames, consider what you might have been.

Yea, If God had taken you away diverse years since without the knowledge of him,
and the knowledge of his Son, In what case had you been in, if you had died when
such a kinsman of yours died, or such a Neighbor of yours died, where had you
been? When you fit in your houses with your Wife and Children about you,
consider what you might have been, I that sit here, and have the day of Grace
continued to me, might have been in the bottomless Gulf, I might have been
cursing and blaspheming God, you that God has wrought something upon, you
desire to fear him, and you come to worship him, and have some delight to
worship him, if God had left you to your self, you might have gone cursing and
swearing, and blaspheming, and committing any vileness that any the most vilest
have committed. It may God has enlarged your heart in Prayer, I but if God had
left you to your self, instead of being enlarged in prayer, you might have been
cursing and blaspheming God: Now this is a mighty means to humble your heart.

Besides, What you might have been in regard of poverty, in regard of pain and
sickness, you now are comfortable in your Houses, and sit with wives and
Children, and delight one in another, you might have been in extremity of
torment and pain, you might have lost your senses, and lost your limbs, and a
Hundred such things might be named, that if you would give your meditations out
upon these things, you might find enough to keep your hearts low before God.

Thirdly: And the third head is this, If God has made any change in your
State, What a trouble it put Heaven and Earth unto, that the Son of God must
take your nature upon him, and die, and be made a Curse, to deliver you from
that condition? Now this is a mighty humbling consideration, for if a Man or
Woman had done any such thing as deserves punishment, though they be delivered,
yet if they know that the deliverance cost abundance of trouble, for a Child to
think, my Father might have cast me off, and I might have been a lost Child, I
but what a deal of charge and trouble have I put my Father to? I have been a
trouble to the Family, and to my Friends: So here, God has not cast us down to
Hell as he might have done; But O! what a deal of trouble have we put God unto,
and Heaven unto, that the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, must come and be
made a Curse for me? the thoughts of this should humble us, it is true, to
consider of the torments of Hell is very humbling, but to consider of the way of
Gods delivering us from those torments, is as great a means to humble us as any
thing in the world.

Yea, Fourthly: Consider what thou art now, though God has delivered thee:
Thou have yet a body of sin and death that thou carriest about with thee, Oh,
abundance of sin and corruption remains in thy Soul, Consider that of Paul,
Romans 7. 24. O! wretched man that I am who shall deliver me from this body of
death? Consider thine unworthy walking for all those good things thou have
received from God, that notwithstanding all that ever God has done for thee,
yet thou walk so unworthily as thou do and God foresaw this, that thou
would walk thus unworthily and wretchedly before him, the thoughts of this,
that there is such unkindness offere do God, that thou that hopest to receive
such greatt things from God, and perswadest thy self that God has done such
great things for thee, as he has in sending his Son to die for thee, I say,
the thoughts of this, is as humbling a consideration as any can be conceived
of, next unto that one, what Christ did for us, and what our souls cost, our
unworthiness of such a mercy, and our unanswerableness to such a mercy is a
mighty humbling consideration, and indeed, it would be a good Argument to
persuade, that thou art one that God has done such things for in Christ, if so
be thou can find, that the thoughts of what he has done for thee, makes thee
humble so much the more, in the consideration of al thine unworthy walking for
what he has done for thee, here is matter enough for meditation to humble the
Soul in the presence of God, if these things be considered, what yet thou art.

Fifthly: Another head is this, what thou would be if God should but leave
thee; though he has done great things for thee, and showed thee himself, and
Christ, and showed thee the evil of sin, and eternal life, yet for all this if
he should but leave thee to thy self one quarter of an hour, thou would
depart from him, and lose all that Grace thou have, and be brought into a
miserable condition as ever thou were, thou would be plunged into the depth
of al evil. Yea, if God should but withdraw his Spirit from thee one moment Oh
consider what thou would be! and if God should come out against thee in his
anger and displeasure, what a dreadful change would there be of that condition
in which now thou art. Now indeed thou have a great many things wherein thy
heart is satisfied and delighted and many excellencies thou have that perhaps
thy heart is lifted up in, but what would thou be in regard of thy
spirituals if God should withdraw from thee, thou would leave all thy
spiritual estate, thou would be in a worse condition than ever thou were.
And for thy natural estate, thy parts of nature, or activity of body, or
strength, what would become of them if God should withdraw from thee. And so
thy outward estate, how soon might God send fire upon thy House, or upon thy
Ship, and how soon might thou lose all, and be brought into woeful extremity;
you that enjoy much now, yet meditate what you might be in a moment, if God
should withdraw himself from you, and especially if he should come out against
you.

Sixthly and Lastly: Consider what you will be ere long, certainly your outward
estate will be gone, whatever you pride your selves in, Beauty, or Health, or
Strength, or Parts, it will be gone and vanish, your strength will be turned into
weakness, and your Health into sickness, this body of yours that now you deck
and trim must be Worms meat ere long, and lie rotting in the Dust; And what
difference will there be between those that are rich and those that are poor. I
remember I have read of one, that coming into a place where was a heap of
Skuls* and among others he heard that Alexanders Skul lay there, he desires to
know of the man which was Alexanders Skul, says the man, yonder Skul that has
hollow eyes, says he to the man, al Skuls has this, I says the man, and
Alexanders too, there is no difference between Alexanders Skul, and others
Skuls, Death makes all the same. You that are rich and above others, and your
Hearts are ready to be ^uft up within a while what difference will there be
between an Almes-body and you? may be this difference will then be, that the
poor man if he dies, he has not so much to answer for so many Talents, and you
die and have had great talents, and you have all them to answer for; Do but
consider of this, what you will be if these things be taken from you, and that
will prick the Bladder of Pride in respect of your natural condition.

And what State you will be in, Consider this, you must stand naked before the
great judgment Seat of God, every one of you that are here, you must after a
while stand naked before the dreadful judgment Seat of God, to receive your
dreadful doom for whatsoever you have done in the Flesh. Now you had need to
walk humbly before the Lord here, considering what you shall be brought under,
to stand naked before him, and give an account of al your ways; whatever you
are proud of you must give account of it before God* of all your Grace, how you
have used it. Now you that want matter of meditation, and want matter of
Prayer, when you go to Prayer, you would fain go and humble your heart, and you
would go and meditate, and you cannot meditate, you find your thoughts very
barren, these things that have been here spoken, may be some kind of supply to
you for meditation, and to help you in Prayer to humble your selves there, and
bring your spirits Low, cast but your thoughts upon these several heads, What
was I? What was I in my natural estate? What I might have been if God had taken
advantage of me, how he might have taken me in the Act of sin, at such a time,
in such a place, and if he had taken me, what had become of me then? And then,
what a great deal of trouble it was to Heaven and Earth to redeem my soul; and
what am I yet, in all the faculties of my soul, and members of my Body, what a
wretched heart I carry about with me still; and what should I be if God should
withdraw himself from me? the Lord has been gracious to me, but if he should*
withdraw himself from me, what should become of me? And what shall I be both in
my naturals, and likewise when I shall stand before the great God to give
account of all my ways? now the working of these things again and again upon
my heart, and especially the making use of these things in Prayer, to express
these things before the Lord in Prayer, or mention these things when you are
between God and your own souls, and beseeching the Lord that he would settle
these things upon your souls, to humble your hearts, it would be a mighty means
to bring your hearts low, and to keep them low. This shall suffice for adding to
what was said, for the working of us to this humble frame of heart.

FINIS
THE FOURTH BOOK. VIZ. The only ready Way to Heaven.
Matthew. 11. 30. For my Yoke is easy, and my Burden is light.
CHAP. CXXXIII.
The words in the 30. verse Opened and Explained.

AND now we come to the last verse, For my Yoke is easy, and my Burden is
light. Here we have the Reason, and Encouragement, the Reason why we should
take the Yoke of Christ upon us, and the encouragement to take it, because it
is easy and his Burden is light.

MY YOKE. Christ would have us take his Yoke upon us, that you had in the
former verse, but the Spirits of men are loath to be brought under a Yoke, they
count it burdensome, therefore says Christ, Learn of me for I am Meek and
Lowly in heart, and then My Yoke is easy, and my Burden light, when once you
have but learned Meekness and Humility, you shall then find my Yoke easy, and
my Burden light.

Easy. The word here that you have translated in your Books, Easy, is Crestos
in the Greek, a word that signifies Profitable, Vtility, and Commodious: so it
might be turned; and upon this, those that were called Christians (Justin
Martyr has such an expression) he called them Crestians, from this word,
because they were men that were useful and profitable, and so they might be
called Crestians as well as Christians, my Yoke is profitable and that makes it
easy, whatsoever it be that a man undertakes, yet if it bring much profit with
it, you count it easy, you that take a great deal of pains and endure much
difficulty at Sea, go to the Indies, yet if it bring in profit, you count it
easy, because there is so much profit co^es in.

Secondly: As the word signifies Profit, so it signifies Gentleness, in
opposi^ion to Severity, to roughness, harshness, or rigidness, and so I find
the word in Romans 11. 22. says the Apostle, Behold the goodness and severity of
God, there it is, Crestos, of easiness, for so Crestos there is the same word,
only here is the Adjective, and there the Substantive, the easiness, and
gentleness, and severity of God, severity and gentleness opposed to one
another, God is very gentle, and sweet, and good unto some, and is very severe
unto others. So, Take my Yoke upon you, for it is easy, that is, it is gentle,
in opposition to severity, and this is very suitable to what Christ has said
before, Learn of me, for I am Meek and Lowly in heart, and my Yoke is as I am,
Low as I am, of a gentle disposition, as I am Meek, so you shall find my Yoke,
my Yoke is very genle, you shall find no rigidness, no harshness, no hardness
in in my Yoke, that is the meaning of the Yoke; For my Yoke it easy, and my
Burden is light, it may be a Yoke and seem to be heavy to you, but the Yoke is
easy: but it may be a burden* well, if ^t be a burden it is light, the word is
Nimble agile, it is a very strange thing that it should be a burden, and yet
light, it may be a burden to flesh and blood, it may be in some respects
burdensome many ways, I but when you have taken it upon you, you will find it
light. Now the word translated here Light, it is taken from the lightness and
agility of Stags, of those Creatures that are very swift, and agill, and
nimble, and light in their motion, from thence the word comes.

My Burden is light. The meaning in the original is this, it is such a light
burden as man may have it upon him, and dance with it, leap and dance, have
joy, and delight with this burden upon their back^; other burdens presses
down, makes a man go heavily, but this burden is so light, that those that have
it on, it makes their hearts light and easy, that they can go, and skip and
dance with this burden upon them, that is the word in the original, we have
not a word in the English to express it thus, and the word that you have in 2
Pet. 1. 5. has some likeness to that that Christ means. Add to your Faith
Virtue, and to Virtue Knowledge, and to Knowledge Temperance, and to Temperance
Patience, and to Patience Godliness, and so multiplies particulars. And now the
word is in the original (...) to lead in the dance, and these virtues one to
another; it is true, it signifies the ministering of the supplies that Members
have from the Head, only in your English it is said, Add to your Faith Virtue,
it either signifies the ministering of the Head to the Members, that which the
Members receive by the ministering of the Head, and so ^t is proper there, that
all the virtues we have they are but added one to another, from the virtue that
is ministered from Christ our Head to us Members. Or else the word signifies, to
lead in a dance, as first one goes, and the other follows, so Faith goes first,
and that leads on the other, it signifies the delightfulness in Christianity,
when Faith goes before, and all the other virtues coming after, there is a
delightfulness in all the ways of Godliness and Christianity, and in the
excercising of Virtues: That for the meaning of the word, My Burden is light,
such a Burden as will make the heart light, and that one may have a Burden on,
and go lightly* and skipping, as if he had none. Only one thing more for the
opening of the words, My Yoke is easy, and my Burden is light* I confess these
two expressions many make but all one, Yoke and Burden, and others think there
is a little difference, tha^ by Yoke is meant, what Jesus Christ requires of us
in the Gospel to do, and by Burden is meant, what we are required in the Gospel
to suffer, both active and passive obedience, the coming under the rule and
government of Christ in the Gospel, that is a Yoke, I but it is a very gentle
Yoke* and so when we come under the obedience of Christ, to be professors of
the Gospel, we must expect to suffer much, and bear great Burdens of affliction
in the world, I but says Christ, these Burdens of afflictions, if they come
and persecute you never so much here, you shall find them but light burdens,
all that I require of you to do shall be easy, and all that I require of you
to suffer shall be light. So that from hence we have this Point of Doctrine,
for I shall not handle them asunder, but put them both together.

CHAP. CXXXIIII.
Doct. The way of the Gospel that brings to Heaven, is an easy way. This
confirmed and explained in Six particulars.

DOCT.
THat whatsoever Jesus Christ requires of us, either in doing or in suffering,
it is very easy, and very light, The way of the Gospel that brings to Heaven
is an easy way: That is the Point. And when we name it, I suppose it will seem
one of the strangest points that ever was preached or that you have heard of:
That the way of the Gospel to bring People to Heaven, is an easy way, it seems
contrary to other Scriptures, Strive to enter in at the straight Gate, for
straight is the Gate, and narrow is the way that leads to life, and few there
be that find it, and Ministers tell us, the way to Heaven is a very difficult
way, and many times it is made an evidence of men that are but carnal, and have
not the power of Godliness in them, that they find so much ease in their way; I
suppose these you have heard of. Well, before we have done with the Point, we
shall reconcile all these things, only for the present seeing they are the
words of Christ, we must yield them to have a truth in them: That the Yoke of
Christ whatever it is that Christ would have us submit unto, it is easy,
whatever Burden he would have us bear in this world, it is a light Burden: Let
all those that are continually complaining of the difficulties that lie in the
ways of Godliness take notice of this Point, many there are, that make it
their Religion to be continually complaining of difficulties that there are in
Gods ways, as if by that they would show that they saw somewhat, and felt
somewhat more than others did, and are never in ways of thanksgiving, or in
ways of rejoicing, but always complaining of the ways of God, and what
difficulties they find in them, let them take notice, that whatever thy
thoughts have been heretofore, or what thy Speeches have been about them, yet
Jesus Christ himself says, that his Yoke is easy, and of his Burden that it
is light.

Now therefore, First I shall confirm it by Scriptures, and then come to branch
it into several particulars for the opening of it.

For Scriptures, take these three, the first is in Psalm. 119. 44, 45. So shall
I keep thy Law continually for ever and ever, and I will walk at liberty, for I
seek thy Precepts. The Soul that does truly seek Gods precepts, to be under the
command of the precepts of God, such a one walks at liberty, never has so much
liberty as at that time when he seeks Gods precepts You may think that to be
under the command of the word, and especially that in seeking the commands of
the Lord, it will bring you into bondage: There is no such liberty in the world
as being under the command of God, and seeking the commands of the word. And
then in Prove. 15. 19. The way of the slothful is as a hedge of Thorns, that is,
there is a great deal of difficulty in the way of the slothful, now this is an
opposition to the ways of the s^othfull, But the way of the righteous is
plain, there is no such difficulty in his way, a righteous man's way to Heaven
it is a plain way, a plain path, he may go in it with ease, it is not a rigid
way, it is not a stony way, a thorny way, but it is a plain way, that a man may
go easy there. Now if you be walking in any place from Town to Town, if you
walk in a place where is plain way in the fields, it is easy all the while.
Now you go to the City, and you walk in the fields, it is plain, it is easy,
but when you come upon stones, it is more difficult, So it is here, The way of
the righteous is plain, the righteous have a plain path to Heaven, but the
wicked they are upon the stones, they are upon the dirt, when one comes upon
the stones, and it be dirty too, that is more difficult, But the way of
righteousness is plain. And there is one Scripture more remarkable than these,
and that is, in 1 John 5. 3. And his commandments are not grievous, the
commands of God have no grievousness in them, there is nothing in Gods
Commandments to be so much as grieving to a* Gracious Soul. It is said in the
Scripture, that God delights not to grieve the Children of Men, certainly,
there is n^thing that God requires of thee if thou understandest it aright that
will grieve thee; when you tender a Child or a Friend, you will not require of
them any thing that may grieve them, now Christ has so tender regard unto you
that are the Servants of God, that he will require nothing of you that will
grieve you, and therefore if nothing be grievous in Gods Commandments, surely
his Yoke is e^sie, and his Burden is light.

But now for the opening of this Point (for there is a great deal that had need
to be said to it for the opening of it, and making it useful and profitable) I
shall cast what my meditations have been about this Point into these Six heads.

The first is, To give you some Evidences of it, that this is so.

And then the second thing is, The differences that there are between the ease
that a carnal heart finds in the ways of Religion, and the ease that a true
Gracious heart finds in the ways of Religion; those that are carnal, and take
up but a mere formality of Religion, they find not ease, but those that are
truly religious, they find rest.

And the third is this, If the ways of God be easy* How comes it to pass,
that many that we hope are truly Gracious and Godly, yet make such complaints
of so much difficulty as they do find in Gods ways.

And then fourthly, We are to open (which is the principal of all in the
explication) wherein the easiness of Gods ways appears, what are those things
that do make the ways of God so easy, and in what particulars does consist
the easiness that there is in the ways of Religion.

And then fifthly, Some Consequences that are to be drawn from this, which is
by way of Application.

And sixthly and lastly, Some Directions, what we should do to make the ways
of God easy, These are the six Heads that I cast the handling of this Point
into.

CHAP. CXXXV.
Six Evidences of the former Doctrine in the last Chapter. 1. Because the word
that injoyns these ways is Sweet. 2. A Gracious Soul counts his Duties his
privileges. 3. He would rather come under any other Burden, than cast off the
Yoke of Christ. 4. Because Christ whose Yoke it is, is Gentle. 5. Never any
truly that put their neck under this Yoke, would willingly take it out again 6.
The Experience of all the Saints of God prove the Point.

FOr the first then: The Evidences that do demonstrate, that certainly the
ways of God are easy, and his Burden is very light unto those that have
indeed submitted their necks unto the Yoke of Jesus Christ.

Evidence 1.
First. The first Evidence is this: Surely Gods ways are easy unto them, for
there is none that is truly Gracious, but they account the word of God that
does require them to walk in those ways, very sweet unto them, and they prize
it highly, now if there were difficulty and a harshness in Gods ways.
Certainly, though the word of God may be accounted just and righteous, yet it
would not be sweet and comfortable unto the Soul; but there is nothing more
sweet and comfortable unto a Gracious heart, than the word of God that does
require such ways of him. Ye know the expression of David, that It is sweeter
than the Honey and the Honey Comb, more precious than Silver or Gold, or any
riches of the world, read but Psalm. 119. and there in every verse almost, you
find such expressions, of much sweetness that David did find in the word of
God, if the word be sweet and delightful, certainly the ways of God must needs
be sweet and delightful that are required in the word, that is the first.

Evidence 2.
Secondly: Surely they are sweet and delightful, for those that are in Gods
ways, do not account what they do only to be Duties, but Privileges; they
look upon every thing that Christian Religion requires of them, not only as
Duties, but as Mercies, as that wherein their happiness consists, I have
received mercy from the Lord that I may be faithful says Paul, I do not say, I
have received mercy from the Lord, that I may go to Heaven, that I may be
rewarded, and have such and such blessings, but I count it mercy from the Lord,
that he makes me faithful in this way, not only dutiful, but faithful. The
Saints of God do not account the bonds of obedience to be fetters to them, they
account them chains of Gold about their necks for Ornament, not bonds of
necessity to tie them to obedience, because otherwise they would not obey them,
but I say, every Law of God is counted by the Saints of God to be as chains of
Gold* Ornaments to them, that they account their Glory as well as their Duty,
and therefore in the Revelation we find, the new City is described thus, that
her streets is paved with Gold, that is, the very way and path of the Saints it
is a Golden way, it is paved with Gold, it is a glorious way, now that which a
man accounts his Privilege, and Dignity, and Glory, that must needs be easy,
their suffering actively and passively, Paul counts his sufferings Glorious,
and Moses counts his sufferings more than the riches of Egypt. If so be that
you had given unto you as much Gold as you could carry, the weightier the bag,
the lighter would your heart be, you would count the burden so much the more
lighter, by so much the more was in it, Certainly, the suffering for Christ,
and dying for Christ is riches, it is so to a Gracious heart, may be this may
be a Riddle to carnal hearts, many carnal hearts think they must do such good
things, and if they do not, they must perish, and go to Hell, and therefore
they force themselves upon Duty, I but it is otherwise with a Godly heart, he
does not think, I must do this, but his work is wages, every work that a Child
of God does is wages to him, the man works hard, I but he expects the more, he
expects wages: So an Hypocrite may work, he may do something, but he expects
wages, but a Gracious heart his work is wages, Receiving the end of your Faith,
the Salvation of your Souls, there is receiving continually while we are
working. Says Christ in Joh. 17. 4. Father I have finished the work that thou
gave me to do: So the very work that the Father set Christ upon, Christ did
count it to be a Gift from the Father, and so the work that Christ sets us
upon, if we have the Spirit of Christ in us, we will count it a Gift from Jesus
Christ, Christ does give it, and this (by the way) would be a special Evidence
of true Grace in the heart, the soul that shall count Gods ways Privileges as
well as Duties, surely has true Grace, truly they are easy then, if they be
Privileges as well as Duties, that is the second.

Evidence 3
Thirdly: And the third Evidence is this, The Yoke of Christ is easy, and his
Burden is light; for there is no gracious heart but would rather come under any
Yoke, any Burden in the world, than willingly to cast off any Yoke and Burden
of Jesus Christ, name what Yoke you will, what Burden you will, rather than a
gracious heart will be from under Christ's Burden, and Christ's Yoke, O! says
he, let me come under that Yoke, and that Burden.

Yea further, If God does put any Yoke, any Burden of affliction upon one that
is Gracious, if that Yoke and Burden of affliction may but bring his neck more
under the Yoke of Christ than before, and bring him more under Christ's Burden
than before, a gracious heart does think it well worth the bearing, thinks
himself fully recompensed in the bearing of any Yoke if it may any way further
him to come under the Yoke of Christ more; as thus, before I had a wanton
Spirit, and I could not get my self to put my neck under the Yoke of Christ, to
be quiet as I ought to have been; Well, but now the Lord Christ has laid the
Yoke of affliction upon me, and that has in some measure subdued my heart, so
that I can come and put the Yoke of Christ upon me better, O! blessed be God
that ever I had the Yoke of affliction upon me, that now brings me under the
yoke of Christ more, Can thou say so, blessed be God for this affliction?
Surely then the Yoke of Christ is easy, that a heart is willing to bear any
Yoke that may but further it to the bearing of the Yoke of Christ, that is the
third.

Evidence 4.
Fourthly: It is an easy Yoke certainly, for it is Christ's Yoke, it must needs
be easy, because it is Christ's, and that upon these two grounds.

First: Christ himself is Gentle, and Sweet, and Lovely, Christ himself has no
Rigidness, no Sowrness in him toward People, as you heard at large when we
opened the Meekness and Lowliness of Christ, now if Christ be meek and lowly,
he loves no bitterness and rigidness. If I had to deal with a man that I were
sure had all the Meekness, and all the Love and all the Gentleness in him of all
the men in the world that ever lived, put all their Meekness, and Gentleness,
and Sweetness together into one man, and I were sure I should never have any
Yoke upon me but what that man should lay upon me, truly, I would never fear
any rigidness. One man has Meekness and Gentleness, I but he has Rigidness
too, and another man has one drop, and another another drop, I but put all
these into one, and surely that man has a great deal of Meekness, now Jesus
Christ has all in him, and if it be his Yoke, then it must needs be easy.

And Secondly: Consider what was the end of Christ's coming into the world, the
end of Jesus Christ's coming into the world was this, he saw poor wretched man,
that he was under a Burden of sin and misery, and he was content to come and
take their natures upon him, and deliver their souls from pain, and trouble,
and misery, he came not into the world to impose Iron Yokes, but he came into
the world to bring the mercy of the Father, to bring the treasure of the riches
of the Father into the world, and was anointed by the Father to that end, that
he might open Prison doors to Captives, and that he might power oil upon them,
to supple souls that was his end, says he, I came not into the world to
condemn it, but to save it that I might bring the mercy of my father into the
world, that I might open the passages of the infinite mercy of my Father that
by your sins was shut up, though there was an infinite ocean of mercy in my
Father, yet not one drop could issue out from him, therefore I came to open the
sluices, as it were, and let them out upon you, and if there be any other end,
it is rather by accident then that which Christ aimed at, but that Christ aimed
at was, to open the sluices of the infinite mercy of God upon man. Now if this
were the end of Christ's coming into the world, then certainly those that are
dear to him, and that he was willing to lay down his life for, they shall find
nothing from him but gentleness, he will lay no yoke or burden upon them but
what is very easy, and very light therefore it must needs be easy, because it
is Christ's, that is a fourth Evidence

Evidence, 5.
Fifthly, It must needs be easy and light, for there was never any in the world
that put his neck under this Yoke, (especially if you take it for the yoke of
obedience) never any put his neck under this yoke that would have his neck out
again, that would wish Christ's yoke otherwise then it is, for his active
obedience and they would have the passive too, but in the conclusion they would
never repent them that ever they were under it, but especially for the former,
there was never Godly Christians when they were themselves, and did consider of
things, except it were in time of temptation, but take them at that time when
they are themselves, I say, there was never any that could wish their neck out
of Christ's yoke, that could wish the yoke of Christ easier then it is, they
would be freed from nothing that Christ requires when they are themselves and
understand things. It is true, Ignorantly, and when they do not understand
things, and in time of temptation, then they may do otherwise, but take a
Christian, and let him be himself, and let him consider and understand the
thing, and there was never any that could wish his neck out of the yoke, or
wish it easier then it is. It is true, a gracious heart may be weary of
himself, because he cannot bear the yoke of Christ as he would do, but he is
never weary of Christ's yoke, he may be weary of the corruptions of his heart
that hinder him from bearing the yoke as he should do, but he would not have
the yoke less then it is, Take one that is Godly, though he be weak, you will
say, it is true, they that are strong will not wish it less, but those that are
weak they may well consider it thus, a gracious heart he would be glad to have
more strength to go under Christ's yoke more comfortably, but he would not have
Christ's yoke less, that is, there is no duty that Christ requires of a gracious
heart that it would be freed from, I appeal to you that are gracious hearts
what one duty that Christ requires of you when you are your selves, that you
would be freed from, Look through the whole book of God, and you shall find it so
of the Saints. And here is a great difference now between an Hypocrite, and a
Gracious man, an Hipocrite would fain do this duty but not that, and omit this,
but not that; but a gracious heart says, Lord, I am not willing only to do
what thou requirest of me, but Lord, whatsoever thou requirest of me, I would
choose it, if I had my choice, but I leave that till I come further, only now to
show that it is easy, because no gracious heart that will ever take up any
other yoke, but says, let me always be here, surely it must needs be easy
then; that is a fifth Evidence.

Evidence, 6
And the Sixth and Last Evidence is this, it is taken from the experience of
the Saints, and that is as great a demonstration as any thing, that which I
have found experimentally, that I find so, it is taken from the experience of
the Saints, there is none that are truly Gracious though they may be afflicted
with temptation, especially when they are grown in the ways of Christianity,
but they have some experience of it, perhaps at first they find it somewhat hard
to get their necks under, but afterward, they will say, well, I never found
that rest, that ease, that quiet upon my ^oul, as since I got my neck fully
under the yoke of Christ, since I brought my self to resign my self fully and
wholly to the ways of Jesus Christ, I bless God I have had great ease and rest.
Just as it is with your ships, if your ship Stick fast in the Sands and water,
the Waves come and beat against your ship, and it is ready to break, but now if
it is got off from the Sands, and wholly upon the Water, then away it goes, and
you may hold a cup of wine in your hands and it goes away with ease, so it is
with a Godly heart, when he is part in Gods ways, and part in the mudd, and
does not fully give up himself to Gods ways, then he finds trouble, and his
Conscience flies in his Face, and he cannot sleep quietly, but let the Soul
fully resign it self to Christ to be guided by him, Oh! the unspeakable joy
that there is in this. Heathens may talk, and have witty discourses about
tranquillity of mind, but only the true Cristian can have the true tranquillity
of mind, never could the soul say till now, my soul return unto thy rest, let
there be never such commotions in the world, and troubles and stirs in the
World, yet I can retire to God, and I can bless my self in God, and bless God
in what I enjoy, when I can say as in the presence of God to my soul, O my
Soul, return to thy rest, I never had such rest and quiet in any ways as I
find in these. Surely these Six things do evidence the truth, that his yoke is
easy, and his burden light.

CHAP. CXXXVI.
The Second Particular mentioned, Chap. 13. Is opened in two differences
between a Carnal heart, and a Gracious Soul, in the ways of God. 1 The
Hypocrite finds ease in the ways of God and Sin both. 2. The Hypocrite has
some ease, because he mistaks the Yoke of Christ, contenting himself with the
outward form of Godliness, but theb eleevers ease comes from the power of it.

BUt now many carnal hearts, they think it easy: Gracious hearts may think
this point at first hearing very strange, but carnal hearts they think, I, we
like this point well enough, for men keep such a do, and make the ways of God
so difficult, to go on in a fair way, that is easy, but to be put to so much
trouble and pains, there must be Such praying, and humbling, and such strict
keeping of the Sabbaths, this is that disturbs, now because civil men, they
find ease as well as carnal hearts, that will be the next thing, for Indeed, I
was loath to speak so much of the easiness of the ways of Christ without
showing the difference between the rest, and ease of a carnal heart or an
Hipocrite, and a true Gracious heart, an Hipocrite and a carnal heart shall find
no ease and rest at al though a gracious heart shall

Wherefore the differences between that ease which a carnal heart finds, and
that which a gracious heart finds in Gods ways they are many.

First of al, a carnal heart finds ease in Christ's yoke and ease in the yoke of
sin both, they find ease in both yokes, when they have a temptation to sin,
that is comfortable to them, when it is suitable to their own ends to their own
ways, when they come to perform duty and come to the Church, and sometimes
pray, and receive Sacraments, and the like, they think they find a great deal
of ease there, they are content with both, now it is quite otherwise with a
gracious heart, a gracious heart finds ease in the yoke of Christ, but there is
nothing more burdensome to a gracious heart then the yoke of sin, the yoke of
Christ is such an ease as cannot stand: with ease under the yoke of any sin,
but the yoke of sin it is burdensome and intolerable unto the heart that has
true ease in the yoke of Jesus Christ. Yea, and the more ease any gracious
heart has in bearing the yoke of Christ, the more intolerable is the burden
that such a heart has when it is under the yoke of sin; if at any time sin
does prevail with one that is come under subjection to Jesus Christ, O! how
grievous is that sin, and therefore grievous, because such a foul knows what
the difference is between the yoke of Christ, and the yoke of sin, therefore it
is grievous, It is not only grievous, because it brings terror to the soul
through fear of judgment and fear of hell, but it is grievous, because the soul
knows a difference between the yoke of Christ and the yoke of sin. As now, if a
man has been acquainted with a service to some Noble man or Prince, and has a
great deal of Honor and respect, and gained very much, and afterward this man
should come to be a slave in the Galleys, Oh, how burdensome would this be to
him upon this ground, because he once knew a better service, he knew what it
was to serve such a Prince, that was a gracious Prince, and loved him and
delighted in him, and required nothing of him but that that was very suitable
to him, now if such a one comes to the Gally, it will be very grievous. Truly
thus it is, a true Gracious heart, that has been acquainted with the yoke of
Christ, if at any time he is overcome with any corruption, with any sin* he is
like one in the Gally, Oh, this soul considers, I am in a different way from
what I was wont to be, I was wont to be in the service of Jesus Christ, and my
heart had soul satisfying contentments while I was there, but O what a
difference is there in this work? here is a base drudgery in comparison of what
I was wont to have, Oh, the sweet communion I had with Jesus Christ while my
heart kept close to him, but now, now I am raking in kennells, and rowing in
Galleys, Oh! wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this burden? now
this is a wide, a broad difference, between the easiness of the yoke of Christ
to one and to the other, one finds a great deal of ease in the yoke, but the
other finds all one, if he goes amongst company that are vain, and slight,
and profane, and when he comes to hear the word to read or receive the
Sacrament, almost all one; and indeed, if there be any difference, his greatest
ease is in that of sin; he has ease in the duties of religion, in performing
duties, but his greatest ease is in the other way; I but now, the ease of a
Saint is such as cannot stand with the ease of sin, a child of God can bear
the yoke of Christ with ease, but he cannot bear the yoke of sin, it is death
to him to bear the yoke of sin, that is the First

Secondly, Another difference is this, a carnal heart may have some ease in
duties of religion, in the yoke of Christ, but it is because he mistakes the
yoke of Christ, it is because he does not know the yoke of Christ, he thinks
that the yoke of Christ is only some external duties that Christ requires, or
to keep from some gross sins, and now and then to say his prayers, and now and
then to read a chapter, and come to Church, and to receive Sacraments, he
thinks this is all that Christ requires of him, what needs any more to do then
this? May not I go to Heaven as well with this, as with keeping so much a do as
others do? and he thinks here is the yoke of Christ, and this is fine and easy
indeed. If this were the way that would bring to Heaven, it were a very easy
matter to go to Heaven, that is, for a man to keep from a gross foul sin, that
would make him odious in the place where he lives, and for him only to come
from his house, and sit an hour or two and hear a Sermon, and come at Easter
and other times and receive the Sacrament, this is the easiest thing in the
world, who would not go to Heaven if this were all: But now, if thou were
acquainted with the spiritualness of holy duties that Jesus Christ requires,
with the power of Godliness that there is in holy duties that Christ requires
in the word, mortification of thy Lust, and the keeping of thy thoughts, and of
thy heart holy and spiritual* he requires that thou should serve the Lord
thy God withal thy heart and all thy might, if thou knew (I say) the
spiritualness of holy duties, and the power of Godliness that is in holy
duties, then it would be an intolerable burden to thee, it would be very
grievous to a carnal heart to put it self under the spiritual acts of
Religion; to put it self under the outward acts of Religion that is easy, but
to put it self upon the inward acts of Religion, they would find that to be
somewhat indeed. For one that has learned a Prayer, to go and say it over, and
read it in a Book: What an easy matter is that part of Religion? for a man in
the morning and evening, to go and turn over two or three Leaves, and shake
himself and go away, and then there is Religion for all that day. But now if
you would set your selves to the power of Godliness in Prayer, that is, when
you come to Prayer, to meditate what an Infinite, and Glorious, and eternal
God you have to deal withal in Prayer, I am now coming to tender up that high
respect that I owe to the infinite God, that which the Creature ows to an
infinite Creator, now I am coming to open my Soul to God, to search out all the
corruptions of my heart, and I am now coming to bewail them in the presence of
the infinite God, and to set my self before the Lord, as in my self a condemned
Creature before an infinite Judge, I am coming now to plead with God for my
life, for my Soul, for my eternal estate, I am now coming to engage my Soul to
God, that as ever I expect mercy in the day of Christ, so I am willing to give
up my self to God, here is some power of Godliness in this, now I would have
you put your selves to this divine ease, the more a Gracious heart does this,
the more ease he has in Prayer, as I will appeal to you; Take a carnal heart,
such a one thinks he must pray, and so he comes in the morning, and speaks a
few words, such words as he was wont to do, and such words as may be he has
heard other men speak when he joins with others in prayer, and he hears some
expressions in prayer from them, and he gets them, and comes in the morning and
speaks them, and perhaps gets into his Closet, and barely speaks them over, now
if it be one that has true Grace, alas, he is in a troublesome condition all
the day after, if he find not the power of Godliness in it, such a one has no
quiet in his Spirit all the day after, Why? because there has not been the
power of Godliness in his Duty, and therefore he is troubled all the day long.
But now, let such a one come to Prayer to purpose in the morning, and stir up
the life and power of Godliness in Prayer, worshipping God as a God, Oh! the
ease and quiet that such a one has all the day, he can go on in his work, and
can sing at his work: So that the ease of a Gracious heart, comes from the
power of Godliness in a Duty, and from the spiritualness that is in a Duty: but
the ease of a carnal heart comes from the formality of a Duty, as because the
Duty is formal, and he thinks that it is the Yoke of Christ and this is pretty
well, it is easy indeed, to have no other Yoke than this, to worship God in a
few words, and not to have the power of Godliness in the Duty. And so we might
instance in the hearing of the word, you come to the word barely, you rise out
of your bed, and come and sit here an hour, that is easy enough, but now if
you come to the word with preparation, and think now I am going into the
presence of God, to hear what God has to say to my Soul this morning, Oh, my
Soul, what is it that is in thee amiss? What is it that thou would fain have
the word come close unto, to help thee against? What is the special corruption
thou would have the word to mortify in thee? If now you set your selves
before you come to the word, to examine your hearts, and when you are there, to
attend to the word as that which is your life, upon which your eternal estate
depends, and so to sanctify the name of God in his word, and not to dare to
cast off any truth, knowing that your Soul may lie upon that very truth, and to
drink in the word of God in every thing that is revealed according to Gods
mind, this will be a very hard thing, you will complain of almost an
intolerable Burden. But now a gracious heart finds more ease, when it
Sanctifies God in the power of Godliness in hearing the word, than in a formal
Duty. Alas! when such a one comes in a formal way, and goes away and gets
nothing, such a one is troubled at such a Sermon, it brings more Burden and
grief to such a heart, to come to the word and not find profit by the word,
than any other thing can do, almost nothing can be more difficult than this.
You find no difference, you come to the word and you get nothing, and you go
away with as much comfort as at other times, it is as easy to you; but now a
Gracious heart cannot find ease except he finds Christ in the Duty, but you can
find ease in holy Duties though you never find Jesus Christ in holy Duties; I
appeal to you, if this thing God would be pleased to settle upon the hearts of
Men and Women, it might be a very great settlement to their hearts, you perform
holy Duties, What is the ease in holy Duties? merely the performance of the
Duty, but now if your ease were that which is the ease of a true Gracious
heart, it comes from the meeting with Jesus Christ in holy Duties.

And so for the Sabbath, how easy is it to keep the Sabbath, to do as the
most, it is easy, Why? Because you do not now work in your calling as other
days you do, and you put on your best Clothes, and come and meet with your
Neighbors, and so you come to Church and home again, and have better fare at
your Tables than other days, and sometimes walk up and down the Fields, this is
easy: But now the Saints find the ease of the Sabbath to be this, that whereas
upon the week day I am busied about other things, and so have not that
immediate Communion with Jesus Christ as at other times, now upon the Sabbath
my Soul comes to enjoy more immediate communion with Jesus Christ, when I awake
I am put upon it more to mind spiritual things, to prepare my heart for him,
And now this whole day is dedicated for my converse with Jesus Christ, and it is
no more to me but the very Type and forerunner of that eternal Sabbath that I
hope to enjoy in the highest Heavens hereafter, and so it is easy to me. Now
methinks, whatever trouble I have in the week time in my business in my
calling, the Sabbath day that refreshes me again and makes me fit for my
calling, and my heart that was so perplexed with outward crosses, and with the
troubles of the world, that did so dead and dull my Spirit, the Sabbath quickens
me again and adds new strength again, for I have found Christ refreshing my
Soul? Now is there not a wide difference between the ease of a carnal heart
and a Gracious heart in holy Duties? The one merely mistakes the Yoke of Christ.

And so for the Sacrament, It is an easy thing for a man to come in his best
Clothes, and take a piece of Bread and a cup of Wine, but he knows not what is
the power of Godliness in such a holy Duty, he thinks that the outward coming
to the Sacrament makes amends for all, though he has been a wicked carnal
wretch the week before, now if he comes to the Sacrament, the mere performing
the Duty, that makes amends, though there be no preparation before, no
spiritualness in the Sacrament, no discerning of the Body of Jesus Christ, and
the Mysteries of Jesus Christ, no closing of his heart with Jesus Christ in the
Sacrament, no engaging his Soul to God, no renewing his Covenant with God as he
comes to receive the Seal of Gods Covenant with him, no such things. But now a
Gracious heart cannot find ease in taking the Sacrament, except it find Christ,
the ease it has in the Sacrament, it is in preparing the Soul for communion
with Jesus Christ, it is in the exercise of Faith and repentance, the more
Faith is exercised and the more Repentance exercised, the more the heart is
broken in the Sacrament, the more ease a man has, and the more he gets his
heart engaged to God in the Sacrament, and the more he has renewed his
Covenant, the more ease he has, I, when a man can go to the Sacrament and do
this* O! this is a good day indeed. And indeed this I am speaking upon, is as
great a point of Religion for the helping of you to know the frame and
disposition of your hearts, and how things stand between God and your Souls, as
any thing I know; What it is in holy Duties that brings most ease to your
Souls, whether it be the bare external performance of them, or the spiritual
performance of them, is the power of Godliness in them? that holy Duties for
the matter of them cannot satisfy your heart, except you find your hearts
sanctified by them, and Gods name sanctified ^n them, that is the second note
of difference, between the ease a carnal heart finds in the ways of God, and
the ease a gracious heart finds.

CHAP. CXXXVII.
Contains a third and fourth Difierence between the ease of a Hypocrite, and
true Believer in the ways of God. For, 1. They are easy even to the
Corruptions of a Hypocrite. 2. He takes up the ways God partially.

THirdly: Another Difference is this: The ease a carnal heart finds, it may
not only stand with the ease under the Yoke of sin to the Flesh, but the truth
is, even the Duties of Religion are easy to their corruptions, to their very
corruptions, not only may stand with their corrupt ways, but are easy to the
very corruption it self, to the very sinful distemper of their hearts, this is
a very evil and vile ease, for to perform holy Duties so, as to be easy to
the very flesh, to the fleshly part, Indeed, the Yoke of Christ is easy unto
the Saints, but it is not easy unto the flesh, I mean to the corrupt part, it
is not easy to that, I but the ways of Religion to carnal hearts is easy to
their very corruption, to their corrupt part.

For, First: There is agreement enough between any Duty they perform and their
secret sins, they can perform holy Duties and keep their sins both together,
and this now they find very easy. There is nothing in holy Duties that is
against their sin, yea, there is something in holy Duties that makes for their
sins, I do not say holy Duties in their own natures makes for their sins, but
their performing of them makes for their sins, makes them the more quiet in
their sins. As thus, It makes more for their sins, and they have more quiet in
them upon two Peasons.

As first by this means sometimes their corruption and sin is hidden, as you
that have many Servants that are naught and vile, they will be very forward in
good things, and go to Sermons, and Prayer and the like, that they might hide
much of their sin, that they might not be uspected to be such and such,
therefore they perform Duties of Religion; and now these Duties must needs be
very easy to them: And so it is with many Hypocrites that go beyond civil
men, and the Duties of Religion that that they perform, are more than civil
men do, they will not only come to Church, but seem to be affected, not only be
ex^ercised in the ordinary Duties, but in extraordinary, Fasting and Prayer,
not only come to hear the word, but repeat it in their Families afterward, not
only pray here, but pray in their Families, and Closets, yet so, as to cover
their corruption, to cover their very filthiness, now these Duties are very
easy.

Or Secondly, which is a amore close way, Because it satisfies their
Consciences, their Consciences would not be at quiet except they did something,
a Man and Woman that walks in a carnal way, that has a vile Spirit, a
sensual spirit in his constant way and course, if such a one should not do
some good thing, having some enlightening of mind, his Conscience being somewhat
awakened and stirred, he could not be at quiet if he did not now and then pray,
and now and then come to hear the word, and desire Sacraments, his Conscience
would fly in his face, and would not be at quiet, now having many secret
corruptions that he is loath to part with, he is content to do something, to take
a Book, and read a Chapter, and go into his Closet, and pray in his Family, and
will not neglect the word, but come to hear the word all the Lords day, come
twice, and thrice to hear the word, now all these things are very good, and
they are to be encouraged in them, but now examine I beseech you, whether all
the good and comfort that you find is not only this, that by these things your
Consciences are quieted, and so you go on more easy in some sinful way,
because of this, you can with the more ease let out your heart unto the world,
you can with more ease take liberty to some haunt of evil that you are
conscious of, some secret sin, you can take the more liberty, because you have
been exercised in holy Duties at another time. I beseech you examine your heart
in this, there is a great deal of secret corruption in this, and it is not very
rare, not an extraordinary thing that I am speaking of, but I fear it is an
ordinary thing that I am speaking of, that many people take the more liberty in
some secret haunt of evil, because they have been exercised in holy Duties at
other times, they have been at fasting and prayer and perhaps their hearts have
been stirred in Fasting and Prayer, but now what use make they of this? it is
that they may be more sluggish at other times, this is a cursed ease, an ease
that may stand not only with your corruptions, but an ease to your corruptions,
make you to go on in the way of sin more quietly, What a horrid sin is this?
for a Man and Woman to make no other use of the Ordinances of Jesus Christ than
this, to this end, that he may go on more quietly in the ways of sin, now this
is an abhorring thing to a gracious heart, a gracious heart finds ease in the
way of Duty but it is more easy because it strikes at their corruptions, and
mortifies their corruptions, Oh! blessed be God for his Ordinances, for before
I came to be exercised in them, and had power and life in the use of them, I
had ease in my sin, but since the time I set my self to follow God indeed in
his Ordinances, and have had communion with God in his Ordinances, I thank God
I can have no ease in my sin, that though my corruptions sometimes overcome me,
yet by the performance of holy Duties I find it makes my corruptions more
burdensome to me, and God that knows my heart knows this, it is my desire that
I may never find ease in any sinful way, and I love all the ways of God
better, because they will not let me be at quiet in the ways of sin. And this
is the reason that you that come to the word of God, many times, you hear many
things that you like well, and you love them well, but because they disquiet
your corruptions, and you cannot have quiet in your sinful way, therefore you
sit at home, and you will not come to hear the word. Oh, many men, they would
love Sermons, and love to hear such a man, but only for this one thing, that
they will not let them be at quiet, they cannot go on fo quietly in some sinful
way which their hearts hanker after, and therefore those Sermons that do not
disquiet them in this kind, Oh, they love them exceedingly, it is that I have
observed; you shall have many Women, ignorant People and others, when they come
to hear a Sermon that has a great deal of Latin, and quaint expressions in it,
Oh, how they commend this, and what an excellent Sermon was this? and what an
excellent Man was this? It may be said of those Sermons, as Bradford said of
the Mass, The Mass does not bite, therefore you love it; and so men used to
love the common Prayer, alas, it did not bite, they would come, and stand, and
hear a man read out of a Book a while, this did not bite, whereas a Prayer that
comes from the heart, and fearcheth into men's hearts* that stirs their
corruptions, and therefore they do not love it. And so it is in regard of the
word, let the word come to search the heart, and come near, to divide between
the marrow and the bones, to come into the secret of the hearts of men and
women then for the soul to love the word so much the more, and to say Oh! this
is the word of God that gives ease to my soul, I find more ease by such a
ministry then I find by any ministry, this is the ease of a Gracious heart: but
a corrupt heart will have ease only in that way that is most subservant to his
own lusts That is the third difference.

Fourthly, Another difference is this, The ease that a corrupt heart has in
the ways of God, it is that ease that he has in taking up the ways of God
but by holiness, it is in partial obedience, it is but in part of the yoke of
Christ, it is not in all the yoke of Christ he can take up some part, some
pieces of the yoke of Christ but if you come to urge him to take up all the
ways of God then he cries out, what! must we make Conscience of all our
thoughts, of al our words, and all our actions? must we answer for every action
before the judgment seat of Christ? Oh! this he counts to be hard and grievous
to him, he could be content with something, but to take up the full yoke, and all
the yoke of Jesus Christ, that he thinks an intolerable burden; that he must
have the scripture, the word of God to be the rule of all his actions, that is
somewhat hard: But now a gracious heart finds the greatest ease when he comes up
unto all Gods commands, It is true* indeed says he, I cannot come to that
pitch as to obey them perfectly but yet my heart is so far brought off as to
subject my self to all the commands of God if at sometimes he yields to some,
and then at other times unto others, that brings more trouble to his spirit,
but now when he can find his heart submitting to all the precepts of God, then
he finds most rest, all the ways of wisdom are pleasant. A Child of God finds
no one thing in the ways of God that is not easy, and the more it comes to an
universal obedience in every thing, the more ease it has when indeed it does
but begin to make some entrance upon Gods ways, and takes up some duties and
not all, then it finds trouble, but when it comes to take up all, and comes to
yield universal obedience, then it finds ease. Now examine your hearts in this
you find it may be some ease in the ways of religion, O! but it is but partial
obedience, you take this, and leave that, observe this, a partial obedience, is
an easy obedience to a carnal heart, but an universal obedience is the most
easy obedience to any Gracious heart.

CHAP. CXXXVIII.
Contains Six differences more of the former Point 5 A Carnal heart can take
up and lay down duties when he will. 6 He has ease in the remissness of his
Spirit. 7 His ease is al alike. 8 The more ease he has the more sluggish he
is. 9 He has but one principle in the heart that acts him both in the ways
of God, and the ways of the world. 10. His ease comes from the performance of
duties in his own Strength.

Fifthly, Another is this, A carnal heart finds ease, from the liberty of taking
up and laying down the duty, it is easy because he can take it up and lay it
down when he will, if a beast have a yoke that he can shift the collar when he
will it is easy, when he can put in his head when he will, and slip out his head
when he please, this is no grievousness to the beast, so it is with carnal
hearts, the ways of God are easy to them, why? because sometimes they can take
up duties, and sometimes lay them down, when they are in a good mood, then they
can take up duties, and read, and pray; and the like if any thing vex and
trouble them* then they can lay them down again; and sometimes when they list
they can come and hear Sermons, and when they list they can go into bad
company, go into the Tavern, and the like; but now a gracious heart finds the
greatest ease when it can be constant in the ways of God, when I can bring my
heart to this, that there is an evenness and proportion between what I do at
one time, and what I do at another time, there is the greatest ease to a
gracious heart, and indeed, there can be no true comfort in any holy duty where
the heart is not constant, the constancy and the evenness of spirit, and the
proportion that there is between one thing and another, is that that makes the
ways of God easy unto the Saints. As in going in any way or common path if a
man have one ledg long and another short, or if the way be uneven, sometimes
plain, sometimes rugged, sometimes down hill, and sometimes uphil, that is hard to
a man in his walking; and so it is with the work of a Christian, that that
makes it difficult is this, Oh, I cannot find my heart in a constant evenness,
were my heart so, then I should find ease, but that which makes it most
difficult, it is the unevenness of my heart, on the contrary, put now a carnal
heart to this, to a constancy in any duty or work for God, O! it will cry out
of weariness in Gods ways, perhaps he will be content to be a while in holy
duties, to hear a short Sermon, and go away again, but to spend the whole
Sabbath, that is wearisom to him; Nay perhaps he could be content to keep one
Sabbath, but to keep Sabbath after Sabbath, that is burdensome to him, and
perhaps he could be content to pray one morning in his family, but to pray
every morning, and every night, and to go on from morning to morning, and from
day to day, and from week to week, and from year to year, Oh! this is
wearisom, truly, we have no reason to grudge God any service all our days, but
thus it is with a carnal heart.

Sixthly, The ease that a carnal heart has, it is in his remissness in duty, in
the remissness of his spirit, in his moderation that he pleads for, there lies
his ease, but for the other, the extension of duty, that he pleads not for; you
shall have a carnal heart plead for holy duties, but with moderation, we must be
moderate, and if we do something that God requires, though we be not so hot and
fiery as others, I hope it is well enough, does not virtue consist in the middle
way? As I like not the profaneness of some men, that are Swearers, and
drunkards, and whoremongers on the one side, so I do not like your precise men
on the other side, so that his ease lies in the remissness, in the lukewarmness
of his spirit in holy duties. But now the ease of a gracious heart lies in the
exactness of his spirit, to come to the very top of holy duties. It is with a
gracious heart, as it is with many fowls, you shall have many fowls that fly,
when they are low, they flutter, and it is a trouble to them to get on high,
but when they are aloft, then it is no trouble to them; so it is with a
gracious heart, to get up his heart, is some trouble to him, but now when he
has got up his heart, then he is in his element, there he can fly swiftly,
when he has got up into the highest region, there he gets the most ease. It is
quite otherwise with a carnal heart, when he pleads for moderation, this virtue
of moderation that he pleads for, it is not a middle of participation, the
middle in which virtu consists; it is not a middle that does participate of a
degree of both the contraries, but a denying of the extremes of both, as the
true virtue of liberality consists not between prodigallity and covetousness,
but denies the extremes, of both, it will have nothing to do with either of
both the etreames, but that which a carnal heart cal^ for in moderation, is the
mixture of both extremes together, and so makes up a religion of the mixture,
as thus, there is open profaneness, that is one kind of extreme, and there is
deadness of spirit the other way, that that is opposite unto the open
profaneness in wickedness of many people that of drunkennhss, and uncleanness
and the like they will none of this, And then there is the Strictness of power
and life in the ways of God in the other way; that that is in their hearts is
a deadness of spirit, there is a mixture, there is some profaneness of heart,
though they would have somewhat of religion too, of that which is the hypocrisy
not the power of religion, there is hipocrisy and profaneness, those are the
too extteams, he will not be a profane man in the grossness of it, nor will he
be strict in the ways of God in the exactness of them, but mix them both, he
will not be only profane, and only have a show in religion, but he will retain
some profaneness of heart; that is, though he will not be drunk and profane,
yet he will retain an inward profaneness of heart, that is, when he comes to
perform holy duties, he counts them but as common things, the blood of Jesus
Christ, he counts it as a common thing and so he has a profaneness of heart
when he comes to perform holy duties, and yet he will not be profane neither,
and so he will have a mix^ure of both, and this makes up a civil man, and yet
the civil man will cry out for both he thinks he is not an hipocrite, and he
thinks he is not profane, but he is a middle man, a mixture of a profane person
and a strict person, he is between both: But now a gracious heart equally
opposes profaneness and hipocrisy, so that the right moderation, is such a
moderation as is a middle between two evils and partakes of none, the ease of
a carnal heart lies in his moderation of holy duties, and therefore those
duties that would lift up the heart high, those are troublesome unto him. As
now, you shall find in some beasts, a horse that is a jade and tired, will go
pretty well in some smoth way, but if he come to the least rising of a hill,
Oh, how hard is it for such a beast to draw? and how ready is he to stand
still? perhapps, when the way is down hill he will draw, but at no rising or
up-hil, now it is otherwise with a horse of mettle, you shall find no difference
between one way and another, nay, he will go better up-hill then down hill: So
it is with Carnal hearts perhaps in some kind of things that may be suitable to
them, and are smoth they may go apace, but in that that raises his spirit,
that that is uphill, Oh, that is difficult, but now a Godly heart, is lively,
and spiritual, and joyful, and finds most quiet and ease when he rises highest.

Seventhly, A carnal heart, the ease that it has in Gods ways, it is all a
like as well one time as at another time, it is not so with the Saints, they have
ease, but they do not find it all alike when indeed they can be constant in
Gods ways, then they find constant ease, but because sometimes they find
corruption prevail then indeed the ways of God are difficult, more difficult
then at other times, when they find a temptation that overcomes their hearts,
they find a great deal of difficulty before they can get it off, but this will
discover many men to be naught, when you find your corruptions prevail, you can
have as much ease as at other times, As suppose you have been the last week
drunk, or have been committing uncleaness, or have been in Company, and you can
come to the Sacrament on the Lords day, and join with the Minister when at
prayer, you can come and put on your sunday clothes (as you call them) and sit
at the word, and it is as easy to you as any other thing, surely, now thy heart
is but carnal, were thou spiritual, if thy heart were conscious of some sin
committed the week before when thou were in company, Oh! when thou come to
the word, thou would find the word as a dagger stuck to thy soul, thou
would find the presence of God terrible to thee, in prayer, and in the word
and Sacrament: but can thou give way to thy sin in the week time, and God
knows that thou have not been humbled before the Lords day, and yet can thou
come and join in prayer, and the word, and Sacrament with ease, this is a sign
of a carnal heart, that thou art not acquainted with God or any of his ways:
but it is otherwise with a gracious heart, he has ease, the presence of God is
comfortable unto him so long as he can keep his reckoning even between God and
his Soul, but if he should give way to sin, and draw the power of the devil
upon him when he comes into the presence of God, he finds the presence of God
terrible unto him.

Eighthly, Another Difference between the ease of a carnal heart, and a
gracious, heart is this: In the effect of it there are other manner of effects
that are produced by the ease of a Gracious heart, than of any carnal heart:
As thus, A carnal heart, the more ease he has, the more sluggish he is, and
the more barren he is; but a gracious heart, the more ease it has in Gods
ways, the more fruitful it is. As we say of States and Kingdoms, that peace
in States and Kingdoms brings plenty, and so it does, we have had experience
of it, so peace in the Conscience of one that is Gracious makes him plentiful
in all good works, a heart that is truly Godly, is never so fruitful in the
ways of God, as when he has the most ease and rest in Gods ways; but now
take a carnal heart, if his Conscience be troubled, Oh, then he will set upon
holy Duties, but if he be at ease and quiet, he grows more barren, and more
sluggish, by how much the more ease he has. I do not know any one thing, to
help you better to exam in your own hearts in a great case of Conscience than
this: How do I know when I have peace and quiet, whether it comes from
presumption, or from true Faith? I bless God, I have hope of Gods mercy, and so
I have quiet in my Conscience, well, but now here is the case of Conscience,
whether is this quiet that I have in my Conscience from the hope I have of Gods
mercy, from presumption in me, or from true Faith? It concerns every one to get
this case of Conscience answered. Now I know no greater help for the answering
this case of Conscience, than this one thing that I have spoken of. Have thou
quiet and ease? and have thou hope of Gods mercy? and does that bring thee
quiet? if it be but presumption, it makes thee secure, it makes thee barren,
and sluggish: but on the other side, if thou have ease and quiet in thy Spirit,
and thou find, that the more that ease and quiet increases, the more
fruitful thou art in all good works, it makes thee the more active and
stirring in all good works, this is a sign that it comes from Faith; as you
heard before, a gracious heart has the more activeness in it the more ease it
has, now as his activeness in goodness causes easiness in his heart, so the
easiness in his heart causes activeness in goodness, there is a mutuallness in
these two, and indeed this latter is the more facile for people to exam in
themselves by, perhaps every one cannot group to that activeness of heart, but
now has it this power upon your hearts, that you are more fruitful than
before? This is the ease of a gracious heart, if it does so.

Ninthly, And then the ease that a carnal heart has in the ways of God is
from hence, because he has but only one principle in his heart, when he is in
the ways of God, and when he is in the ways of the world, he is acted but by
the same principle in both, there is not a contrary principle in his heart, one
that carries him one way, and another that carries him another way: but the
ease of a gracious heart, is this, that he finds a stronger principle, that
overcomes a contrary principle of corruption in him, there lies his ease, a
carnal heart goes on and performs Duties, and has not diverse principles in
his heart to carry him this way or that way, but has only one principle, a
carnal principle that carries him on to serve his own ends, and sometimes he can
serve his ends in one thing, and sometimes in another thing, but one that is
Godly finds ease from hence, from the power of Gods Grace that does overcome
his corruption, I find a stirring in my heart, but I thank God I can get the
victory, the ease of a Godly heart comes from the victory that it gets, but it
is not so with a carnal heart, your civil men do not find ease from their
victory, because what they do is not suitable to them, but a Godly man finds
that there is a principle of Grace that opposes the principle of lust and
corruption, and therefore can say since I set my heart toward God and his
ways, I have found more corruption than before stirring, but I thank God I
have got victory over them, I find a conquest gotten over the corruption that
is stirring in my Soul, and that is my ease, another man, he finds no
corruption stirring in his heart, and therefore no marvel if he find ease, but
now a Godly man finds a contrary principle to that which is good stirring in
his heart, and then finds Gods Grace coming in upon his heart to help him
against that corruption, and this brings ease and quiet to him.

Tenthly, And then the last is this, That the ease the one has comes from
this, that all that he does he preformes in his own strength, and he does not
see any need of any further strength than that which he has in himselelf, to
enable him to perform Duties, and so he finds ease: As a man finds his Trade to
be easy if he trades with his own stock, and has nothing but his own stock to
trade with, and trades in no higher things then what himself can reach unto,
whereas another man, that must have the stocks of other men to trade with,
finds a great deal more trouble that sees his trade requires more stock than
his own. It is so with a Gracious heart, he sets upon duty so, as needs he
finds he more stock than his own, his trade is beyond his own strength: but now
a Godly heart when he comes to want strength, he fetches strength from Christ,
he fetches strength from the Covenant of Grace, he fetches strength from the
Promise, and when he has got strength from Christ, from the Covenant of Grace,
from the Promise Oh, now he finds rest and ease in his Duty, and you shall see
the reason of it in the next Point, why the Sants finds difficulties, many
times they will think to be trading with their own strength, and their own
stocks, whenas the things they trade about is beyond their own strength, but
now when they can look higher and see a fullness in Jesus Christ, in the
Mediator of the new Covenant, and of his fullness we must receive Grace for
Grace, and fetches strength from this, Oh! then here is quiet and ease, when
the Soul comes to trade with another stock. Observe this, you will find it as
certain as can be, all those that are mere civil People, that find it so easy
to go on in the ways of God, they were never sensible of any need they have of
any more strength than their own, whereas the Yoke of Christ is heavier than
any natural strength is able to bear, and therefore if you find ease, in that
you have strength of your own to perform it, Certainly, it is not the Yoke of
Christ. But now, when you find your own strength too short, when you go to
perform any Duty, and find a great deal of difficulty, you can go to Christ,
and to the Covenant of Grace, and to the Promise, and there fetch in strength,
you have ease and quiet. Oh, that you were acquainted with this Mystery of
Godliness, that when you go out to perform Duties, and you find them difficult
and hard, that then you can go out to Christ, and the Covenannt of Grace, and
the Promise, and fetch strength from them to perform Duties, this is the ease
of a Godly heart, when it finds ease in Gods ways after this manner; and all
you that are acquainted with this Mystery of Godliness, know that whatsoever
ease you have found hitherto, it is not the ease of a Gracious heart, but
rather of a carnal heart.

CHAP. CXXXIX.
Diverse Objections answered. The easiness of the ways of Christ; which is the
third particular mentioned in Chap. 139.

QUEST.
BUT do we not find that Christ has said in his word, that the way to Heaven
is difficult, and the Gate to Heaven is strait and narrow? and do we not find
Preachers ordinarily speaking so, that the way to Heaven is difficult and
strait? according to what is in Scripture, yea, do we not find that the People
of God themselves complain, that there is a great deal of difficulty in the
ways of God? and do they not oftentimes complain of the hardness of them? Yea,
and what though some things may be easy, yet some others are very hard, As,
you will say to the Discipline of Christ in his Church: Is that easy? Is not
that hard? and what will you say to the sufferings that Christ requires of his
people, Does it not seem very hard?

Answ. Now to clear the point from all these difficulties, either what Christ
says of the straitness of the way to Heaven, or what the Saints of God find,
or what may be said in regard of the Discipline of Christ in his Church, or
what in regard of the suffering that Christ requires, notwithstanding all
these, yet we hope we shall make it clear, that yet his yoke is easy, and his
burden is light, and further we are to show how it comes to be easy and light.

But first to clear the Point from all these difficulties.

First: That of Christ, That the way to Heaven is a strait way, a very strait
way, there must be crowding, and taking a great deal of pains.

It is true, It is strait, it is a very strait way to men that are but
natural, that are not his Disciples, it must needs be a strait in their
apprehensions, in the esteem of the world, the way that Christ does propound to
come to Heaven it must needs I say be very strait, and a very difficult way in
the esteem of the men of the world, and that upon these grounds.

1. They do not know wherein the true spiritual excellenc^es of the ways of
Christ dorh consist, they do not understand what the excellency of Christ's
ways are.

2. The things that are required are unsutiable to them, they are not suitable
to what there is in their spirits, and to put a man upon a work that is no way
suitable to his spirit must needs be difficult, must needs be tedious, it is
not suitable to them; Yea, it is contrary to them, contrary to the spirits of
those that are natural, cross unto the grain, they go quite contrary to their
own spirits, when they venture upon doing what is required in the ways of God.

3. They are weak, and have not the strength that should carry them on in the
ways of God, indeed it must needs be difficult, to think to do that which is
supernatural and have nothing but a natural strength, it must needs be hard to
nature that has nothing but weakness, it must needs be hard to the men of the
world, for they have a great many prejudices against the ways of Christ, they
must deny themselves in many things that are as dear to themselves as their
very Souls, and their lives, and they have nothing to make up their comforts,
they must deny their comforts, and have nothing to make up their comforts,
this must needs be difficult and hard, and so many grounds might be shown, that
the way to Heaven is hard to the men of the world, a hard thing for them to
enter upon the way to Heaven, and so it is strait to them in their esteem.

Quest. I but further. Is it not strait unto the Saints, even to the very
Disciples of Christ, Do not they find difficulties in the ways of God?

Answ. Now for the answering of that, to show how the ways of God are easy,
notwithstanding what even those that are the people of God find in them, and
notwithstanding all their complaints, those that are Godly, they say, they find
much difficulty in the ways of Religion.

1. It may be the difficulty thou speak of, it is but in opinion rather than
reality, it is but an imaginary difficulty, when thou look upon a Duty a
great way off: Oh! thou think it is very hard, but when thou come to it
thou do not find it so hard: I appeal to those that are ac^uainted with the
ways of God, Has it not been so with you, that things have seemed to be hard
and difficult a great way off, but when you have come unto them, and ventured
upon them, you have not found them so? It is just in this case for all the
world, like as it was with the women that we read of in Mark 16. that went to
the Sepulcher of Christ, as they were going at verse 3. O! they were very
solicitous about the Stone that was rouled upon the Sepulcher, Who shall ro^l
away the Stone, but now when they came to the Sepulcher the Stone was rouled
away. So it is here when there are many Duties to be done, it may be you cry
out; Oh, it is very hard, and how shall we be able to do such a thing? such a
poor weak body as I am, how shall I be able to do it? but when you come to the
Duty you do not find it so, I suppose there are many, that at first thought it
a very difficult Duty to keep a watch over their heart, and to pray in their
Families and Closets, and to keep close to God, but when they have come to the
thing, sometimes when you have had no heart to pray, when you have thoughts to
go to prayer* and you have thought it impossible for you to make any work of
it, but when you have come to it, you have found it before you have done to be
a very sweet and comfortable Duty; you have found a stone hardness of heart,
and indisposition to the Duty before you have come to the Duty, but when you
have come to the work, you have found the stone rouled away, and the work not
so hard. As we read of Peter in Acts 12. 10. When he was coming out of the City
and those with him, When they came to the Iron Gate in was open, It may be if
they had known there had been such an Iron Gate to pass through, they might
have been troubled, Oh, how shall we get through, but when they came there, the
Iron Gate was open, so that the difficulty is before we come to make trial,
rather than when we make trial.

2. But you will say, It is real, not in opinion, but real. I but it is so
but at the entrance, at the beginning, and it may be the greatest difficulty is
but to get the neck into the collar, to get the yoke upon the neck, there lies
the great difficulty, when once you are in the yoke, then you will find it
easy, the greatest difficulty many find in the ways of Religion it is their
first entrance, because they have not been accustomed to such things. You shall
have many times some kinds of Bullocks that come into their yoke, there is more
stir to get their necks in, to get their yokes upon their necks, then there is
for them to bear it afterward: So there is with many men and women a great
deal of stir* and a great deal of do to get their necks under Christ's yoke, to
come under the burden of the yoke of Christ, but were they come in* they would
not find it so difficult. Sometimes indeed, the work of God in converting of a
Soul comes to it so, as the Soul finds a great deal of difficulty: The Ministry
of John by way of preparation comes in a terrible way, to make smooth the rough
paths, and level the lofty hills, comes in a fiery way to prepare them, many
times it is very terrible, and they find a great deal of difficulty, much
trouble of conscience, and terror at first, I but this is but to get ^hy neck
into the yoke, this is not the difficulty of Christ's yoke, but it is the
bringing thee under the yoke of Christ, therefore let not those that God is
beginning to stir them in awakn^ng their Consciences, be offended because they
find difficulty, because they find the ways of God terrible to them, and
conscience terrible to them, and they find the flashes of Hell upon their
spirits, be not offended because thou have more trouble now then before, it is
but in getting that unruly spirit of thine under the yoke of Christ, if once
thy spirit be subdued to Jesus Christ, and brought under his yoke, thou will
not find it so terrible and it may be the more terror thou have now the more
sweetness and comfort thou will find afterward.

Thirdly, Thou complainest of difficulty that thou find in Gods ways, do
not therefore complain of the yoke of Christ, it may be it is from the
distemper of thine own heart, not from Christ's yoke, we know that a light yoke
to one that has a sore neck, seems to be very grievous, but the fault is not
in the yoke, but in the soreness of the neck if the neck were sound, and made
whole, the yoke would seem light, so it is with many that profess religion, and
it may be have true grace, they find the yoke very hand to them, and they
complain of the yoke, and think that which Christ requires of them is grievous
to them, but truly it is the distemper of thy heart, and the unsoundness of thy
spirit that makes it so if so be thy heart were but healed, if thy hear^ were
but sound, thou would not find any such difficulty in any way of Christ. In
2 Timothy 1. 7. There the spirit of power, of love and of a sound mind are joined
together, where there is a sound mind a sound spirit, the^e will be power,
there will be strength, there will be love and sweetness, but where the mind
and the heart is unsound, and diste^pered* there you will find a great deal of
difficulty in the yoke of Christ, so that I say, where you find the yoke of
Christ difficult, do not complain of that so much, as of your own heart, and
labor to heal your own soul, and then it it will not be so difficult, and that
is the third answer I would give to the Godly that yet find difficulty in the
ways of religion, it is not because of the yoke, but it is because you are not
enough under the yoke, that is the difficulty, if your hearts were under it
more then it is, it would not be so difficult, and this expression may serve to
enlighten us into the fourth answer which is this.

Fourthly, the yoke of Christ may seem to be hard but it is because of the
disordered carriage of thy spirit when thou art under it, not only from a
distempered heart, that thy heart has distempers, and habitual corruptions,
but now when thou art doing a duty thou do behave thy self in a disorderly
way in the performance of the duty, the disorderly behavior of thy heart in the
performance of duty. As now we know it is with some Bullock, some creatures
that are unruly, when they are in the yoke they keep such a stir, and riggle
this way and that way, and they are so unquiet when they are under the yoke,
that they toil and trouble themselves abundantly more then another that can
carry the yoke quietly* that goes on quietly with his yoke so it is with many
Christians when they are in the performance of duty, if they cannot do it as
they would, they do so vex* and frett, and are so disquieted in their spirits,
and so tumultuous in their spirits and are ready to cast it off, Conscience
will keep it on, and they are ready to cast it off there is such a
disorderliness of spirit, and such tumultuousness of spirit, this makes duties
difficult, whereas now, when thou art in performance of duties if thou could
be under the yoke of Christ with a calm, quiet Spirit, and carry it in a meek
way, Oh! the sweetness that thou would find there, how many times shall you
have many people, that when they go to prayer, if they cannot pray as they
would do, then they vex and fret and are ready to think to pray no more, and
why should they pray any more? they are so disturbed in the duty, they think it
is better to cast it off, and they begin to have hard thoughts of the duty, and
so their spirits are all in a d^stemper and disorderly working presently, and
there is the difficulty. Whereas another, though he cannot do what he would,
yet he has an humble dispose to God, and thinks I will try another time, may
be God may come in another time, still I love the duty, the law is good, the
duty is just and good, and though through the untowardness, of my spirit I
cannot do it now, yet I hope God will come at another time, I will do my duty,
and leave it to God to come in when he pleases; as you heard before, when the
Bullock or the Heifer that bears the yoke,, if he goes on quierly, his yoke is
not so grievous, but if he flings, this way and that way, and turns to this
side and that side, every way, he makes his yoke grievous to him, and so it is
with many Christians, it is the disorderly carriage of people under this yoke
that makes it so difficult.

Fifthly Thou complainest and say this yoke is hard, consider that the
casting of the yoke off would be a great deal harder, and therefore there is no
cause to complain, can a man in a rational way complain of a yoke to be hard,
whenas the casting of the yoke off would be a harder thing then the bearing of
it? therefore the Hebrew word that signifies sin, signifies also labor and
trouble, there is more trouble if thou should cast off the yoke, thou
would find more distress of spirit, and more difficulty in casting off the
yoke, then to be under the yoke. It is true, those that be carnal and wicked,
do not find it so, but if thou have Grace, if thou should cast off the duty
because of the difficulty thou would find it more difficult to be without
the duty, then to perform it. As I will instance to your own experiences, you
fiend sometimes that your hearts are loath to come off to prayer in a morning,
or if you do pray, you do it slightly, now do not you find your hearts off the
hooks all the day long after, have not you more trouble all the day long when
your conscience tells you that you should go and seek God and pray, I but other
things are more easy, and that is a hard thing, and therefore you neglect it,
now do not you find it more dificult to be with out prayer in a morning, then
is in all the labor of prayer? compare one day with another, and see which is
the easyest. The yoke of Christ that was upon David, might be somewhat hard to
the flesh but the casting off the yoke broke his bones, therefore in Psalm. 51.
He cries to God, to restore to him the joy of his Salvation and to heal those
Bones of his that were broken, That the Bones that thou have broken may
rejoice, that expression the Prophet has, Psalm, 51. verse. 8. Make me to hear
joy and Gladness, that the Bones that thou have broken may rejoice, so that it
broke the very Bones of David, the casting off the yoke of Christ, the trouble
that David felt in his heart, it was such a burden to him as broke his bones,
now when did ever any duty that David performed break his bones? though it
might a little pain his flesh, and be a little burdensome to his flesh, yet it
was not that which broke his bones, the casting off the yoke of Christ is a
greater burden, and more troublesome to a gracious heart then to keep it on.

Sixthly. Thou complainest of difficulty in duty, in Christ's yoke. may be it is
not the yoke of Christ that is upon thee, that is so heavy upon thee, if thou
examinest it again, perhaps thou shall find it is not Christ's yoke that is upon
thee.

1. May be it is a yoke that thou have taken upon thy self, perhaps something
that thou have put upon thy self that Christ never required of thee, then it
may be grievous to thee, if we will put that upon our selves that Christ never
required, as Papists do that put that upon themselves that Christ never
required, who required these things at your hands? It may be some men have put
something upon you that Christ never required of thee, it may be thou put
upon thy self a duty at this time, that is not the duty of this time, but is
the duty of some other time, when thou will enjoyne thy self to do such a duty
that is not the duty of this time, but the duty of another time, then it may be
troublesome; as many poor Christians are pestered this way, when God would have
them do such a duty, conscience puts them upon another duty, God calls them to
a duty of their calling, but conscience puts them upon prayer, now that is not
the duty it may be of this time, and this is the way of Satan, of the Devil, to
weary them, and tire them, by putting them upon duty unseasonably, when he
cannot by temptation hinder them from duty, then he labors to weary and tire
them, by putting them unseasonably upon duty, As I have known some, they could
not be at their work a quarter of an hour, but suddenly they must leave all and
go to prayer, and they thought it was the motion of Gods Spirit, and the
dictates of conscience, and they thought they must not neglect it, and so made
their lives uncomfortable upon that ground; whereas the Spirit of God puts
people upon duty seasonably, every thing in its right order, and right way, and
in its due time, it will put you upon prayer in a fit time, and put you upon
duties of your calling in a fit time, and when it comes unseasonably to
disquiet you, it is rather a suggestion of Satan to disquiet you, then to make
you to obey Christ's yoke.

2. May be it is not the yoke of Christ, but merely the yoke of the Law, as
thus, though it may be the same thing that Christ would have you do, yet you
may have it laid upon you in a legal way, to do it merely out of fear of the
wrath of God, and damnation, and so it may be as a scourge to force you to it,
and so to look upon every duty as if your eternal estate depended upon it, as
if you were to be cast or saved by the mere performance of your duty, this is
rather the yoke of the Law then the yoke of Jesus Christ, to be put and hurryed
upon duty, as if your eternal estate did depend upon your duty, and you were to
be cast in your eternal estate by that rather then any thing, here is the yoke
of Moses, not the yoke of Christ, Christ puts you upon duty for the honor of
God, yet so, as the hazard of your eternal estate is over, and thou art not to
be cast upon the performance of the duty this way or that way, that if thou
failest thou were to be cast for ever to everlasting destruction upon thy
failing, he does not bring you before God as before a severe and revenging
judge, but puts you upon service, as a Child is put upon doing service by a
Father, now it is a great deal easyer for a child to do service to a father,
then for a slave to do service to one that has him in bondage, that will be
continually lashing him, and beating him black and blue; so indeed the yoke of
the Law (which we are to speak of afterward when we come to speak of the
easiness of Christ's yoke) that is grievous, and many Christians they do their
duties merely in a legal way, and so it is rather Moses yoke, then the yoke of
Jesus Christ, and so it comes to be hard; whereas when thou come to
understand what the yoke of Christ is, and what the duties are that are
required by Jesus Christ, and so to take them from him by a covenant of Grace,
for so they are required, there is no duty in the Morral Law, but is required
of you in the Gospel, and in a stronger bond then ever it was required upon the
first Covenant, but in another way, coming unto it in another way in Christ*
and through the hand of the mediator Jesus Christ, so it comes to be a great
deal more easy, and when duties are taken up in an evangelical way* then they
are easy* but so long as you take them up in a legal way, then they come to be
very grievous, that is the Sixth Answer.

Seventhly, Another answer is this, that difficulty that you find, it is not
the Yoke of Christ, if you consider, That now Corruption is more Stirred then
ever it was before, the difficulty is in the discovery of corruption, and in
the Stirring of your corruption more then before, so that your Corruption
through this, by means of the yoke of Christ comes to be more stirred then
formerly it was: As thus now (sometimes I think, I have given you this
Similitude) if there be a few embers of fire that is covered under the ashes,
while no body medles with those embers, the ashes lie Still, but if you come to
blow up these ashes, the ashes fly up and down: So it is with the Soul that
has Grace, while corruption lies still all is at quiet, but when Grace comes
and stirs corruption, that makes a trouble, you come now to see your sins more,
and to oppose them more. As when a Physician comes to give Physic, the
stirring of the humor makes the Party more sick, should the Patient complain of
the Physician and say, this Physic makes me more sick, and I will take no more
of his Physic? if the Physic did not make thee more sick, it would do thee no
good. And so when thou come to the practice of Religion, if Grace do not stir
thy corruptions, it will not cure thy corruptions, thou come to be sensible of
thy sin more than ever, and thou art ready to think that it is the yoke of
Christ that troubles thee, but it is the sight and the further sense of thy sin
that makes thee thus, and thou have cause to bless God for this trouble, there
is nothing more ordinary than for Christians that are not well experienced in
the ways of God to think thus, that they are worse than ever, they never had
such thoughts, they never were troubled with such blasphemous thoughts in
Prayer, they never found such stirrings of corruption in their hearts as now
they have, and they think they are declined, and they are further off from God
and eternal life than before, because they see more evil in themselves, and
find more stirring of corruption than before, be not discouraged by this, it is
the stirring of thy corruption though the thing in it self is evil, yet it is
a good sign, it is a sign the word of God is working in thee, and God stirs
in thee, therefore do not complain of the word of Christ, that it makes thee
worse, but it is a mere accidental cause of the stirring of thy corruption, and
it will do thee good at the latter end.

Eighthly: Another Answer is this, The yoke of Christ is hard, but to what? It
is hard to flesh and blood, it is hard to the unregenerate part, it is hard
unto that that should endure hardness, it is fit that flesh and bood should
endure hardship, and there is no cause to complain that it is hard to them, to
flesh and blood, woe to thee if so be the ways of God should prove easy to
flesh and blood, it is a sign that it is the true yoke of Christ, because it is
hard to flesh and blood* it is hard to that we should beat down, it is hard to
that that is our enemy, Is there any cause to complain that such a thing is
very difficult, hard and grievous unto our enemy? unto one that we should beat
down? Now it should be the care of a Christian, to beat down flesh and blood as
long as we live, and therefore that that is most hard unto flesh and blood,
that they should rejoice in, if they find it to be so, Should any one complain,
if the City should have Rebels and Traitors that should rise in the City, to
have Bolts and Fetters cast upon them? Is not this an ease to a City? Does a
Kingdom or City suffer by this, because Iron Bolts and Fetters are upon
Traitors, Rebels, and Malefactors? What greater Traitors, Rebels, and
Malefactors are there against Jesus Christ, our happiness, and everlasting
good* that arises up in rebellion against Jesus Christ, than flesh and blood?
and if Iron Bolts and Fetters be upon them which we should seek to subdue and
crush, why should we complain of hardness there? Would thou have ease to
flesh and blood, that is a cursed ease, But now is not the yoke of Christ easy
to the regenerate part in me? In my flesh (says Paul) there is no good, but
the regenerate part finds an ease in the ways of Christ, and they are very
sweet, and very comfortable to the Soul.

Ninthly: Thou complainest of difficulty, it may be it is because thou have not
learned the former lessons, Learn of me (says Christ) for I am meek and lowly
in heart, and you shall find rest unto your Souls, for my yoke is easy and my
burden is light. Art thou ure that thou have learned of Jesus Christ these two
lessons that you have heard so much of heretofore, Meekness and Humility? Have
you meek spirits, quiet spirits? Have you humble spirits, lowly spirits? Angry
flesh will not endure any great burden, if you touch angry flesh, Oh, it is a
burden to it, and so proud flesh, a swollen Leg, and swollen Arm, and Shoulder, and
Neck, if the Neck be swollen it cannot bear a yoke: So the proud flesh in thee it
is that that makes the yoke of Christ so grievous, and burdensome to thee. But
now if thou have learned thoroughly these two Lessons, of Meekness of Spirit,
and Lowliness of heart, Oh, how easy is every thing that Jesus Christ requi^es
to a meek and lowly spirit? if once thou gettest thy heart down, the bladder
pricked, to be low in thine own eyes, and thy heart low, then every thing will
be easy that Christ requires, thou complainest that they are difficult, but it
is because of pride.

Lastly, Another Answer is this: Though there be some kind of difficulty in the
ways of God, and the Saints find it so yet there is more delight than there is
trouble, and more ease than pain* and compare one with another, and take all
together, and then it may be said to be rather easy than any way burdensome,
and light than any way heavy. As I will express it by this similitude, a sick
man's clothes, the clothes that a sick man has upon him, may be they are
somewhat burdensome, a man that is weak, to put on the clothes that he was wont
to wear, he feels it a burden, a pain, I but he finds more good by his
clothes then the burden comes to, his clothes keep him from catching cold, and
keeps him warm from the air, and so he finds the benefit of his clothes more to
him than the burden of his clothes come to: So though there may be some burden,
some kind of trouble in the ways of God to one that is sanctified, being but
in part sanctified here, yet there is more delight, and more ease, and more
good that he does find in the ways of God than there is trouble, and therefore
put all together, and then the yoke of Christ is easy, and his burden light,
these several considerations will satisfy against all the difficulties that
any of the Saint*s do find in Christ's yoke.

CHAP. CXL.
Shows the Reasons of the Discipline and Government of Christ, and Objections
against the same are answered.

WEll, this we cannot but be convinced of, that the Duties of Religion and the
ways of Godliness (all things considered) they are easy, But what will you
say to the other two: The ways of God indeed and Religion, and walking in the
ways of God we must needs acknowledge to be easy, but there is two other
things, as the Discipline of Jesus Christ, and the sufferings that Jesus calls
us unto: How will that be made out to be easy to us? Now I verily believe,
that Jesus Christ had an aim at these two, as well as to any other, to let them
know what Discipline and Government he would have his people come under in the
times of the Gospel, and indeed we cannot be the Disciples of Jesus Christ as
we ought, except we be willing to put our necks under the yoke of the
Discipline of Jesus Christ, the Government of Christ as it is in his Church; we
must not think it sufficient merely that we profess Religion, and profess
God^^ness that we keep from the sins of the world, that we walk close with God
in our Families, but Christ requires likewise that we should come and sub^it
our selves to what Government he appoints in his Church, and that is a part of
the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, as well as his ruling in our hearts, indeed, that
is the principal work of Christ, in ruling in our hearts, but Christ has a
Kingly power in ruling in his Church, the main yoke is inward, but there is an
outward yoke too, for Christ would not have men live as they list, in a
disorderly way, but it is the mind of Jesus Christ that all his Saints though
some in one place, and some in another, should join together in exercising such
Ordinances as he has appointed, in the external governing of his Church, and
yet so, that all these are very easy to a spiritual heart, though it may seem
very difficult to a carnal heart, for I should wrong the Text, and not be
faithful if I should not give you what I verily believe is the scope of the
Text; I say this yoke is the order of Christ in his Church, if it be neglected
by people, it is a great dishonor unto Jesus Christ, and hinders them
exceedingly in the ways of Religion, and though it be very hard to carnal
hearts, it is very easy to spiritual hearts. I am verily persuaded, that one
of the greatest things that causes so much malignity in this Kingdom at this
day, it is the fearing of the yoke of Christ, men are afraid of the government
of Christ in his Church, they are afraid they shall not have that liberty for
their lusts and wickedness as formerly, but that there shall be yokes to
restrain and keep them from those loose ways that formerly they lived in, and
you may see plainly it is so, who are they that join with the malignant party
that have such spirits, but such as have loose spirits? they are those that
live very loosly, and others that have mere civility, and know little of the
power of Godliness, they are afraid of this, and Oh, how is it said by most, we
will not have this man reign over us? they even said they will break his bonds
asunder, and cast away his cords, that is the controversy that it is come to
at this very day, and that Prophecy in Psalm 2. seems to be fulfilled at this
day, at verse 2. The Kings of the earth set themselves, and the Rulers take
counsel together against the Lord, and against his anointed, saying, Let us
break their bonds asunder, and cast away their cords from us, he that sits
in the Heavens shall laugh, the Lord shall have them in derision, Then shall he
speak to them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure yet have I set
my King upon my holy hill of Zion, for all this I will set my King upon my holy
hill: Certainly, Christ is not set up as King as he ought to be, whatever
profession we make, except we be willing to come in, and put our necks under
the yoke of Christ, and Oh, what a heavy burden and yoke it is? For instance,
That Men and Women should not make a mere verbal profession, and say, I
believe, and I hope to be saved by Christ, but should give an account of their
Faith, and give an account of some work of God upon their hearts, that God has
called them out of the world, certainly, that is one thing that Christ does
require in his peoples joining together, to set up the Ordinances as they ought
to be, that they should have some knowledge one of another, knowledge of some
work of the Holy Ghost upon their hearts. You will say, that is secret. I but
though the Holy Ghost works in secret, yet certainly, this may some way or
other appear, we cannot know it certainly, for there may be many Hypocrites (no
question) in the Church of God, and it is a very vain cavil for men to say, can
the Church of God be without Hypocrites? that is taken indeed for granted, and
no body in the world denies it, I but there must be that in the judgment of
Charity, so as by the judgment of Charity we may see so far as we are able to
see, that the Holy Ghost has been working upon the Soul of this Man and Woman,
and has called them out of the world, this is the first thing in coming under
the yoke of Christ in his Church. Now how hard is this to carnal hearts? the
very mentioning of it, is enough to make a mutiny in many places, What! have we
lived all this while, and must we now come to give account of our faith? But now
it is an easy thing to a gracious heart, what is more easy to a Gracious Heart,
then to speak of the work of God upon his Heart, and to give Glory to Jesus
Christ in manifesting the work of God in calling him out of the world, and
bringing him out of the Kingdom of darkness, and translating him into the
Kingdom of his dear Son? the manifestation of this is exceeding delightful to a
gracious Heart. And whereas many think, that some will lay a greater yoke upon
them by coming in, and submitting to the government of Christ in his Church,
they say, they will make them to enter into a solemn Covenant before they will
admit them. I confess, were it so, that this were urged as a thing necessary,
that they should not come in and join in the ordinances of Christ, without an
explicit solemn Covenant, then I cannot but acknowledge it were a yoke that I
think Christ never laid upon his Church, not an explicit solemn Covenant, to
urge it as necessary, that they cannot come and join in the ordinances without
it, and as for my part, I know not any that urge it as necessary, though it is
used it is true, because it is the way of manifesting themselves one way or
another, and some way they would have for the manifestation of the grace of
God, and of their willingness to join with them in all the Ordinances of
Christ, so far as is revealed to them, and I know no other way that is urged
than this, but to manifest the Grace of God upon the^r hearts, the work of God
upon them.

And for the matter of Covenant, only to profess a willingness to join with
such a Society of People in all the Ordinances of Jesus Christ, so far as they
know, suppose I should not be convinced of this particular Ordinance, or the
other particular Ordinance, if there be a willingness to walk in the Ordinances
of Christ so far as I know, this is the uttermost that is required, and for the
other it is only for edification, but for necessity, I know none that do
require it. Now what an easy Yoke is this? that one should come to be partaker
of all the privileges of the Gospel, and all the Ordinances that Jesus Christ
has be trusted his Church with, and this is all that we must come, and profess
our willingness to walk with all the People of God in all the Ordinances of
Jesus Christ, so far as is revealed to them, is there not an easiness in this
to a Gracious heart, Certainly, this that is complained of has no great
difficulty in it.

Object. I but you will say, There is more difficulty than this, It is required
that every one should watch over another, a narrow watching over one another in
their ways, and observing one another, and this is true, a carnal heart cannot
do it, we were wont to have a loose kind of way, that we lived in a Church
communion one with another, and never knew one another, perhaps never saw one
another face in all your lives, but when you came to the Sacrament, and
whatever evil you had heard of one another, you never minded their reformation,

Answ. Now it is true, That in the way of the Gospel, when the Saints are
joined together in that way, they must and ought to watch over one another, And
what great burden is this to a Gracious heart? to a carnal heart it is true,
all the ways of God are burdensome, but to a Gracious heart it is an ease,
that there shall not only be my own care, and the Grace of God in me to watch
over me, but I shall have the use of all the Graces in the al Saints of God to
watch over me, And is here any hurt in this? It is an honor that God puts upon
thee, that he gives not only his Angels charge over thee, but all his Saints a
charge over thee likewise. A Prince has a great Guard for the safety of his
Person, and that is the honor of a Prince, he cannot go alone so as others do,
but must go with a Guard: Now as the Prince in an outward way, so the Saints in
a spiritual way, they are dear to Jesus Christ, and therefore they shall never
go up and down, but they shall have their Angels to have charge over them, But
what have they charge over them for? it is as the Scripture says, that they
should not dash their foot against a stone, they have charge over your Bodies
in a more peculiar way, and the Saints have charge over you in a more spiritual
way: now that you shall have Angels to watch over your Bodies, and I make no
question but they keep Satan off from hurting of you, and then you shall have
the Saints of God with whom you shall live eternally in Heaven, and they shall
watch over you for your spiritual good, and so they shall communicate all their
Graces, and Gifts, and they are bound in Conscience, so to do, and this is a
great ease to a Gracious heart.

Object. I, but you will say* there is another difficulty, if so be we fall at
any time, then we must give public Satisfaction, if we fall into that which
gives public offense there must be public Satisfaction given, for private
offense we* must give private Satisfaction, and Oh! this is a heavy Iron yoke
to a carnal heart, if we should come to such a reformation as we desire, Oh!
what a burdensome thing would every carnal heart think it? let me look now to my
walking, I cannot do as I was wont before time, let me be never so vile, do
what I will, I could give a Proctor a little money, or an Archdeacon, or a
Commissary, or the like, and then let the Minister and the Congregation do what
they dare, Oh! this is fine and easy to a wicked and corrupt heart. But now to
come to this, that whatever you are, Rich or Poor, if you fall into scandalous
sins, it is not making friends this way or that way, or to a Minister, no, but
you must come and make public confession, and give public Satisfaction, and
this is a yoke that is hard to a carnal heart, but to a gracious heart it is
easy. What difficulty to a gracious heart is this? I have publicly
dishonored the name of God, and now I come publicly to repair the name of
God that I by my sins have darkened, and done hurt unto, I come now to repair
it openly, nay, what ease can thou have till that be done? certainly, if thy
heart be thoroughly humbled for the sins of thy soul, wherein thou have sinned
publicly against God; if thou have sinned secretly, then Christ requires not
public Satisfaction, but if thou have sinned publicly, what more suitable to
thy heart if Gracious then this? Oh! that I might publicly repair the honor
of God, that has publicly been dishonored by my sin? how can thou sleep, or
die before thou have done this? I cannot possibly see how such a man or woman
can die quietly, and go out of the world quietly, except they have had some
opportunity to repair the honor of God publicly, as they have sinned
publicly, and therefore this is not a way of punishment and p^nnance for thy
sin, but a restorring of the honor of God that thou have impaired, and this is
that that is no burden un^o a Gracious heart, the sin indeed is a burden, the
sin is a shame; it is a shame to me that I should ever dishonor the blessed
God, that hope to receive such great satisfaction from God, it is fit that I
should come and repair the honor of this God, Oh! this is the honor of a
Christian, and therefore I beseech you have no hard thoughts of the ways of
Jesus Christ in his Church.

And consider yet further, for the easiness of it, that Christ gives a charge
to all his Saints, that if thou be humbled and give Satisfaction, that they
should restore thee with all meekness, and Gentleness, and if there should be
any one that should insult over thee, and any way deride and scorn thee
certainly, Jesus Christ will reckon with such a one for that, and there is no
sin that goes more against the Spirit of Jesus Christ, then For any one to
insult over those that come in the trouble of their spirits to repair the
honor of God that they have impaired by their sins. Christ requires that every
one should mourn with thee, as thou art sorrowful and lamentest over thy sin,
so they should have their hearts melt for thy sins, and should endeavor to have
their hearts sensible of thy sins as thou art, and and they that are acquainted
with the ways of Christ in his Church, they have found it so, they have found
all the Congregation as well to fall a lamenting and bursting ou^ in tears as well
as thy self, thou bursting out in pea^es for thy sins, and they praying and
seeking unto God that he would forgive thy sins, and all the congregation does
thi^, now is not this better, then (...) should go on to rancle in his sin, is
in not better that he should come into a Congregation, and give glory to God
and lament it before him, and all the Congregation lament, and they all send up
their sighs and groans for pardoning of this offender, and restoring of him,
and for the lifting up the light of Gods countenance upon him, if your heart
were humble, you would find it a great d^ale of ease, for the truth is, you
cannot expect to have ease before you have done this, those that have offended,
though they have gone in their closets and sought God, yet have had no rest but
upon this, now God does usually grant abundance of ease, peace, and joy in
Christ, that it is a thousand times more ease to their spirits, then for them
to go on in their sin, and let their sin ranckle.

And further, Christ in the government of his Church will not have any officer
over you but whom he appoints; indeed in a Civil State, they may appoint
taskmasters, and what officers they please, but now in a Church State, Christ
appoints every officer, and therefore all that rabble of Commissaries,
Archdeacons, Deans, and Deanes and Chapters is gone away, for there ought to be
none such, and it is a great ease unto the Church of God to be rid of them.

And again, you are to have none forced upon you, but what you your selves
shall yield unto, they cannot in a domineering way say, you shall have such a
Minister. It was enough before, that if a wench in an Alehouse, or an Hostler
should have an uncle die, and leave them to be his heir, and an Advouson
belonged to him, this Wench that lives in an alehouse, or an Hostler, Should
have power to send any fellow that he will, if he can give account of his creed
in Latin, to send one a hundred miles, or one that they never saw in all their
lives, and they to whom he was sent, must take this man to have charge over
their souls, to depend upon this man for dispensation of all the ordinances of
Jesus Christ as long as they live together, here was a burden. But now the way
of Christ is, that there should be none that should take the Charge of Souls to
dispense the ordinances of Christ, but such as the people themselves shall
choose to themselves, that they shall be satisfied in before, and that they are
faithful, and that they are fit by the gifts and graces of the spirit of God to
take charge over their souls, and to dispense the ordinances of Christ in a
right way, is not this now a great deal of ease?

And further, what a great deal of ease is in the ways of Christ in his
Church, when the officer is such as Christ appoints and you approve?

And further, when they are there, they have no liberty to make any new law,
but just as Jesus Christ has made, they cannot obtrude any thing upon you to
believe and do, but they must show that Jesus Christ would have you to believe
and do the same: Now in Civil states, it is otherwise, there you may be
required to do things that you cannot find directly in the word, if it be a
thing that the officer thinks reasonable to be done, if it be not contrary to
the word, it is enough, if it be a thing rational, that may suite with the
public good of a Country, or Kingdom, it is enough: but now, when it comes to
the Church, the Church officers, it is not enough for them that there is
nothing in the word against it, but they must have it out of Gods word, and
this is a great ease, that I shall have nothing imposed upon me but what Jesus
Christ would have me to have, and to do many other particulars might be showed
for the opening of the yoke of Christ, differing from the yoke of the Civil
State.

Yea, And Christ requires nothing to be done in his Church, but what he would
have a Reason given for it, but if a Prelate did but sit at his Table amongst
his Cups, and write but a line or two, what a disturbance was there thereby,
unto many thousand Congregations? he never came to them himself, but merely he
commands, and they must do it. But now the commands of Christ are otherwise,
whatever is required of them from Christ, they may require a Reason of it, they
are to be satisfied themselves in the Reason of the thing, and how Christ
requires it before they submit unto it. Indeed, I am not bound in a Civil State
to satisfy my self in all they do, but I may-think that they understand more
of the Civil good than I do, but it is not so in a Church state, the meanest in
a Congregation is not to say, the Ministers and Officers they know more than I,
and therefore though I see no Reason to the contrary, I will submit: Now Christ
has such a tender care over every one of his members, that whatever they do
they must know it themselves, they must do it in Faith, they must know how this
comes out of the word, and they must do it then in Faith, now what an ease is
this? and if men did know this, how readily would they come under the
government of Jesus Christ? it is as great an Argument of the carnality of the
hearts of men, that they having been under the yoke of Antichrist, and now they
have some inkling of the yoke of Christ, that they cry out of it, and say, they
had rather be in the former way; just as the Children of Israel* they desired
to go back into Egypt again, and they liked not their deliverance, but would
fain have gone back to their bondage again; and has there not been the same
murmurings in the hearts of men* that they would willingly return to their
former bondage? Oh, it were just with God that we should return back again to
Egypt, to our former condition, and ^wo unto us if we should come to this, to
return unto our former condition again: But for any of you that desire to fear
the Lord, and keep your Consciences clear, and that walk in the way of eternal
life, I appeal to your Consciences, what is there that I have named to you that
would not be easy in your spirits? What difficulty would there be in the ways
of Christ in the Church? Truly, I have told you the main difficulties, and I
have dealt plainly with you in this thing, the chief difficulties in all the
outcry in the world about the ways of Christ in his Church I have told you.
Now is there any Gracious heart, (if I should single out any Gracious heart)
that would count this a difficulty? and truly, we should not only think it
easy, but we should pray for the government of Christ, for his government is
better than the government of Antichrist. We must know that if we be those that
profess Christ, we have certainly need of all the Ordinances of Jesus Christ,
and they are not instituted in vain, and therefore if you have not been
sensible of them heretofore, Labor to be sensible now, for if you did
understand your selves, you would see a need of them, and those that have had
them, they have found this yoke of Christ to be very easy, and the other yoke
to be a very heavy yoke unto them.

CHAP. CXLI.
Of the easiness of the Yoke of Afflictions for the Name of Christ.

WE are now to proceed unto another thing, and that is, The sufferings about
those things that Christ requires: though to do those things that Christ
requires may seem to be easy, yet to bear and suffer those heavy things that
we read that Christians did suffer in former times when they came under the
yoke of Christ, and which we are like to suffer in the cause of Christ, now
especially, if the Lord should let the Adversary prevail over us, we may come
to suffer those things that would be very hard, whereas if we had liberty of
Conscience as others have, that we could go any way this way or that way, so as
may serve our own turn, and be suitable to our own ends, we might avoid a great
deal of suffering, but now when we come under the yoke of Jesus Christ, we must
keep on in the right way, we must keep on in the way of suffering, whatever
sufferings come we must not decline the ways of Christ in the word.

Now for Answer unto this: The Scripture does not judge it so hard a thing to
suffer for Christ as thou seem to judge it to be, see what the Scripture
judges it to be, St. Paul speaking of his sufferings that he endured, in 2
Cor. 12. 10. Therefore I take pleasure in Infirmities, in Reproaches, in
Necessities, in Persecution, in Distresses for Christ's sake, the word is in the
Original, I am well pleased, here I take pleasure, I am well pleased in
Infirmities, in Reproaches, in Necessities, in Persecutions, in Distresses, I
am well pleased in them all: Certainly, that that a man has a good pleasure
to, that he can be well pleased with, that is easy, a man must needs have ease
in a thing that he is well pleased in, now the Apostle professes that he is
well pleased in that which he suffered for Christ, and we are never like to be
called to suffer so great things as he suffered.

And as the Scripture sets out sufferings as those things that a man may be
well pleased in, so likewise we may rejoice in them. That place in Luke 6. 23.
there our Lord Christ would have his Disciples when they met with hardship, to
rejoice in it, Rejoice (says he) in that day, yea, to rejoice exceedingly;
that is the third degree, rejoice, and leap for joy: when is this? it is when
they shall be separated from their company, and they shall be reproached for
Christ's sake, yet rejoice says he, and leap for joy. Yea, the Scripture sets
out our sufferings for Christ, our suffering that we meet withal any way in the
ways of Christ, as that wherein above al things we may rejoice, there is well
pleasing, there is joy, and exceeding joy, even to leaping, yea, and there is
al kind of joy, all joy; so the Apostle in James 1. 2. My Brethren, count it
all joy when ye fall into diverse temptations; and among other temptations,
these are great ones, the temptations of sufferings, count it al joy. Yea, and
lastly, there is the glorying in them: so in Romans 3. 5. We glory in
tribulations: surely then there is not such difficulty in suffering for Christ,
if there be well pleasing, and joy, and exceeding joy, and all joy, and
glorying: Thus the Scripture sets out our sufferings for Christ.

And so I might give you the examples of abundance of Martyrs, that found a
great deal of ease in their sufferings for Christ, the example of James
Bainham, in the Book of Martyrs, when they kindled the fire under his feet,
says he, me thinks you strew Damask Roses under my feet, truly, there is
sweetness enough in the Roses that are strewed under ones feet, that ones feet
go upon. And so Basil speaking of a Martyr, he says, that he did account the
Prison that he was in, as a pleasant Garden, and the several kinds of Tortures
that he was put unto, as several sorts of sweet flowers in the Garden, so
delightful were they to him. And Luther reports of one Agaba a young Virgin,
that when she went to martyrdom she went as if she went to Marriage, and to a
Banquet. And the story of Mr. Sanders, that excellent Martyr is famous, when he
came to suffer, he found such an issuing and going of his heart into all the
Members of his body, and from all the members of his body to his heart again,
an intercourse as it were in a bodily way. And it were endless to name you the
particulars, and to show wherein even the easiness of suffering for Christ
appears, but I shall not do this at large, some of you may see that in your
hands of Moses, counting it grater riches to suffer for Christ than to enjoy
all the treasures of Egypt, and a man counts not his riches a burden: Now this
is the judgment of Moses that had the Spirit of God in him, that whereas he
might have had any riches that might have been enjoyed in all the land of
Egypt, yet he accounts the sufferings with the People of God greater Riches
than all the Treasures of Egypt Oh! there is the highest improvement of our
sufferings for Christ as can be, somewhat higher improvement of our sufferings
than Angels are called unto, Angels are not called to such high improvement of
their abilities for God, as when a Christian suffers for Christ, there they do
confess with a glorious Voice. Says an Ancient concerning the Martyrs in the
primitive times. We do abundance of service in a little time then, and never
have the Saints such a Spirit of glory resting upon them, as in the time of
suffering, they are under most glorious promises in those times, and have more
glorious comforts in those times, than at other times; and so in such respects,
and diverse others that might be mentioned, there is a great deal of ease and
contentment in their sufferings for Jesus Christ. I was in prison til I got
into prison for Christ, says one Martyr. And many professed that they never
knew the difference, between the comforts of the world, and the comforts of
God, so much as then when they suffered. Says Ignatius, when the wild beasts
crushed his bones between their teeth, Now I begin to be a Christian. And
another professed he had rather be a Martyr than work miracles; and therefore
there is no such difficulty or heavy burden in suffering for Christ as ye are
afraid of. Many poor Christians, when they hear what things others have
suffered, they think, Oh, if I should be called to suffer such things, I should
never go through them: Be not discouraged, the more sensible thou art of thy
weakness, the better: Poor women and children that have been afraid to suffer
as well as you, when they have come to suffer, it has been given to them to
suffer, a mighty presence has come from Jesus Christ upon them, and it has
been easy to them; indeed the thing that is difficult to one that is weak, is
easy to one that is strong: Now when you come to suffer for Christ, there
comes in a great deal of strength from Christ, and therein you will find ease;
for certainly, Christ never calls us to do hard things, but he will give us
strength proportionable; and then that which appeared more difficult, will
appear more easy than before.

CHAP. CXLII.
What the things are that makes the ways of Christ easy (which is the fourth
point in Chap. 139.) opened in five particulars. 1. They are such as a gracious
Soul will impose upon himself. 2. He comes freely off to them. 3. The ways of
Christ are even, and not contrary one to another. 4. They bring Strength with
them. 5. In them all there is good Success. 6. In them a gracious heart is
always receiving his wages. 7. He has all the passages of Gods providence to
help him. 8. They bring ease to the Conscience. 9. They free the Soul from
cares. 10. They make all other things easy.

BUt now we are to proceed to a further thing to show you what there is in the
way of Christ that makes it easy, which will be a further manifestation of the
ease that there is in the ways of Christ that it is so, that has been showed
you before!: but now that it must needs be so, and how it comes to be so, how
it comes to pass that the ways of Christ should have such ease to a gracious
heart, Certainly, there is a great many Grounds for it.

First: They are such ways as have much in them, that if a gracious heart were
put to it freely, that he may either impose them upon himself or not, he would
rather impose them upon himself than otherwise, supposing him to be himself;
that is, his mind enlightened and his heart in a good frame, he would take them
upon himself, and certainly this is no hard thing, that if a man were left to
his liberty he will take it upon himself rather than not. Let any Christian lay
this to his heart and consider what way of Jesus Christ he would be without,
every gracious heart is a Law to himself, that Law is not a very hard Law that
a man would make to himself, so the Scripture says of the Godly that they are
a Law to themselves, a Godly heart chooses the ways of Christ, not as one
chooses the less evil of the two, so you may say he may choose them as the less
evil, for he may be put to choose, ^ but I say, if he were left free and not put
to it of necessity, if there were neither Hell nor Heaven, I do not know any
thing in the ways of Jesus Christ and dare challenge any one to tell me, that
if there were no Hell o^ Heaven that any thing is in the ways of Christ but he
would choose them: What is there that Christ requires of any Soul, but without
any such consideration such a heart would choose? Would not he go rather
according to the rules of equity and righteousness than iniquity and injustice?
Is it not better to walk according to the rules of right reason, than to walk
in irrational ways? But then a Believer one that has Faith, acts from a
Principle above Reason, a Principle that is supernatural, and look as one that
is a rational creature, would choose those things that have the most agreement
with the rules of right reason, so one that has a higher principle a divine
Principle, he would choose that that is according to the Principles of Divinity,
according to the Divinity (as I may so say) that he has in his heart; Yea,
Afflictions, when we bring our hearts to Gods will, have no great burden in
them, but are easy, but they are not so easy as Gods ways are for
Afflictions, though they come to be easy, yet they are such, as if a Godly
heart were put to it, he would, and he ought rather to choose to be without
them. Here is the difference between Afflictions and Duties, that if God would
set a gracious heart free, he should choose rather to be without afflictions
though it is true, in regard of the good that God brings about in them, so they
are good, but in themselves they are evil, and so a Godly man should rather
desire to be without them but now, for the duties of religion and Godliness,
there we are not to desire and wish to be without them, or that they were
otherwise then they are, A gracious heart is not to wish any command of Jesus
Christ to be otherwise then it is, and when at any time you find such a rising
in your hearts, as to wish that such a thing were not a duty, know, that now
temptation comes and corruption stirrs. You may not do it perhaps, but you may
have a corruption stir so far, as to wish it were otherwise, certainly, this
is a great temptation, when the heart is in a right frame, it would not wish
any thing in the ways of Christ otherwise then they are, if he were left to
himself, he would himself choose them. That is the first.

Secondly When he has chose them, this makes them easy because they are such
ways as himself comes freely on unto, what a man comes freely on unto that is
easy, and all the people of God are a willing people in Psalm. 110. Now when he
comes freely on, perhaps, you will say, a man may come freely on to a thing,
yet when he is come on, he may find more difficulty then he thought of.
Therefore in the second place they are easy in this respect, because they are
suitable unto the temper and disposition of a gracious heart, such a one finds
the ways of Christ very suitable and agreeable to him. Now Similis Simili
gaudet, every like thing does rejoice in that which is like, a Godly heart
finds the counterpane (as I may so speak) of the Lord Jesus Christ written in
his own heart, that as it was in the first creation, there the Law of God, the
Morral Law, it was written in the heart of man fully, and that that we have
written in scripture, it is but as it were an extract and counterpaine of what
was written in the heart of man in the first creation, now by sin a great part
of it is blotted out, but now when the soul comes to Jesus Christ, then Christ
writes again the Law of God in the heart of the siner, writes it fair out
again, and writes the Law as it comes to be Evangelical, in an evangelical
way, for so it is, the Gospel comprehends all that holiness that was in the Law
before, the same holiness that was in the Law, the Gospel that takes it in, and
makes it more complete, and raises it up higher, and makes it more spiritual,
and has more of God in it, and does show us how to enjoy God in a higher,
better, and fuller way, that the Law of the Gospel is written in the heart of
believers as the Morrall Law was in the heart of Adam at first was, when he was
made, and the Law of the Gospel takes in the holiness of Gods Law, and adds a
further spiritualness, and shows a higher way of enjoyment of God then before
was, when man at first was created, now therefore it must needs be easy in that
respect It is easy for a fish to swim in the water, and it is easy for a bird
to fly in the air, for it is their own element, so the ways of the Gospel are
the proper element of a true godly, and gracious heart And as we say, nullum
corpus grave in suo loco* no element is heavy in his own proper place. It is
true, the ways of Godlyness is a heavy burden to a carnal heart, Why? because
he is not in his element, when he is in holy duties, and sanctifying the
Sabbath, he is not in his element, when he is in wicked company, drinking, and
Swearing, then he is in his element, but now that which is your elements is but
sand to a Godly heart, and that is the reason that you think that such Godly
people are dumpish, and heavy, and Melancholy, because they are not merry as
you are, it is because of your company, they are not in their element, when
they are amongst company that they can converse withal, and talk of Godlyness,
and showing and discovering one another hearts, and telling the experiences of
Gods working in their hearts one to another, and so breathing graces one upon
another, and praying one with another, then they can be as merry, and be as
delightful in such things as you can be amongst your companions, swearing,
rioting, and the like, you think it is impossible they should be so, but it is
so, that is their proper element, as the other is your element, and therefore
it is as easy for a Saint to go on in the ways of religion, as for a fish to
swim in the water, so far as the regenerate part prevails, all Satisfaction
flows from a suitableness between the faculty and the object, now the ways of
God are the most suitable things to a gracious heart that can be, therefore
there is a great deal of ease in them, there is nothing required in them but he
finds it in his heart before it is required. It is said in Prove. 18. 2. Of a
fool, that he does not receive the way of Wisdom, the instruction of Wisdom, it
is in your books, a fool has not delight in understanding, but that his heart
may discover it self, but I find it translated in the old vulgar Latin, that a
fool receives not understanding, receives not what you say to him, except those
things that are in his heart be spoken, except you speak to him such things as
are in his heart, so they turn it, and so it is true in this, speak to any man
any thing, if there be not a principle in his heart, to close with the thing
that you speak, he will not easily receive it, therefore a fool will not
receive that which you speak to him of, because it is not suitable to his
heart. But now a Godly man, when you speak to him the things of God, and what
the ways of Christ are, such a man receives them, because you speak to him
that that is in his heart, it is in his heart before, you speak to his heart,
and he finds somewhat in his heart that comes presently to close with it, which
makes it easy, there is in his heart such a principle, as upon mentioning any
thing of the ways of Christ, he closes with it, and takes hold upon it, there
being the same thing in his heart, for though there be an object seen, except
there be something in the eye suitable to the object to close with it, there
would be no sight, so the heart of a Christian makes the ways of God easy, and
readily imbraceth them, because there is something in the heart that is like to
Gods ways, and therefore it is ready to receive and close with them. As now if
you bring fire to a stick that has some fire in it, as soon as ever you bring
the fire, the fire that was in the stick before, will come out to the other
fire that you bring near to it, and will join together and so grow into a
flame. If you bring a candle that has some fire remaining upon it unto a fire,
it lights presently, so it is with the heart of a Godly man, a gracious heart
sets before him the excellency of the ways of God, now there is a holy
principle, a principle of holiness in the heart that comes out unto what is
said in the word of the ways of God, and so closes with them: I, these are
the things that I find in my heart; now these things must needs be easy,
because they are the very element of a gracious heart, and they are suitable to
his heart, there is a freeness to choose, That is the Second.

Thirdly, Another thing that makes them easy is this, The ways of Christ,
there is an evenness in them, there is a proportion in all the ways of Jesus
Christ, there is not one thing contrary unto another, but every thing helps one
another, and so they come to be easy. You know in other things, when you are
going in any path where there lies things, to interrupt you, there lies a great
deal of Difficulty in your going, but when the way is so laid, as that there is
no one thing in it but helps to another, if you take one step that helps you to
another, and that step helps you to another, and so there is such an evenness
and proportion as one helps to another If you be drawing a thing that one link
helps another, and one lets into another, this makes it easy, when every action
of a man's work is such, as the first makes the second easy, and the second the
third, and the third the fourth, that work must needs be easy; so in all the
ways of Jesus Christ, one duty lets in another; and this is the difference
between one that is truly acquainted with the ways of religion, and an
Hypocrite, the one, when he sets upon one duty, that one duty so tires him,
that he has no mind to another, but now a godly heart, one duty does but let
him in another, by performing one duty, he is fitted to another duty, and this
is a sign you perform duty in a right way, when it is thus with you, it is
true, the outward man may be tired, but yet the heart is in a better frame to
perform duty the next time, one duty is an in let into another, and helps on
the other, that is a Third.

Fourthly, The ways of Christ they are easy, because they bring strength with
them, and increases strength, certainly, that work must needs be an easy work
that a man gets strength by his work, and the more he works the more strength
he gets. It is true, great works come to be difficult, because you do not only
not get strength, but you spend strength, but now the ways of religion, the
more you work, the more strength you have, and the more work you do, the more
strength comes in. It is true, the natural strength may be spent, I but there
is inward strength comes in and increases, and is supplied by Jesus Christ:
the Body that carries the Soul, I but the Soul is no burden to the Body, the
Soul supports the Body, and enables the body to move and makes it lighter, if
the Soul were gone, the body would be a heavy lump, heavier than when the soul
lives in it, so such a kind of burden is the ways of Religion to a gracious
soul, no other burden than the soul is to the body, when the soul is there, it
is no burden, but it rather helps the Body, it makes the Body lighter and so
when any work of Grace is added more than before, the burden comes to be
lighter, and easier. In Prove. 10. 29. The way of the Lord is strength to the
upright, their very way is strength, surely then their way is easy, that which
is strength, cannot be a hard way, now the way of the Lord is strength to the
upright, an Hypocrite indeed, if he will meddle with the way of God, he is
tired, as those in Malachi, What a weariness is the ways of God to them? I but
it is to an Hypocrite, but the way of the Lord is strength to the upright. A
man that has a carnal heart, he is tired presently, you that complain for want
of strength, and you have no heart to set about Duties of Religion, because you
say you are weak, the more ye set about these Duties, the more strength you
shall have. There is many a Man and Woman, that prays away their strength in
prayer, and strengthens their sin in prayer, and I showed you, how to carnal
hearts their very duties may be easy to their sins, but now a gracious heart
does not pray away his strength, but he shall have more strength in his Soul for
the present, and he shall see it afterward. You will say, How shall I know
that? for my body is weary and tired, if you get but a little time to refresh
your body with sleep, or the like, when you come to prayer again, you will have
more strength to the Duty, there was more strength in your Spirit then when you
were in the Duty, only your natural strength did fail, and therefore do as much
as you can in holy Duties, do not fear tiresomness in them, you will do more
than you did before. That is the fourth thing that makes them to be easy,
because they beget strength.

Fifthly: They must needs be easy, because that in all the ways of Religion
there is ever more good fuccess, a gracious heart evermore finds success in the
ways of Godliness, now that way that a man always has success in, is very
easy to him, you count that work very easy work that always thrives in your
hand, and that you may certainly, know that it will succeed before you go about
it. If a man go about a work, and he is uncertain in the success, and he
thinks; I may take a great deal of pains, but I know not how I shall speed, Oh,
that is tedious, I but now, when he goes out to the work of the Lord, where he
knows he shall never fail of success, this work is very easy to him, In the
first Psalm it is said, that a Godly man prospers in every thing that be does,
whatever he does shall prosper, it is true, we may set upon outward things and
not have success, but there was never any gracious action since the beginning
of the world but had success, here is the difference between your outward
employment, and your gracious employment, your earthly and your spiritual
employment in one, though we work never so well according to the Rules of our
Art, yet there will not be success in what we do always, but now let us perform
any holy Duty, we shall never lose any action, though we may not see it, yet we
shall certainly prosper in it; and therefore there is a great deal of ease.

Sixthly: A great deal of ease must needs be in Gods ways, because that a
gracious heart* is continually receiving his wages in all his work: Now that is
a very easy work, ye shall not need be working all the day and receive no wages
at night, but a Godly man is receiving his wages continually while he is
working. In 1 Pet. 9. Receiving the end of your Faith, the Salvation of your
Souls, Receiving the end of your Faith, he does not say, that ye shall hereafter
receive the end of your Faith, but ye are now receiving, every moment in every
Duty ye perform, you are receiving the end of your Faith, there is no holy
action but there is somewhat of the Glory of Heaven in it, and the Soul does
receive somewhat of the Glory of Heaven in every holy action, so that he shall
not need to stay for Heaven hereafter, that indeed were enough one would think
to make any of the ways of God easy, the believing the Glory we shall
hereafter have in Heaven, it were enough to make any journey easy, that we
shall have a Crown at the end of it, but it is not so with the Saints, they have
not ease because they know that they shall have Glory hereafter, but they have a
Heaven while they are doing their holy Duties, therefore are easy in regard of
their end, as many things may be easy in regard of that that comes afterward,
and so may be good in regard of the good which is to come, but the actions of
Religion are part of the happiness, and of the Glory of the Soul, and if we
were well principled in this, it would be a great means to help us to go on
with a great deal of ease in the duties of Religion: That it is the happiness
and Glory of our Souls, and the perfection of holiness is our highest end, the
Angels have no higher end than the perfection of Holiness. In Hosea 10. ver.
11. Ephraim is a Heifer that is taught, and loves to tread out the Corn,
Eph^aim counted that an easy work to tread out the corn, the meaning is this,
the Cattle in those times, some were used to plow the ground, and others to
tread out the corn, Now those that were plowing, they were abroad in the
fields, and endured the storms, and all the while eat nothing til they come
home, and then they eat, But now those cattle that were treading out the
corn, all the while they were treading out the corn, and working, they were
feeding upon the corn, now says God, Ephraim is a tender delicate thing, he
does not love to go all the day to his work, and receive his wages at night,
but he loves to tread out the corn, he loves to receive his wages continually
in his work. Thus it is with a Godly heart he is upon the receiving hand
continually and his work is but as the treading out of the corn, rather then
plowing. That is the Sixth.

Seventhly, The ways of God must needs be eas^ because let a man set upon the
ways of Godliness, and every thing in the world shall help him, no passage of
Gods providence but shall help him, no creature but shall help him, no
ordinance but shall help him, nay those things that seem to go quite contrary
they Shall help him; now it is easy to go when all things help one, when wind
and Tide help you. I but you will say, may be we may meet with a contrary wind,
I but when that contrary wind shall help you, as I have seen some that have made
use of a contray wind, So it is with Godly people, all all good things help and
encourage them, and ill things are turned by God to be helpful to them, and to
be good to them, Yea, many have found help in the ways of God, by the
strongest temptation that they have met withal in their very faces, Yea,
sometimes that God turns their sins, their stepping out of the way to be helps
unto them, their very falls, as a man when ^e stumbles in his way, it makes him
go the softer, you will put your Horse out upon his stumbling, and make him go
the faster, God turns the worst things of al to the People of God to help them
in their way, so that by Grace now, we do not only help our selves so, as to
keep off the hindrances to other things, we do not overcome the world (as
sometimes I have said) thus to keep our selves from being hurt by it, but to
make all things useful and serviceable to our graces, and that is the
excellency of a Christian, that he can by grace make all things in the world
serviceable to his grace, that is the glory of grace, it shows that grace is of
a royal breed indeed, that it can bring all things to be serviceable to its
end, therefore the ways of God are easy, because all things are helpful to
the encouragement of a Child of God in those ways.

And further, If a man were going in a way, and there were many stones lay in
the way, it would be rough going, and uneasy, but were they laid in that
fashion that they should be laid in a slough, in such a place that it should
help me to step over such a slough then it would be more easy: Now here is the
difference between wicked and Godly men, God in his just judgment lays
stumbling blocks in the plainest ways of Godliness, so as to hinder wicked men
in ways that are good, to the wicked I say, wicked men, they meet with
stumbling blocks in plain ways, in ways that are the best ways; but now God
is plealed to lay stumbling blocks in the ways of sin to the Godly, to hinder
them from going on in the ways of sin, he takes all the stumbling blocks that
were before in the ways of sin, and lays them in their way to Heaven. As now
if there be diverse paths to go to a place, those that would give marks to
others that they might not go out of the way, they dig a ditch or lay somewhat
in the way, perhaps some boughs of Trees or the like, to keep them off that
they may go in the right way, So when the Lord sees any thing that lies in the
ways of his people that may occasion stumbling to them, he takes them away,
and lays them in such a place that may keep them from going out of their way,
and if there be any slough, he takes the stones, and lays them to help them
over the slough, and therefore the ways of God must needs be easy.

Eighthly, They must needs be easy, because they bring so much ease to the
Conscience, they bring abundance of ease to the Conscience of a man or woman;
When has any man or woman ease to their consciences, but when they have gone
in the ways of Religion? though before they had throbs of conscience, and
terrors of conscience, an angry conscience. Thou could never lie down to
sleep, but thy consicence was as it were a hard stone to thy head, and as
pricks in thy side, but now when thou art got into the ways of Religion, thou
can lie down in the bosom of a reconciled Father in peace, and thy
conscience very easy, and thy soul easy, thou feel no more of the throbs
of conscience that thou wast wont to feel* the ways of God bring ease to thy
conscience. Many of you love your estates, because you can have means coming in
when you are old, and you can sit in a Chair, and can have maintenance brought
in unto you, Oh, but if that be good, what is it to have quiet and ease in your
consciences, which only the yoke of Jesus Christ brings in? and therefore the
ways of Jesus Christ are easy.

Ninthly: The ways of Christ are easy, because they bring ease and freedom
from al cares, al your troubles and cares, all your carking cares you have
hereby ease from under them, come once under the yoke of Christ, and then you
have nothing to do but to make known your requests to God, you need not care
what shall become of you, either for the present or for erernity, if you be once
got into the yoke of Christ. Do not mistake me, to think that if once you come
to profess religion you need take care for nothing, No, But I say, from al
carking cares, and troublesome cares, you may be delivered from them as soon as
ever you come into the ways of Christ; many Christians have it at the first,
and if not at first, yet if you continue in them, you may come to have so much
satisfaction in them, that any carking care that may cause trouble to your
souls, in regard of your outward or inward, your present or eternal estate, all
will be gone, for whatever you would take care for to help you, it is taken
care for you there. Luther has such an expression I remember, A Christian may
keep a perpetual Sabbath all his life, and all the week long, any thing that
you would have to help you otherwise, God himself will take care for you that
you shall have it in himself, you shall have all in himself. We have a place in
Isaiah for the encouragement of the people of God, in Isa. 30. 7. For the
Egyptians shall help in vain, and to no purpose, therefore have I cried
concerning this* their strength is to sit still. Here they did depend much upon
the Egyptians for help, I but says God, you need not trouble your selves about
this, the Egyptians to help* Their strength is to sit still. The word Strength
here in the Original is Egypt, their Egypt is to sit still* as in another
place, in Isaiah 51. 9. Awake, Awake, put on strangth, O Arm of the Lord, awake
as in the ancient days, in the Generations of old, Art thou not it that cut
Rahab, and wounded the Dragon, Rahab, that by most Interpreters is used as a
word that comes of Egypt, and so in some other Scriptures the word Rahab comes
of Egypt, and so in this place too, The Egyptians shall help in vain, and to no
purpose, therefore have I cried concerning this, their Rahab, or their Egypt is
to sit still, that is, look what help others would have from Egypt, you need
not care how Egypt shall come to help you, you shall sit still, you shall have help
in me in your sitting still, you shall have an Egypt, all the strength you should
have in Egypt you shall have in me, Be quiet and sit still, and whatever strength
you think may be otherways, I will supply in my self, O! the holy security
that there is in the ways of God, and if there be a holy security in those
ways, there must needs be abundance of ease in them.

Tenthly: There is abundance of ease in the ways of Christ in this respect,
because they make other things easy, that which will make other things easy,
that must needs be easy, as thus, The ways of Christ will make hard things
easy, afflictions easy, for afflictions come to let out thy sin, and thy
corruption: And is there not a great deal of ease in that? When a man has a
sore and there is a great deal of corruption in that sore, if one come and
prick the sore* and the corruption comes out, there is a great deal of ease: So
here, afflictions to Gods people, they are but as that which comes to prick
their corruptions, and to let out their sins, and their corruptions, and that
gives ease to the soul, A man's cal^ing is easy to him if he have grace, the
going on in ones calling in a gracious m^nner is easy, and the going about any
thing that a man sets himself about it is easy, O! with what abundance of
sweetness does Godly Men and Women go about their business more then those that
have corrupt hearts? You shall have many that have wicked and corrupt hearts,
go about their business with such fretting and vexing, if any thing fall amiss
they are so vexed: I but now, one that is Godly sets about his business in
obedience to God, and commits all to God, and leaves the success to God, and so
he is at ease. A Servant now, if he have not grace in his or her heart, if the
Master or Mistress do not please them, they go about their works, and fret and
vex themselves. But now those that have grace, and know that they are in the
way that Christ would have them, and that they obey Christ, and serve Christ in
that way, they can find abundance of ease, for I am serving Christ in this
work, though the work is a low work, a poor work, yet I am about Christ's work,
I am serving Jesus Christ, and so they go about it with ease. And thus the
ways of Religion make every thing easy, our lives easy, and our death easy,
our passage out of this world will be easy too.

But there are two or three things more to be added; the yoke of Christ is
easy in regard of the yoke of the Law, therefore says Christ in the Text,
Take my yoke upon you, for my yoke is easy, the yoke and bondage you were
under in respect of the Law, that was a burden, but my yoke is easy. And it is
easy in respect of Antichrist, that was spoken prophetically indeed, but now
we may open the yoke of Christ in respect to that. But then compare it with the
yoke of sin, then it is easy too, the yoke of Christ not only in regard of all
the former yokes, but if you compare it with the yoke of the Law, the yoke of
sin, and the yoke of Antichrist, their yokes are far harder than the yokes of
Jesus Christ. I con^ess I need not spend much time upon those two of the yoke
of the Law, and the yoke of sin, somewhat I would speak of either of them, to
open the difference between the yokes in them, and the yoke of Christ, though
there has been a great deal said in opening of the Text, Come unto me all ye
that are weary and heavy laden and I will give you rest, there we spoke of the
rest from the Law, and the rest from the burden of sin, only I shall in this but
a little compare the difference between the burden that there is in the yoke of
the Law, and the yoke of Christ, and see which is easiest, and so compare the
yoke of sin with the yoke of Christ, and then you shall see when I have set them
both together, that one is a great deal easier than the other.

CHAP. CXLIII.
The Yoke of Christ easier than the Yoke of the Law: For, 1. The Ceremonial
Law required abstinence from the comfort of the Creature. 2. Its Service was
chargeable. 3. The Ceremonies were beggarly Rudiments.

THE ways of Christ are easy.

First: In regard of the yoke of the Law.

Secondly: In regard of the yoke and burden of sin.

For the easiness of Christ's ways, in comparison of the yoke of the Law, you
know what the Scripture says, in Acts 15. 10. That the Law it was a Yoke,
which our Fathers nor we were neither able to bear. Even the Ceremonial Law,
the way of Christ is easy in respect of that.

For First: The Ceremonial part of the Law required abstaining from the
comforts of the Creature, the People of the Jews in the times of the Law were
forbidden the use of many Creatures that we have a great deal of use of now;
this is one ease that we have by Jesus Christ, that we are to make use of all
the Creatures, we need make no question for Conscience sake of the use of any
Creature, in the world, that is somewhat easier than to be restrained from this
Creature and the other Creature.

And then, Secondly: We have a great deal of ease in respect of the Jews that
were under the burden of the Ceremonial Law, because that their service it self
was very chargeable to their outward estates, their Sacrifices that they did
offer up to God, How chargeable was it? What a great part of the estates of men
did go forth, partly in the maintenance of their Levites? There is a great deal
of murmuring now for a little Money for maintenance of Ministers, but there if
the account be summed up, the maintenance of the Levites was a great part of
their estates, not barely the tenth of their Sacrifices. They had their Cities,
diverse, forty or more Cities that were theirs for their possession. And many
things might be showed that way, the mighty charge that they were at for the
service of God several ways, not Tithes only, but Cities and the like; now God
has in a great part eased us of those things that he required, of the People
of the Jews, there is nothing now required but what is in moral equity, what is
in common reason due to the Laborer for his work, only somewhat is due by that
Scripture, Thou shall not muzle the mouth of the Ox that treads out the Corn,
so that all the maintenance now for the work of God is due in a way of common
reason, but there was other things required in the service of God in the times
of the Jews, and that is an ease that is very suitable to many men, to have
ease that way from their outward service, yet certainly, the Lord (as we shall
hear more by and by) requires of us more service other ways.

And then Thirdly, In the ceremonial Law, there the very service of God had a
kind of burden in it, for there were so many external performances, that the
Holy Ghost calls them beggarly Rudiments, so many outward ceremonies, outward
things, that were a burden to the outward man, and they were mean things, and
childish things, in comparison of the Gospel, they are called by the Apostle
Beggarly Rudiments: And truly, one would think, that when we shall read such a
Scripture as that, that shall call the ceremonies of the Law beggarly
rudiments, that were the ceremonies appointed by God himself, and yet when they
came to be abrogated they were called but beggarly rudiments, one would admire
how it is possible that any one that professes Christianity, should come and
conform themselves to so many ceremonies as they have done, to such beggarly
rudiments; certainly, these must needs be beggarly rudiments much more, and
what a strange pass were we brought into, that we should count such things the
great Ornaments of Gods service, whenas God did not require them but at that
time, and that they are so vilified by God now. But inventions are never
required by God, and therefore they are to be accounted more vile, and it is a
great mercy to be delivered from the bondage of the outward ceremonies of the
Law, though such things as were once appointed by God, to spend so many days
as they did from their outward business, this is somewhat, Surely, if it were in
man's power to appoint ceremonies, and make days holy as many did undertake
heretofore, we had been brought into a greater bondage than ever the Jews were
under the Law, but Christ would have ease in the outward administration of his
worship.

And then likewise, though God has appointed some outward things, yet very
few, for the outward part of his worship, What a few things are appointed by
Jesus Christ? whereas in the times of the Law, there were multitudes of
external things, yea, and how easy are they that Christ has appointed for the
outvvard part of his worship; whereas in the times of the Law it was hard,
as circumcision, what a hard thing was it to have to foreskin of the flesh
cut off? and you know it made them sore, when the men of Sichem were
circumcised, they were so sore, that two or three men were able to destroy a
whole City, now Christ has required no such hardness of us.

And truly that may be one thing that may make us much doubt of the ways of
many that put people upon such ways, as in the Winter time to go into Rivers,
and venture their healths and lives as they do, certainly, Christ requires no
such thing, if Christ did require such a thing, I dare appeal to any to give me
any one place in the old Testament where there is a harder commandment than
that, if that were a commandment then Christ's yoke in that one thing is harder
than any one thing that Christ required of the Jews, no one Duty so difficult
to the outward man as that thing i^, now certainly the yoke of Christ as he
himself says, it is but easy, it is not hard to the outward man in such
external services, Christ did not change one Ordinance from another to make it
harder, there is no Ordinance that Christ did change from the Law to the Gospel
to make it harder, and there is no mercy that is allowed in the times of the
Law, but is allowed in the times of the Gospel.

And further, That is another Argument that is very perswa^ive to the Believer
and his children, for if God should deny this condition to the children in the
times of the Gospel that was in the times of the Law, it would make the Gospel
to be harder than the Law, and the truth is, the denying such a mercy to
Believers children would be a harder yoke to Believers, a greater burden to
them than all the ceremonies were to the Jews in the times of the Law. As
suppose this, if a Believer should plead thus, Lord, there was a time when
thou did not only receive me into Covenant, but receive my child too, and
give my child the seal of the Covenant likewise, and there was a time that I
had such a privilege, that not only I, but my child was in a different
condition from the Heathen, the Heathen round about me was not in such a
condition as I was in, in regard of my posterity, and I counted this a great
mercy, but Lord, since the time I was converted, and embraced Christian
Religion, and since the time that Jesus Christ is come, as suppose a Jevv
should speak thus, one that was a Jevv before Christ's time, and should live
til Christ came, and should plead thus, Lord, have thou brought a greater
burden on me since Christ came than I had before Christ came, for before Christ
came I had such a liberty that was as dear to me as my life, that I would not
be without for all the world, that I should not only have my self, but my
child separated from the world, and be in covenant with thee, and under the
Seal of thy Grace, but Lord* since Christ's coming into the world and since I
embraced religion, though I may come and take the seals, though I may be in
covenant with thee, yet now my child may not, there is no difference between my
child and the child of a heathen, Lord is there no difference between this and
the times of the Law? thou say, thy yoke is easy, and thy burden is light,
but here is a great burden upon me, that I have not that benefit that
heretofore I had, certainly, my brethren, Christ did not come into the world to
lessen the Grace of God: you will say, they were in a worse condition then
this, but how are they in a better? as for the covenant of Grace in Jesus
Christ, that certainly a Jew had, they were saved by the same way that we are,
namely by believing in Jesus Christ, now those that were believers, and did
understand Jesus Christ, they had the same benefit by Jesus Christ that we
have, I but if their children now should not have the same benefit that they
had, I say then Christ has brought a greater yoke upon believers in the times
of the Gospel, then was upon believers in the times of the Law, and this is
contrary to what Christ says, my Yoke is easy, and my Burden light. Methinks,
I wonder that any men that are Believers, that have children of their own, that
should drink in that opinion; for certainly, it cannot but be a greater Yoke
upon them, and if they should think there were no difference between their
children and the children of heathen, they should count it a great Yoke, and
they should think it better for them if they had lived in the times of the Law,
and before Christ came into the world, for then they had benefit for their
children. Now we are delivered from the Yoke of the ceremonial Law that
required hard things, and we are not brought into a worse condition, you cannot
be in a worse condition says Christ in coming unto me then you were in the
times of the Law.

But especially the Morral law, that was a great burden, a great yoke, as
looked upon in the Covenant of works: now for that I shall not need to speak
much, because I have opened it in the invitation of Christ, Come unto me, al ye
that are weary and heavy laden, and there I showed unto you the burden of the
Law, and from that, says Christ, I will give you rest. I showed how Christ
delivers from the burden of the Law, Certainly, the Gospel then is a great
ease, to mention to you but two or three particulars in this, then I showed you
there how it required absolute, impossible things, impossible unto us now, not
unpossible unto Adam, not impossible to that power that Adam had at first, but
impossible to us. Now it requires absolute perfection in every thing, it does
not admit of any repentance, no nor of any endeavor, not to accept of it, the
Law accepts of no endeavor, except he continue in every thing, he accepts of
no repentance. But now, says Christ, my yoke is easy, I require nothing of you
but what is easy, the Law does not accept of endeavor, but I will accept of
endeavor, if there be a will I will accept of it, if there be repentance I
will accept of it, the Law would not do ^t, let a Sinner weep his heart out,
the Law would ^ot accept of it; after you have sinned* the Law binds ^ou over
to an eternal curse, and had not Jesus christ come into the world, you had been
bound o^r to an eternal curse for ever, and that is the rea^^ that the Angels
cannot be saved, and therefore sa^h Christ, take heed of this yoke, this is a
heavy b^den, that there should be no mediating, nothing should be accepted, but
says Christ, I will bring you an easyer yoke, it is not so when you come to
believe in me, now your endeavors shall be accepted, and though you be
imperfect, yet if you be upright, it shall be accepted.

CHAP. CXLIV.
The Yoke of Christ easier then the Yoke of Sin, and Antichrist.

WEll, the next is the Yoke of Sin, the Yoke of Christ is far easyer then
that, sin is the greatest slavery in the World, it makes a man or woman a slave
to the worst of Creatures that ever was made; to the Devil himself, to be a
slave to sin it is to be a slave to the Devil, we have many bills sent up to
us, to pray for those that are taken captives in Argire, it may be there are
some of you here that have been taken slaves there, and you count that a
miserable Yoke, when you are made slaves to the Turk, you thought your friends
that were at home were happy that had their liberty to go up and down. Now Oh!
you that ever felt that Yoke, or that have heard the doleful complaint of that
Yoke by your friends, that you would by that be sensible of the slavery to sin,
and to the Devil: is it no^ better to be in slavery to any men in the world
then to the Devil? When you go abroad you must nee^s go into the Alehouses, to
drink, and to be amon^st company, and abuse your bodies to drunkenn^ss, and
uncleanness, and you have eyes full of adul^ery that cannot cease to sin, and
you will excuse your selves, and say, you cannot do otherwise, ^hen you are
slaves, and are taken captive by the Devil to do according to his will, that
Text you have for it in 2 Timothy 2. And the last, That they may recover
themselves out of the Snare of the Devil, that are taken captive by him at his
will. When a man is taken captive, he cannot do his own will, he cannot go
whither he will, but he must go whither his master will have him, and he cannot
do what work he will, but he must do what his Master will have him. So you
cannot do what you would, but you must do what the Devil would have you to do,
sin is a slavery to the Devil. But now the obedience of the Gospel, is that
that brings the soul to be a subject to Jesus Christ your King, so that here is
the difference between the Devils service, and Christ's, that in the one, your
work is a base slavery, and in the other, it is an honorable service, Christ
requires no base slavery of his subjects, it were better to do any slavery and
drudgery to Jesus Christ, then to do any work for the Devil, the Devil requires
nothing but drudgery, and Christ requires nothing but honorable service, and
therefore the Yoke of Jesus Christ is easyer then the Yoke of sin; yea, the
Yoke of sin, has a great deal of contradiction in it, there are cross
commands, they serve diverse lusts, one lust would have them do one thing, and
another would have them do another: but now in the service of Christ there is a
blessed agreement between them, in the service of sin there is nothing but
contradiction, but in the service of Christ there is nothing but comely order,
and therefore his service is a great deal easier then the service of sin, and
the truth is, if so be you did but know both of them you would say as much. We
cannot compare two things together, to know which is heavier then the other,
except we understand both of them, you that are believers, and are got under
the Yoke of Christ, yet through temptation you are brought to some service of
sin, now though sin do reign over you, yet you are brought under the service of
sin in a great measure, but now if you would compare when you keep closes^ to
Christ, and the ways of holiness, whether you do not find more ease to your
spirit, then when you have liberty to sin. You think it is fine to go abroad,
and be merry with your friends, and abuse your selves, you think this is a fine
thing, I but when you come home your hearts ache upon it, and your bodies are
worse two or three days after, O! but when you walk with God in a holy manner,
and walk with God in your calling, and pray morning and evening, and walk close
with God, and ever and anon have ejaculations to God, and have the face of God
shining upon you, and so when you go to rest, and lie down in the bosom of a
reconciled Father, to have for your pillow the bosom of a reconciled Father,
and eat your food as that which comes from the fruit of your labor, and the
blessing of God, and sitting with your yoke fellow blessing God for those good
things he grants unto you, and looking upon your children as the blessings of
God unto you, and seeing the grace of God in them, and in all these things
expecting, that after a while you shall be taken from the world, that you shall
never sin more, nor sorrow more, nor never be troubled more, nor never tempted
more, when you shall see the face of God, and enjoy his presence everlastingly,
Is not here a better life than to be under the bondage and drudgery of the
Devil? to swear, and rail, and vex, and fret, and contend one with another, Is
not here a great deal more ease? Certainly, if you will make trial, you shall
find abundance of ease, and it is a good means to draw the heart of any one to
repentance, when they hear, O! what a difference is there between my state now,
and that whenas I walked close with God? What a deal of vexation and trouble
have I now? whereas when I kept close with God, how much better was it then
with me then it is now? one day then was better then ten thousand worlds now,
If I should live a thousand years, to live ^ne day as I did before when I
walked close with God, O! this is far better, and the thoughts of this makes
them to return to God, and say with them in Hose^, let me return again, for
then it was better with me then now, thus for the yoke of sin.

And then to name one thing more, the yoke of Christ is easier then the yoke of
Antichrist, for so Christ speaks not only for what is for the present, but what
is afterward, and this scripture is an exhortation to us now, as well as to the
Disciples in Christ's Time, now, says Christ, it is easyer then the yoke of
Antichrist, he says so to you, now suppose Christ were here in this time among
you, and should say, take my yoke upon you, for my yoke is easy, and my burden
light; you have heard somewhat of the yoke of Antichrist, my yoke is easier, you
will say, what is the yoke of Antichrist? I opened it a little in Christ's
discipline, and you shall see it here in the yoke of Antichrist.

First. Take my yoke upon you, and I require you to be under no kind of
government, but what you shall appoint your own officers, Antichrist he will
appoin^ hi^ officers; but Christ he allows you to choose your own officers.

And Secondly, No law that you shall be under for your spiritual estate, as a
Church, that which is properly ecclesiastical and spiritual, no law but what I
appoint in my word, I will not give liberty to men to make what laws they will
make, no law enjoined for your spiritual estate but what I appoint: if there be
a company of men and women that meet in a congregation, and meet not only as
Christians, but as men and women, there is somewhat common to them as men and
women, and there indeed the laws of men may take hold of them, in those
actions that are but humane and civil, but now in those things that are
properly ecclesiastial and spiritual, that concerns the spiritual man, such
things as I must expect for spiritual efficacy upon my Soul, to work upon my
heart, to draw me to God, or to bring God to me, in these things I am under no
law but the law of Jesus Christ, no men in the world have power, no not Church
officers, nor civil officers, neither Magistrates, nor Ministers, have any
power to put any Law upon a church in regard of the spiritual estate of it, in
regard of any spiritual ordinance, but such as are in the word of God. Christ
is the great Lawgiver, and has made them already, and and they are to look
that those Laws be kept, but they are to make no new ones, there is no new
act, no new Statute, for the ordering of men in their spiritual estate. Those
things that are properly spiritual, to work upon the inward man, that concerns
the worship of God, to draw their hearts to Christ, or Christ to them, to work
upon their hearts, there can be no new act, no new Law made by Magistrates, or
any church officers in the world, but only such as you find in the Scripture*
now this is a great ease to a Christian, to think, Lord thou tenderest my Soul
so much, that none can command any thing but what thou have set down in the
word, and what thou have commanded: indeed Lawyers are to show men the Laws of
the state, and Ministers are bound to show the people if there be any Law, and
to teach it the church, but there is no law that Ministers are bound to open
but only the commands of Jesus Christ, they may be made use of as men, as
public men, and as opportunity serves be helpful in the civil State, but as
Ministers, they have nothing to do but to open the Laws of Jesus Christ: and
this is a great ease, whereas this is the bondage of Antichrist, he will make
laws to bind conscience, and so though a man should keep all Gods laws, yet he
may be damned to eternity by breaking his laws, and therefore he makes it a
bondage in this regard, that a man should be not only in danger of eternal
damnation by disobedience to Christ's laws, but a thousand laws that he never
knows. And that is the second ease of the yoke of Christ, that there shall be
no Laws to govern the Church but the laws of Jesus Christ.

Thirdly: The difference between the yoke of Antichrist, and the yoke of Christ
is this: Antichrist requires submission to his laws by violence and compulsion,
and you must do them whether you understand them or not, you must understand
them by a Prison else, that which shall befall you is imprisonment, and
banishment, by inflicting corporal punishment upon you, he will force you that
way to come to believe, if you cannot come to believe this to be a truth, that
is the way to make you to believe it, imprisonment, and banishment, and mulcts
upon your estate, and corporal punishments upon your bodies; but Christ takes
no such course, and gives no such commission, to enforce to believe things by
such a way as this, but his ways are gentle, and meek ways, says he, come
unto me, and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly, and take my yoke upon you,
for my yoke is easy; and it is easy in this, that what I require of you to
believe, I do not use violent and compulsive ways and means to bring you to
believe, No, but the way that I would have my people use, it is instruction and
information, it is the showing of them the truth, and answering their
Objections that they have against this way, it is gently to lead them, and not
compelling of them to believe, that if a man cannot believe such a truth they
shall be compelled to it, certainly, to use violence and to compel such a man,
is not the way of Jesus Christ. Indeed for some outward ways to be used to
keep men from doing hurt to others, that is another thing, from doing that
which may do mischief to another man: But for a violent compelling of a man,
merely to alter his judgment, though he will keep it to himself, and live
quietly, yet to compel him to subscribe to such Articles that he cannot sub^it
unto, certainly, Christ would not have any such yoke, to have a compulsory way,
to make men believe that which hey cannot see any reason for, but Christ would
first have the soul be convinced of the thing before he believes it, and it is
a mighty ease, if we did understand it, we would think it to be worth all the
trouble we have been under since these wars began, to be delivered from what
the Prelatical, Antichristian men did determine, that they would put upon all
those that should have any office or exercise any Gift in the Church of God,
they would force them, either to believe what they say to be true, or otherwise
not to live among them, yea, all people were brought unto it, though they did
not understand it. As thus, many people were brought under this bondage,
Suppose any of you were complained of by a Parator in their Court, well, when
you were once complained of, if you had not appeared, then presently
excommunicated if they had got any advantage over you, well, if once they got
you under the censure of their Court, you could not get off for your lives
without taking an Oath, and in that Oath you must acknowledge such things, as I
dare say not one* in five hundred understood what it was, and yet you must
acknowledge subjection to them; Now what an intolerable bondage was this? and if
you did not, you were undone for your outward estates, they would force it by
violence, says Christ, my yoke is otherwise, Oh, what a bondage were we in,
and yet not sensible of it? and did we understand it, we would not so murmur
and complain of some trouble that we meet withal, and we would cry to God that
we might never come under such a bondage again, in such a violent way, to be
forced to such an Oath, and to believe such and such things to be true, though
otherwise we lived quietly and peaceably, yet not to be suffered so to live,
except we would change our judgments, certainly, this is an intolerable
burden. And would you know what is Antichristianism, and what not? It is in
this, that herein the Yoke of Antichrist is an Iron Yoke, that it will have a
violent, Base, Forced belief, and forced alteration of a man's ju^gment, that
if he were but merely a man* he* must suffer all the torments ^n the world
rather then come to alter his judgment before he be convinced of it: Certainly,
if a man have but reason* the Reason of a man, the spirit of a man, if one
should come and say, you must believe this to be true, he would say, I but I
must understand first that it is true, Certainly, he would be ^orne in pieces
with wild Horses, rather then alter his judgment before he be convinced of i^,
but for a man to come and s^y, you must believe this to be true, and he say, I
but I do not believe it to be true, no, then you must be made to believe it by
imprisonment, and Banishment, and confiscation of your goods, and the like, Oh
what a bondage is this? And this is the bondage of Antichrist.

And then there is another thing in the yoke of Antichrist, and that is not to
accept of repentance, of any general repentance and mourning, except there be a
reforming of the particular thing wherein they judge men to be amiss, which is
contrary to the yoke of Christ. Says Christ, you must do what you are
convinced of to be true, what you see to be my will, but now, because of your
weakness, you cannot perhaps understand it to be my will, this is your sin, well
but I will accept of a general repentance, that if I see your Heart upright, and
sincere* and you mourn, not only for your sins of knowledge, but sins of
ignorance, although you should die and reform none of this all your life, I
will pardon and accept you. But now mark how the yoke of Antichrist is,
Antichrist requires such things to be done, Well, but I cannot do them, I
cannot see Reason why I should do them, Well, he will never remit no
punishment, he will inflict punishment, and never remit any til you revoke your
judgment; you may say, well, though I cannot believe I will live quietly, and
wait, and use all the means I can to convince me that this is the right way,
and if I cannot, I will live quietly with you, that will not serve the turn,
Nay, but if you do not see it, you must lie under this punishment til you come
to revoke your Error, and profess and practice the contrary, Thus Antichrist
lays more weight upon his laws, then Christ does upon his, for Christ says
thus, there is such a Law I require of you, it is true, if you do not do it, or
understand it, it is your sin, but because of your weakness I will accept of a
general repentance, you repent of all the sins you do know, there you repent in
general for sins of ignorance, and though you should not reform all your
days, I will accept of it, but now when you come to their Court, there would
be no help for you, except you promise the contrary thing that you did before,
you must come and reform, and amend, and do the thing that before you did not
do, or else never be absolved by them, but Christ will absolve you, though you
should never come to do the thing that he would have you to do, if there be a
willingness of heart to inquire into his mind, and a willingness to do so far
as you know. Now what a deal of difference is here? Though you do not reform
the outward action, yet if your heart be upright, I will pardon your offenses,
come to me, says Christ, for my Yoke is easier then the yoke of the Law, then
the Yoke of sin, and then the yoke of Antichrist, Oh how just were it for us to
be brought under the Yoke of Antichrist indeed, that are not willing to be
brought under the Yoke of Jesus Christ, it is a great argument indeed, that we
are under the Yoke of sin, when we are not willing to be under the yoke of
Christ. In Exodus, 12: 25: You shall read there of the Passover, which was to
put them in mind of the bondage that they were in spiritually, it was to put
them in mind to bless God for the deliverance from that bondage now, Says the
Lord there, It shall come to pass, when ye be come to the Land which the Lord
will give you according as he has promised, that he shall keep this Service. Now
the word that is Translated Service, it is the same word in the Original that
is used when they were in Service under Pharoa^, in the first of Exodus, 14.
They made their lives bitter in all manner of Service. Now when they were
delivered, says God you shall keep this Service* as if the Lord should say.
Oh, this is a great deal better Service, then the Service you were in under
P^aroah, you shall keep this Service. Oh, if you did but think of the
difference between the Service of Antichrist, and the Service of Christ, it
would be a very strong motive to persuade us to this Service rather then the
former. And so the Scripture you shall find comparing the Service of sin, and
the Service of Christ together, it is said of sin, that the service of sin it
is a hard service, sin has a great deal of hardness in it. In Prove. 13. 15.
The way of transgressors is hard, That you may annex to the former, about the
way of Antichrist, and yet it is strange to think, how men had rather be under
any yoke then the yoke of Jesus Christ. Therefore the Apostle says, in 2 Cor.
11. 20. Ye suffer, if a man bring you into bondage, if a man devour you, if a
man take of you, if a man exalt himself, if a man smite you on the Face, If the
false teachers did any thing against you, whatever they did to you, you
suffered it, though they would exalt themselves over you, bring you to bondage,
make themselves Lords of your faith, you would suffer them, but you will not
suffer me; and this is usual with men, to suffer any kind of bondage from falls
teachers, rather then from the ministers of Jesus Christ, men will complain of
any Service under Jesus Christ, rather then they will be under the yoke of Jesus
Christ. If you were under a great bondage in the Prelatical Courts you cannot
but know that if a minister would be a slave to the Bishop, he might inslave
all his parrish: As now, any people in the country, if he would be gracious
with the commissary, he would bring any gentleman into slavery to attend upon
him as he pleased, and yet how willing are many rather to be under that
bondage, then any other whatsoever, and men are loath for to come under this,
though we show it to be Canonical out of Scripture, this shows the perverseness
of men's spirits.

CHAP. CXLV.
E^ght Consequences from the former Doctrine, 1. The world is mistaken about the
service of Christ, 2. A great sin to reject Christ. 3. Bless God for this easy
Yoke, 4. Bring not an evil report upon the ways of Christ, 5. Christ will
expect much Service, it being so easy. 6. Make not the Yoke of Christ hard. 7.
We should give up our Selves to Christ. 8. It is an accursed thing to be an
apostat.

COme we now to the First, for I have two things yet to do, having opened in
what respects the yoke of Christ is easy, there is, First, The Consequences
and Corollaries to be drawn from all this that has been said by way of Use.
And Secondly, To show how you may make the yoke of Jesus Christ easy to you,
what it is that facilitates it.

Consequence, 1.
For the Consequences hence. First, Certainly, That mistake of the world about
the service of Jesus Christ is rotten, how many men will rather venture all the
hardship of eternal misery, of Hell fire, then come under the yoke of Christ
for the present in this world: Certainly, This is a dreadful thing, for a man
to have hard thoughts, not only without Reason, but such hard thoughts, as when
both are laid together, either thou must come under the yoke of Jesus Christ,
or perish eternally, and endure all the hardship of eternal fire hereafter in
hell; Well, says a carnal heart, rather then I will endure the crossing of my
sin, I will venture the other, I hope the other will not be, but I will venture
it, now what a dreadful thing is this, that you will venture this. I will
grant, you are not convinced of it, but you hear this ou^ of the word often
threatened; and you cannot but acknowledge it is a great venture, that you
venture all the wrath of God, and the curse of the Law, and all that that God
threatens in the word, that will pursue those that do perish, Now this is a
hard venture, now you venture all this rather then you will come under the yoke
of Jesus Christ. Oh, what a mistake is this? What excuse can ye have for your
selves that run upon such a mistake as this is? That that has been delivered
to you shows the great aggravation of th^s sin.

Consequence, 2.
And that may be a Second Particular, a great aggravation of the wickednes^ of
men's hearts, and of their lives, says the Lord in his word* ^ have sent my Son
into the World, to bring my mercy and goodness and love unto you, and he is
come for to deliver you from a heavy yoke, and to lay an easy yoke upon you,
and to bring you to Heaven that way, but now you refuse and reject him* and
will rather endure more hardship in your refusing of him, and in damning your
Souls then in subjecting to him, and saving your Souls eternally. Oh it will be
a dreadful aggravation of men's sins at the great day, what a dishonor do men
^ut upon Jesus Christ, whenas they by their actions do as much as if they
should say, Oh, the yoke that Christ will put upon men's Necks is into lerable,
we cannot bear it, I will rather be under the yoke of sin, and under the yoke
of the Devil, and under the yoke of Antichrist, then under the Yoke of Jesus
Christ, whereas the truth is, Jesus Christ is come into the world to bring such
a way of Sweetness, and Love, and Mercy, and Ease unto us, as if all the Angels
in Heaven, and men in the world, had set all their Wisdoms on work from the
beginning of the world, to find out a way to bring us to Heaven, they could not
have found out such a way as this, and yet this way to be refused, Oh the
aggravation of men at that day! And the truth is, that which I have delivered
to you out of this Text, if you shall yet continue under the yoke of your sins,
and be bondslaves to the Devil in your wicked courses, these things shall
another day rise up in Judgment to stop your Mouths, when this shall be brought
against you, did not you live in such a Town? And such a place; And where you
heard such a Text opened to you, that if you would come to Jesus Christ his
yoke was easy, and his burden was light, and that the way of Jesus Christ
brought such sweetness, and love, and mercy? And yet you refused it, and you
would choose rather to be a bondslaves to my enemy the Devil, then come under
the yoke of my son, Oh, How will this aggravate your sin another day! I beseech
you, let not what we speak unto you, be an aggravation of your sin, the Reason
why I have been so long upon this Text was, to take away the stumbling blocks
that men laid in the ways of Christ, and to draw your hearts to the Love of
the ways of Jesus Christ, But now, if you should reject the ways of Christ,
and continue under the yoke and bondage of sin after all, this will be the
fruit of the Sermons that they will be called over again at the day of
judgment, to make your yoke and burden heavier when you are under the wrath of
God to all eternity. And that may be a second use of this Point.

Consequence, 3.
Thirdly, If the Yoke of Christ be thus easy, and his Burden light, then you
that are the people of God, that are come under this yoke, and have felt the
easiness of this yoke, bless the Lord for it, and bless your selves for what
ease you find in the ways of Jesus Christ. Think but thus with your self,
there are others indeed, they have a strange conceit of the ways of Jesus
Christ, and think them hard, and indeed, if their natures be not changed, they
will be hard unto them, but blessed be God I find them otherwise, when I began
to turn my face to Jesus Christ, my Father or Mother called me Fool, and said,
you will have no comfort, and my Uncle and kindred, they told me that my
comfort would all be gone, but blessed be God I did not harken to them, but I
find them otherwise, I do not find that these things bring me into any such
bondage, but blessed be God I never had that comfort that now I have, Nay, I
have that sweetness ease, and comfort, that I cannot but think, that if all the
men in the world did seek now and feel that comfort that I feel, they would be
in Love with the ways of God. I hope there are many that can think with
themselves, did but all my kindred, and my friends, Yea, did but all the world
feel that sweetness* ease, and comfort, that I feel in the ways of Christ,
they would be in love with them. If you can speak so, Oh* blessed be God for
this easy yoke of Christ. There might have been required a hard yoke, if
Christ should say, Well, I endured a hard yoke for you, I came from the Bosom
of my Father, and came under the curse of the Law for you, and if you will be
delivered, you must have a heavy yoke upon you too, if Christ should have
required, that we should have been tied unto a Stake, and endured the fire and
have been held unto it, and saved at last, yet we had cause to fall down and
bless God for ever for this: but Christ requires no such thing, Christ reveals
not only Salvation at last, but he reveals a fair way, he paves our way with
Gold, so that we go through Canaan unto Canaan, not through the wilderness. It
is true, before we came under the yoke of Christ fully, there was some trouble*
but take it in respect of the inward man* I say, their way to a Heavenly Canaan
is through Canaan, here in this world they have a Canaan that flows with Milk
and Honey. It is true, the Jews were in a servile way, and God would not bring
them into Canaan but through the Wilderness, and it is true, in outward view
there is a great deal of trouble to come to you but in regard of the inward
man, there is a spiritual Canaan to bring us to the Heavenly Canaan, and the
Saints they may suck Milk and Honey continually, if they do not hinder
themselves all the way they are going to the Land of Canaan; the Lord has
appointed them to suck sweetness and honey out of the Promise of the Gospel all
the way they go: while the wicked have nothing but Swill and Dogs meat, ^o
suck* and to feed upon. And here is the difference between a Godly man, and a
wicked man, an ungodly man or woman is appointed for execution, and he lives
upon the basket, in the mean time, he has nothing to maintain him, as a
Prisoner he lives upon the basket, this is his life in comparison of a Godly
man's life, he is going on to execution even in this world: now between the
greatest Prince that is, and what the Saints have in this world, there is this
difference, the one is appointed to execution, and lives upon the basket to
maintain him till the day of execution, and the other is going to immortality,
to receive a Kingdom, to live upon the greatest dainties that Jesus Christ
brought from the bosom of his Father, from the Riches and Glory of his Father,
here in this world he has that that sweetens his life* and has his food, in
some respects better than the food of the Angels, he feeds upon Manna that
comes from Heaven, though he be in the Wilderness of this world. Oh, bless God
and Jesus Christ that has made such a way for thee to Heaven, and love these
ways of Christ, and speak well of them, and labor to promote them and all that
ever you can, and live so, as you may not bring an ^ill report upon the ways
of Christ, that others may not be deterred from the ways of Jesus Christ by
your lives.

Consequence 4.
And that may be another Use, if the ways of Christ be so easy, then do not
bring an ill report upon them, Do not lead such discontented, sullen, dejected
lives, especially you that have carnal Husbands, carnal Wives, carnal Parents,
carnal Masters, and Mistresses, they look upon you, what you do now, and if
they see that since you began to go to Sermons, and to make more profession of
Religion, that your lives are more filled with discomfort, and vexing and
fretting* and discouragement than before, What will they say? What ways are
these? Who would come into these ways? they make the^ mad, and make them
fools, and unfit them for any business, Oh, this is a shame to he ways of
Christ, though it is true, now thou see more cause of humiliation than
before, but for all this know, that this is not legal humiliation, but
evangelical humiliation, and there is sweetness in that bitter of sin if thou
understandest it in an evangelical way, and though thou should mourn for thy
sin, yet thou should carry thy self with that gentleness, and humility, and
meekness in thy spirit, thou should discover that sweetness of heart, and
cheerfulness, and activeness in your callings, going about your business better
than ever before, that they may say, surely, the way of Christ is easy, and so
others may be in love with them; but if others shall see you to be more high,
and lofty in your spirits, more proud, more disdaining, more neglective in your
callings, and more cross in your carriage than before, then they will be kept
off from those ways.

Consequence 5.
Again if the ways of Christ be so easy, certainly, Jesus Christ will expect
a great deal of service from you because he gives you much ease, a man that
walks at liberty, he may walk apace, a Porter that has a great burden upon
him, whilst that that burden is upon him he cannot go so fast, if one should
come and say to him Why do not you go faster? he would answer, if you had such
a burden upon you as ^ have; you would go as softly as I do. A cart that has a
great load upon it, cannot go apace, so here has Jesus Christ laid no weight
upon you in his ways, then let us run the ways of Gods commandments.
Believers in the time of the Law, they had Shackles, they had a weight, a
burden upon them, and therefore no marvel we do not read of so much holiness,
and spiritualness, in the ways of the Godly in the times of the Law generally,
because, I say their yoke was heavy, and therefore they did drive very slowly
on, but now, when Jesus Christ is come into the world, and has taken our yoke
from us, certainly, Christ expects that we should now go on freely in his
ways, and abound in the work of the Lord, and do more than they did in the
times of the Law. Read the Book of the Psalms, and see the sweetness of David's
spirit, had David had the Epistles of Paul, and had known all of Christ, and
heard so much of the Gospel opened to him, How would he have said, O! how sweet
is thy Law? and if his heart was enlarged, he could run the ways of Gods
commandments, I but David, he was under the burden of the ceremonial Law, for
it is not that which is revealed in the Gospel, certainly, he had not the
knowledge of the Gospel, the things revealed there, though he had a more then
ordinary measure of knowledge, and if he walked so freely, and cheerfully in the
ways of Christ, certainly, we should do much more Service for the Lord, now
the yoke is taken from us, as the ceremonial Law in respect of charge, we are
freed from a great deal of charge that they were at, therefore we should be
more free when God requires it of us. And they spent so much time in outward
things, in mere outward things, then shall we grudge god our time in spiritual
communion or grudg God time in our Families, a quarter of an hour to Worship
God in our* Families morning and evening? In the Law, they spent abundance of
time in the Service of God, it may be you think it much to rise and come to
hear the Word, they were fain to go long journies to Worship at Jerusalem,
vvherever they lived in the country, to go to Jerusalem to worship, and yet
their worship was but an external thing, and in the greater part but bodily
labor, when they went thus to worship, they had not the Mysteries of the Gospel
opened to them as you have to recompense your labor, therefore I say, be more
abundant in the service of God. We have a notable Scripture for this, in Acts
9. 31. of the state of the Church, when once they had ease and rest, mark what
came of it: Then had the Churches rest throughout all Judea and Gal^lee and
Samaria, and were edified, and walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the
comfort of the Holy Ghost we^e multiplied. Here is the fruit of their rest. The
ease of a secure heart, is that that makes it more barren in Gods ways, but
now the Church had rest through all Judea, What then? then they walked in the
fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost, and were multiplied;
and does God give rest unto your Soul, and peace to you? then walk in the fear
of the Lord, and be edified, and built up more and more, and multiply the
service of God more and more, there is a promise, that the people of God should
be fat and well-liking in the times of the Gospel, and flourish in the Courts
of the Lord. There is two things that causes Fatness, the one is much Feeding,
the other is a great deal of rest and ease, when men feed much, and then have a
great deal of ease, this causes fatness, if there be either want of food, or
if there be never so much food, yet if a great deal of labor, it keeps them
from fatness; but when there is ease, and food, that causes bodily fatness.
Now Christ expects in the times of the Gospel, that all Christians should be
fat, and well liking, that they should not be lean in their souls, Why? for, 1.
They have as plentiful food as ever was since the world began, never had they
better diet and more full diet, and wholesome diet than now. And 2. He has
revealed likewise the blessed ease of the Gospel, there was never a time
wherein the Mystery of the Gospel was so much revealed to make the ways of
Christ so easy as now; there is a revealing indeed of the ways of the Gospel
to be easy sensually* and loose, but woe to those that are thus at ease, but I
say, there is a revealing of the Gospel and the ways of Christ to be easy
spiritually. Certainly, formerly many went to Heaven more hardlier than we, not
only in respect of suffering, but in respect of horror of sin, the spirit of
bondage, there were scarce any brought to Jesus Christ, but were brought with
abundance of horror, and had much of the spirit of bondage upon them, and God
did recompense them afterward abundantly, and we find this, that it is true,
that many true Christians, never knew so much horror of conscience, and are
very holy and spiritual, and have ease in their coming to, and living with
Christ, but we find many very loose and vain that never had the bondage of sin,
if God would humble them for their sins more, and make them sensible of sin,
they would not be so frothy and carnal as they are. Well, but though some do
abuse the free Grace of God in Christ, yet others do not, now you that have so
much ease in the ways of Christ, and also have so much food, surely Christ
expects you should be fat and wel-liking, and that you should do much service
for him.

Consequence 6.
And another Use is this. If Christ accounts his ways easy, let not men make
them hard, take heed how you make the ways of Christ harder than Christ makes
them, though it is true, you cannot make them hard, I but, you do what you can
to make them hard, as thus; you have an Apprentice, or a Child, or a Friend, or
a Kinsman, that is looking after the ways of Christ, Do not you do what you
can to make the ways Christ hard to them? you scorn at them, and scoff at
them, and rail at them. and smite them, and take all advantage you can against
them, you do what you can to vex their spirits, and to make Christ's ways hard
to them. Says Christ, I came into the world to that end to bring souls to me,
to carry them on comfortably to Heaven, but here is a Wretch, so soon as any
one looks toward Heaven, he does what he can to make his life uncomfortable, a
child that you respected before, and lived sweetly with you before, now you do
what you can to make them live worse lives than formerly they lived, and so the
Wife of your bosom, or your Husband, and the like; and thus you do what you can
to draw them off from the ways of Christ, and if they would come off from
those ways, then you would do what you can to make their lives more
comfortable, O! Wrerch, Wretch that thou art to cross the ways of Christ, thou
do in this thing but act the part of the Devil, for what does the Devil? the
Devil will make his ways as easy as he can, and the ways of Christ to be as
hard as he can, and that is the reason that many young Christians are troubled
with more temptations now than before, because the Devil sees they are getting
away from him, and he does what he can to make their getting away to be as
troublesome as can be. As a Jailer, when the Jailer has a Prisoner, if he be in
Prison he takes no notice, but if he be a plotting how ^o get out of the
Prison, then he comes and lays fetters upon him; So when men are in the
Dungeon of the Devil, and the Devil has them fast, then he is at quiet with
them, but when they come to enquire after the ways of Heaven, and labor to get
out of their bondage, then the Devil comes with Darts, and Suggestions, to make
their lives uncomfortable, and as the Devil does, so do wicked men.

Consequence, 7.
But then another use from hence is this, To exhort people to come in to the
ways of God, labor to get over the Stumbling Stone, the Devil and the world
has deluded thee, but now say, God forbid that I should any longer stand it
out, Oh! now I come, now I will put my neck under the yoke of Jesus Christ, I
will come and be the servant of Christ, you that are servants, you have been
commended to live in such a service, with such a master or mistress, but there
has come another servant and told you, that they are very hard, and you will
never live comfortably there. But now if you have another that comes and tells
you, that it is mere envy, that the other puts you off out of ill will, and
that certainly if you can be but one in such a family you will live a happy
life, you will find so much peace, love, and kindness, and as fair dealing as
ever any servant had in any family in the world; Now upon this, if you should
be taken off, would it not grieve you? truly, it is thus in the ways of
Christ, you have had (perhaps) good thoughts of the ways of Christ, I but
some, it may be, has put it into your head, that you will live but a
melancholy and dumpish life in them, but now, you have heard out of the word,
that you shall live the most comfortable life in the world, and therefore, O!
now resolve to give up your names to God before this night, go into the
presence of God, and there profess your selves that you will be his servants for
ever, and bind your selves unto him, say, Lord, reveal what thou have to
enjoyne ^e, and here I am professing to be thine.

Consequence. 8.
And again, If the ways of Christ be so easy, then we may see from hence what
a cursed thing it is to be an Appostate, for one to begin to put on inro the
ways of Jesus Christ, and then break off again, O! thou bring a disgrace
and dishonor upon the ways of Jesus Christ, as though they were such hard
ways. You shall have many say, well, I was a puritan once, and I was wont to be
praying and fasting with them, but it was such a burden to me, that it was
impossible for me to bear it, Oh! thou had a base carnal heart, and do thou
leave the ways of Christ upon such grounds? know, that a time shall come, that
thou shall be cast off with eternal abhorring, and those that thou seek to
put off from the ways of God, shall rise up in judgment against thee; it is
the usual manner of Apostates to put off others from the ways of God, because
they leave the ways of Christ themselves, therefore they labor that others may
leave them two. As a wicked servant, that has behaved himself wickedly in a
family, and the Master and Mistress put him off, then he railes, and brings up
an ill report all he can, upon the Master and Mistress, saying, there is no
living with them, and if they hear of any inclining to live in the family,
they cry out against them why? because they are put off? so here Apostates
behave themselves wickedly, and Christ casts them off as unsavory Salt and
Filth, and when they are once out, then they find their spirits filld with
guilt in their consciences, and then they rail against the ways of Christ,
what is the reason that the Devil does so much labor to bring off men from God?
because he is cast off himself, he was once an Angel, and he being cast off
from God himself, it troubles him that any should be brought on to the ways of
God, but if there be any such here, Oh, that this text might convince them that
they should return again and say, I will return unto the ways of Christ
again, for then it was better with me then it is now.

And then the Last thing is to speak especially to young ones, those that
complain of hardness in the ways of Christ for the present, and feel their
work very difficult, that say, Oh, that I could find what you say is in the
ways of Jesus Christ, that I could find them so, what a happy life should I
live? Now be convinced there is such a way, what should be done to facilitate
and make easy this way. Now what rules we should observe to make the ways of
Christ easy, that we may go on with ease, sweetness, and comfort in them, is
the next thing I shall come unto.

CHAP. CXLVI.
The means to make the ways of Christ easy to our selves. 1. Our obedience
must be evangelical. 2. Keep the heart in a readiness to every duty. 3. Get the
heart in love to the duty. 4. Loose not your encouragements. 5. Continue not in
the guilt of any Sin. 6. Order the duties of your condition. 7. Leave the
Success wholly to God. 8. Bind not your self to what Christ does not. 9. Lay
hold upon all opportunities. 10. Preserve all experiences. 11. Beware of
disturbing passions. 12. Entertain communion with the Saints. 13. Exercise
much faith. 14. Get strength of Grace.

THe last thing that I intend in this point is, To show how we may come to
facilitate the ways of Godliness to our selves, that is, how we may come to
live so under the yoke of Christ, as to make it easy unto our selves, for
certainly, though Christ's yoke be easy, yet many people of God find more
difficulty in Gods ways then they need, there is an art, a skill, a mystery of
Godlyness, which if you come to hit on right, you may carry on the work of
Godliness with power, and yet with a great deal of ease and sweetness. As you
know a workman that is skillful in his trade indeed, and can handle his tools
well, and is exercised in it, he carries on his work with ease, it goes on
before him delightfully whereas an unskilful young workman, that cannot tell
how to handle his tools, he will keep a bungling and stir, and tires himself,
and does not carry his work on with ease, and does but a little work, and does
it not well neither, those Workmen that do their work well, with most ease, they
do the most work. Now for those rules to be observed, that may help us to make
the ways of Christ easy to us, they are these.

1. Be sure that all your obedience be evangelical obedience, when you are
tendering up any service to God let it be (I say) an evangelical service; you
will say, what is the meaning of an evangelical work, or evangelical obedience,
or service? certainly, the want of the knowledge of Christ, is the chief thing
that makes the ways of God difficult to Godly people, their obedience is
legal, not evangelical. I have already, in the former part of the invitation of
Christ, showed much of the difficulty that there is in legal obedience, I will
give you but the heads of some four or five things for evangelical obedience,
and show what it is, or what ease there is in evangelical obedience, in
comparison of the other.

First, Evangelical obedience, is an obedience that the child tenders up unto
the father, when you come to do any work, do not look upon God as a severe
Judge, passing judgment, and condemning of you, But look upon God as a father,
and all your obedience to be nothing but the obedience of a child to his
father, this will make it easy; it is a greater ease for a child to obey his
father; when he knows that he is a loving and tender father, then for a gally
slave to obey him that has the power over him.

Secondly, Evangelical obedience, is to know that the Gospel accepts of
uprightness, where there is not perfection, many Christians are exceedingly
troubled in the duties of religion, and they are very difficult to them,
because they think, that God being an infinite, Holy God, he looks for absolute
perfection from them in their duties, and if there be any imperfection in their
duties, they think they shall not be accepted, but now Evangelical obedience,
accepts of uprightness, when there is not perfection, if there be uprightness
this is accepted of God.

Thirdly, Evangelical obedience, the Duties of the Gospel, has ever a promise
going along with them, whatever the Gospel requires, it joins a promise to it,
as it is in the body, there is an Artery that goes along together with the
Veins in the body, that carries the blood, and the Spirits through the body, we
must look upon every Duty as having a promise joined to it, and this will make
our obedience easy, evermore join promises unto commands.

Fourthly, Evangelical obedience, it bears the heart upon the strength of Jesus
Christ, upon Christ's strength, to look up to him; when we go to Duty, not to be
tiring our selves, and think to carry it out by main strength of our own, but
to look up to him, and bear our selves upon Christ, upon his strength.

Fifthly, Evangelical obedience, it is not an obedience upon which our eternal
life depends, we are not to look upon what we do, as any part of the Covenant
of eternal life, as that which our eternal life depends, not as a covenant of
works upon which eternal life depends: but the safety of our Souls and eternal
life is in another way, and all that which we do is rather in way of
thankfulness unto God for the mercy that God has granted to us, and the
eternal life that Christ has purchased for us already; this is Evangelical
obedience, now if our obedience and Duties were after this manner performed,
they would be very easy, if we would but do thus, this it is to obey
evangelically* If we could come as children to obey our Father, and know, that
the uprightness of our hearts is accepted, and to look upon every Commandment
as having a promise annexed to it, and to bear our selves upon the strength of
Christ, and to look upon every Duty only as a testimony of our thankfulness to
God for eternal life purchased for us, rather then a part of the Covenant of
eternal life: Now this obedience has a great deal of ease in it. But because
we have spoken largely heretofore about the difficulty of the burden of the
Law, and of the rest of the Soul from under it, it shall be sufficient to nam^
it at this time, but if we would have ease in the ways of Christ, we must
perform all our obedience in an Evangelical way, and I will add this one thing
to it.

As our obedience, so our humiliation for want of obedience must be
evangelical, for many Christians, may find their obedience somewhat easy to
them, I but, when they do not obey, then the sorrow for their sin that is
grievous, their humiliation that is a burden to their Spirits, sin lies upon
them as a burden, I but, we should be humbled for our sins in an evangelical
way, as well as perform duty, in an evangelical way. Now evangelical
humiliation, it is a sorrow for sin, not that we might purchase p^^don for that
sorrow, as we must not perform a duty to think to purchase Heaven, neither must
we sorrow for sin to think to satisfy for sin, and to purchase pardon for our
sin, but our very sorrow for sin must have a sweetness from Christ in it, it
must be out of love, our very mourning must be a fruit of love, and not come
from the fear of being destroyed eternally for such sins, that is legal sorrow,
I have sinned against God, and therefore am afraid that God will destroy me
eternally, and therefore I am sorry, No, but I have sinned against the Lord, a
gracious, and a merciful Father, and the Lord yet has made a Covenant with me,
that he will not take advantage of my sin, that he will not destroy me, and
therefore my soul mourns and laments the rather for my sin, that I have sinned
so much against the grace of the Gospel as I have done: Sorrow evangelically,
and then your sorrow will have more sweetness in it then all the joy that the
men of the world have, when all their Corn and Wine and Oil is increased, not
only when God lifts up the light of his countenance, but even the very sorrow
of your heart for sin may have more sweetness in it, then all the men of the
world have, when their Corn and Wine and Oil increases. Many Christians have
much bitterness in their sorrow, but certainly, Evangelical sorrow, the tears of
it is Rose water, that has a great deal of sweetness, it is sweet both unto
God, and sweet unto the soul, even while the soul is sorrowing, there is
sweetness in the heart, and this is the difference between legal terror, and
Evangelical sorrow, the one has nothing but bitterness and gal in it, and the
other nothing but sweetness. That is the first thing.

Secondly, Another way to facilitate and make easy that we do is this, Labor
to keep our hearts in a constant readiness and preparation to every duty;
Duties are very hard because we fall upon them unprepared, we are not in a
readiness continually unto every good work, you know when you are set about any
work, and if you have many things to prepare, and to look for, when you should
go about your work, it will go off but heavily, and it will be more troublesome,
but now, when every thing is prepared in a readiness, then how soon and how
easy does the work go on? when you are going to Sea, there is making a great
deal of preparation aforehand, now when the Ship is rigged and trimmed and
every thing ready, then you are at an instant able to put off, and set saii,
and go away, when al things are ready, you go off with ease. If you would
entertain Guests, if they come upon you suddenly, and you have nothing ready,
what a deal of stir is in the house? what running up and down this way and that
way, but now, if things be ready when they come, they are entertained with a
great deal of delight, and all things in the house are in order, and things go
off very easily, and there is no trouble in it. Truly, thus it should be with a
Christian, he should not only perform duties now and then, but his life should
be a constant walking with God, so that he should be always in readiness for
every duty that God requires of him, and so it comes to be easy. As now for
the duty of Prayer* you should keep your hearts in a praying frame continually,
and then prayer would be easy, it would be an easy thing for you to pour
forth your souls to God, when you keep your hearts in a praying frame all the
day long. It may be when you go to prayer, you find a great deal of trouble
within you, your thoughts wander, and your affections are dead and dull, and you
rise up discouraged: But what is the reason, you do not keep your heart all the
day long in a praying frame, in a heavenly temper and frame in the day time,
and therefore when you come to pray at night, there is no readiness in your
hearts to the duty, but you are altogether indisposed to it. And so to come
unto the Sacrament, you find it a great labor and toil to prepare for the
Sacrament as you should, I speak of those that make conscience of preparation,
many times they find it a mighty toil, a hard work; I, but Christians should
keep themselves always in a Sacramental disposition, a Sacramental frame,
always having their spirits savoring of the meditation of the death of Jesus
Christ, that nothing should be more familiar to a Christians Soul than the
meditation of the death of Christ, and of discerning the Lords Body, and the
Covenant of grace, and giving it self likewise to God in a Covenant of grace,
this should be continually, and then if you should receive the Sacrament every
day, you might be fit for it, or every week, you would be fit for it. Now
People think it a great matter, and make a great deal of do about receiving of
it often, whereas the truth is, the Saints of God, they should be in as great a
readiness to receive the Sacrament, as to hear the word, or to pray, and that
would be a mighty ease unto them, therefore if things were as they should
certainly, it would be more convenient to have it more ordinary and constant,
every Lords day the Sacrament. The Christians in the primitive times would
receive it every day in the year, and they kept their heart in readiness to
such kind of duties, let it be what work it will be. You should be patient in
affliction, if affliction come upon you and your heart is not in a readiness to
alter your condition, Oh! it will be a grievous burden to exercise patience, it
will be a hard thing for you; now you should keep your hearts ready for every
condition, that is the true work of grace in the Soul, to keep the soul in a
constant bent Godward and that Soul will do things very easily. Sometimes you
have much ado with your children when strangers come, to keep them in good
order the reason is, you neglect them at other times* and that is the reason
that they trouble you when strangers come; but keep them in a good order at all
times, and then you will have them right at those times; So it is with the
heart, keep the heart prepared and ready to every good work, and then every
work will be easy.

Object. But you will say, That is a great deal of toil and labor, to keep our
hearts always bent, and ready to good works.

To that I answer, at first it may be some labor and toil, but those that have
once got their hearts into a readiness, find it not so hard, but have a great
deal of ease, As now it is a great deal of toil for one that neglects his
accounts, he is not ready, but his accounts are entangled, if he be called to
give a perfect account, it is a great deal of toil to him, but now let a man
get over the difficulty, and make all his accounts clear, now for him every day
to keep his Books straight and clear, this will not be so great a trouble. This
is the difference between one Christian and another for all the world, one that
shall take his pleasure all the week long, and ride this way and the other way,
and neglects his Books, and but one day in the week will look them over, he will
have a great deal of trouble, and it will break his head sometimes, when he has
multitude of business. But now the other Merchant, looks into his Books every
day, spends half an hour, or a quarter of an hour every day, and he goes on
with a great deal of cheerfulness: So it is with many Christians, they think on
the Lords day they must have their hearts in a good frame and temper, but all
the week they have no thoughts of God, and of the word, and now when the
Sabbath comes, or Sacrament and holy duties come, they are burdensome to them;
whereas another that keeps his heart in a holy frame, he rejoices in the
Sabbath, for he has had a Sabbath day frame of heart all the week long. Luther
says, a Christians life should be a perpetual Sabbath. And that is the second
means to facilitate every good work.

3. Another is this, Labor to inflame your hearts with love unto the Duty, Do
not do duties because you must do them, but use all the means that you can for
to kindle in you a love unto the duty, never satisfy your selves with this, I
see I must do duty, Conscience puts me upon duty, therefore I must do it, so it
may be burdensome but labor to use all arguments you can to make you in love
with the duty. A Scholar that is in love with his Book, will not cry when he
goes to the School, and especially if he delight in it, and be in love with his
Master, there is many that are put to go to School, that dare not go, Oh, their
Father will be angry, and their Master will be severe, if they should not learn,
and so they learn but with much ado, they had rather do any thing in the world
than go to School, neither love their Books, nor love their Master, and so
seldom come to any eminence of learning. Love takes away all difficulty, love
is ashamed to complain of difficulty at any time, as now take a man that loves
recreation, that loves that kind of sport of hunting or hawking, if he love it,
he will be running in the dirt all the day long, though it be a hot day, run
over hedge and ditch, whereas now if such a man had not a love to such a thing,
but were enjoined to such a thing, that you must all the day from morning to
night eat not a bit of bread, but all the day long run after dogs over hedge
and ditch, and through waters, it would take away the love that such a one
should have in his sports, and what a miserable bondage would this be? so it is
in the ways of God, let there be love to the ways of God then whatever
difficulty, there may seem to be in them, it is taken away presently, love to
the person of Jesus Christ will take away the difficulty of the ways of
Christ; you know when Jacob loved Rachel, he cared not how long he served for
her, the hard nights were not hard to him, Love God, and love Christ, and then
his ways will not be difficult.

4. Another rule is this, do not loose your encouragements, that that you have
had from what good God does bestow upon you, and enable you to do, take heed of
loosing that encouragement, many Christians are altogether looking upon what
they ought to do, what God requires of them to do, and because they have had
not yet attained unto what they ought to do, and what is required of them to
do, therefore they find no encouragement from what the Lord has already
bestowed upon them what the Lord has already enabled them to do, they wholly
neglect that, and never think of it, they think of what they want, and what
they should have, and what they should do, and so they are laboring to get
what they should have, and to do what they should do, but for what God has
enabled them to do already, or what God has given them already, that they do
not think of, and for want of those encouragements, they make their endeavors
for the getting of more to be burdensome to them; but now, when we are
endeavoring to do more we should go on in the strength of this encouragement,
Oh, blessed be God for any little. You shall have Christians thinking of what
they should do, and therefore they think all the grace they have is nothing,
Oh! say they, that which I have done what is it? It is true, if we were looked
upon in the way of the Covenant of works it is nothing, but in the way of the
Covenant of Grace, it is a great deal: now that will be a great ease to your
souls, labor to get more, and do more for God, but still carry along with you
the encouragement of what God has done for you, when you pray for any grace,
bless God for any grace you have: Take notice of all the encouragement that God
does give you, and that will help you to go on in any further work that God
calls you unto, and the want of this makes the lives of many Christians to be
very grievous and burdensome unto them, because they neglect those
encouragements they might have from what God has enabled them to do, and from
what God has done already for them.

5. Take heed of lying in the guilt of any sin, I mean, though in respect of
God the guilt is taken away from believers, but of lying so in any sin, as not
to clear up all between God and your soul for the discharge of it, of having
any thing not cleared up in your own consciences, take heed of lying in any sin
unrepented of, that is my meaning, every sin that a man commits, excepting
those daily incursions and infirmities of the Saints, which they cannot while
they are here in the flesh be altogether without, but every other sin, it is as
a thorn, at least a thorn ^n the foot, every sin that a man has committed by
strength of temptation, it is a thorn in the foot, and if it be a greater sin
it is a gash in his flesh. Now a man that has a thorn in his foot, he cannot
go very fast, but especially, if he have a gash in his flesh: when thou have
been overcome with a great sin, thou have given a great gash unto thy soul, and
other sins, the sin of thy passion, and the sin of thy giving liberty to thy
thoughts, may be as a thorn to thy foot, to make thy way very hard unto thee.
No marvel though thou complainest the way is hard, it is not the hardness of
thy path, but the tenderness of thy foot that makes thee to think the way
hard; therefore let every Christian, if he would go on with ease in the ways
of religion, as soon as ever a thorn is got into the conscience, Oh! get it out
presently, do not let it lie and fret in the flesh, Oh! if we would as soon as
we had committed sin get it out of the conscience presently, then repentance
would not be so difficult, and you would find your heart at a mighty deal of
ease. When a man goes with pain, and he looks upon his foot, and pulls the
thorn out, he goes with ease then. As the beast, when you go in the way, and
your beast halts and shufflles, you will have him searched, if you cannot see
it your self, then when you come to the next Smith, you have him searched; so,
do you find the ways of God difficult, that you cannot go the pace you were
wont to go, search your hearts see whether there be not a stone in your hearts,
or some gravel, see if there be any particular sin that you know to be a sin,
and particularly repent of that, and that will make the way of God easy to you,
the often renewing of repentance will make the way of God easy.

6. Labor by wisdom to order the duties of your condition, that is thus, Labor
for wisdom to know what is suitable to your condition, and order the duties
about that condition: many think, Oh! if I were in such a place as such a one
is, I would do thus and thus, but you should look upon the duties of your
present condition, what is the condition that I am now in? I am a servant, what
is my duty in that condition? not what is the duty of a governor. And so in a
single estate, what is the duty of this condition? not what is the duty of a
married Condition, and so in a Married Condition, what is the duty of that? And
so when you are in affliction, what is your duty at that time? or if so be that
God call you to humiliation, you should mind the duty of humiliation, And when
God calls you to rejoicing you should know the duty of that time. Some when God
calls them to rejoicing, they think they must be humbled, and when they are
called to be humbled, they think they should rejoice, and when they are called
to believing, then they will be poring upon their corruptions, and when God
calls them to searching of their hearts, they have thoughts of matter of joy.
Now wisdom to suite our duty to our condition, and to apply our duty to that
condition, is a great ease to the soul. Now many times we are thinking of a
duty at one time, that is not the duty of that time, may be when one is sick,
Oh! they are many times troubled that they cannot go to hear the word, and
mere with Gods people, and spend so much time in prayer, and meditation, and
reading as they were wont to do, and upon this they trouble themselves, now
this is not the duty of your condition, the duty of your condition at that time
is to fanctify Gods name in your affliction and to quiet your heart under the
hand of God and the duty of your condition is not to go to hear sermons now,
but to think of what you have heard heretofore, the duty of your condition now
is not to spend so much time in your closet in prayer as when you were in
health, and you are troubled for the want of this, we often trouble our selves
about those duties that are not the duties of our present condition, and that
makes them difficult, now wisdom in ordering our duties will much help to
facilitate them.

7. Another Rule is this, In the performance of duties, you should ease your
selves of the care of the success of what you do, about success, or
discouragement for want of success; nothing makes our lives more troublesome,
and our work more difficult than our carking care about success, I will do this
and this, but I am afraid I shall not have success, or if I have success, not
such as I desire, but now, if you would perform duties in a gracious manner,
look to the duty perform that, and cast the care wholly upon God, it is enough
for me to do what is required of me as a creature to do, and let God himself
take care of that that belongs to him, and that is the success. I told you, in
the opening of the ease, that there is certain success, and yet we might
trouble our selves in carking about success; now if we can go on in performance
of duty, and never be troubled about success, it will be exceeding easy, but
Christians find sometimes that though they have been diligent in performance of
duty, yet they do not find success, they find nothing comes of it, and this
troubles them, and this makes them go heavily to the duty at another time, I
but observe that whatever duty you perform, if you do not find present success
you must not conclude that there will be no success, the carking about the
success in things, makes the work extraordinary difficult, now if we could
bring our hearts to this, Lord, I am where thou would have me, and doing what
thou would have me, and as for the success that belongs not to my work but to
thy self, I walk according to that that is thy will, and as for success I will
leave that to thy self.

8. Another rule is this, do not tie your selves to what Christ does not tie
you unto; there are many Christians, bring upon themselves many snares that
way, by tying themselves to that which Christ does not tie them to, tying
themselves to such a time of prayer, to spend so much time in such a duty, we
must take heed of laying a yoke upon our selves, do not put a yoke upon Christ's
yoke. It is a great question to many, and its to me a question, whether in the
Gospel there is required any Vows at all, to vow any thing that is not a duty
before we have vowed it, indeed to strengthen our selves to do what God
requires, as David, I have sworn to keep thy righteous Laws, we may engage our
selves that way, but properly in the Law it was a free will Offering, but for a
Vow now, I do not find that the Gospel has any such thing, for men to bind
themselves to that that they were not bound to before by the word* Indeed
whatever we are bound to by the word, that we are to engage our selves to the
utmost, but now to bind our selves to any thing else, as that we will as long
as we live keep such a day, this will prove to be a snare to you, God requires
it not, it may be that day that you would observe for one duty, God may require
it for another duty, may be you will keep a day of fast for such a great
deliverance, for such a great mercy, certainly, it may prove a snare unto you,
God may call you to another duty on that day, to the duty of thanksgiving. Many
will vow to keep such a day, and when they have vowed it, they know not how to
go back. And so many will vow they will do so much every morning, and so much
that day; this may bring a snare upon you* labor to do all what you can for
Christ all the day long, consider your duties, and lay the word upon you, but
to put upon your selves that which Christ puts you not upon, it is that that
makes the duties of Religion very tedious, and many have done it that way, not
foreseeing the inconveniences that may come upon it, and yet they dare not go
back. Therefore I would rather advise Christians, to take heed of such things
as those are, but to walk in the way of Christ according to that the Lord
requires for the present, and not to bring themselves into a snare, and so they
shall make the way of God more easy.

9. Another Rule is this, Take all advantages, take all opportunities and
advantages, all the gales of Gods Spirit, do not neglect the opportunities you
have, the neglect of opportunities may bring us to woeful difficulties, As in
voyages, if a ^arriner neglect the opportunity of the gale of wind, it is a
difficult voyage, and then he cries out, I may thank my self for all this, had
I taken such an opportunity, such a wind, then I had been freed from this
hardship that now I meet withal: So it is with a Christian, many times the
spirit of God comes with a gracious gale, and gives them opportunity to go on
with cheerfulness in the ways of God, had thou taken the opportunity, the
gale of the spirit, Oh, what a deal of trouble might thou have avoided?
Those that are watchful for all opportunities find the ways of God easy. It
was the speech of Alexander, because he carried things so easy as he did, and
in a little time conquered all the world, when it was asked him, how he could do
so great things, and carry on things with so great ease? his answer was, by
neglecting nothing, he meant, by neglecting no advantage. There are many men,
that when God helps them a little, they carry the work on with ease, but then
they do not follow on their work, and so they bring themselves into streights.
As now we cry out of these wars, what a great deal of trouble they put the
Nation to, and one main thing is, for want of taking advantages, and following
advantages, We say sometimes, Oh, if such a victory had been followed, such a
victory that we had at Brainford, and York, and other places we might have
delivered our selves from abundance of trouble, and tediousness of war; but
when God gives advantages and we do not follow them, no marvel that we find
trouble: So it is with many Christians, you find many troubles in Religion, Oh,
it is because you do not follow your advantages, if you had ever since you were
young, and ever since God revealed himself to you, followed the gale of Gods
spirit, your old age might have been spent in nothing but gales of joy,
comfort, and the like, but now no marvel you act with so much difficulty in the
ways of God.

10. Another Rule is this, Preserve all your experiences that you have had of
the goodness of Gods ways, when your hearts have been most enlarged, and you
have walked most close with God, and God has come in to your soul: Preserve
those experiences, keep them by, that they may help you against an il day, it
may there be may be a time a coming, that you may be in spiritual desertion
and that may be grievous to you, but if you had kept the experiences you had of
God when your heart kept close to God, it would much help you, and sweeten your
hearts, to think of the days of old. As David when he was in desertion, he
would many times be thinking of the days of old: So if Christians would be
very careful to observe and lay up all the experiences that they have of God
and his ways, the sweet and good of them, it would mightily facilitate them in
holy duties, and be a continual Cordial to them, and put spirits into them, to
make them go on with ease in any duty God requires of them.

11. Another Rule is this, Take heed in any duty of disturbing passion, the
disturbance of passion puts people ou^ of frame, that they are fit for nothing
when they are passionate, passionate with God, passionate with men, because
they cannot have what they would have, fling up all. As Children, that when
they cannot have their desires, fling a way all, this makes every thing hard,
but if you could but keep your selves in a constant quietness, you should have
every condition and every duty delightful but I have spoken of that (you know)
of the evil effects of it, and of meekness, and the gracious effects of that,
but I bring it only now as a rule, that you may present all these rules
together. As now suppose a company that are in a Boat, and there comes a
strong wind and tosseth the Boat, you shall have some silly people, that will be
shriking out, and mightily troubled, and through their passion will be rising
up in the Boat, and be ready to tumble down all through their passionate
carriage in the Boat, whereas those that have skill; will sit still, and be quiet*
and give up themselves to the stream, and that is the best way to come with the
greatest ease, you make the Boatmans labor so much the more d^fficult, by your
unquietness in the Boat; So certainly, you make the work of God more difficult
when your hearts are unquiet. Let the thing be what it will, you will say, Oh, no
bodies condition is so as mine, Certainly, your unquietness will not help you,
you will not come the sooner to your landing place, if people toss from one side
of the Boat to the other, and be unruly in their carriage, they will not come
the sooner to their landing place, the quieter they sit in the Boat, the sooner
they will come to land. So it is in a Christians course, he must not think to
come to have his desires satisfied by his froward carriage, to be angry with
God or man, or the means, that they do not work as they would have them, but
the quieter they sit, and give up themselves to God, the sooner they come to
their desires.

12. Another Rule is this, Communion with the Saints, spiritual Communion,
Heavenly Communion, not frothy Communion, but a spiritual holy gracious
communion with the Saints, will facilitate the ways of God very much, the
experience of this is very much, I do not know how it comes to pass, but
certainly, now there is a great deal less communion between Gods people than
formerly the times have been, when some that have been alone, have bin striving
and tugging, and could not get their hearts into any good frame, they have come
bu^ into the company of Gods people, and laid their experiences together, and
warmed themselves together, and then they have gone away, and they have thought
nothing too hard that God should require of them to do or to suffer, they would
go into their closets and pour out their hearts, if there were trouble in the
Family, between Wife and Husband, in regard of passion, when they have been
amongst Gods people, they could carry themselves in a gracious manner, Oh!
communion, much communion with the Saints of God, it is that that facilitates
the ways of Religion. We know in traveling, if a man be traveling a journey
all alone especially if he have wind and weather against him, his way is
tedious to him, very hard and grievous, and he is tired in his journey: but
now, if he travel and have good company, and good discourse, and is joyful,
and cheerful when he is going, his journey is nothing, when he comes to the
Inn, he says, I thank God, I am not weary at al, Why is it so? the journey is
long, I but the company is good, the d^scourse is good, and that makes it
easy: So it is in our journey to Heaven, we complain of tediousness in our
journey, Why is it? because we love to be alone. As many that are of a dumpish
disposition, loving always to be alone, there is a time indeed that people
should be alone, and they have sweet refreshings from God that way, but there
is a time to have Society with the Saints, and it is an ordinance appointed by
God for the facilitating of Gods ways, while we are passing in the wilderness
in our way to Heaven, and therefore make Conscience of that, to have Communion
with the people of God, to spiritualize your Communion, and make what use you
can of them to help you in your Christian course.

13. Another Rule is this, Exercise much Faith, Faith does facilitate every
action as Unbelief makes every thing difficult, let a man be put upon any duty
if he have an unbelieving heart, it is difficult, Why? because before he comes
to it, he says, I shall never go through with it, and therefore comes heavily
to it, all the while his unbelief prevails, his work goes heavily on, but let a
man come to a work, and come to purpose, A man of confidence, and of spirit, he
says, let me take such a thing, another man he is toyling and laboring, and he
says, I shall never bring it to any thing, but now another man, that is of a
lively constitution, faith he, let me come to it, and he carries it on with
ease: and the truth is, when Christians see Gods call to any work, they should
not pore upon the difficulty, but exercise Faith, and come with courage to the
duty, and God will carry you through, God that calls me to a work, he will give
me strength in the work, and therefore let me go to the work as if I were
carried through it already, go on with confidence and resolution, and take heed
of Unbelief, up and be doing, and the Lord will be with you* so do you say to
your souls when you are discouraged in the work, Oh, such and such have
miscarried, and how shall so weak a soul as I do? Well, up and be doing, and the
Lord will be with you.

14. Lastly, Do not satisfy your selves that you have grace, but labor to have
strength of grace, that is easy to a strong man that is hard to a weak, now
Christians should not satisfy themselves with Gods grace, God has begun grace
in thee, you will say, he that has the least dram of grace, it will carry him
to Heaven, I but it is a great deal of grace that must make the ways of
Religion easy and delightful to thee: Therefore look into the word, and when
thou do exercise Faith, or make use of any Ordinance, Do it for the increase
of grace, for strengthening thy self, strengthen those weak things that are in
thee, that thou may go on steadily in the ways of Religion, and know to that
end, that though thou be never so weak, yet there is strength enough to be
had. Look into the word of God, and you shall find there, that there is a most
glorious strength that is possibly to be attained unto by Christians, in Ephesians.
1. 18, 19. that place that we have often made use of, What is the exceeding
greatness of his power to us ward which believe, according to the working of
his mighty power. Mark this Text, it is not only meant of the greatness of Gods
power in working Faith in us, but the greatness of his power toward us who do
now believe, God does put forth power, greatness of power, and exceeding
greatness of mighty power, and the same that he wrought in Christ when he
raised him from the dead, and set him at the right hand of God. Thou mai'st
come to have by the exercise of Faith, the power of God put forth, his almighty
power to give thee Faith, so now by the exercise of Faith, thou mai'st have the
power of God, the greatness of his Power the mighty power of God, and the
exceeding greatness of the mighty power of God, and the same that God put forth
when he raised Christ from the dead, and set him at the right hand of the
Father. Thou sai'st, thou have a dead heart, but will not the power of God that
raised Christ from the dead raise thy heart, exercise Faith, Lord, I go about
such a business, it is difficult because of the hardness of my heart, But Lord,
will not the power that raised Christ from the Grave, raise my dead heart. And
so, Lord I have a heart sunk down to the things of the world, I but Lord have
thou not promised to put forth the same power into the hearts of thy people,
that set Jesus Christ at thy right hand? Will not that power raise up my heart
to Heaven, and give me an heavenly heart? Now here is strengthening of thy
Faith from the word of God, and that strength that the Scripture holds forth,
that God himself will put forth into the heart of his people upon the exercise
of Faith. And so in Ephesians. 3. 16. That he will grant unto you, according to the
Riches of his Glory, to be strengthened with might by his spirit in the inner
man, what a heap of expressions are here! therefore I put you upon this, not to
content your selves with weak grace, for there is abundance of strength, not
only the strength in Christ, but the strength that is conveyed into the heart
by the Spirit of Jesus Christ, it is one thing for Christ himself to look upon
you, as having a fullness of all strength in him, and for Christ to come and
assist you. As now a man that has a weak Child, he may come with his hand and
enable the Child to do that which he could not do, but the strength that I
speak of now is, as when one that was a Child before is made a strong man, and
has Marrow put into his Bones, and Blood into his Veins; so this strength is
such a strength, that is the Riches of his Glory, according to the inward man,
Mark, First, Here is strength. Secondly, Here is strength in the inward man,
strength in the outward man is not so much as the inward man. Thirdly, Here is
strengthened with might. Fourthly, This strength is by the Spirit, now the
Scripture uses that word Spirit to express strength by. Their Horses are not
Spirit, but Flesh. And then again, It is by the Spirit of God. And then it is
according to the Riches of the Spirit of God, such strength and such might, and
the Spirit of God in the inward man, such as shall show forth the riches of
Gods Spirit, and then Lastly, The riches of his Glory: So that the Saints may
come to have in them such strength in the inward man, with such might by the
Spirit of God, and according to the riches of God, and the riches of his Glory;
you must not satisfy your selves til you find such a work of Gods grace in
you, as may manifest the riches of the glory of Gods power. Now Christians, Do
you work so, as by your strength in the ways of Religion, you do manifest the
riches of the Glory of Gods power? If you do, then certainly the ways of
Religion will be easy to you, And then another Scripture, which is to show you
that there is a great deal of strength to be had to enable you to go on, is
that in the 1. of the Collossians and ver. 11. Strengthened with all might,
through his glorious power, unto al patience, and long-suffering with
joyfulness, here is strengthened with might, strengthened with all might, and
this according to Gods power, and according to his glorious power, and unto all
patience, and long suffering, with joyfulness; mark, when we come to have
strength from God, that is, when we come to the hardest things, to exercise
patience, then we have patience and all patience, and and joyfulness, and
giving thanks to the Father and nothing but thankfulness and joyfulness, though
our condition be such as needs patience. Now these rules being put together,
they may make the way of Christ easy, you may run the ways of Gods
commandments, and go leaping to Heaven, and certainly, the more easy, and the
more sweet they be unto you, the more sweet will they be to others, and you
will bring a better report upon the ways of religion, and make the ways of
God amiable and lovely unto others. Well consider what has been said in this
text, Many truths you cannot but acknowledge that they nearly concern you, now
know, that God will require this text at our hands, this invitation of Christ,
come to me al ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest, take
my yoke upon you, and learn of me for I am meek and lowly in heart, and you
shall find rest unto your souls; for my yoke is easy and my burden light: The
truth is, the same and the very marrow of the Gospel is in this invitation of
Christ, and therefore I have labored, to show you as fully as I could, what
the spirit of God does intend in this invitation, and to lay before you all
those truths that are here, and have labored to work them upon your hearts,
hoping that the impression of diverse things that have been delivered from this
scripture, in the invitation of Christ, are upon your spirits, and shall
remain in many of your souls, even to the day of Christ, so that Jesus Christ
when he shall come again with another invitation and say, come, come ye blessed
of my father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you, I say, Christ will look
upon you, having the impression of this invitation upon your hearts. And
certainly, Christ when he shall come to judgment, when poor souls shall bring
this impression upon their hearts, he will entertain them with a great deal of
cheerfulness, and he will give them another invitation, Christ says now, come,
come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, take my yoke upon you and
learn of me, for my yoke is easy, and my burden light, does this invitation
prevail? has these arguments prevailed with your spirits? and do you keep the
impression of these upon your spirits? can you if Jesus Christ were to come to
judgment, show the impressions of these invitations upon your hearts, and say
Lord, thou have invited us, and many arguments has been used to draw us unto
thee, and our spirits are come to thee? and behold now the impressions of those
truths upon our hearts. Oh! if you shall be able at the day of judgment to show
the impressions of these truths upon your hearts, you will be happy, and then
you shall have the other invitation, come ye blessed of my father, that will
come fully upon you, the remembrance of the work of this invitation upon you,
Oh! how sweet will it be to you? And for others that shall live wickedly when
they shall come to that day, when Christ shall invite others unto him, come ye
blessed of my father when they shall remember, that there was a time when we
heard a blessed sweet invitation of Christ opened to us in the Ministry of the
word, we heard Christ calling, Come, come, and professing that his yoke was
easy and his burden light, and yet we followed after our lusts, and wicked
sinful lusts and wicked sinful ways, and now we hear that the Saints that did
come upon his invitation, that they shall be blessed for ever, but Christ will
not call us to him, we would not have his yoke upon us then, and therefore now
we must be cast off, and have the iron yoke of the wrath, and vengeance, and
curse of eternal displeasure upon us, Now the Lord persuade you to take those
easy yokes of Christ upon you for the present, rather then Gods eternal wrath
and displeasure should come to be your portion hereafter.

FINIS.

