A Second part of the ENQUIRY Into the REASONS Offered by Sa. Oxon for
abrogating the TEST: Or an ANSWER to his Plea for Transubstantiation; and for
Acquitting the Church of Rome of IDOLATRY.
THe two seemingly contrary Advices of the Wiseman, of Answering a Fool
according to his Folly, and of not Answering him according to his Folly, are
founded on such Excellent Reasons, that if a man can but rightly distinguish
the Circumstances, he has a good Warrant for using both upon different
occasions. The Reason for Answering a Fool according to his Folly, is, lest he
be wise in his own eyes; that so a haughty and petulent humor may be subdued;
and that a man that is both blinded and swelled up with self-conceit, may by so
severe a Remedy be brought to know himself, and to think as meanly of himself
as every Body else does. But the reason against Answering a Fool according to
his Folly, is, lest one be also like unto him, and so let both his mind and
style be corrupted by so Vicious a Pattern. Since then in a former Paper, I was
wrought on to let our Author see, what a severe Treatment he has justly drawn
on himself, and to write in a style a little like his own, I will now let him
see, that he is the man in the World, whom I desire the least to resemble: and
so if I writ before in a style that I thought became him, I will now change
that into another, which I am sure becomes my self. In the former, I examined
his Arguments for abrogating the Test, in a strain, which I thought somewhat
necessary for the Informing the Nation aright, in a matter of such Consequence,
that the Preservation of our Religion is judged to depend upon it, by the
Presumptive Heir of the Crown: but now, that I am to argue a point, which
requires more of a Gravity, than of an acrimony of style, I will no more
consider the Man, but the Matter in hand.

In a word He would persuade the World, that Transubstantiation is but a Nicety
of the Schools, calculated to the Aristotelian Philosophy: and not defined
positively in the Church of Rome: but that the Corporal and Real Presence of
the substance of Christ's Body and Blood in the Sacrament, was the Doctrine of
the Universal Church in the Primitive Times: and that it is at this day the
generally received Doctrine by all the different Parties in Europe, not only
the To. Catholics and Lutherans, but both by the Churches of Switzerland and
France, and more particularly by the Church of England; so that since all that
the Church of Rome means by Transubstantiation is the Real presence and since
the Real Presence is so Universally received, it is a heinous thing to renounce
Transubstantiation; for that is in effect the renouncing the Real Presence.

This is the whole strength of his Argument, which he fortifies by many
Citations, to prove that both the Ancient- Fathers and the Modern Reformers,
believed the Real Presence; and that the Church of Rome believes no more. But
to all this I shall offer a few Exceptions.

I. If Transubstantiation is only a Philosophical Nicety concerning the manner
of the Presence; where is the hurt of renouncing it? and why are the To.
Catholics at so much pains to have the Test repealed? for it contains nothing
against the Real Presence: indeed, if this Argument has any force, it should
rather lead the To. Catholics to take the Test, since according to the Bp they
do not renounce in it any Article of Faith, but only a bold curiosity of the
Schoolmen. Yet after all, it seems they know, that this is contrary to their
Doctrine, otherwise they would not venture so much upon a point of an old and
decried Philosophy.

II. In order to the stating this matter aright, it is necessary to give the
true notion of the Real Presence, as it is acknowledged by the Reformed. We all
know in what sense the Church of Rome understands it, that in the Sacrament
there is no Real Bread and Wine, but that under the appearance of them we have
the true substance of Christ's glorified Body. On the other hand, the Reformed,
when they found the world generally fond of this phrase; they by the same
Spirit of Compliance, which our Savior and his Apostles had for the Jews, and
that the Primitive Church had (perhaps to excess) for the Heathens, retained
the phrase of Real Presence: but as they gave it such a sense as did fully
demonstrate, that tho they retained a term that had for it a long Prescription,
yet they quite changed its meaning: for they always showed, that the Body and
blood of Christ, which they believed present, was his Body broken and his Blood
shed, that is to say, his Body, not in its glorified state, but as it was
crucified. So that the presence belonging to Christ's dead Body, which is not
now actually in being, it is only his Death that is to be conceived to be
presented to us, and this being the sense that they always give of the Real
Presence, the reality falls only on that conveyance, that is made to us in the
Sacrament, by a federal rite of Christ's Death as our Sacrifice. The learned
Answerer to the Oxford discourses has so fully demonstrated this from the
copious explanations which all the Reformed give of that phrase, that one would
think it were not possible either to mistake or cavil in so clear a point. The
Papists had generally objected to the Reformers, that they made the Sacrament
no more than a bare Commemoratory Feast; and some few had carried their
aversion to that gross Presence which the Church of Rome had set up, to another
extreme to which the People by a principle of libertinism might have been too
easily carried; if the true Dignity of the Sacrament had not been maintained by
expressions of great Majesty: so finding that the world was possessed of the
phrase of the real Presence, they thought fit to preserve it, but with an
Explanation that was liable to no Ambiguity. Yet it seems our Reformers in the
beginning of Queen Elisabeth's Reign had found that the phrase had more power
to carry men to Superstition, than the explanations given to it, had to retire
them from it, and therefore the Convocation ordered it to be laid aside, tho
that order was suppressed out of prudence: and the phrase has been ever since
in use among us, of which Dr. Burnet has given us a copious account, Hist.
Reform. 2 Vol. 3. Book.

III. The Difference between the notion of the Sacraments being a mere
Commemoratory Feast, and the Real Presence, is as great as the value of the
Kings head stamped upon a Meddal differs from the current coin, or the
Impression made by the Great Seal upon Wax differs from that which any carver
or graver may make. The one is a mere Memorial, but the other has a sacred
badge of Authority in it. The Paschal Lamb, was not only a Remembrance of the
Deliverance of the People of Israel out of Egypt, but a continuance of the
Covenant, that Moses made between God and them, which distinguished them from
all the Nations round about them, as well as the first Passover, had
distinguished them from the Egyptians. Now it were a strange Inference, because
the Lamb was called the Lords Passover, that is, the Sacrifice upon the
sprinkling of whose Blood the Angel passed over or passed by the Houses of the
Israelites, when he smote the firstborn of the Egyptians, to say, that there
was a change of the substance of the Lamb: or because the Real faith of a
Prince is given by his Great Seal, printed on Wax, and affixed to a Parchment,
that therefore the substance of the Wax is changed: so it is no less absurd to
imagine, that because the Bread and the Wine are said to be the Body and Blood
of Christ as broken and shed, that is, his death Really and effectually offered
to us, as our Sacrifice, that therefore the substance of the Bread and Wine, are
changed.

And thus upon the whole matter, that which is present in the Sacrament is
Christ Dead, and since his death was transacted above 1600. years ago, the
reality of his presence, can be no other than a Real offer of his death made to
us in an Instituted and federal simbole. I have explained this the more fully,
because with this, all the ambiguity in the use of that commonly received
phrase, falls off.

IV. As for the Doctrine of the Ancient Church, there has been so much said in
this Enquiry, that a man cannot hope to add any new discoveries to what has
been already found out: therefore I shall only endeavor to bring some of the
most Important Observations into a narrow compass, and to set them in a good
light: and shall first offer some general Presumptions, to show that it is not
like, that this was the Doctrine of the Primitive times, and then some Positive
proof of it.

1. It is no slight Presumption against it, that we do not find the Fathers
take any pains to answer the Objections that do naturally arise out of the
present Doctrine of the Church of Rome: these Objections do not arise out of
profound study, or great learning, but from the plain dictates of common sense,
which make it hard (to say no more) for us to believe, that a Body can be in
more places than one at once, and that it can be in a place after the manner of
a spirit: that Accidents can be without their subject; or that our senses can
deceive us in the plainest cases: we find the Fathers explain some abstruse
difficulties that arise out of other Mysteries, that were less known, and were
more Speculative: and while they are thought perhaps to over-do the one, it is
a little strange that they should never touch the other: but on the contrary,
when they treat of Philosophical matters, they express themselves roundly in
opposition to those consequences of this Doctrine: whereas since this Doctrine
has been received, we see all the speculations of Philosophy, have been so
managed, as to keep a reserve for this Doctrine. So that the uncautious way in
which the Fathers handled them (in proof of which Volumes of quotations can be
made) shows they had not then received that Doctrine, which must of necessity
give them occasion to write otherwise than they did.

2. We find the Heathens studied to load the Christian Religion with all the
heaviest Imputations that they could give it. They objected to them the
believing a God that was born, and that dyed, and the Resurrection of the Dead,
and many lesser matters, which seemed absurd to them: they had malice enough to
seek out every thing that could disgrace a Religion which grew too hard for
them: but they never once object this, of making a God out of a piece of Bread,
and then eating him: if this had been the Doctrine of those Ages, the Heathens,
chiefly Celsus, and Porphiry, but above all Julian, could not have been
Ignorant of it. Now it does not stand with common sense to think, that those
who insist much upon Inconsiderable things, could have passed over this, which
is both so sensible and of such Importance, if it had been the received belief
of those Ages.

3. It is also of weight, that there were no disputes nor Heresies upon this
point during the first Ages; and that none of the Heretics ever objected it to
the Doctors of the Church. We find they contended about all other Points: now
this has so many difficulties in it, that it should seem a little strange, that
all men's understandings should have been then so easy and consenting, that this
was the single point of the whole Body of Divinity, about which the Church had
no dispute for the first Seven Centuries. It therefore inclines a man rather to
think, that because there was no disputes concerning it, therefore it was not
then broached: since we see plainly, that ever since it was broached in the
West, it has occasioned lasting Disputes, both with those who could not be
brought to believe it, and with one another concerning the several ways of
explaining and maintaining it.

4. It is also a strong Prejudice against the Antiquity of this Doctrine, that
there were none of those rites in the first ages which have crept in in the
latter: which were such natural consequences of it, that the belief of the one
making way for the other, we may conclude, that where the one were not
practiced, the other was not believed. I will not mention all the Pomp which
the latter Ages have Invented to raise the luster of this Doctrine, with which
the former Ages were unacquainted. It is enough to observe, that the Adoration
of the Sacrament, was such a necessary Consequence of this Doctrine, that since
the Primitive Times know nothing of it, as the Greek Church does not to this
day, it is perhaps more than a Prosumption, that they believed it not.

V. But now I come to more Positive and convincing proofs: and

1. The language of the whole Church, is only to be found in the Liturgies
which are more severely composed than Rhetorical Discourses; and of all the
parts of the Office, the Prayer of Consecration, is that in which we must hope
to find most certainly the Doctrine of the Church: we find then in the 4th
Century, that in the Prayer of Consecration the Elements were said to be the
Types of the Body and Blood of Christ, as St. Basil Informs us from the Greek
Liturgies; and the Figure of his Body and Blood, as St. Ambrose Informs us,
from the Latin Liturgies: The Prayer of Consecration, that is now in the Canon
of the Mass, is in a great part the same with that which is cited by St.
Ambrose, but with this Important difference, that instead of the words, which
is the Figure of the Body and Blood of Christ that are in the former, there is
a petition added in the latter, that the gifts may be to us the Body and Blood
of Christ. If we had so many of the Mss. of the Ancient Liturgies left, as to
be able to find out the time in which the Prayer of Consecration was altered,
from what it was in S. Ambroses days, to what it is now, this would be no small
Article in the History of Transubstantiation: but most of these are lost; since
then the Ancient Church could not believe otherwise of the Sacrament, than as
she expressed her self concerning it, in the Prayer of Consecration; It is
plain, that her first Doctrine concerning it, was, that the Bread and Wine were
the Types and the Figure of the Body and Blood of Christ.

2. A second proof is from the Controversy, that was began by the
Apollinarists, and carried on by the Eutichians, whether Christ's humanity was
swallowed up of his Divinity or not? The Eutichians made use of the General
Expressions, by which the change in the Sacrament seemed to be carried so far,
that the Bread and Wine were swallowed up by it; and from this they inferred,
that in like manner the human nature of Christ was swallowed up by his
Divinity: but in opposition to all this, we find Chrysostom the Patriarch of
Constantinople, Ephrem the Patriarch of Antioch, Gelasius the Pope, Theodoret a
Bp in Asia the lesser, and Facundus a Bp in Afric, all within the compass of
little more than an Age, agree almost in the same words, in refuting all this:
asserting, that as the human nature in Christ remained still the same that it
was before, notwithstanding its union with his divine Nature, even so the Bread
and Wine retained still their former Nature, Substance and Form, and that they
are only sanctified, not by the change of their Nature, but by adding Grace to
Nature. This they do in terms plain, and beyond all exception; and Theodoret
goes over the matter again and again, in two different Treatises, so that no
matter of fact can appear more plainly, then that the whole Church East and
West and South, did in the 5th and 6th Centuries believe that the
Sanctification of the Elements in the Sacrament, did no more destroy their
natures, than the union of the two natures in Christ, did destroy his humane
nature.

A 3d proof is taken from a practice which I will not offer to justify, how
Ancient soever it may have been: It appears indeed in the Antientest Liturgies
now extant; and is a Prayer in which the Sacrament is said to be offered up in
honor of the Saint of the day, to which a petition is added, that it may be
accepted of God by the Intercession of the Saint. This is yet in the Missal,
and is used upon most of the Saints days: now if the Sacrament was then
believed to be the very Body and Blood of Christ, there is nothing more crude,
not to say profane, to offer this up to the honor of a Saint, and to pray
that the Sacrifice of Christ's body may be accepted of God through the Intercession
of a Saint. Therefore to give any tolerable sense to these words, we must
conclude, that tho these Prayers have been continued in the Roman Church, since
this Opinion prevailed, yet they were never made in an Age in which it was
received. The only meaning that can be given to these words, is, that they made
the Saints days, days of Communion, as well as the Sundays were: and upon that
they prayed that the Sacrament which they received that day, to do the more
honor to the Memory of the Saint, might be recommended to the divine
Acceptance by the Intercession of the Saint: so that this Superstitious
practice, shows plainly, that the Church had not, even when it began, received
the Doctrine of the change of the Elements into the Body and blood of Christ.

I will not pursue the proof of this point further, nor will I enter into a
particular recital of the Sayings of the Fathers, upon this subject; which
would carry me far: and it is done so copiously by others, that I had rather
refer my Reader to them, than offer him a lean abridgment of their labors.

I shall only add, that the Presumptions and Proofs that I have offered are
much more to be valued, than the pious and Rhetorical Figures by which many of
the Fathers have set forth the manner of Christ's Presence in the Sacrament. One
thing is plain, that in most of them, they represent Christ present in his dead
and crucified state, which appears most eminently in S. Chrysostom; so that
this aggreed with that notion of a Real Presence, that was formerly explained.
Men that have at the same time, all the heat in their Imaginations that
Eloquence can raise, and all the fervor in their heart which devotion can
inspire, are seldom so correct in their phrases and figures, as not to need
some allowances: therefore one plain proof of their Opinions from their
reasonings when in cold blood, ought to be of much more weight than all their
Transports and Amplifications.

From this General view of the State of the Church during the first Centuries,
I come next to consider the steps of the change which was afterward made. I
will not offer to trace out that History, which Mr. Larrogue has done
Copiously, whom I the rather mention because he is put in English. I shall only
observe, that by reason of the high expressions which were used upon the
occasion of the Eutichean Controversy, formerly mentioned, by which the
Sanctification of the Elements was compared to the Union of the humane nature
of Christ with his Divinity, a great step was made to all that followed: during
the Dispute concerning Images, those who opposed the worship of them said,
according to all the Ancient Liturgies, that they indeed acknowledged one Image
of Christ, which was the Sacrament; those who promoted that piece of
superstition (for I refer the calling it Idolatry to its proper place) had the
Impudence to deny that it had ever been called the Image of Christ's Body and
Blood: and said, that it was really his Body and Blood. We will not much
Dispute concerning an Age, in which the World seemed mad with a zeal for the
Worship of Images; and in which Rebellion and the deposing of Princes upon the
pretense of Heresy, began to be put in practice: such times as these, we
willingly yield up to our Adversaries. Yet Damascene, and the Greek Church
after him, carried this matter no further than to assert an Assumption of the
Elements, into an union with the Body and Blood of Christ. But when the Monk of
Corbie began to carry the matter yet further, and to say, that the Elements
were changed into the very Body of Christ that was born of the Virgin, we find
all the great men of that Age, both in France, Germany, and England, writ
against him: and he himself owns that he was looked upon as an Innovator; Those
who writ against him, chiefly Rabanus Maurus, and Bertram or Ratramne, did so
plainly assert the Ancient opinion of the Sacraments being the Figure of the
Body and Blood of Christ, that we cannot express our selves more formally than
they did: and from thence it was that our Saxon Homily on Easter Day was so
express in this point. Yet the War and the Northern Invasions that followed,
put the World into so much disorder, that all Disputes were soon forgot, and
that in the 11th Century, this Opinion which had so many Partisans in the
ninth, was generally decried and much abandoned.

VI. But with relation to those Ages in which it was received, some
observations occur so readily, to every one that knows History, that it is only
for the sake of the more Ignorant, that I make them.

1. They were times of so much Ignorance, that it is scarce conceivable to any
but to those who have labored a little in reading the productions of those
Ages; which is the driest piece of study I know: the style in which they writ,
and their way of arguing, and explaining scripture, are all of a piece, both
matter and form are equally barbarous. Now in such times, as the Ignorant
populace were easily misled, so there is some what in Incredible stories and
Opinions, that makes them pass as easily, as men are apt to fancy they see
Sprights in the Night: nay the more of Mystery and Darkness that there is in
any Opinion, such times are apt to cherish it the more for that very reason.

2. Those were ages in which the whole Ecclesiastical Order had entered into
such Conspiracies against the State, which were managed and set on by such
vigor by the Popes, that every Opinion which tended to render the persons of
Church men Sacred, and to raise their Character, was likely to receive the best
entertainment, and the greatest encouragment possible. Nothing could so secure
the persons of Priests, and render them so considerable, as to believe that
they made their God: and in such Ages no Armor was of so sure a proof as for a
Priest to take his God in his hands.

Now it is known, that as P. Gregory the 7th, who condemned Berengarius, laid
the foundations of the Ecclesiastical Empire, by establishing the Deposing
power, so P. Innocent the 3d who got Transsubstantiation to be decreed in the
4th Council of the Lateran, seemed to have completed the project; by the
Addition made to the Deposing power, of transferring the Dominions of the
Deposed Prince to whom he pleased. Since before this, the Dominions must have
gone to the next Heirs of the Deposed Prince. It is then so plain, that the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation, was so suitable to the advancing of those ends,
that it had been a wonder indeed, if it being once set on foot, it had not been
established in such times.

3. Those Ages were so corrupt, and more particularly the Clergy, and chiefly
the Popes, were by the Confession of all writers so excessively vicious, that
such men could have no regard to truth in any of their Decisions. Interest must
have carried all other things before it, with such Popes, who according to the
Historians of their own Communion, were perhaps the worst men that ever lived.
Their Vices were so crying, that nothing but the credit that is due to Writers
of their own time, and their own Church, could determine us to believe them.

4. As the Ignorance and Vices of those times derogate justly from all the
credit that is due to them, so the Cruelty which followed their Decisions, and
which was Employed in the Execution of them, makes it appear rather a stranger
thing that so many opposed them, then that so many submitted to them. When
Inquisitors or Dragoons manage an Argument, how strong soever the Spirit may
be, in opposing it, it is certain the Flesh will be weak, and will ply easily.
When Princes were threatened with Deposition, and Heretics with Extirpation,
and when both were executed with so much rigor, the success of all the
Doctrines that were established in those days, ought to make no Impression on
us, in its favor.

VII. It is no less plain that there was a great and vigorous opposition made
to every step of the progress of this Doctrine. When the Eutichians first made
use of it, the greatest men of that Age set themselves against it. When the
Worshippers of Images did afterward deny that the Sacrament was the Image of
the Body and Blood of Christ, a General Council in the East asserted, according
to the Ancient Liturgies, the Contrary Proposition. When Paschase Radbert set
on Foot the Corporal Presence, in the West, all the great men of the Age writ
against him. Berenger was likewise highly esteemed, and had many secret
Followers, when this Doctrine was first decreed: and ever since the time of the
Council of the Lateran, that Transubstantiation was established, there have
been whole bodies of men that have opposed it, and that have fallen as
Sacrifices to the Rages of the Inquisitors. And by the Processes of those of
Toulouse, of which I have seen the Original Records, for the space of twenty
years, it appears that as Transubstantiation was the Article upon which they
were always chiefly examined, so it was that which many of them did the most
constantly deny, so far were they on both sides from looking on it only as an
Explanation of the Real Presence.

VIII. The Novelty of this Doctrine appears plainly by the strange work that
the Schools have made with it, since they got it among them, both in their
Philosophy and Divinity, and by the many different methods that they took for
explaining it, till they had licked it into the shape, in which it is now:
which is as plain an Evidence of the Novelty of the Doctrine as can be
imagined. The learned Mr. Alix has given us a clear Deduction of all that
confusion, into which it has cast the Schoolmen, and the many various Methods
that they fell on for maintaining it. First, they thought the body of Christ
was broken by the Teeth of the Faithful: then that appearing absurd, and
subjecting our Savior to new sufferings; the Doctrine of a Bodies being in a
place after the manner of a spirit was set up. And as to the change, some
thought, that the Matter of Bread remained, but that it was united to the Body
of Christ, as nourishment is digested into our Bodies: others thought, that the
Form of Bread remained, the Matter only being changed: and some thought, that
the Bread was only withdrawn to give place to the Body of Christ, whereas
others thought it was Annihilated. While the better Judges had always an eye
either to a Consubstantiation, or to such an Assumption of the Bread and Wine
by the Eternal Word, as made the Sacrament in some sense his Body indeed; but
not that Body which is now in Heaven. All these different Opinions, in which
the Schoolmen were divided, even after the Decision made by Pope Innocent, in
the Council of the Lateran, show, that the Doctrine, being a Novelty, men did
not yet know how to mould or form it: but in process of time the whole
Philosophy was so digested, as to prepare all Scholars in their first
formation to receive it the more easily. And in our Age, in which that
Philosophy has lost its credit, what pains do they take to suppress the New
Philosophy, as seeing that it cannot be so easily subdued to support this
Doctrine as the Old one was. And it is no unpleasant thing to see the Shifts to
which the Partisans of the Cartesian Philosophy are driven, to explain
themselves: which are indeed so very ridiculous, that one can hardly think that
those who make use of them, believe them: for they are plainly rather Tricks
and Excuses than Answers.

IX. No man can deny, that Transubstantiation is the Doctrine of the Church of
Rome; but he that will dispute the Authority of the Councils of the Lateran and
Trent: now tho some have done the first avowedly, yet as their number is small,
and their Opinion decried, so for the Council of Trent, tho I have known some
of that Communion, who do not look upon it as a General Council, and tho it is
not at all received in France, neither as to Doctrine nor Discipline, yet the
contrary opinion is so universally received, that they who think otherwise,
dare not speak out: and so give their Opinion as a secret, which they trust in
confidence, rather than as a Doctrine which they will own. But setting aside
the Authority of these Councils, the common Resolution of Faith in the Church
of Rome being Tradition, it cannot be denied, that the constant and general
Tradition in the Church of Rome, these last 500. years, has been in favor of
Transubstantiation, and that is witnessed by all the Evidences by which it is
possible to know Tradition. The Writings of Learned Men, the Sermons of
Preachers, the Proceedings of Tribunals, the Decisions of Councils, that if
they were not general, were yet very numerous, and above all by the many
Authentical Declarations that Popes have made in this matter. So that either
Tradition is to be forever rejected as a false conveyance, or this is the
received Doctrine of the Church of Rome, from which She can never depart,
without giving up both her Infallibility, and the Authority of Tradition.

X. There is not any one point, in which all the Reformed Churches do more
unanimously agree, than in the rejecting of Transubstantiation: as appears both
by the Harmony of their Confessions, and by the current of all the Reformed
Writers. And for the Real Presence, tho the Lutherans explain it by a
Consubstantiation, and the rest of the Reformed, by a Reality of Virtue and
Efficacy, and a Presence of Christ as crucified, yet all of them have taken
much pains to show, that in what sense soever they meant it, they were still
far enough from Transubstantiation. This demonstrates the Wisdom of our
Legislators, in singling out this to be the sole point of the Test for
Employments: since it is perhaps the only point in Controversy, in which the
whole Church of Rome holds the Affirmative, and the whole Reformed hold the
Negative. And it is as certain, that Transubstantiation is the Doctrine of the
Church of Rome, as that it is rejected by the Church of England; it being by
name condemned in our Articles.

And thus I hope the whole Plea of our Author in favor of Transubstantiation
is overthrown, in all its three Branches: which relate to the Doctrine of the
Primitive Church, the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, and the Doctrine of the
Church of England, as well as of the other Reformed Churches. I have not loaded
this Paper with Quotations: because I intended to be short: but I am ready to
make good all the matters of fact asserted in it, under the highest pains of
Infamy if I fail in the performance: and besides, the more Voluminous Works
that have been writ on this subject, such as Albertines, Claud's Answer to Mr.
Arnaud, and F. Nonet, Larrogues History of the Eucharist, there have been so
many learned Discourses written of late on this Subject, and in particular two
Answers to the Bishops Book, that if it had not been thought expedient that I
should have cast the whole matter into a short Paper, I should not have judged
it necessary to trouble the world with more Discourses on a subject that seems
exhausted. I will add no more, but that by the next I will give another Paper
of the same Bulk upon the Idolatry of the Church of Rome.

FINIS.

