WE the Servants and faithful Witnesses of the most high God, called and
Chosen of him, and Redeemed out of Nations, Kindreds, Tongues, and People; who
are Ministers of the word of Life and Reconciliation; and Messengers of glad
tidings, and salvation unto Captive and weary Souls; (our glorying is only in
the Lord, and not in our selves) who are by the world in scorn called Quakers;
who are at this present in outward Bonds for the testimony of Jesus Christ: in
Dublin; and who have been in the labor and Travel of the Gospel of God this
six months and upward, in the Nation of Jreland according to the will of God
ordained here unto; and moved and Commanded by his Eternal Spirit, into this
his work for the seeds sake which is not of this World, to the gathering of it
into the fold of everlasting Peace; and to the clearing of the Lord from the
Blood of his Enemies, that they may be lest without excuse, by his powerful
word given unto Us and uttered by Us, (and herein we are a good savor to God
both in them that perish, and in them that believe) and for this cause have we
denied our dearest and nearest Relations; and loves not our lives unto Death,
that our testimony we may finish, which is Committed to Us of the Lord, and
because of this are we Laborers under many burdens, and Travelers in many
afflictions, and sufferings, and are abundantly reproached, and our Lords truth
of which we bear witness, greatly Infamed by many Slandering and Backbiting
Tongues; espetially by the Thachers and Professed Ministers in the ears of
their People and Hearers; slandering Us with being Jesuits, and Deceivers, and
Seducers, and Heriticks, and Blasphemers, and Witches and such like: and we of
those false accusations being clear, and our Lords truth (the testimony which
we hold) wholly Innocent; and are wiling to be tried and proved, and made
manifest to the Inhabitants of this City and Nation, in the sight of God; this
therefore are we moved to give forth; and hereby in the Name of our Liveing
eternal God; of Heaven, and Earth (whom we serve, and worship in that way which
is called Herisie) do send it abroad, as a Challenge to all you Teachers, and
pretended Ministers, of what sort and form so-ever, and to all you People whom
it may really Conscerne; and especially to all you, in the City of Dublin, and
places else where in Jreland to whom this may come. That you meet Us, in the
City of Dublin, at some public place at a convenient time appointed by you;
at which place and time, if the Lord permit, (by the permission of the Counsel
of Jreland whose Prisoners we are) we shall you meet then, and there to have a
faier and sober dispute, in the presence of all people, who may desire to be
Informed or satisfied concerning Us, and You, in these things whereof you can
accuse Us, and also of those things, by way of sober Questions, which we have
to propound to You, not for any end to our selves, nor to set up a Kingdom of
our own, God is our witness, but that the way of our God may be made manifest,
and all deceit, and error Discovered, and all People may be informed the way to
Salvation, and as you are true to your God and will answer for him; and are
willing to be made manifest in your way of Worship, and Doctrine, and Ministry,
You are not to neglect; but here-in to answer our Desires, and the Desires of
many hundreds; that you and we may be made manifest in the sight of God, to all
men's Consciences, who are in truth and who are in error: That shame and
Condemnation may come upon the guilty, and Truth may be exalted over all Deceit.

Sent forth the 23 of the 12 m from the Sarjent at Arms his house in Dublin.
Given under our hands who are Prisoners for the Testimony of Jesus, whose Names
in the flesh are Francis Howgill, and Edward Borough.
YOU are desired to send your answer of these Propositions to Us, and if you
Consent to meet Us, Let sufficient notice be given abroad; that the Jnhabitants
of the City and Country may know five or six days time before.




