A DECLARATION Of the SAD and GREAT Persecution and Martyrdom Of the People of
God, called QUAKERS, in NEW ENGLAND, for the Worshipping of God.

Whereof 22 have been Banished upon pain of Death. 03 have been MARTYRED. 03
have had their Right-Ears cut. 01 has been burned in the Hand with the letter
H 31 Persons have received 650 Stripes. 01 was beat while his Body was like a
jelly. Several were beat with Pitched Ropes. Five Appeals made by them to
England, were denied by the Rulers of Boston. One thousand forty four pounds
worth of Goods has been taken from them (being poor men) for meeting together
in the fear of the Lord, and for keeping the Commands of Christ. One now lies
in I^on-fetters, condemned to dye.


ALSO, Some CONSIDERATIONS, presented to the KING, which is in Answer to a
Petition and Address, which was presented unto Him by the General Court at
Boston: Subscribed by J. Endicot, the chief Persecutor there; thinking thereby
to cover themselves from the Blood of the Innocent.

Gal. 4.29. But as then, he that was born after the flesh, persecuted him that
was born after the Spirit, even so it is now. God has no respect to Cains
Sacrifice, that killed his Brother about Religion. London, Printed for Robert
Wilson, in Martins Le Grand.

SOME CONSIDERATIONS Presented unto the King of England, etc. BEING Partly an
Answer unto a Petition and Address of the Genesis Court of Boston in New England,
presented unto the King (as is said) Feb. last, the 11th day.
OH King, this my occasion to present thee with these Considerations, is very
urgent and of great necessity, even in the behalf of Innocent Blood; hoping
that my Work will find such favor with thee, as to induce thee to the reading
and serious consideration hereof: my occasion is this, Because of a Paper
presented to thee, called The humble Petition and Adresse of the General Court
at Boston in New England: In which is contained diverse Calumnies, unjust
Reproaches, palpable untruths, and malicious slanders, against an Innocent
People, whom they scornfully call Quakers; whom, for the Name of Christ's sake,
are made a Reproach through the world, and by these Petitioners, have been
persecuted unto Banishment, and Death; it is hard to relate the Cruelties
committed against these People, and acted upon them by these Petitioners; they
have spoiled their Goods, imprisoned many of their Persons, whipped them, cut
off their Ears, burned them, yea, banished and murdered them; and all this I
aver and affirm before thee, O King, wholly unjustly and unrighteously, and
without the Breach of any Just Law of God or Man; but only for and because of
Difference in Judgment and Practice concerning Spiritual things, and without
any transgression of the Law of God, or their own Laws; Saving that they made
Laws against them, on purpose to spoil their Goods, imprison their Persons, cut
off their Ears, yea and kill them; which Laws were made by them, without any
Power truly derived from the lawful Authority of England, contrary to their
Pa^ent.

And now, O King, these same Men have presented thee with a Petition, in which
is asserted very many ex^ream Reproaches, as I have said, in contempt and
derision of that People; and all this, as if those People were guilty of
heinous crimes, that it might appear to thee as if these Petitioners had done
nothing but Justice in what they have done; and they seek to cover themselves,
and to hide their Wickedness before thee, in what they have unjustly acted; and
this seems to be the current of some part of the same Petition, already
presented unto thee; like as if they had done no Evil, though they have
uniustly banished, cut off Ears, whipped inhumanely, and taken away lives, as
aforesaid; and they would have thee believe they are Innocent toward thee, and
toward us; when as it is evident, as the Sun at Noonday, that they are our
persecu^ors, and that they have unjustly persecuted us unto death for the Name
of Christ; and that also they are not unto thee as they hypocritically feign
themselves.

And therefore, O King, for the clearing of our selves, and the Name of the
Lord which we profess, and for the reproving of their bold and impudent
Insolences, both in what they have already done to us, and now in seeking to
cover themselves unto thee; and also, if there be any doubtfulness in thy heart
of these matters, for these ends and causes, with respect to the Fear of God,
and Honor to the King, I hereby presume to pursue their said Petition, even
unto thy Court, and to wipe away the slanders and reproaches of Ungodly men, as
much as possible; hoping hereby thou will receive due and just information in
this matter of proceeding between us and them, that thy Just Judgment may be
given accordingly.

And I shall transcribe some few of their own words presented to thee, and
thereupon spread some few Considerations before thee also; and I pray God give
thee an understanding to judge justly in this and all other cases.

The first thing that I note, is, Whereas they say, That they have chosen
rather the pure Scripture-worship with a good Conscience in this poor remote
Wilderness (to wit, New England) among the Heathens, than the pleasures of
England, with subjection to the imposition of the then so disposed, and so far
prevailing Hierarchy, which we could not do without an evil Consciencee, etc.
say they.

The Considerations presented to the King, upon these words, are diverse.

1. The Worship, Doctrine, Discipline and Constitution of the Church of
New England, is different and contrary, and not purely according unto the
Scriptures, in the Administration of the Gospel; nor in a pure Conscience,
purely guided by the Spirit of God, though they seem to justify their own way
and case before the King; and this may justly be made appear in his presence,
upon good occasion; only at this time I assert the Case, and, if ever God gives
opportunity, I may prosecute it with Proofs and Evidences, and that to the
great Reproof of the Church (so called) of New England, who are not only in
Doctrine, Worship and Conversation, contrary to the Scriptures, but impudent
and too presumptuous, to affirm their own Self-justification and Innocence
before the King; when, as it is manifest, as the Day is from the Night, that
the Pastors and Members of the Church of New England want the Spirit of God
that gave forth the Scriptures, and follow the spirit of Persecution, Violence
and Cruelty, and are void of a Good Conscience both to God and Men: To prove
this, there needs no greater Evidence than their own Deportment toward the
Harmless Quakers for these five years time, who, as I have said, have spoiled
their Goods, and imprisoned their Persons, cut off their Ears, banished them
and Inhumanely put them to death; and all this only, because of difference in
judgment and practice in Religious matters; when as no manner of Evil could be
charged upon them in the things between Man and Man: And if these be not works
contrary to the Scriptures, and the Spirit that gave them forth, and contrary
to a good Conscience, I am yet ignorant, and must leave it to the Judgment of
the King, before whom this matter is brought to receive his Judgment.

2. Let the King consider, how they have ignorantly condemned themselves in the
same things, for which they have judged others; for while they seem to Complain
of the Imposi^ions of the Bishops, which they style prevailing Hierarchy; If it
was Transgression in the Bishops in days past, to impose upon these
Petitioners, and to persecute them for Non-Conformists, How much more are these
men guilty of Imposition and Persecution of tender Consciences? Nay, they have
exceeded in the same Transgression, and become sevenfold guilty of the sins
themselves, which they Complain against in others; for they have gone further
in Cruelty and Persecution toward the innocent Quakers, than ever the Bishops
proceeded against them, even so far further, as the murdering of a Man is more
than cutting off his Ear: and the Cause of the Quakers toward these
Petitioners has been as Innocent as ever theirs was toward the Bishops.

Oh Hypocritical generation! who are Condemning of others for that whereof
themselves are guilty; and Imposing upon others in a far higher degree than
ever the Bishops imposed on them; witness their Law in New England, which
judges every man to pay 5 s. per day, who come not to their Assembly, and
imposing Fines of 40 s. and 50 s. a piece on such as meet together to Worship
the Lord; which are evident Signs of an evil Conscience, as themselves speak.

The next thing that I note, upon which the King ought to Consider, the
Petitioners say, concerning the Quakers, open Capital Blasphemers, open
Seducers from the Glorious Trinity, the Lords Christ, the Blessed Gospel, and
from the Holy Scriptures as the Rule of Life, open Enemies to Government it
self, as Established in the Hands of any but men of their own Principles,
malignant Promoters of Doctrines directly tending to subvert both our Church
and State.

By way of Answer to this, let the King Consider:

1. The envious and detestable Spirit of maliciousness of these Accusers, and
how vehement and fervent their persecuting Spirit is drawn forth with
reproachful terms in the highest degree, like as if they could not utter
sufficiently the Envy of their hearts, or, as if they wanted words to
demonstrate their malignity and devouring malice against that People, whom they
in scorn call Quakers; and all this to present us odious and abominable before
Thee, O King; I say but this of them unto thee, The Lord forgive them, if they
have not sinned unto death and unpardonably; I have no desire of Revenge
toward them, but I leave vengeance to the Lord, who will recompense in his
season; neither do I desire to provoke or incense the King against them, only
duty to God and the King teaches me, and love constrains me, and an absolute
necessity presses much upon me, to spread our denial of their bitter and
malicious Accusations against us, before the King, unto whom we are thus fowly
accused: And I say, I am Confident, That the King has better experience of us,
than to believe these our malicious Accusers; And I do Appeal to him, from the
knowledge which he has already of us, that he believes we are Innocent, and
not guilty of those things thus unjustly Charged upon us; and I question not
but he will rightly understand that these Accusations are more out of Hatred
and Envy against us, than out of desire to benefit the King by such
presentation.

2. I do Testify unto the King, and before the whole World, That we do profess
and believe concerning the Father, Son and Spirit, and the Lord Jesus Christ,
and the blessed Gospel, and the Holy Scriptures; I say, We do believe and make
Profession in Truth and Righteousness concerning all these things, and by our
Doctrines and Instructions, do persuade all People to believe, and not Seduce
any from these Truths of the Gospel: And this is known through these Kingdoms
concerning us, though we stand now Accused falsely concerning these Matters
before the King. But as for the Scriptures being the Rule of Life, We say, The
Spirit of God that gave forth the Scriptures, is the Rule of Life and Faith
unto the Saints, and leads not contrary, but according unto the Scriptures, in
the belief and practice of whatsoever the Scripture says; and if these
Petitioners did make the Scriptures the Rule of their Lives and Practices, for
the denial of which they here accuse us, they would not have Cut off Ears,
Banished and put to Death for the Cause of Conscience, which is contrary to the
Scriptures, and proceeds from another Spirit than that which gave forth the
Scriptures.

3. Concerning Government, our Principles and Practices are known to many, and
partly to the King; We are not Enemies unto Government it self, as these our
Accusers do charge us, but it is our Principle, and has ever been, and is our
Practice to be subject to whatsoever Government is set up over us, either by
doing or suffering; and neither to vilify nor rebel against any Government or
Governors, by any malicious Plots or Contrivances, but to walk in meekness and
humility toward all, being subject for Conscience sake, as I have said, either
by doing or suffering; and I doubt not but the King is sufficiently informed
hereof, and believes this Testimony.

4. As for our Doctrines tending to subvert both Church and State, this is also
a false Accusation and Slander; for our Doctrines are to convert, and not to
subvert; even to Convert to God, and Truth, and Righteousness, that men should
live in these things, and forsake all that which is contrary; and this effect
our Doctrines have wrought in the World, as the Testimony of many Consciences
shall bear witness. Oh let the King Consider of our Defense, as well as of our
Enemies Charge, who have thought it not enough to whip, most cruelly banish,
cut Ears, and put to death the Innocent, but must still accuse them falsely, and
seek to cover themselves by fawning and flattering Addresses unto the King,
like as if they had done no evil; when as the God of Heaven is witness, to
whom we can Appeal, That our Brethren suffered the Tortures of shameful Death
in New England, (through their unjust Laws and Sentences) as Saints and
Servants of the living God, for the Name of Christ Jesus, and for his Truth,
which they held until Death, and not for evil-doing; And the Executioners of
these inhumane cruelcies seem so far from Repentance for their Evil doing, that
they rather Justify themselves in what they have done, and cease not to Smite,
and Wound, and Reproach the Innocent, and that before the King, and that after
they have martyred them.

Again, These Petitioners say, After all other means for a long time used in
vain, We were at last constrained for our own Safety, (say they) to pass a
Sentence of Banishment against them upon Pain of Death, such was their
dangerous impetuous and desperate Turbulency to Religion, and to the State
Civil and Ecclesiastical, as that how unwilling soever, could it have been
avoided, the Magistrate, at least in Conscience both to God and Man, judged
himself, called for the Defense of all to keep the Passage with the Point of
the Sword held toward them; this could do no harm (say they) to them that
would be warned thereby; their willingly rushing themselves thereupon was their
own act; and we with all humility conceive a Crime, bringing their blonds upon
their own heads.

By way of Answer to this, let it be Considered:

1. What Means was for a long time used before they put them to Death, is
shameful to mention; was it not by the means of cruel Whippings, Banishment,
Imprisonment, cutting off Ears, and taking their Goods by violence? It is true,
by this means the Petitioners dealt with the Quakers, and never by any
Christian-like means; for the very first of our Friends that ever came among
them, they made them prisoners ere they came on shore, and inhumanely dealt
with them, and banished them; and this was the first and fairest means that
ever was used by them; which are not Gospel-Means, nor the Way by which the
Church of New England ought to have proceeded; had our Friends been in Error,
and such, as they say of them, it had been their duty to have gained them by
Love, by Mercy, and by long-suffering; these are the Weapons of the Spirit of
God, which ought to be used toward them that are in Error, in order to the
Converting of them from the Error; but contrary to this, the Magistrates and
Church Members of New England took Cains Weapons, and dealt Cruelly, and not
like Christians, nor like sober men, toward the Innocent; but their thus
proceeding was in vain, as themselves acknowledge, for notwithstanding the
Gospel of Christ grew and increased, and many were Converted to the Faith of
Christ Jesus, throughout New England.

2. Let it be Considered, What their dangerous and despera^e Turbulency was to
States, Civil and Ecclesiastical? Did ever these poor People, whom they
condemned and put to shameful death, lift up a hand against them, or appear in
any Turbulent gesture toward them? Were they ever found wi^h any Carnal Weapon
about them? Or, what was their Crime, saving that they warned sinners to
Repent, and the ungodly to turn from his way? We appeal to the God of Heaven on
their behalf, whom they have Martyred for the Name of Christ, That they had no
other Offense to charge upon them, saving their Conversation, Doctrines, and
Practices, as Saints of the Most High God; and this is witnessed by many of
their Neighbors, though themselves have hardened their hearts against the
reproof of Gods Witness; And we certainly believe it was their Malice and Envy
that constrained them to pass Sentence of Death upon them, and not the Equity
of either just Law of God or Man; for they deserved not the merit of Death,
such was the Innocence of their Cause: and they are no more safe by the taking
away the lives of our guiltless Brethren, than they were before; no more safe,
I say, but more liable to the Justice and Terror of the Almighty, and to the
Justice of the King, and the good Laws of England, for, and because of their
Barbarous Cruelties; but, as I have said, we leave Vengeance to the Lord, and
commit them to the Justice of Gods hand, which we doubt not but it will pass
upon them in his day and season.

3. Whereas they would seem to extenuate their Crime of putting to shameful
death the Lords servants, they tell the King, as if they only kept the Passage
with the point of the sword held toward them, as if they had no intention to
hurt them, and this the Magistrate did both in Conscience to God and man. I
say, it is to be considered what occasions were given them to stand in the
passage with the point of the sword toward this People, Was it for any cause
on their part, but as aforesaid, for reproving their sin, and crying against
their wickedness? when as their lives and conversations were harmless and
innocent amongst them: I say, this was no just cause for the Magistrates to
stand in the passage with the point of the sword, and therefore they were
unjust in so doing, if they had done no more, and proceeded in the way of
Insolent Usurpers; for what reason had they to stop the passage with the point
of the sword, for hindering of as good Subjects as themselves to pass through
the Kings Dominions? Is not this derogating from the Honor and Authority of
the King, for the subordinate Magistrates of New England to usurp such
Authority over freeborn People of England, as to prevent them from Egress and
Regress in lawful occasions in any part of the Kings Dominions? and I suppose
this will be found contrary to their Patent and Prescription, delivered them by
CHARLES the First; even this standing in the Passage with the point of the
Sword toward the Innocent, and imposing great Fines upon men that came to their
Harbor to sell their lawful Commodities; if they had but the name of Quakers,
though no other thing could be charged against them, yet they were imposed upon
by Fines and Imprisonment, and the point of the sword was held out against
them; and all this, I suppose, is contrary to their Patent, and in Derogation
and Dishonor to KING CHARLES the Second.

4. But to extenuate their own fact of put^ing to shameful death the Innocent,
they charge their Death to be a wilful rushing, and their Death was their own
Act, and their Blood was upon their own Heads. Concerning which, let it be
considered, they no more wilfully rushed upon their Death, neither is their
Blood on their own heads, more than the Prophets and Apostles that were slain
for the Testimony of Jesus. But these Petitioners do plead: These Quakers (so
called) knew there was a Law proclaimed against them, Sentence of Banishment
upon pain of Death; but they would not keep away, but came again, and run
themselves upon the Sword point: and after this manner of arguing they would
make it appear their death was of themselves, and their blood was on their own
heads: But these poor Evasions, and favorable Interpretations of their own
Cruelties, ought not to cover them from the Justice of God, nor from the
Justice of the King; for it is to be considered, that where God commands one
thing, and men another, God ought to be obeyed rather than men; and it is fully
believed by us, that these Sufferers did not go into New England in their own
cause, but in Gods Cause, and in the Motion of his Holy Spirit, and in good
Conscience toward God: they did rather suffer the loss of their own lives for
their obedience toward God, than to disobey him, to keep the Commandments of
men; and this was the Apostles case, when they were commanded to preach no more
in the Name of Jesus, Did they at all obey it for fear of Man? And when the
three Children were commanded to bow to the Image, did they do it for fear of
Man? Or, if they had dyed for their disobedience of the Kings Commandment,
could it have been said, That their Blood was upon their own heads, and that
they rushed themselves upon it? and this is in part the like case that our
Friends suffered, under the Injustice of these Petitioners, who would now cover
themselves like men of guilty Consciences; but the God of Heaven will let them
know one day, and the King may justly do it, That the blood of our Brethren
lies upon the heads of the Magistrates of New England, and they are guilty of
their cruel death; for they put them to death, not for any evil-doing between
man and man, but for their obedience to God, and for good Conscience sake
toward him.

Again, The Petitioners say, The Quakers dyed not, because of their other
Crimes, how capital soever, but upon their superadded Presumptions, and
incorrigible Contempt of Authority, breaking in upon us, notwithstanding the
Sentence of Banishment; had they not been restrained, there was too much cause
to fear that we our selves should quickly have dyed, or worse; and they would
not be restrained but by death: Nay, had they at last but promised to depart
the Jurisdiction, and not to return without leave from Authority, we should
have been glad to have said they should not dye.

In Answer to this, it is considerable,

1. What these other Capital Crimes were, which the Sufferers were guilty of;
here is a secret Charge of Crimes, without nomination; and this is the part of
Slanderers, to accuse in general, without particular proof; but this is still
to extenuate their own horrid fact, of putting the Innocent to death, and that
the King may believe better of them, than indeed he has cause; and the
superadded Presumption, and incorrigible Contempt of Authority, What, was it
any more, than that unjustly and without reason they commanded them to depart,
or if they did not, they should be put to death? when as no reason could
possibly be rendered for such Law and Commandment, but because they were called
Quakers, and were different in matters of Faith and Judgment concerning
Spiritual things; for, as I have said, no Sedition, evil-dealing, Drunkenness,
Lying, nor any of these things could be charged against them, and therefore the
Law and Commandment of Banishment was unjust, and could not be actively obeyed
by our Brethren; but they returned again, not in contempt of Lawful Authority,
but as they were moved, and upon their occasions, which was lawful and just in
the sight of God and Men, deporting themselves harmlesly toward all people;
and this is styled, Superadded Presumption, and Incorrigible Contempt of
Authority: but they must needs put a Good Name upon their Bad Work, and render
the Innocent as high Offenders, as excellency of speech can demonstrate.

2. There can be no just cause rendered, wherefore they should fear our
Brethren, except the Guiltiness of their own Consciences; for, as I have said,
they were never seen with any Sword or Staff amongst them, nor any Carnal
Weapon, nor ever held Designs of Mischief; and for them thus wickedly to
suggest unto the King, as if they would have killed them, or worse, this is
backbiting and slandering in the highest degree, and punishable by the Laws of
God and Men; and it is true, them whom they have killed, are restrained, but the
Principles and Practices of the Quakers (so called) has entered into
New England, and passes through the Consciences of people without restraint; and
it is a shame for themselves to mention, how all the Pastors and the whole
Church of Boston overcame three Innocent persons, and what weapons they
overcame them by; not the weapons of the Spirit of God, but the weapons of
Cruelty, and Hard-heartedness; even as Cain overcame Abel, and as the Jews
overcame Christ; and so did the Church of New England overcome our Brethren:
And this is all the confession they can make of Restraining our Friends, that
they cruelly put them to Death, and thereby overcame them; And it is not known
to us, that the Court at Boston has such Absolute Power, as that the free
Subjects of England may not come and return again and again, according to their
lawful occasions, without leave from the Authority of Boston Court; I say,
this seems to be usurped Authority, rather than lawfully established upon them
by CHARLES the First, but it is apparent, and the King knows it, that in this
case the Magistrates of Boston have taken too much upon them, and proceeded
further than they can justify, either before God, or the King, in Imprisoning,
Whipping, cutting off Ears, Banishing, and putting to Death the good Subjects
of England, without either President, Example, or any Power derived from the
Lawful Authority of England.

And we have cause to say, They were so far from desiring to spare their lives
(as they would suggest to the King) that they thirsted for their blood, and
nothing else could satisfy them but the extinguishment of their lives by
shameful torture.

Again, The Petitioners fawn and flatter in these words; (say they) Let not the
King hear Men's words; your servants are true Men, fearers of God and the King,
and not given to Change; zealous of Government and Order; We are not seditious
to the Interest of Caesar, etc.

In Answer to this, many things are considerable:

1. Why should the Petitioners seem to exhort the King, Not to hear Men's Words?
Shall the Innocent be accused before him, and not heard in their Lawful
Defense? Must not the King hear the Accused as well as the Accusers, and in as
much Justice? I hope God has given him more Nobility of Understanding, than to
receive or put in practice such Admonition; and I desire it may be far from the
King, ever to condemn any Person or People upon the Accusation of others,
without full hearing of the Accused, as well as their Enemies; for it is
Justice and Equity so to do, and thereby shall his Judgment be the more just.

2. They pretend to be Servants to the King, and that they fear him, and are
not given to Change: I shall not seem to intrude into the Matters to which I am
a stranger; but I leave this Case to the King to Consider what their former
Actings, and the Current of their Spirit has been toward the King: I shall
only instance one Particular, well known to me in a Letter to one Gurden, dated
at Boston, and Subscribed by some of these Petitioners; where they say, There
is more Danger in these Quakers (as they call them) to trouble and overcome
England, than in the King of Scots, and all the Popish Princes in Germany:
these be the Petitioners own words, whereby it is manifest what the current of
their Spirit was against the King then, though now they have changed their
Tale, and call Him High and Mighty Prince, and Dread Sovereign, and such like;
and that they are the Kings Servants, etc. when as not long since they have
signified by their words, quoted against them, That there was Danger in the
King of SCOTS (as they called him) and reputed him a Troubler of ENGLAND; and
numbered him with the Popish Princes of Germany, or amongst them: Let but the
King Consider their own words, and he shall plainly read as well the temper of
their Spirit against him not long since, as he shall see their Hypocrisies and
fawning flatteries at this time; and he may fully perceive that these
Petitioners are given to Change, though they would make him believe otherwise;
And this their Address unto the King, is like the approach of the uncircumcised
Gibeonites unto Joshua, chapter 9. who wrought wilily and deceitfully, using the
same words to Joshua, We are thy Servants, as these Petitioners have used to
the King; whose deceitful Address is equally parallel with that mentioned: The
Case is worth observing, Joshua 9. verse. 4, 6, 9.

3. As for being Zealous of Government and Order, not Seditious nor
Schismatics, as they say, it is to be Considered, That their Government, and
the Order thereof, is not only different and contrary to the Government and
Order of the Churches of Christ, but different and contrary also to the
wholesome Constitution of the Civil Government of England; who have made Laws,
and executed them to Banishment and Death, without any Power derived from the
lawful Authority of England; which is absolute contrary to their Pattent, by
which they Hold their Jurisdiction, which says, They shall make no Laws
contrary to the Laws of England, etc. And I shall not Charge them in the Kings
Presence further of Sedition and Schism than Himself believes concerning them.

Again, The Petitioners say, They could not live without the Public Worship of
God, and they were not permitted the use of Public Worship without such a
Yoke, Subscription and Conformity, as they could not Consent unto without sin,
etc.

In Answer to this, this is to be Considered:

That these Petitioners have laid heavier Yoaks of Subscription and Conformity
upon others than ever was laid upon themselves; Witness their Imposing Fines
upon such as cannot conform to their Worship, some ten shillings, some forty
shillings, and some five pounds; if any shall be absent from their Assembly it
is so much a day; and if any keep any Meetings different from their Way of
Public Worship, it is so much a time; and these are unjust and illegal
Impositions; and it is a heinous yoke of Tyranny put upon the neck of the Kings
good Subjects, without any Power derived in this case from the King: This they
themselves do, and yet are Complaining of such Impositions and Yoaks laid upon
them by the Bishops, which were not compareable to these; which discovers their
own just Condemnation in the same Matters for which they Accuse others.

And thus these CONSIDERATIONS are Presented to the King, in Vindication of
that Innocent People, called Quakers, whom these Petitioners have Accused, as
Guilty of heinous Crimes, that themselves might appear Innocent of the Cruelty,
and Injustice, and shedding of the Blood of Just men without Cause; being men
of Guilty Consciences, upon whom the Terror of God and of the King, seems to
be, because of what they have done: But now, let the King rightly Consider of
the Case between Us and Them, and let him not hide his Face from the Hearing of
the Cry of Innocent Blood; And for a further Testimony of the Wickedness and
Enmity of these Petitioners, and to Demonstrate how far they have Proceeded
contrary to the good Laws and Authority of England, and contrary to their own
Pattent: Hereunto is Annexed a Brief of their unjust Dealings toward the
Quakers (so called)

E. B.

A DECLARATION Of some part of the SUFFERINGS of the People of God (in scorn
called QUAKERS) from the Professors in NEW ENGLAND, Only for the Exercise of
their Consciences to the Lord, and Obeying and Confessing to the TRUTH, as in
his Light he had discovered it to them.
1. TWo Honest and Innocent Women stripped stark naked, and searched after such
an inhumane manner, as modesty will not permit particularly to mention.

2. Twelve Strangers in that Country, but freeborn of this Nation, received
twenty three Whippings, the most of them being with a Whip of three Cords, with
Knots at the ends, and laid on with as much strength as they could be by the
Arm of their Executioner, the stripes amounting to Three hundred and seventy.

3. Eighteen Inhabitants of the Country, being freeborn English, received
twenty three Whippings, the stripes amounting to two hundred and fifty.

4. Sixty four Imprisonments of the Lords People, for their obedience to his
Will, amounting to Five hundred and nineteen weeks, much of it being very cold
weather, and the Inhabitants kept in Prison in harvest time, which was very
much to their loss; besides many more Imprisoned, of which time we cannot give
a just account.

5. Two beaten with Pitched Ropes, the blows amounting to an hundred thirty
nine, by which one of them was brought near unto death, much of his body being
beat like unto a jelly, and one of their own Doctors, a Member of their Church,
who saw him, said, It would be a Miracle if ever he recovered, he expecting the
flesh should rot off the bones; who afterward was banished upon pain of death.
There are many Witnesses of this there.

6. Also, an Innocent man, an Inhabitant of Boston, they banished from his Wife
and Children, and put to seek a habitation in the Winter; and in case he
returned again, he was to be kept Prisoner during his life: and for returning
again, he was put in Prison, and has been now a Prisoner above a year.

7. Twenty five Banishments, upon the penalties of being whipped, or having their
Ears cut; or branded in the Hand, if they returned.

8. Fines laid upon the Inhabitants for meeting together, and edifying one
another, as the Saints ever did; and for refusing to swear, it being contrary
to Christ's Command, amounting to about a Thousand pound, besides what they
have done since, that we have not heard of; many Families, in which there are
many Children, are almost ruined, by these unmerciful proceedings.

9. Five kept Fifteen days (in all) without food, and Fifty eight days shut
up close by the Jailer, and had none that he knew of; and from some of them he
stopped up the windows, hindering them from convenient air.

10. One laid Neck and Heels in Irons for sixteen hours.

11. One very deeply burnt in the right hand with the letter H. after he had
been whipped with above Thirty stripes.

12. One chained the most part of Twenty days to a Logg of wood in an open
Prison in the Wintertime.

13. Five Appeals to England, denied at Boston.

14. Three had their right Ears cut by the Hangman in the Prison, the Door
being barred, and not a Friend suffered to be present while it was doing,
though some much desired it.

15. One of the Inhabitants of Salem, who since is banished upon pain of Death,
had one half of his House and Land seized on while he was in Prison, a month
before he knew of it.

16. At a General Court in Boston, they made an Order, That those who had not
wherewithal to answer the Fines that were laid upon them (for their
Consciences) should be sold for Bondmen, and Bond-women to Barbados, Virginia,
or any of the English Plantations.

17. Eighteen of the People of God were at several times banished upon pain of
Death, six of them were their own Inhabitants, two of which being very aged
people, and well known among their Neighbors to be of honest Conversations,
being Banished from their Houses and Families, and put upon Traveling and
other hardships, soon ended their days; whose Death we can do no less than
charge upon the Rulers of Boston, they being the occasion of it.

18. Also three of the Servants of the Lord they put to Death, all of them for
obedience to the Truth, in the Testimony of it against the wicked Rulers and
Laws at Boston.

19. And since they have banished four more, upon pain of Death; and twenty
four of the Inhabitants of Salem were presented, and more Fines called for, and
their Goods seized on, to the value of Forty pounds, for meeting together in
the fear of God, and some for refusing to swear.

These things (O King) from time to time have we patiently suffered, and not
for the transgression of any Just or Righteous Law, either pertaining to the
Worship of God, or the Civil Government of England, but simply and barely for
our Consciences to God, of which we can more at large give Thee (or whom thou
may order) a full Account (if Thou will let us have admission to Thee, who
are Banished upon pain of Death, and have had our Ears cut, who are, some of
us, in England attending upon Thee) both of the Causes of our Sufferings, and
the Manner of their disorderly and illegal Proceeding against us; Who begun
with Immodesty, went on in Inhumanity and Cruelty, and were not satisfied until
they had the Blood of three of the Martyrs of JESUS: Revenge for all which we
do not seek, but lay them before Thee, considering Thou have been well
acquainted with Sufferings, and so may the better consider them that suffer,
and may for the future restrain the Violence of these Rulers of New England,
having Power in Thy hands; they being but the Children of the Family, of which
Thou art Chief Ruler; Who have in diverse of their Proceedings forfeited their
Patent; as upon a strict Inquiry in many particulars will appear.

And this, O King, we are assured of, that in time to come it will not repent
Thee, if by a Close Rebuke Thou stoppest the Bloody Proceedings of these Bloody
Persecutors; for in so doing, Thou will engage the hearts of many honest People
unto Thee, both there and here; and for such Works of Mercy, the Blessing is
obtained, and showing it, is the way to prosper.

We are Witnesses of these things; Who, Besides long Imprisonments, and many
cruel Whippings, Had our Ears cut, John Rous, John Copeland.
Besides many long Imprisonments, diverse cruel Whippings, with the seizing on
our Goods, are Banished upon pain of Death, and some of us do wait here in
England, and desire that we may have an Order to Return in Peace to our
Families, Samuel Shattock. Josiah Southick. Nicholas Phelps. Joseph Nicholson.
Jane Nicholson.



Here follovveth a brief Relation of the Bloody Sentence of Death, passed on
Three of the Servants of the Lord, by John Endicot; viz. William Robinson,
Marmaduke Stevenson, and Mary Dyar; And also the Manner of their Execution at
Boston in New England.
William Robinson and Marmaduke Stevenson, two Servants of the Lord, called
Quakers, were imprisoned in Boston in New England; and at the beginning of the
7th Month, 59. they were called before the Court of Assistance, by whom they
both were Sentenced to be Banished upon pain of Death; yet notwithstanding the
Sentence aforesaid, they made a Decree to have William Robinson whipped, and
Commanded the Constable to get an able man to do it; which thing being
accomplished, they caused William Robinson to be brought into the open Street,
and there stripped him; and having put his Hands through the holes of a Carriage
of a great Gun, where the Jailer (a Member of their Church) held him till the
Executioner gave him twenty stripes with a Threefold Cord-whip, with Knots at
the ends; which stripes were laid on in a violent manner, according to the
Desire of some of the Blood-thirsty Rulers, who commanded him to be Whipped
severely; whereupon he, together with his fellow-Sufferer, M. S. were shortly
after Released: Yet it being laid upon them from the Lord not to depart that
Jurisdiction, they in obedience thereunto passed abroad, and had great Service
for the Lord within the Jurisdiction aforesaid, many being by them convinced of
the Evil of their ways; for the Power and Presence of the Lord of Life was
with them to the confounding of their Enemies.

And upon the 13th of the 8th Month, it being upon them so to do, they Returned
again to Boston, where they, with seven other Friends, were Apprehended, and
cast all of them into Prison: But William Robinson and Marmaduke Stevenson were
delivered to the Custody of the Jailer to be kept in Chains in a Room by
themselves, which accordingly was done, and they had Chains laid upon their
Right Legs.

But the next Week, on the 20th of the 8th Month, 1659: William Robinson,
Marmaduke Stevenson, and Mary Dyar of Rhode Island, were had into the Court,
where John Endicot, with others of the Council, were Assembled; And being
called to the Bar, John Endicot Commanded the Keeper to pull off their Hats,
which accordingly was done: Then John Endicot began to speak unto them very
faintly, as a man possessed with much fear, in these words, That they had made
several Laws, an^ tried and endeavored by several ways to keep them ( i. e.
the Quakers) from amongst them; and neither Whipping, nor Imprisoning, nor
Cutting off Ears, nor Banishing upon pain of Death, would not keep them from
amongst them: And further said, He or They desired not the Death of any of
them: Yet notwithstanding, his following words were, Give ear and hearken to
your Sentence of Death; which words (as was said before) passed from him very
faintly. Then William Robinson desired that he might give them an Account of
the Cause and Reason, why after Banishment upon pain of Death, they stayed in
their Jurisdiction: But John Endicot being filled with fury, would not permit
it to be done; but soon after in Envy called W. R. by his Name, and said unto
him, Hearken to your Sentence of Death: William Robinson, this is your
Sentence, You shall be had back to the place from whence you came, and from
thence to the place of Execution, to be hanged on the Gallows till you are
dead; And then soon after the Jailer was called to have him away; which
accordingly was done.

Soon after William Robinson was taken out of the Court; his dear Brother and
fellow-Sufferer, Marmaduke Stevenson being present; The Governor being
partial, spoke unto him, saying, If you have any thing to say, you may speak;
but he was silent and gave no Answer: whereupon Sentence was pronounced against
him also in these words, You shall be had to the place from whence ye came, and
from thence to the Gallows, and there to be Hanged till you are Dead: Whereupon
these words were uttered forth by M. Stevenson, Give ear ye Magistrates, and
all who are Guilty, for this the Lord has said concerning you, who will
perform his Promise upon you, That same Day you put his Servants to Death,
shall the Day of your Visitation pass over your Heads, and you shall be Cursed
for evermore, The mouth of the Lord of Hosts has spoken it: Therefore in love
to you all, take Warning before it be too late, that so the Curse may be
removed; for assuredly, if you put us to Death, you will bring Innocent Blood
upon your own heads, and swift destruction will come upon you: After which
words were spoken, he was had to Prison again to his Brother W. Robinson.

The like Sentence was also passed against Mary Dyar, (after they were taken
away) by John Endicot, in these words, Mary Dyar, You shall go to the place
from whence you came, namely the Prison, and from thence to the place of
Execution, and there to be Hanged until you are Dead: Whereupon she made
Answer, The Will of the Lord be done. Then Command was given to the Marshal to
take her away; she returned Answer, Yea, and joyfully I go: And in her Passage
to the Prison she often used Speeches of Praise to the Lord for the same; and
spoke to the Marshal to let her go alone, for she would go to the Prison
without him: The Marshal Answered, I believe you Mris Dyar, but I must do what
I am Commanded. This is a short and true Relation of the Sentence passed upon
them, not for evil-doing, but only for bearing their Testimony against all
manner of Wickedness, and testifying to the Truth as it is in Jesus, keeping
their Consciences clear both toward God and Man.

Now Concerning the Martyrdom of these Three Servants of the Lord, I shall
give a short and true Relation.
The 27th day of the same Month, was the day appointed that they were to be
Executed, having notice thereof given them the Night before, which accordingly
was done; For on the 27th day, being the 5th day of the Week, in the latter
part thereof, after their Lecture (so called) was done; William Robinson and
Marmaduke Stevenson were had forth of the Prison into the open Street, where
James Oliver was Captain over a Band of Armed Men, by information 200. which
were prepared to Guard them to, and at the place of Execution, with Drums, and
Colors, and Halberds, Guns, Swords, Pikes, etc. besides many Horsemen to keep
off the Multitude of People: The two dear Lambs being placed near the hinder
part, the chief Marshal and Drummer next before them; Then Command being given
to march to the Place of Execution, W. Robinson spoke these words saying, This
is your Hour and the power of Darkness; Then the Drummer made a Noise with his
Drum, and shortly ceased again; Then Marmaduke Stevenson said, This is the Day
of your Visitation, wherein the Lord has visited you: Other words being spoke
not understood by reason of the sound of the Drum: So they walked along in pure
retired Cheerfulness to the Place of Execution, triumphing in the strength of
the Lamb, over all the wrath of man, and fury of the Beast, in the pure retired
Heavenly Dominion of the Invisible God. And when they came to the Ladders-foot,
they took their leave each of other; and William Robinson stepped up the Ladder,
and spoke to the People, saying, This is the Day of your Visitation wherein the
Lord has visited you; This is the Day the Lord is Risen in his Mighty Power to
be Avenged on all his Adversaries: And the Rope being about his Neck, as he
spoke, the Executioner bound his Hands and Legs; a^^ his Neck-cloth being tied
about his Face, he said, Now ye are made Manifest: So the Executioner being
about to turn him off the Ladder, he said, I Suffer for Christ, in whom I live,
and for whom I die.

So he being turned off, Marmaduke Stevenson went up the Ladder, and spoke to
the People, saying, Be it known unto all this Day, that we Suffer not as
Evildoers, but for Conscience sake; And as the Executioner was about to turn
him off, these words he expressed, This Day shall we be at Rest with the Lord.
Thus the faithful Witnesses sealed their Testimony for the Lord against the
Dragons Power, and blessedly departed with Praises in their mouths, entering
joyfully with their Beloved into Everlasting Rest.

This Account was sent from Plymouth in New England, by Peter Peirson.

Mary Dyar having received the same Sentence, only for coming a second time to
Boston to visit her imprisoned Brethren there, was with them carried to the
place of Execution; and after they two were executed, she stepped up the Ladder,
and had her Coats tied about her feet, and the Rope put about her neck; and as
the Hangman was ready to turn her off, they cried out, Stop, for she was
Reprieved, and having loosed her feet, bad her come down; but she was not
forward to come down, but stood still, saying, She was there willing to suffer,
as her Brethren did, unless they would null their wicked Law; but they pulled
her down, and a day or two after carried her by force out of Town.

Here follows the Copy of a Letter that Mary Dyar sent to the Rulers of
Boston, after she had received the Sentence of Death.
To the General Court now in Boston.
Whereas I am by many charged with the guiltiness of my own Blood; if you
mean in my coming to Boston, I am therein clear, and justified by the Lord, in
whose Will I came, who will require my Blood of you be sure; who have made a
Law to take away the Lives of the Innocent Servants of God, if they come among
you, who are called by you, Cursed Quakers; although I say, and am a living
Witness for them and the Lord, that he has blessed them, and sent them unto
you: therefore be not found fighters against God, but let my Counsel and
Request be accepted with you, To repeal all such Laws, that the Truth and
Servants of the Lord may have free passage among you, and you kept from
shedding Innocent Blood, which I know there are many among you would not do, if
they knew it so to be: nor can the Enemy that stirs you up thus to destroy
this holy Seed, in any measure countervail the great Damage that you will by
thus doing procure: Therefore, seeing the Lord has not hid it from me, it
lies upon me, in love to your Souls, thus to persuade you: I have no
self ends, the Lord knows, for if my Life were freely granted by you, it
would not avail me, nor could I expect it of you, so long as I should daily
hear or see the Sufferings of these People, my dear Brethren, and Seed, with
whom my Life is bound up, as I have done these two years; and now it is like to
increase, even unto death, for no evil doing, but coming among you: Was ever
the like Laws heard of among a People that profess Christ come in the flesh?
And have such no other weapons but such Laws, to fight against Spiritual
Wickedness withal, as you call it? Woe is me for you! of whom take you Counsel?
search with the Light of Christ in ye, and it will show you of whom, as it has
done me and many more, who have been disobedient and deceived, as now you are;
which Light as you come into, and obeying what is made manifest to you therein,
you will not repent, that you were kept from shedding Blood, though it were
from a Woman: It Is not mine own Life I seek, (for I choose rather to suffer with
the People of God, than to enjoy the Pleasures of Egypt) but the Life of the
Seed, which I know the Lord has blessed; and therefore seeks the Enemy thus
vehemently the Life thereof to destroy, as in all Ages he ever did: Oh hearken
not unto him I beseech you, for the Seeds sake, which is one in all, and is
dear in the sight of God; which they that touch, touch the Apple of his Eye,
and cannot escape his Wrath, whereof I having felt, cannot but persuade all men
that I have to do withal, especially you who name the Name of Christ, to depart
from such Iniquity, as shedding Blood even of the Sain^s of the Most High;
Therefore let my Request have as much acceptance with you (if you be
Christians) as Esther had with Ahasueras, (whose relation is short of that
that is between Christians) and my Request is the same that hers was; and he
said not, that he had made a Law, and it would be dishonorable for him to
revoke it, but when he understood that these People were so prized by her, and
so nearly concerned her, (as in truth these are to me) as you may see what he
did for her; Therefore I leave these Lines with you, appealing to the faithful
and true Witness of God, which is One in all Consciences, before whom we must
all appear; with whom I shall eternally rest, in everlasting Joy and Peace,
whether you will hear or forbear: with Him is my Reward, with whom to live is
my Joy, and to dye is my Gain, though I had not had your forty eight hours
warning, for the preparation to the Death of Mary Dyar.

And know this also, That if through the Enmity you shall declare your selves
worse than Ahasuerus, and confirm your Law, though it were but by taking away
the Life of one of us, That the Lord will overthrow both your Law and you, by
his Righteous Judgments and Plagues powered justly upon you, who now whilst you
are Warned thereof, and tenderly sought unto, may avoid the one by removing the
other: If you neither hear nor obey the Lord nor his Servants, yet will he send
more of his Servants among you, so that your end shall be frustrated, that
think to restrain them, you call Cursed Quakers, from coming among you by any
thing you can do to them; yea verily, he has a Seed here among you, for whom
we have suffered all this while, and yet suffer; whom the Lord of the Harvest
will send forth more Laborers to gather (out of the mouths of the Devourers of
all sorts) into his Fold, where he will lead them into fresh Pastures, even the
paths of Righteousness for his Names sake: Oh! let none of you put this good
day far from you, which verily in the Light of the Lord I see approaching, even
to many in and about Boston, which is the bitterest and darkest Professing
place, and so to continue so long as you have done, that ever I heard of; let
the time past therefore suffice, for such a Profession as brings forth such
Fruits as these Laws are. In Love and in the Spirit of Meekness I again
beseech you, for I have no Enmity to the Persons of any; but you shall know,
That God will not be mocked, but what you sow, that shall ye reap from him,
that will render to every one according to the deeds done in the body, whether
good or evil; Even so be it, says

Mary Dyar.

A Copy of this was given to the General Court after Mary Dyar had received the
Sentence of Death, about the 8th or 9th Month, 1659.
A further Account concerning Mary Dyars Martyrdom.
MAry Dyar being freed, as aforesaid, returned to Road-Island, and afterward
to Long Island, and there was most part of the Winter, over the Island, where
she had good Service for the Lord; and then came to Shelter-Island, (whence she
thought she might pass to Road-Island) and being there, sometime she had
Movings from the Lord, to go to Boston, and there she came the 21 of the 3d
Month, 1660. and the 30th day was their Governor Chosen, and the 31 of the 3d
Month, in the former part of the day, she was sent for to the General Court;
The Governor said, Are ye the same Mary Dyar that was here before? (speaking
of one in Old-England that Returned, and would have made them believe he was
not the same man; with more words to that purpose, and said, Have not you such
Evasions?) Mary Dyar, I am the same Mary Dyar that was here the last General
Court. The Covernour said, You will own your self a Quaker, will you not? M.D.
I own my self to be so reproachfully called. The bloody-minded Jailer having
now opportunity to have his blood-thirsty Will fulfilled, said, She is a
Vagabond. The Governor said, The Sentence was passed upon her the last General
Court, and now likewise; You must Return to the Prison from whence you came,
and there Remain un^il to Morrow at Nine of the Clock, then from thence you
must go to the Gallows, and there be Hanged till you are Dead. Mary Dyar said,
This is no more than that thou said before: I, I, (the Governor said) and
now it is to be Executed, therefore prepare your self to Morrow at Nine of the
Clock (being the first day of the 4th Month, 1660) Mary Dyar Answered and said,
I came in Obedience to the Will of God the last General Court, desiring you to
Repeal your unrighteous Laws of Banishment upon pain of Death; and that same
is my work now, and eanest Request, because ye refused before to grant my
Request, although I told you, That if ye refused to Repeal them, the Lord will
send others of his Servants to Witness against them. John Endicot asked her,
Whether she was a Prophet? She said, She spoke the words that the Lord spoke in
her; and now the thing is come to pass: She beginning to speak of her Call, J.
Endicot said, Away with her, away with her: So she was brought to the
Prisonhouse, where she was before, close shut up, until the next day. About
the time perfixt, the Marshal Michaelson came and called hastily for her; when
he came into the Room, she desired him to stay a little; and speaking mildly to
him, she said, She should be ready presently; even like a Sheep prepared for
the slaughter: But he in the Wolvish Nature, said, He could not wait upon her,
but she should now wait upon him. Margaret Smith, her Companion, hearing him
speak these words, with others, from the Cain-like Spirit, was moved to
Testify against their unjust Laws and Proceedings, being grieved to see both
him, and many others, in such gross Darkness and Hard-heartedness: Then he
said, You shall have your share of the same, with other violent words. Then
they brought her forth, and Drums were beat before and behind her with a Band
of Soldiers through the Town, and so to the Place of Execution, which is about
a Mile, the Drums beating, that none might hear her speak all the way.

The Words of Mary Dyar upon the Ladder.
Some said unto her, That if she would return, she might come down and save her
L fe ( Bonner and Gardener-like.) She answered and said, Nay, I cannot, for in
obedience to the Will of the Lord God I came; and in his Will I abide faithful
to the Death.

Their Captain, John Webb, said, she had been here before, and had the Sentence
of Banishment upon pain of Death; and had broken this Law in coming again now,
as well as formerly; and therefore she was guilty of her own Blood.

To which M. Dyar said, Nay, I came to keep Blood-guiltiness from you, desiring
you to repeal the unrighteous and unjust Law of Banishment upon pain of Death;
made against the Innocent Servants of the Lord: therefore my Blood will be
required at your hands, who wilfully do it: but for those that do it in the
simplicity of their hearts, I do desire the Lord to forgive them. I came to do
the Will of my Father, and in obedience to his Will, I stand even to the Death.

John Wilson, their Priest of Boston said, M. Dyar, O Repent, O Repent, and be
not so deluded and carried away by the deceit of the Devil.

M. Dyar answered and said, Nay, man, I am not now to Repent.

Some asked her, Whether she would have the Elders to pray for her? She said, I
know never an Elder here.

They asked, Whether she would have any of the People to pray for her? She
said, She desired the Prayers of all the People of God. Some scoffingly said,
It may be she thinks there is none here, this is a mock. M. Dyar looked about
and said, I know but few here.

Then they spoke to her again, That one of the Elders might pray for her. She
replied, and said, Nay, first a Child, then a young man, then a strong man,
before an Elder of Christ Jesus.

Some charged her with something that was not understood what it was. But her
Answer was, It Is false, it is false, I never spoke the words.

Then one said, she should say, she had been in Paradise. And she answered,
Yea, I have been in Paradise several days. And more she spoke of her Eternal
Happiness, that is out of mind. And so sweetly and cheerfully in the Lord she
finished her Testimony, and dyed a faithful Martyr of Jesus Christ.

And still they are going on in acting their cruel Laws; for the same day, in
the former part of it, they sent for Joseph Nicholson, and his Wife Jane
Nicholson, and banished them on pain of Death. Then sent for three more, and
whilst they were examining them, there came one to the Court, and tells them,
Now M. Dyar is cast off. Then several of the Court spoke to this purpose, and
one scoffingly said, She did hang as a Flag for them to take example by. [But
precious in the sight of the Lord is the Death of his Saints.]

But now the fruits of New England Professors are made manifest to the World,
who are so far degenerated from the Lord, that they set up the killing of his
Saints, as an Eusign, or a Flag, that many may follow their Cruelty. These are
the people that say, Their Churches are the purest Churches in the World; and
that their Magistrates, are godly Magistrates, and godly Ministers: A fair show
to the World; even another Beast coming up out of the Earth; and he had two
horns, like a Lamb; and he spoke as a Dragon; and he exercises all the power
of the first Beast before him.

And their General Court being ended, they left Nine of us still remaining in
Prison (it seems) looking for encouragement from England, that more may follow
their Ensign.

And we have a further Account also, That one of our Friends, named William
Leddra, being Banished upon pain of Death; he not Departing the Colony, but
being moved to Return again to Boston, was Apprehended and cast into Prison,
and there lies Chained to a Logg with a Horse-lock, Condemned to Die.

By all which it is manifest, That in them is fulfilled the words of Christ, He
that will lose his life for my sake, shall find it: But we do clearly in the
Light of the Lord see, That he that seeks to save his own life, will kill the
Just: Witness what these Persecutors in New England (who fled to save
themselves) have done.

Therefore let all People take notice, That Christ, nor his Apostles, never
gave any President, Example or Command, to take away the Lives of any: Who
ended the Jews Law, which was to put to death false Prophets and Blasphemers;
and so all that be in the Power of God, may see the Ignorance of the Governors
of New England, concerning the Scriptures and the Power of God, who know not
what spirit they are of.

POSTSCRIPT.
LEt the King hear me one Request more, which I crave of him, and (I hope) will
be judged but just in me to intercede for, and noble just and righteous in him
to grant.

Forasmuch as I perceive, that diverse Informations and Accusations against us,
may come to the Kings Ear, by Word, or Letter, or Petition, whereby our
Innocent Cause may be falsely reputed, and we made to seem great Offenders in
his presence; upon which I Request, That we may have the knowledge of what any
such Informations and Accusations are against us in any relation, and who are
our Accusers; and this is requisite for us to know, and just in the King to
grant, that we may not suffer prejudice or suspicion in the Kings mind in any
case, and neither know what our Accusations, nor whom the Accusers are; And
therefore we should account it great favor in the King, and no more than what
he may do in Justice and Nobility, to suffer us to have the knowledge of what
we are Accused of, in any case, in any manner, by any person; and this for no
other end, than that we may make our Innocent and Lawful Defense, and may clear
our selves from all false Accusations before the King, and all the world; that
we may not be judged in any matter upon any secret Information and Accusation,
without being heard in our lawful Defense; for if the King should so proceed in
Judgment against us, upon any Accusation, without hearing our Defense, as well
as our Accusers Charge, how should he but endanger himself in passing
unrighteous Judgment against us to his own hurt: And therefore that the King
may be truly directed to just Judgment, by hearing the Accused in their
Defense, as well as the Accusers in their Charge; and that Gods People, and his
glorious Truth, may not be unjustly judged without hearing their Defense, and
for the avoiding of unjust Judgment and Persecution in the Land, and for the
reproving of false Accusers; for these Causes the King ought to show so much
favor and justice, to let us know what our Accusations are, and by whom, in
all things that are or may be presented to him; for there is not any thing,
whereof we can be accused, concerning either Civil or Religious Matters, but I
hope we can make our Defense clear, and prove Gods Innocence, with which we are
clothed, from all false Informations and Accusations; And this Request I
present to the King, and not presumptuously, but with all due respect to the
honor of God, and love to his People, and Reverence to the King.

E. B.
London the 15th of the first Month, 1660.
THE END.

