THE RARE JEWEL OF CHRISTIAN Contentment.

Wherein is showed;

1. What CONTENTMENT is.

2. The Holy Art or Mystery of it.

3. Several Lessons that Christ Teaches, to work the Heart to Contentment.

The Excellencies of it.

5. The Evils of Murmuring.

6. The Aggravations of the sin of Murmuring.

By Jeremiah Buroughs.

The first of the Eleven Volumes that are Published by Thomas Goodwin, William
Greenhil, Sydrach Sympson, Philip Nigh, William Bridge, John Yates, William
Adderly.


LONDON, Printed for Ben. Billingsley at the Printing-Press in Cornhill, over
against Popes Head-Alley. 1666.

To the Reader.
THis worthy Man, especially in his latter times, was surrounded (through Gods
blessing on him) with a very great confluence of what might give forth
Contentment to a vast Spirit of his Rank and Calling. He was enriched with a
large measure of Abilities and Opportunities in serving his Lord, to glorify
whom, and do much good to others, is the divine part of a man gracious (which
he was) the highest and most solid Satisfaction, and in many respects exceeds
what personal Communion with God, singlely considered, brings in) Besides, he
lived and died in a fullness of honor and esteem with the best of men, of
Saints; Yea, the worst of enemies: Likewise of Estate, and outward Comforts
within his Sphaere and Rank, all which might and did afford Contentment to what
was outward in him. In the midst of these, his study was to find out a more
sublime way, and hidden art of Self-sufficiency, than was in the power of all
things to contribute or teach; Such a skill as did not only poise and compose
his spirit in the present enjoyment of all, but might fortify and furnish him
with provision for the future against the loss of all, in times wherein no man
knows what evil will be in the earth. This mark his first Lines show he shot
at. This Art some Philosophers of old pretended themselves Masters of, and to
instruct others in, through the assistance of Natural and Moral Elements,
elevated to the utmost height their Principles could carry them, but in vain.
Their Chemistry in this kind being able to produce no more but a sullen
obstinacy and obdurateness of mind. The Natural Spirit of a Man, feeling it
self greater than all Creatures, gathering up, and consolidating it self into
it self, is able (as Solomon says) to sustain its own and all other
infirmities. But that Autarchy this Author here presents, is a Mystery, which
none of these Princes of the world know, or the wisdom of Man teaches, but
the Holy Ghost teaches; and which few, but those that are perfect do attain;
Teaching the soul to deny it self into weakness, emptiness, in and to it self,
and all things else; and thus dissolved to unite its self to Him who only has
blessedness and All Sufficiency, with whom associated and made intimate, it
melts it self into all his Interests, making them its own, and thereby comes to
have all that All Sufficiency of the High God to be its Self-sufficiency: And
then, What state can that Soul be in, wherein it may not be content? seeing
it has God to be the chiefest comfort in its best times, and only comfort in
its worst. This though it be the inheritance of every Saint, in the right and
title to it, yet the possession and enjoyment of it, depends upon an
improvement of this inheritance, and that upon a skill which is to be learned
by experience and much exercise (as Paul speaks) I have learned in whatsoever
state I am, therewith to be Content. This piece of learning this serious
spirited Man inured himself into, and digging for it as Rubies (as Solomon's
Scholar for Wisdom) has found it, and has hewn forth this JEWEL (a Title
given neither by Himself, nor by Us the Publishers, to the Subject it self, yet
the Materials themselves deserving it) out of the Rock, and has artificially
cut it) that the innate Rays of this so glorious a Grace might shine forth to
others. And here it comes to be presented, though set forth as the richest
Jewels are, often for a while in ruder metals until bargained, but then are
placed in tablets worthy of them. The only seat this is ordained for, is, the
precious Tablets of men's hearts, in, and from which alone, the native luster of
will be made conspicuous. Reader, buy it, set and wear it there, and it shall
(as Solomon speaks. Prove. 3.22, etc.) Be life unto thy soul, and grace unto thy
neck: Thou shall not be afraid when thou lie down; Yea, thy sleep shall be
sweet unto thee: for the Lord will be thy confidence.

Thomas Godwin, Sydrach Sympson, William Greenhil, Philip Nigh, William Bridge,
John Yates, William Adderly.


The CONTENTS.
SERMON I. THe Words opened Page 2 Doctrine. To be well skilled in the Mystery
of Christian Contentment, is the duty, glory, and excellency of a Christian
Page 3 Christian Contentment described. Page 4 1 It is Inward ibid. 2 It is
quiet, which is not opposed 1 To sense of affliction Page 5 2 To complaint to
God or man ibid. 3 To lawful seeking of help Page 6 But it is opposed 1 To
Murmuring ibid 2 To fretting and vexing ib. 3 To tumult of spirit ib. 4 To
insettledness of spirit Page 7 5 To distracting cares and fears ibid. 6 To
sinking discouragement ibid. 7 To sinful shifting Page 8 8 To rising of the
Heart against God Page 9 3 It is a frame of spirit 1 It is spread through the
whole Soul Page 10 2 It is a frame of soul Page 11 3 It is a habitual frame
Page 13 4 It is a gracious frame opposed 1 To natural stilness ib. 2 To sturdy
resolutions ib. 3 To strength of natural reason Page 14 5 It is a frame of
spirit, freely submitting 1 The heart is readily brought over Page 25 2 It is
not by constraint Page 16 3 It is not out of stupidity Page 17 6 Freely
submitting ib. 7 Taking Complacency in Gods dispose ib. 8 In Gods dispose Page
19 In every condition Page 20

SERMON II. We must submit to God in every affliction 1 For the kind Page 22 2
For the time Page 23 3 For the variety Page 25 Contentment is a Mystery Page 26
1 A Christian is content, yet unsatisfied Page 27 2 A Christian comes to
contentment by substraction Page 29 3 By adding another burden to that he has
Page 31 4 By changing the affliction into another Page 33 5 By doing the work
of his condition. Page 35 6 By melting his will into Gods will Page 37 7 By
purging out that that is within Page 39

SERMON III 8 He lives by the dew of Gods blessing Page 40 1 He has the love
of God in that he has Page 41 2 It is sanctified for his good. ib. 3 There is
no after-reckoning for it Page 42 4 It is by purchase of Christ ib. 5 It is an
earnest of glory hereafter Page 43 9 A Christion sees Gods love in affliction
Page 44 10 His afflictions sanctified in Christ Page 45 11 He fetches strength
from Christ Page 47 12 He makes up his wants in God Page 49 13 He fetches
Contentment from the Covenant Page 53 Objection concerning the Plague, Answered
Page 54

SERMON IV. He supplieth wants by what he finds in himself Page 57 He fetches
supply from the Covenant Page 61 1 In General ib. 2 From Particular promises
Page 64 14 He reallizeth the things of Heaven Page 67 15 He lets his heart
out to God ibid. Lessons whereby Christ teaches Contentment 1 Self denial Page
68 Whereby a Christian knows 1 That he is nothing Page 69 2 That he deserves
nothing ib. 3 That he can do nothing Page 70 4 That he can receive no good of
himself ib. 5 If God withdraw himself he can make use of nothing ib. 6 That he
is worse than nothing Page 71 7 That there is no loss of him if he perish ib. 8
That he comes to rejoice in Gods ways Page 72 2 Lesson, To know the vanity of
Creatures Page 73 3 Lesson, To know that one thing necessary Page 74

SERMON V. 4 Lesson, To know his relation in this world Page 76 5 Lesson,
Wherein the good of the Creature is Page 79 6 Lesson, The knowledge of his own
Heart Page 82 Which helps to Contentment 1 By discovering where discontent lies
ib. 2 By knowing what is suitable to our condition Page 83 3 By this we may
know what we are able to manage Page 84 7 Lesson, To know the burden of a
prosperous estate Page 85 Which is fourfold 1 The burden of trouble ib. 2 The
burden of danger Page 86 3 The burden of Duty Page 89 4 The burden of account
ib. 8 Lesson, A great evil to be given up to our own hearts desire Page 91

SERMON VI 9 Lesson, The right knowledge of Gods providence Page 94 Wherein
four things 1 The Universality of it ib. 2 The Efficacy of it Page 95 3 The
Variety of it ib. 4 Gods particular dealing with his people Page 97 In three
things 1 They are ordinarily in affliction Page 98 2 When he intends them
greatest mercies, he brings them lowest ib. 3 How he works by contraries Page
99 The Excellency of Contentment 1 Excellency, By it we give God his due
worship Page 101 2 Excellency, In it there is much exercise of grace Page 103 1
There is much strength of grace ib. 2 There is much beauty of grace Page 104 3
Excel. The soul is fitted to receive mercy Page 106 4 Excel. It is fitted to do
service Page 107 5 Excel. Contentment delivers from temptation Page 108 6
Excel. It brings abundance of comfort Page 110 7 Excel. It fetches in that
which we possess not Page 111

In four Particulars SERMON VII. 8 Excel. Contentment a great blessing of God
upon the soul Page 115 9 Excel. A contented man may expect a reward Page 116 10
Excel. By contentment the soul comes nearest the excellency of God himself Page
117 Use 1 To be humbled for want of Contentment Page 118 The Evils in a
murmuring spirit 1 It is an argument of much Corruption in the soul Page 119 2
It is a note of a wicked man Page 120 3 Murmuring is accounted rebellion Page
121 4 It is exceeding contrary to grace in conversion Page 122 The works of God
in Conversion 1 To make us sensible of the evil in sin Page 123 2 A sight of
the Excellency of Christ ib. 3 Taking the heart from the Creature ib. 4 Casting
the soul on Christ for all good Page 124 5 Subduing the soul to Christ as King
ib. 6 Giving up the soul to God in Covenant Page 125 5 Evil Murmuring below a
Christian Page 126 1 Below his Relation 1 To God as a Father ib. 2 To Christ as
a Spouse ib. 3 To Christ as a Member Page 127 4 To Christ as a Coheir ib. 5 To
Gods Spirit as a Temple ib. 6 To Angels as one with them ib. 7 To Saints, as of
the same body ib. 2 Below his dignity Every Christian a King Page 128 3 It is
below the Spirit of a Christian Page 129 4 Below the profession of a Christian
Page 131 5 Below the grace of Faith ib.

SERMON VIII, 6 Below the helps of a Christian Page 132 7 Below the expectation
of a Christian ib. 8 Below what other Christians have done Page 133 6 Evil, By
murmuring we undo our prayers ib. 7 Evil, The effects of a murmuring heart 1
Loss of much time Page 134 2 Unfitness for Duty ib. 3 Wicked risings of heart
Page 135 4 Unthankfulness ib. 5 Shifting Page 138 8 Evil, Discontent a foolish
sin ib. 1 It takes away the comfort of what we have ib 2 We cannot help our
selves by it Page 139 3 It causes foolish carriage to God and man ib 4 It
takes out the sweetness of mercies before they come ib. 5 It makes affliction
worse Page 141 9 Evil, It provokes the wrath of God ib. 10 Evil, There is a
curse upon it Page 146 11 Evil, There is much of the Spirit of Satan in it Page
147 12 Evil, It brings an absolute necessity of disquiet ib. 13 Evil, God may
justly withdraw his protection from such ib. Aggravations of the sin of
Murmuring 1 Aggravation, The greater the mercies, the greater the sin of
murmuring Page 150

SERMON IX. 2 Aggrav. When we murmur for small things Page 157 3 Aggrav. When
men of parts and abilities murmur Page 158 4 Aggrav. The freeness of Gods mercy
ib. 5 Aggrav. Discontent for what we have Page 159 6 Aggrav. When men are
raised from a low condition ib. 7 Aggrav. When men have been great sinners Page
160 8 Aggrav. When those murmur that are but of little use in the world Page
161 9 Aggrav. To murmur when God is about to humble us ib. 10 Aggrav. When Gods
hand is apparent in affliction Page 162 11 Aggrav. To murmur under long
affliction Page 163 Pleas of a discontented heart 1 Plea, I am not sensible of
my afflictions 1 Sense of affliction takes not away sense of mercies Page 165 2
It hinders not Duty ib, 3 It will make us bless God for the mercies of others
ib. 2 Plea, My trouble is for my sins 1 It is not, if you were not troubled for
sin before Page 166 2 What the greatest care is to remove affliction ib. 3 If
after affliction is removed sin trouble us ib. 4 If there be not care to avoid
sin after Page 167 5 There is the more cause to accept of the punishment ib. 3
Plea, God withdraws himself 1 We think God is departed when he does but afflict
Page 168 2 Disquiet is a sign and cause of Gods departure ib. 3 If God depart
from us, we should not from him Page 169 4 Plea, I am troubled for men's ill
dealing 1 Men are Gods Instruments Page 170 2 We should rather pity them than
murmur Page 171 3 We have righteous dealing with God ib.

SERMON X. 5 Plea, It is an affliction I looked not for 1 It is folly not to
look for afflictions ib. 2 We should be more careful in our carriage in it Page
172 6 Plea, The affliction is exceeding great 1 It is not so great as thy sins
ib. 2 It might have been greater Page 173 3 It is greater for thy murmuring ib.
7 Plea, It is greater than others afflictions Answered in four things Page 173
8 Plea, If any other affliction they could be content Answered in four things
Page 174 9 Plea, My afflictions make me unserviceable to God 1 Though thou art
mean, thou art a member of the Body Page 176 2 Thy general calling is high Page
177 3 Thou art equal with Angels ib. 4 God highly esteems the actions of mean
Christians Page 178 5 Faithfulness in a mean calling shall be rewarded ib. 10
Plea, My condition is unsettled 1 Every man in his settled state is vanity Page
179 2 God will have us live in dependence ib. 3 Thy spiritual condition may be
settled Page 181 11 Plea, I have been in a better condition 1 Thy eye should
not be evil, because the Eye of God has been good Page 182 2 Prosperity was to
prepare thee for affliction ib. 12 Plea, I am crossed after much pains 1 The
greater the Cross, the more the obedience Page 184 2 Thy pains should he with
submission to God Page 185 3 Contentment in such a condition, is a testimony of
more love to God ib. 13 Plea, Distempers of heart accounted as words before God
ib.

SERMON XI. Considerations to work the heart to contentment 1 Con The greatness
of the mercies we have Page 187 2 God is beforehand with us with mercies Page
188 3 The abundance of mercies we enjoy Page 189 4 All creatures in a
vicissitude ib. 5 The creatures suffer for us ib. 6 We have little time in the
world Page 190 7 It has been the condition of our betters Page 191 8 We were
once content with the world without grace, and should now with grace without
the world Page 193 9 When we had Contentment we gave not God the glory ib. 10
Experience of Gods doing us good in afflictions ib. Directions to Contentment 1
There must be grace to make the soul steady Page 195 2 Not to gripe too much of
the world ib. 3 Have a call in every business Page 196 4 Walk by rule ib. 5
Exercise much Faith Page 197 6 Labor to be spiritually minded Page 198 7
Promise not your selves great things Page 200 8 Get mortified hearts to the
world ib. 9 Pore not too much on afflictions Page 201 10 Make a good
construction of Gods ways toward us Page 202 11 Regard not others fancies,
but what we feel Page 205 12 Be not inordinately taken with the comforts of
the world Page 206

FINIS.
THE RARE JEWEL OF CHRISTIAN CONTENTMENT.
SERMON, I. at Stepney. July 27. 1645.
PHIL. 4.11. For I have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be
content.

HERE is a very seasonable Cordial to revive the drooping spirits of the Saints
in these sad and sinking times: For the hour of temptation is already come upon
all the world to try the Inhabitants of the earth; and in special, this is the
day of Jacobs troubles in our own bowels.

Our great Apostle experimentally holds forth in this Gospel-Text, the very
life and soul of all practical Divinity; wherein we may plainly read his own
proficiency in Christ's School; and what lesson every Christian that would
evidence the power and growth of Godliness in his own soul, must necessarily
learn from him.

These words are brought in by Paul, as a plain argument to persuade the
Philippians that he did not seek after great things in the world, and that he
sought not theirs, but them: He did not pass for a great estate; he had better
things to take up his heart withal. I do not speak (says he) in respect of
want, [For] whether I have or have not, my heart is fully satisfied, I have
enough; I have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content.

I have learned] Contentment in every condition is a great Art, a special
Mystery: It is to be learned, and so to be learned as a Mystery; And therefore
verse 12. he affirms, I know how to be abased, and I know how to abound, every
where, and in all things I am instructed: (...)
The word which is translated [Instructed] is derived from that word which
signifies Mystery; and it is as much as if he had said, I have learned the
mystery of this business. Contentment is to be learned as a great mystery; and
those that are thoroughly trained up in that art, have learned a deep Mystery;
The which is, as Sampsons riddle to a natural man. [I have le^ued it.] It is
not now to learn; neither had I it at first; I have attained it though with
much ado, and now by the grace of God I am become Master of this Art.

In whatsoever State I am] The word [State] is not in the Original, (...).
but, In what I am, that is, in whatsoever concerns or befalls me, whether I
have little or nothing at all.

Therewith to be content] The word which we render Content here, (...)
has in the Original much elegancy and fullness of signification in it. In
strictness of phrase it is only attributed unto God, who has styled himself
God Alsufficient, as resting wholly satisfied in and with himself alone; but
he is pleased freely to communicate of his fullness to the creature, so that
from God in Christ, the Saints receive grace for grace, Joh. 1.16. In so much
that there is in them an answerableness of the same grace in their proportion
that is in Christ. And in this sense Paul says, I have a Self-sufficiency, as
the word notes.

But has Paul a self-sufficiency you will say? How are we sufficient of our
selves? Our Apostle affirms in another case, That we are not sufficient of our
selves to think any thing as of our selves? 2 Cor. 3.5. His meaning therefore
must be, I find a sufficiency of satisfaction in my own heart, through the
Grace of Christ that is in me; though I have not outward comforts and worldly
accommodations to supply my necessities, yet I enjoy portion enough betwixt
Christ and my own soul abundantly to satisfy me in every condition. And this
interpretation is suitable to that place, Pro. 14.14. A good man is satisfied
from himself, and ageeable to what he verifies of himself in another place;
that though he had nothing, yet he possessed all things; because he had right
to the covenant and promise, which virtually contains all, and an interest in
Christ the fountain and good of all, and having that, no marvel he says, that
in whatsoever state he was in, he was content. Thus you have the genuine
interpretation of the Text. I shall not make any division of the words, because
I take them only to prosecute that one duty most necessary, viz. The quieting
and comforting the hearts of Gods people under the troubles and changes they
meet withal, in these heart-shaking times, And the Doctrinal conclusion is in
brief this.

Doct. That to be well skilled in the mystery of Christian Contentment is the
Duty, Glory, and Excellency of a Christian.

This Evangelical truth is held forth sufficiently in Scripture; yet take one
or two parallel places more for the confirmation of it. 1 Timothy 6.6. and 8. you
have both the duty expressed, and the glory thereof: Having food and raiment
(says verse 8.) let us therewith be content, there is the duty; But godliness
with Contentment is great gain, verse 6. there is the glory and excellency of
it: as if godliness were not gain except there were Contentment withal. The
like exhortation you have in Heb. 13.5. Let your conversation be without
covetousness, and be content with such things as you have. I do not find any
Apostle or Writer of Scripture treat so much of the spiritual mystery of
Contentment as this our Apostle has done throughout his Epistles.

For the clear opening and proving of this practical conclusion, I shall
endeavor to demonstrate these four things: First, The nature of this Christian
Contentment, what it is. Secondly, The Art and Mystery of it. Thirdly, What
those lessons are that must be learned to work the heart to contentment.
Fourthly, Wherein the glorious excellencies of this grace does principally
consist.


Concerning the first, take this description; Christian Contentment is that
sweet, inward, quiet, gracious frame of spirit, freely submitting to, and
taking complacency in Gods wise and fatherly dispose in every condition.

I shall break open this description, for it is a box of precious Ointment,
very comfortable and useful for troubled hearts, in troubled times and
conditions.

First, Contentment (I say) is a sweet [inward] heart-thing, it is a work of
the spirit within doors: It is not only a not-seeking help to our selves by
outward violence, or a forbearance of discontented murmuring expressions, in
froward words and carriages against God or others; but it is the inward
submission of the heart. Psalm. 62.1. Truly, my soul waits upon God; and verse
5. My soul wait thou only upon God, so it is in your Books; but the words may
be translated as rightly, My soul be thou silent unto God; Hold thy peace O my
soul: Not only the tongue must hold its peace, but the soul must be silent:
Many may sit down silently, forbearing discontented expressions, yet are
inwardly swollen with coffeehouse; now this manifests a perplexed
distemper, and a great frowardness in their hearts: And God notwithstanding
their outward silence, hears the peevish fretting language of their souls. The
shoe may be smooth and neat without, whilst the flesh is pinched within: There
may be much calmness and stilness outwardly, and yet wonderful confusion,
bitterness, disturbance, and vexation within. Some are so weak that they are
not able to contain the disquietness of their own spirits, but in words and
behavior discover what woeful perturbations there are within, their spirits
being like the raging Sea, casting forth nothing but mire and dirt, being not
only troublesome to themselves but to all those they live with: Others there
are who are able to keep in such distempers of heart (as Judas did when he
betrayed Christ with a kiss) but still they boil inwardly and eat like a
Canker: As David speaks concerning some whose words are smoother than honey and
butter, and yet have war in their hearts; and as he says in another place,
whilst I kept silence my bones waxed old; so these, whilst there is a serene
calm upon their tongues, have yet blustering storms in their spirits, and whilst
they keep silence, their hearts are troubled, and even worn away with anguish
and vexation; they have peace and quiet outwardly, but war from the unruly and
turbulet workings of their hearts, that is within. If the attainment to true
Contentment were as easy as keeping quiet outwardly, there need be no great
learning of it; it might be had with less skill and strength than an Apostle
had; yea, than an ordinary Christian has, or may have. Therefore certainly
there is a great deal more in it, than can be attained by common gifts, and
ordinary power of reason, which often bridles in nature. It is a heart business.

Secondly, It is the [quiet] of the heart; All is sedate and still there, and
to understand this the better; This quiet gracious frame of spirit. It is not
opposed,

1 To a due sense of affliction. God does give leave to his people to be
sensible of what they suffer: Christ does not say do not count that a cross
which is a cross, but take up your cross daily. As it is in the body natural,
if the body takes Physic and is not able to bear it, but presently vomits it
up, or if it be not at all sensible, if it stir not the body either of those
ways, the Physic does no good, but argues the body much distempered and will
hardly be cured. So it is with the spirits of men under afflictions; if either
they cannot bear Gods potions, but cast them up again, or are not sensible of
them, and their souls are no more stirred by them, than the body is by a draught
of small beer, it is a sad symptom that their souls are in a dangerous, and
almost incurable condition. So that this inward quietness is not in opposition
to the sense of affliction: for indeed there were no true Contentment, if you
were not apprehensive and sensible of your afflictions when God is angry. It is
not opposed,

2 To an orderly making our moan and complaint to God, and to our friends.
Though a Christian ought to be quiet under Gods correcting hand, yet he may
without any breach of Christian contentment complain to God; (as one of the
Ancients says) though not with a tumultuous clamor and skreeking out in a
perplexed passion, yet in a quiet still submissive way he may unbosome his
heart unto God. And likewise communicate his sad condition to his gracious
friends, showing them how God has dealt with him, and how heavy the affliction
is upon him, that they may speak a word in due season to his wearied soul. It
is not opposed,

To all lawful seeking out for help unto another condition, or simply
endeavoring to be delivered out of the present affliction by the use of lawful
means. No, I may say in provision for my deliverance and use Gods means,
waiting on him, because I know not but that it may be his will to alter my
condition, and so far as he leads me I may follow his providence, it is but my
duty. God is thus far mercifully indulgent to our weakness, and he will not
take it ill at our hands, if by earnest and importunate prayer we seek unto him
for deliverance, till we know his good pleasure therein. And certainly thus
seeking for help with such a submission and holy resignation of spirit, to be
delivered when God will, and as God will, and how God will, so that our wills
are melted into the will of God, this is no opposition to the quietness which
God requires in a contented spirit.

Quest. But then, what is this quietness of spirit opposed unto?

Answ. To murmuring and repining at the hand of God; as the discontented
Israelites often did, which if we our selves cannot endure either in our
children or Servants, much less can God bear it in us

2 To vexing and fretting; which is a degree beyond murmuring. It is a speech I
remember of a Heathen, A wise man may grieve under, but not be vexed with his
afflictions. There is a vast difference betwixt a kindly grieving, and a
distempered vexation.

3 To tumultuousness of spirit: When the thoughts run distractingly, and work
in a confused manner, so that the affections are like the unruly multitude in
the Acts, who knew not for what end they were come together. The Lord expects
that you should be silent under his rod, and as he said in Acts 19.36. You
ought to be quiet and to do nothing rashly.

4 To unsetledness and un fixedness of spirit, whereby the heart is taken off
from the present duty, that God requires in our several relations, both toward
God, our selves, and others. We should prize duty at a higher rate than to be
taken off by every trivial occasion; a Christian indeed values every service of
God so much, that though some may be in the eye of the world and of natural
reason, a slight empty business, beggarly rudiments, foolishness, yet seeing
God calls for it, the authority of the command does so overawe his heart, that
he is willing to spend himself and to be spent in the discharge of it. It is an
expression of Luthers, ordinary works that are done in faith, and from faith,
are more precious than Heaven and Earth. And if this be so, and a Christian
know it, it is not a little matter that should divert him: but he should
answer every avocation and resist every temptation, Nehemiah did chap. 6.3.
Sanballat, Greshem, and Tobiah (when they would have hindered the building of
the wall) with this, I am doing a great work (says he) so that I cannot come
down, why should the work of the Lord cease?

5 To distracting heart-eating cares and fears. A gracious heart so estimates
its union with Christ, and the work that God sets it about, as it will not
willingly suffer any thing to come in to choke it, or dead it. A Christian is
desirous that the Word of God should take such full possession as to divide
between soul and spirit, but he would not suffer the fear and noise of evil
tidings, to take such impressions in his soul, as to make a division and
struggling there, like the twins in Rebeckahs womb. A great man will permit
common people to stand without his doors, but he will not let them come in and
make a noise in his closet, or bedchamber, when he purposely retires himself
from all worldly employments. So a well-tempered spirit though it may inquire
after things abroad without doors in the world, and suffer some ordinary cares
and fears to break into the suburbs of the soul, so as to have a light touch
upon the thoughts: Yet it will not upon any terms admit of an intrusion into
the privy chamber, which should be wholly reserved for Jesus Christ as his
inward Temple.

6 To sinking discouragements, When things fall not out according to
expectation, when the tide of second causes runs so low, that we see little
left in the outward means to bear up our hopes and hearts. That then the heart
begins to reason as he in the Kings, If the Lord should open the Window of
Heaven how should this be? Never considering that God can open the eyes of the
Blind with clay and spittle, he can work above, beyond, nay contrary to means;
he often makes the fairest flowers of man's endeavors to wither, and brings
improbable things to pass, that the glory of enterprises may be given to
himself. Nay if his people stand in need of miracles to work their deliverance,
miracles fall as easily out of Gods hands, as to give his people daily bread.
Gods blessing is many times secret upon his servants, that they know not which
way it comes; as 2 Kings 3.17. Ye shall not see wind, neither shall ye see
rain, yet the valley shall be filled with water. God would have us depend on him
though we do not see means how the thing should be brought to pass, else we do
not show a quiet spirit; though an affliction be upon thee, let not thy heart
sink under it. So far as thy heart sinks, and thou art discouraged under thy
affliction, so much thou want of this lesson of Contentment.

7 To sinful shiftings and shirkings out for ease and help. As we see in Saul
turning to the witch of Endor, and his offering sacrifice before Samuel came:
Nay, the good King Jehoshaphat joins himself with Ahaziah, 2 Chronicles. 20. ult.
And Asa goes to Benhadad King of Assyria for help, not relying upon the Lord (a
Chron. 16.7, 8) Though the Lord had delivered the Ethiopian Army into his
hands, consisting of a thousand thousand, a Chron. 14 11. And good Jacob joined
in a lie with his mother to Isaac, he was not content to stay Gods time, and
use Gods means, but made too great haste and stepped out of his way, to procure
the blessing which God intended for him: as many do through the corruption of
their hearts, and weakness of their faith, because they are not able to trust
God, and follow him fully in all things always; and for this cause the Lord
often follows the Saints with many sore temporal crosses, (as we see in Jacob)
though they obtain the mercy. It may be thy wretched carnal heart thinks, I
care not how I be delivered, so I may but get free from it: Is it not so many
times in some of your hearts when any cross or affliction befalls you? Have you
not such kind of workings of spirit as this? Oh that I could but be delivered
out of this affliction any way, I would not care; your hearts are far from
being quiet. And this sinful shifting is the next thing in opposition to this
quietness, which God requires in a contented spirit.

The Eighth and last thing that this quietness of spirit is opposite to, is
desperate risings of heart against God in a way of rebellion: That is most
abominable. I hope many of you have learned so far to be content, as to keep
down your hearts from such distempers; and yet the truth is, not only wicked
men, but sometimes the very Saints of God find the beginnings of this, when an
affliction lies long, and is very sore and heavy upon them indeed, and strikes
them as it were in the master vein; they find somewhat of this in their hearts,
arising against God, their thoughts begin to bubble, and their affections begin
to stir in rising against God himself; especially such as together with their
corruptions have much melancholy, and the Devil working both upon the
corruptions of their hearts, and the melancholy distemper of their bodies;
though there may lie much grace at the bottom, yet there may be some risings
against God himself under affliction. Now Christian quietness is opposite to
all these things: that is, When afflictions come, be it what affliction it will
be, yet you do not murmur, though you be sensible, though you make your moan,
though you desire to be delivered, and seek it by all good means, yet you do
not murmur nor repine, you do not fret nor vex, there is not that
tumultuousness of spirit in you, there is not unsetledness in your spirits,
there are not distracting fears in your hearts, no sinking discouragements, no
base shiftings, no risings in rebellion any way against God: This is the
quietness of Spirit under an affliction; and that is the second thing when the
soul is so far able to bear an affliction as to keep quiet under it.

Now the Third thing I would open in the description is this, It is an inward
quiet, gracious [frame] of Spirit. It is a frame of Spirit, and then a gracious
frame of Spirit. Contentment it is a Soul-business; First, It is inward;
Secondly, quiet; Thirdly, it is a quiet Frame of Spirit. [Frame] by that I mean
these three things: There are three things considerable when I say, Contentment
consists in the quiet frame of the spirit of a man.

First, That it is a grace that spreads it self through the whole soul: as thus,
it is in the Judgment, that is, the judgment of the soul of a man or woman
tends to quiet the heart; in my Judgment I am satisfied, that is one thing to
be satisfied in ones understanding and judgment, as thus, this is the hand of
God; and this is that that is suitable to my condition, or best for me: although
I do not see the reason of the thing yet I am satisfied in my judgment about it.

And then, It is in the thoughts of a man or woman: As my judgment is
satisfied, so my thoughts are kept in order.

And then it comes to the Will, My will yields and submits to it, my affections
are all likewise kept in order, so that it goes through the whole soul. There is
in some a partial Contentment, and so it is not the frame of the soul, but some
part of the soul has some Contentment: as thus, many a man may be satisfied in
his judgment about a thing, and yet for his life cannot rule his affections,
nor his thoughts, cannot rule his thoughts, nor his will, nor the affections
though the judgment be satisfied: I make no question, but many of you may know
this by your own experience, if you do but observe the workings of your own
hearts. Cannot you say when such an affliction befalls you, I can bless God I am
satisfied in my judgment about it, I have nothing in the world to say in
respect of my judgment against it, I see the hand of God and I should be
content, yea, I am satisfied in my judgment, that my condition is a good
condition in which I am; but I cannot for my life rule my thoughts, my will,
and my affections, me thinks I feel my heart heavy, and sad, and troubleed more
than it should be, and yet my Judgment is satisfied. This seemed to be the case
of David, Psalm. 42. Oh my soul why art thou disquieted? David, as far as his
judgment went, there was a contentedness, that is, His judgment was satisfied
in the work of God upon him; and he was troubled, but he knew not wherefore, Oh
my soul, why art thou thus cast down within me? That Psalm is a very good Psalm
for those that feel a fretting, discontented distemper in their hearts at any
time, for them to be reading or singing: he has it once or twice in that
Psalm. Why art thou cast down O my soul? in verse. 5. And why art thou
disquieted within me? hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him, for the
help of his countenance. David had enough to quiet him, and that that he had,
had prevailed with his judgment, but after it had prevailed with his judgment,
he could not get it further. He could not get this grace of Contentment to go
through the whole frame of the soul. There is a great deal of stir sometimes to
get Contentment into their judgments, that is, to satisfy their judgments
about their condition: Come to many, that the hand of God is upon, perhaps in a
grievous manner, and seek to satisfy them, and tell them that there is no such
cause to be disquieted. O not such cause says the troubled spirit, O then
there is no cause that any should be disquieted; there was never any such
affliction as I have! and a hundred things they have to put off what is said to
them, so as you cannot so much as get into their judgments to satisfy them;
but there is a great deal of hope of Contentment, if once your judgments come
to be satisfied, that you can sit down and say in your judgments, I see cause
to be contented: but though you have gotten thus far, yet you may have much to
do with your hearts afterward: for there is such unruliness in our thoughts and
affections, that our judgments are not always able to rule our thoughts and
affections, and that makes me to say, that Contentment is an inward, quiet,
gracious frame of spirit, that is, the whole soul, Judgment, Thoughts, Will,
Affections, and all are satisfied and quiet. I suppose in the very opening
this, you begin to see it is a lesson that you had need learn, and it is not a
thing soon got, if Contentment be such a thing as this is.

The second thing is this, which is very observable, That spiritual Contentment
comes from the frame of the Soul. A man or woman that is contented in a right
way, their contentment does not so much come from outward arguments, or any
outward thing that helps them to be content, as it does from the disposition of
their own hearts; It is the disposition of their own hearts, that causes this
Contentment: That brings forth this gracious Contentment, rather than any
external thing that does it, as thus I would open my self, one that is
disquieted, suppose a child, or man, or woman if you come and bring them some
great matter to please them, that perhaps will quiet them, and they will be
contented; it is the thing you bring them that quiets them, but it is not the
disposition of their own spirits, not from any good temper that there is in
their own hearts: but from some external thing that is brought them: but when a
Christian is contented in a right way, the quiet does come more from the inward
temper and disposition of their own hearts than from any external arguments, or
possession of any thing in the world. I would yet open this further to you in
this Similitude. The being content upon some external thing, it is like the
warming of a man's clothes by the fire; but being content by the inward
disposition of the soul, it is like the warmth that a man's clothes has from
the natural heat of his body: A man that is of a healthful body, he puts on
his clothes, and perhaps when he puts them on at the first in a cold morning he
feels his clothes cold, but after he has them on a little while, they are
warm; why how come they warm? they come not nigh the fire: No, but it came from
the natural heat of his body. Now a sickly man that has his natural heat
decayed, if he put on his clothes cold, they will not be hot in a long time,
but he must have them warmed by the fire, and then they will quickly be cold
again; So this will difference the Contentments of men. There are some men now
that are very gracious, and when an affliction comes upon them, indeed at first
it seems to be a little cold, but after it has been on a while, the very
temper of their hearts being gracious, it makes their affliction easy, and
makes them to be quiet under it, and not to complain of any coffeehouse. But
now you shall have others that have an affliction upon them, that have not this
good temper in their hearts, their afflictions are very cold upon them, and
grievous; and it may be if you bring them some external arguments, somewhat from
without, as the fire that warms the clothes, perhaps they will be quiet for a
while: but alas, wanting a gracious disposition within in their own hearts,
that warmth will not hold long. The warmth of a fire, that is, a Contentment
that comes merely from external arguments will not hold long, but that holds
that does come from the gracious temper of the Spirit. It is from the frame and
the disposition of the spirit of a man or woman. There Is the true Contentment.
But this we shall speak to further in the opening of the Mystery of Contentment.

The Third thing is this, It is the frame of Spirit that shows the habitualness
of this grace of Contentment. Contentment is not merely one act, a flash in a
good mood; you shall have many men and women, that take them in some good mood
and they will be very quiet; but this will not hold, this is not a constant
way, there is not a constant tenor of their spirits to be holy and gracious
under affliction: But I say, It is the quiet frame of spirit, by that I mean,
The habitual disposition of their Souls, that it is not only at this time, and
the other time when you take men and women in a good mood: but it is the
constant tenor and temper of the heart; that is a Christian that has learned
this lesson of Contentment, that in the constant tenor and temper of heart is
contented, and can carry its self quietly in a constant way, or else it is
worth nothing; for there is no body that is so furious in their discontent, but
will be quiet in some good mood or other. Now First, it is a heart-business;
Secondly, it is the heart quiet; and then Thirdly, it is the frame of the heart.

But Fourthly, It is the [gracious] frame of the heart. Indeed in Contentment
there is a composition of all graces, if the Contentment be Spiritual: if it be
truly Christian, there is I say a composition of all Spiritual graces; As it is
in some Oils there is a composition of a great many very precious Ingredients:
so in this grace of Contentment, which we shall yet further speak of in the
opening of the Excellency of it. But now the gracious frame of Spirit is in
opposition to Three things?

1. First, In opposition to the natural stilness that there is in many men and
women. There are some of such a natural constitution that makes them to be more
still and more quiet than others: others are of a violent and hot constitution,
and they are more impatient than others.

2. Secondly, In opposition to a sturdy resolution. As some men through the
strength of some sturdy resolution, they have not seemed to be troubled, let
come what will come: and so it may be through a sturdy resolution, at some
times they are not so much disquieted as others are.

Thirdly, In way of distinction, from the very strength of Reason (though not
sanctified) the strength of natural reason may quiet the heart in some measure.
But now I say a gracious frame of spirit is not a mere stilness of body through
a natural constitution and temper, nor sturdiness of resolution, nor merely
through the strength of reason.

You will say, wherein is this graciousness of Contentment distinguished from
all these? More of this will be spoken to when we show the mystery of it, and
the lessons that are learned, but now we may speak a little by way of
distinction here, as now from the natural stilness of men's spirits, many men
and women have such a natural stilness of spirit, and constitution of body,
that you shall find them seldom disquieted. But now mark these kind of people
that are so, they likewise are very dull, of a dull spirit in any good thing,
they have no quickness, nor liveliness of spirit in that which is good: but now
mark where Contentment of heart is gracious, the heart is very quick and lively
in the service of God, yea the more any gracious heart can bring its self to be
in a contented disposition, Oh the more fit it is for any service of God, and
is very active and lively in Gods service, not dull in the service of God.

And as a Contented heart is very active and stirring in the work of God, so he
is very active and stirring in sanctifying Gods Name in the affliction that
does befall him: The difference will appear very clear thus, One that is of a
still disposition, he is not disquieted indeed as others, neither has he any
activeness of spirit in sanctifying the Name of God in the affliction: but now
one that is content in a gracious way, as he is not disquieted, but keeps his
heart quiet in respect to vexing and trouble, so on the other side, he is not
dull nor heavy, but is very active to sanctify Gods Name in the affliction that
is upon him, for it is not enough merely not to murmur, not to be discontented
and troubled, but you must be active in the sanctifying Gods Name in the
affliction. And indeed this will distinguish it from the other, from a sturdy
resolution, I will not be troubled: but though you have a sturdy resolution,
that you will not be troubled, is there a conscionableness in you to sanctify
Gods Name in your affliction, and does it come from thence? That is the main
thing that brings the quiet of heart, and helps against discontentedness in a
gracious heart. I say the desire and care that thy soul has to sanctify Gods
Name in an affliction, it is that that quiets the soul, which does not in the
other. Neither when it is merely from reason: As Socrates, it is said of him
(though he were but an Heathen) that whatever befell him, he would never so much
as change his countenance, and he got this power over his spirit merely by
strength of reason and morality: but now this gracious Contentment comes from
principles beyond the strength of reason.

I cannot open that (from whence it comes) til we come to open the mystery of
spiritual Contentment. I will only give you this one note of difference between
a man and a woman that is contented in a natural way, and another that is
contented in a spiritual way. Those that are contented in a natural way, they
overcome themselves when outward afflictions do befall them, they are contented,
yea, and they are contented as well when they commit sin against God, either
when they have outward crosses or when God is dishonored, it is all one,
either when themselves are crossed, or when God is crossed; but now a gracious
heart that is contented with its own affliction yet mightily rises when God is
dishonored.

The fifth is [Freely] freely submitting to, and taking complacency in Gods
dispose, it is a free work of the spirit: now there are four things to be
opened in this freedom of spirit.

First, That the heart is readily brought over, that which one does freely,
there is no great stir to bring them to it; there are many men and women, when
their afflictions are grievous upon them, with much ado they are brought to be
contented, a great deal of stir there is to quiet their hearts when they are
under affliction, yet at last perhaps they are brought to it, I but now this
does not come off freely: if I desire a thing of another and I get it perhaps
with much ado, and a great deal of stir there is, but here is no freedom of
spirit; but when a man is free in a thing, do but mention it, and presently he
comes off to it. So if you have learned this art of Contentment, you will not
only be contented after a great deal of do to quiet your hearts, but readily as
soon as ever you do come to think that it is the hand of God, your heart
presently closes.

Secondly, freely, That is not by constraint, not patience by force (as we use
to say.) As many will say that you must be coment, this is the hand of God and
there is no help for it; O! this is too low an expression for Christians, yet
when Christians come to visit one another, they say Friend or Neighbor you must
be content, this is too low an expression for a Christian, Must be content, No,
readily, and freely I will be content. It is suitable to my heart to yield to
God, and to be content, I find it is a thing that comes off of it self, that my
soul will be content. Oh you should answer your friends so, that come and tell
you you must be content, nay I am willing to yield to God, and I am freely
content, that is the Second. And then a free act it comes after a rational way,
that is freedom, that is, it does not come through ignorance, because I know no
better condition, or that I know not what my affliction is, but it comes
through a sanctified judgment, for that is the reason that no Creature can do
an act of freedom, but the rational creature, the liberty of action is only in
rational creatures, and it comes from hence, for that is only freedom and out of
liberty that is wrought in a rational way, as a natural freedom is when I by my
judgment see what is to be done, understand the thing, and then there is a
closing with what I do understand in my judgment, that is freely done; but now
if a man does a thing and understands not what he does, he cannot be said to do
it freely. So if men are contented, but it is because they understand not what
their affliction is, or because they understand no better, this is not freely:
as for instance, Suppose a Child born in a Prison and never in all his life
went out, the Child is contented, Why? Because he never knew better, but this
is no free act of Contentation. But now for men and women that do know better,
that know that the condition in which they are in, it is an afflicted condition
and a sad condition, and yet they can bring their hearts to a Contentation out
of a sanctified judgment, this is freedom.

Thirdly, This freedom it is in opposition to stupidness, for a man or woman
may be contented merely out of want of sense, this is not free, as a man in a
dead palsy that does not feel you nip his flesh, he is not freely patient; but
if one should have his flesh nipt, and feel it, and yet for all that can be
able to bridle himself, and do it freely, that is another matter. So it is
here, many are contented merely out of stupidness, they have a dead palsy upon
them; but now a gracious heart has sense enough, and yet is contented, and
therefore is free.

Sixthly, Freely [submitting] to, and taking complacency in Gods dispose.
Submitting to Gods dispose, What is that? The word Submit, it signifies nothing
else but to send under; as thus, One that is discontented, the heart will be
unruly, and would even get above God so far as coffeehouse prevails; but
now Comes the grace of Contentment and sends it under; to submit, it is to send
under a thing; now when the soul comes to see the unruliness that there is in
it, here is the hand of God that brings an affliction, and my heart is troubled
and discontented; what says the Soul? Will thou be above God? Is it not Gods
hand, and must thy will be regarded more than Gods? O under, under O thou soul,
get under, keep under, keep low, keep under Gods feet; thou art under Gods
feet, and keep under his feet, keep under the Authority of God, the Majesty of
God, the Sovereignty of God, the Power that God has over thee: Keep under,
that is to submit; then the Soul can submit to God, when it can send it self
under the Power and Authority, and Sovereignty, and Dominion that God has over
it; that is the Sixth Particular: Yea but that is not enough, yet you have not
got to this grace of Contentment, except in the next place you take.

Seventhly, Taking a [complacency] in Gods dispose. That is thus, I am well
pleased in what God does, so far as I can see God in it, though as (I said) I
may be sensible of the affliction, and may desire that God in his due time
would take it off; and use means to take it off; yet I may be well pleased so
far as Gods hand is in it. To be well pleased with Gods hand, that is a higher
degree than the other: and this comes from hence, not only because I see that I
should be content in this affliction, but because I see that there is good in
this affliction. I find there is honey in this rock, and so I do not only say,
I must, or I will submit to Gods hand: no, but the hand of God is good; it is
good that I am afflicted. That it is just that I am afflicted, that may be in
one that is not truly contented, I may be convinced that God deals justly in
this, God is righteous and just, and it is fit I should submit to what he has
done, O the Lord has done righteously in all his ways: but that is not
enough, but thou must say Good is the hand of the Lord, the expression of old
Ely, Good is the Word of the Lord, when it was a sore and hard word, that word
that did threaten very grievous things to Ely and his house, and yet, Good is
the word of the Lord, says Ely. Perhaps some of you may say as David, It is
good that I was afflicted; nay, you must come to say thus It is good that I am
afflicted. Not good when you see the good fruit that it has wrought, but when
you are afflicted to say, It is good that I am afflicted. Whatever the
affliction be, yet through the mercy of God my condition is a good condition;
it is the top indeed, and the height of this art of Contentment to come to this
pitch, to be able to say, Well, my condition and afflictions are thus and thus,
and is very grievous and sore, yet I am through Gods mercy in a good condition,
and the hand of God is good upon me notwithstanding. Now I should have given
you diverse Scriptures about this, I shall but give you one or two that are very
remarkable; you will think this is a hard lesson to come thus far, not only to
be quiet, but to have a complacency in affliction. Prove. 16.6. In the house of
the righteous is much treasure, but in the revenues of the wicked is trouble.
Here Is a Scripture now, that will show that a gracious heart has cause to say,
it is in a good condition whatever it be. In the house of the Righteous is much
Treasure, his house, what house? it may be a poor Cottage, perhaps he has
scarce a stool to sit on; perhaps he is fain to sit upon a stump of wood, a
piece of a block instead of a stool; or perhaps he has scarce a bed to lie
upon, or a dish to eat in; yet says the holy Ghost, In the house of the
righteous is much treasure: Let the righteous man be the poorest man in the
world: It may be there are some that have come and taken all the goods out of
his house for debt; perhaps his house is plundered and all is gone, yet still,
In the house of the righteous is much treasure; the righteous man can never be
brought to be so poor to have his house rifled and spoild, but there will
remain much treasure within, if he have but a dish or a spoon or any thing in
the world in his house, there will be much treasure; so long as he is there,
there is the presence of God and the blessing of God upon him, and therein is
much treasure; but in the revenues of the wicked there is trouble: There is
more treasure in the poorest bodies house, If he be Godly, than in the house of
the greatest man in the world, that has his brave hangings, and brave wrought
beds, and chairs, and couches, and cupboards of plate, and the like; what ever
he has, he has not so much treasure in it, as in the house of the poorest
righteous soul; therefore in a verse or two after my text, no marvail though
Paul (says he) was Content, you shall see in Phil. 4.18. But I have all, and
abound, I am full. I have all: Alas poor man what had Paul that could make him
say he had all, where was there ever man more afflicted than Paul was? many
times he had not tatters to hang about his body, to cover his nakedness, he had
not bread to eat, he was often in nakedness, and put in the stocks, and whipped
and cruelly used, yet I have all (says Paul) for all that. Yea you shall have
it in 2 Cor. 6.10. He professes there, That he did possess all things, as
sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich, as having
nothing, and yet possessing all things, but mark what he says, it is, As
having nothing, but it is Possessing all things. He does not say, as possessing
all things, but possessing all things; it is very little I have in the world,
but yet possessing all things: So that you see a Christian has cause to take
complacency in Gods hand, whatsoever his hand be.

The Eight thing in Contentment it is [In Gods dispose] Submitting to and
taking complacency in Gods dispose. That is, the soul that has learned this
lesson of Contentment, looks up to God in all things; looks not down to the
instruments or the means, as such a man did it, and it was unreasonableness of
such and such instruments, and the like barbarous usage of such and such; but
looks up to God; a contented heart looks to Gods dispose, and submits to Gods
dispose, that is, sees the wisdom of God in all, in his submission sees his
sovereignty, but that that makes him take complacency, it is Gods wisdom; the
Lord knows how to order things better than I, the Lord sees further than I do,
I see things but at present, but the Lord sees a great while hence, and how do
I know, but had it not been for this affliction, I had been undone? I know that
the love of God may as well stand with an afflicted estate, as with a
prosperous estate; and such kind of reasonings there are in a contented spirit,
submitting unto the dispose of God.

The last thing is, This is in [every condition,] It may be in some things you
could be content: You shall have many will say, if my affliction were but as
the affliction of such a one I could be content, yea but it must be in the
present affliction that is upon you. We use to say, There is a great deal of
deceit in Universals; in the general, come to any man or woman and say, Will
not you be content with Gods dispose? Yes say they God forbid but we should
submit to Gods hand what ever it be; you say thus in the general, it is an
easy matter to learn this lesson, but when it comes to the particular, when
the cross comes sore indeed, when it strikes you in the heaviest cross that
you think could befall you, what says your heart now? Can you in every
condition be content not only for the matter, but for the time, that is to be
in such a condition so long as God would have you, to be content to be at Gods
time in that condition, to have such an affliction so long as God would have
the affliction abide upon you, to be willing to stay and not to come out of the
affliction no sooner than the Lord would have you come out of it? you are not
content in your condition else; to be content merely that I have such a hand of
God upon me, and not to stay under the hand of God, that is not to be content
under every condition, but when I can find my heart submitting to Gods dispose
in such particular afflictions that are very hard, and very grievous, and yet
my heart is quiet, here is one that has learned the lesson of Contentment:
Contentment, it is the inward, quiet, gracious frame of spirit, freely
submitting to and taking complacency in Gods dispose in every condition: That
is the description. Now in this there has been Nine several things opened.

1. First, That Contentment is a heart work within the soul. 2. Secondly, It is
the quieting of the heart. 3. Thirdly, It is the frame of the spirit. 4.
Fourthly, It is a gracious frame. 5. Fifthly, It is the free working of this
gracious frame. 6. Sixthly, There is in it a submission to God, sending the soul
under God. 7. Seventhly, There is a taking complacency in the hand of God. 8.
Eighthly, All to Gods dispose. 9. Ninthly, In every condition, every condition,
though never so hard, though it continue never so long: Now those of you that
have learned to be Content, have learned to attain unto these several things;
the very opening of these things I hope may so far work upon your hearts, as,
First, That you may lay your hands upon your hearts upon this that has been
said, the very telling of you what the lesson is, I say may cause you to lay
your hands upon your hearts, and say, Lord I see there is more in Christian
Contentation than I thought there was, and I have been far from learning this
lesson, I indeed have learned but my A B C in this lesson of Contentment, I am
but in the lower form in Christ's school, if I am in it at all; but these we
shall speak to more afterward; but the special thing I aimed at in the opening
of this point, is to show how great a Mystery there is in Christian
Contentment; and how many several lessons are to be learned, that we may come
to attain to this Heavenly disposition, that Saint Paul did attain to.

SERMON II. at Stepney. Aug. 3. 1645.
PHIL. 4.11. For I have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be
content.

WE have made entrance (you may remember) into the Argument of Christian
Contentment. And have opened the words, and showed you what this Christian
Contentation is; that is, the inward, quiet, gracious frame of Spirit, freely
submitting to, and taking Complacency in Gods dispose in every condition. And
therein came to this last thing [In every condition] Now we shall a little
enlarge that, and so proceed.

1 Submitting to God in what ever Affliction befalls us: for the kind. 2 For
the time and continuance of the Affliction. 3 For the variety and changes of
Affliction: Let them be what they will, yet there must be a submitting to Gods
dispose in every condition.
First for the kind, Many men and women will in the general say, that they must
submit to God in affliction; I suppose now if you should come from one end of
this Congregation to another, and speak to every soul thus; Would not you
submit to Gods dispose, in what ever condition he should dispose of you to; you
will say, God forbid it should be otherwise, but we use to say, There is a
great deal of deceit in generals. In general you would submit to any thing: but
what if it be in this and that particular that is most cross to you. Then any
thing but that: we are usually apt to think that any condition is better than
the condition that God does dispose us to, now here is not Contentment it
should not be only to any condition in general, but for the kind of affliction,
if it be that which is most cross to you. God (it may be) strikes you in your
Child, Oh if it had been in my Estate says one, I should be content; perhaps
be strikes you in your Match, Oh says he I had rather have been stricken in my
health; and if he had struck you in your health, Oh then if it had been in my
trading I would not have cared; but we must not be our own carvers, what
particular afflictions God shall dispose us to, there must be Contentment in
them.

Secondly, There must be a submission to God in every affliction, for the time
and continuance of the affliction. It may be faith one I could submit and be
content, but this affliction has been upon me a long time, a quarter of a
year, a year, diverse years, and I know not how to yield and submit to it, my
patience is even worn and broke: yea it may, it is a spiritual affliction. You
could submit to God you say in any outward affliction, but not in a soul
affliction, or if it were an affliction upon the soul, trouble upon the heart,
if it were the withdrawing of Gods face, yet if this had been but for a little
time I could submit; but seeking of God so long a time and yet God does not
appear, Oh how shall I bear this! We must not be our own disposers for the time
of deliverance no more than the kind and way of deliverance, and I will give
you a Scripture or two about this, That we are to submit unto God for the time
as well as the kind, in the latter end of the 1. Chapter of Ezekiel. When I saw it
I fell upon my face, and heard a voice of one that spoke, (the Prophet was cast
down upon his face, but how long must he lie upon his face) And he said unto
me, Son of man stand upon thy feet and I will speak unto thee, and the Spirit
entered into me, when he spoke unto me, and set me upon my feet. Ezekiel was
cast down upon his face, and there he must lie till God bid him stand up, yea
and not only so, but till Gods Spirit came into him to enable him to stand up:
So when God casts us down, we must be content to lie till God bid us stand up,
and Gods Spirit enter into us to enable us to stand up, So you know Noah he was
put into the Ark, certainly he knew there was much affliction in the Ark,
having all kind of creatures shut up with him for twelve months together, it
was a mighty thing, yet God shutting him up (though the waters were assuaged)
Noah was not to come out of the Ark till God bid him: So though we be shut up
in great afflictions, and we may think there may be this and that and the other
means to come out of that affliction, yet till God does open the door we should
be willing to stay; God has put us in, and God is to bring us out: As we read
in the Acts, of Paul, when they had shut him in Prison and would have sent him
out: Nay, says Paul, they shut us in, let them come and fetch us out: So in a
holy gracious way should a soul say, Well, this affliction that I am brought
into, it is by the hand of God, and I am content to be here till God brings me
out himself. God does require at our hands, that we should not be willing to
come out till he coms and fetches us out. In Josh. 4.10. you have a notable
history there that may very well serve our purpose; we read of the Priests,
that the Priests bare the Ark and stood in the midst of Jordan: you know when
the children of Israel went into the Land of Canaan they went through the River
of Jordan: Now the going through the river Jordan was a very dangerous thing,
only God bad them to go, they might have been afraid that the water might have
come in upon them: but mark, it is said, The Priests that bare the Ark stood in
the midst of Jordan till every thing was finished that the Lord commanded
Joshua to speak unto the People, according to all that Moses commanded Joshua,
and the People hasted and passed over: And it came to pass when all the people
were clean passed over, that the Ark of the Lord passed over, and the Priests
in the presence of the people. Now it was Gods dispose that all the people
should pass over first, that they should be safe upon the land; but the Priests
they must stand still till all the people be passed over, then they must have
leave to go, but they must stay till God would have them go, stay in all that
danger, for certainly in reason and sense there was a great deal of danger in
staying: for the Text says, the people hasted over, but the Priests they must
stay till the people be gone, stay till God calls them out from that place of
danger; and so many times it does prove that God is pleased to dispose of
things so that the Ministers must stay longer in danger than the people and
Magistrates and those in public place, which should make people to be
satisfied and contented with a lower condition that God has put them into:
Though your condition be low, yet you are not in that danger that those in that
are in a higher condition; God calls them in public place to stand longer in
the gap and place of danger than other people, but we must be content to stay
even in Jordan till the Lord shall be pleased to call us out.

And then for the variety of our condition, we must be content with the
particular affliction, and the times and all the circumstances about the
affliction; for sometimes the circumstances are greater afflictions than the
afflictions themselves; And for the variety, if God will exercise us with
various afflictions one after another: As that has been very observable even
of late, that many that have been plundered, and come away, afterward have
fallen sick and died: They have fled for their lives, and afterward the plague
has come among them, and if not that affliction, it may be some other
affliction. It is very rare that one affliction comes alone, commonly
afflictions are not single things, but they come one upon the neck of another:
It may be God strikes one in his estate, then in his body, then in his name,
wife or child, or dear friend, and so it comes in a various way: it is the way
of God ordinarily (you may find it by experience) that seldom one affliction
comes alone, now this is hard when one affliction follows after another, when
there is a variety of afflictions, when there is a mighty change in a
condition, up and down, this way, and that way; there indeed is the trial of a
Christian; there must be submission to Gods dispose in them. I remember it is
said even of Cato that was a Heathen, that no man saw him to be changed, though
he lived in a time when the Commonwealth was so often changed, yet it is said
of him, he was the same though his condition was changed, and he ran through
variety of conditions. Oh that it could be said so of many Christians, that
though their conditions be changed, yet that no body could see them changed,
they are the same. Look what gracious sweet, and holy temper they were in
before, that they are still: Thus we are to submit to the dispose of God in
every condition.

Obj. But you will say, This that you speak of is good indeed it we could
attain to it, but is it possible for one to attain to this?

Answer. It is if you get skill in the Art of it, you may attain to it, and it
will prove to be no such difficult thing to you neither, if you understand but
the mystery of it; as there is many things that men do in their callings, that
if a country man comes and sees, he thinks it is a mighty hard thing, and that
he should never be able to do it, but that is because he understands not the art
of it, there is a turning of the hand so as you may do it with ease. Now that is
the business of this exercise, to open unto you the art and mystery of
Contentment: What way a Christian comes to Contentment, there is a great
Mystery and art in it, by that that has been opened to you there will appear
some mystery and art, as that a man should be content with his affliction, and
yet thoroughly sensible of his affliction too, to be thoroughly sensible of an
affliction, and to endeavor the removing of it by all lawful means, and yet to
be content, there is a mystery in that, how to Join these two together, to be
sensible of an affliction as much as that man or woman that is not content, I
am sensible of it as fully as they, and I seek ways to be delivered from it as
well as they, and yet still my heart abides content, this is I say a mystery
that is very hard to be understood by a carnal heart; but grace does teach such
a mixture, does teach us how to make a mixture of sorrow and a mixture of joy
together; and that makes Contentment, the mingling of joy and sorrow, of
gracious joy and gracious sorrow together, grace teaches us how to moderate and
to order an affliction so as there shall be a sense of it, and yet for all that
Contentment under it.

There are diverse things further for the opening of the Mystery of Contentment.

The First Thing therefore is this, To show that there is a great mystery in
it. One that is contented in a Christian way it may be said of him that he is
the most contented man in the world, and yet the most unsatisfyed man in the
world, these two together must needs be mysterious, I say a contented man as he
is the most contented, so he is the most unsatisfied of any man in the world.
You never learned the mystery of contentment except it may be said of you, that
as you are the most contented man, so you are the most unsatisfied man in the
world.

You will say, how is that? A man that has learned the art of Contentment is
the most contented with any low condition that he has in the world, and yet he
cannot be satisfied with the enjoyment of all the world, and yet he is
contented if he has but a crust, but bread and water, that is if God disposes
of him for the things of the world, to have but bread and water for his present
condition, he can be satisfied with Gods dispose in that; yet if God should
give unto him Kingdoms and Empires, all the world to rule, if he should give it
him for his portion, he would not be satisfied with that; here is the mystery of
it, though his heart be so enlarged as the enjoyment of all the world and ten
thousand worlds cannot satisfy him for his portion; yet he has a heart quieted
under Gods dispose, if he gives him but bread and water; to join these two
together, this must needs be a great art and mystery. Though he be contented
with God in a little, yet those things that would content other men, will not
content him; The men of the world they seek after estates, and think if they
had thus much, and thus much, they would be content, they aim at no great
matters; but if I had (perhaps some man thinks) but two or three hundred a
year, then I should be well enough; If I had but a hundred a year, or a
thousand a year (says another) then I should be satisfied: but says a
gracious heart, If he had ten hundred thousand times so much a year, it would
not satisfy him, if he had the quintessence of all the excellencies of all the
creatures in the world, it could not satisfy him, yet this man can sing, and
be merry, and joyful when he has but a crust of bread and a little water in
the world: Surely Religion is a great Mystery, great is the Mystery of
Godliness, not only in the Doctrinal part of it, but in the Practical part of
it also. Godliness teaches us this Mystery, Not to be satisfied with all the
world for our portion, and yet to be content with the meanest condition in
which we are. As Luther, when he had great gifts sent him from Dukes and
Princes, he refused it, and says he, I did vehemently protest God should not
put me off so; it is not that which will content me. A little in the world will
content a Christian for his passage: Mark, here lies the Mystery of it, A
little in the world will Content a Christian for his passage, but all the world
and ten thousand times more, will not Content a Christian for his portion: Now
a carnal heart will be Content with these things of the world for his portion;
and there is the difference between a Carnal heart and a Gracious heart: But
says a gracious heart, Lord do with me what thou will for my passage through
this world, I will be content with that, but I cannot be content with all the
world for my portion, so there is the mystery of true Contentation. A contented
man though he be most contented with the least things in the world, yet he is
the most unsatisfied man that lives in the world. That Soul that is capable of
God, can be filled with nothing else but God; nothing but God can fill a soul
that is capable of God: though a gracious heart knows that it is capable of
God, and was made for God; Carnal hearts think of no reference to God: but a
gracious heart being enlarged to be capable of God, and enjoying somewhat of
him, nothing in the world can fill a gracious heart, it must be only God
himself; and therefore you shall observe, That let God give what he will to a
gracious heart, a heart that is godly, except he gives Himself, it will not do;
a godly heart will not only have the mercy, but the God of that mercy, as well
as its self, and then a little matter is enough in the world, so be it he has
the God of that mercy he does enjoy. In Phil. 4.7, 9. I shall need go no
further to show a notable Scripture for this, Compare verse. 7. with verse. 9.
And the peace of God which passes all understanding shall keep your hearts and
minds through Jesus Christ. The peace of God shall keep your heart. Then in
verse. 9. Those things which you have both learned and received, and heard and
seen in me, do; and the God of peace shall be with you, The peace of God shall
keep you, and the God of peace shall be with you. This is that that I would
observe from this Text, That the peace of God is not enough to a gracious
heart, except it may have the God of that peace. A carnal heart could be
satisfied if he might but have outward peace, though it be not the peace of
God; peace in the State and his trading would satisfy him: But mark how a
godly heart goes beyond a carnal, all outward peace is not enough, but I must
have the peace of God: But suppose you have the peace of God, Will not that
quiet you? No, I must have the God of peace, as the peace of God, so the God of
peace; that is, I must enjoy that God that gives me the peace, I must have the
cause as well as the effect, I must see from whence my peace comes, and enjoy
the fountain of my peace, as well as the stream of my peace; and so in other
mercies, have I health from God, I must have the God of my health to be my
portion, or else I am not satisfied: It is not life, but the God of my life; it
is not riches, but the God of those riches that I must have, the God of my
preservation, as well as my preservation; a gracious heart is not satisfied
without this; To have the God of the mercy, as well as the mercy, In Psalm.
73.25. Whom have I in Heaven but Thee, and there is none upon the Earth that I
desire besides thee. It is nothing in Heaven or Earth, can satisfy me, but thy
self; if God give thee not only Earth but Heaven, that thou should rule over
Sun, Moon and Stars, and have the rule over the highest of the sons of men, it
would not be enough to satisfy thee, except thou had God himself; There lies
the first mystery of Contentment; and truly a contented man, though he be the
most contented man in the world, yet he is the most unsatisfied man in the
world, that is, Those things that will satisfy the world, will not satisfy
him.

Secondly, There is this Mystery in Christian Contentation. A Christian comes
to Contentment, not so much by way of Addition, as by way of Substraction, that
is his way of Contentment, and that is a way that the world has no skill in. I
open it thus, Not so much by the adding to what he would have, or to what he
has, not by adding more to his condition, but rather by substracting of his
desires, and so to make his desires and condition to be even and equal. A
carnal heart knows no way to be Contented but this, I have such and such an
estate, and if I had this added to it, and the other comfort added that now I
have not, then I should be contented; it may be I have lost my Estate, if I
could have but that given to me, so as to make up my loss, then I should be a
contented man: But now Contentment does not come in that way, it comes not in I
say by the adding to what thou want, but by the substracting of thy desires;
it is all one to a Christian, either that I may get up unto what I would have,
or get my desires down to what I have; either that I may attain to what I do
desire, or bring down my desires to what I have already attained; my estate is
the same, for it is as suitable to me to bring my desire down to my condition,
as it is to raise up my condition to my desire. Now I say a heart that has no
grace, and is not instructed in this Mystery of Contentment, knows no way to
get contentment, but to have his estate raised up to his desires; but the other
has another way to Contentment, that is, he can bring his desires down to his
estate, and so he does attain to his Contentment. So the Lord fashions the
hearts of the children of men: Now if the heart of a man be fashioned to his
condition, he may have as much contentment as if his condition be fashioned to
his heart; some men have a mighty large heart, but they have a straight
condition, and they can never have Contentment when their hearts are big and
their condition is little; but now though a man cannot bring his condition to
be as big as his heart, yet if he can bring his heart to be as little as his
condition, to bring them even, from thence is Contentment. The world is
infinitely deceived in this, To think that Contentment lies in having more than
they have; here lies the bottom and root of all Contentment, when there is an
evenness and proportion between our hearts and our condition; and that is the
reason that many that are godly men that are in a low condition, live more
sweet and comfortable lives than those that are richer: Contentment is not
always clothed with silk, and purple, and velvets, but Contentment is
sometimes in a russet suit, in a mean condition, as well as in a higher; and
many men that sometimes have had great estates, and God has brought them into
a lower condition, they have had more Contentment in that condition than the
other: Now how can that possible be? Thus easily, For if you did but understand
the root of Contentment, it consists in the sutableness and proportion of the
spirit of a man to his estate, and the evenness, when one end is not longer and
bigger than another: the heart is contented, there is comfort in that
condition; now let God give a man never so great riches, yet if the Lord gives
him up to the pride of his heart, he will never be contented: But now let God
bring any one into a mean condition, and then let God but fashion and suit his
heart to that condition and he will be content. As now in a man's going, Suppose
a man had a mighty long Leg, and his other Leg were short, why, though one of
his Legs be longer than ordinary, yet he could not go so well as a man that
has both his Legs shorter than he. I compare a long Leg, when one is longer
than another, to a man that has a high condition, and is very rich, and a
great man in the world, but he has a great proud heart too, that is longer and
larger than his condition: now this man cannot but be troubled in his
condition: Now another man that is in a mean condition, his condition is low,
and his heart is low too; so that his heart and his condition is both even
together, and this man goes on with more ease abundantly than the other does:
So that now a gracious heart works after this manner, The Lord has been
pleased to bring down my condition, now if the Lord bring down my heart and
make it even with my condition, then I am well enough: And so when God brings
down his condition, he does not so much labor to raise up his condition again,
as to bring down his heart to his condition: The Heathens themselves they had a
little glimpse of this; they could say, That the best riches that is, it is the
poverty of desires: that is a speech of a Heathen, that is, If a man or woman
have their desires cut short; and have no large desites, that man and woman
they are rich, when they can bring their desires to be but low: So this is the
Art of Contentment. Not to seek to add to our conditions, but to substract from
our desires. Another has this, The way to be rich, says he, it is not by
increasing of wealth, but by diminishing of our desires; for certainly that man
or woman is a rich man or woman that has their desires satisfied, now a
contented man has his desires satisfied; God satisfies his desires, that is,
all considered, he is satisfied in his condition for the present to be the best
condition, and so he comes to this Contentment by way of Substraction, and not
Addition.

The Third thing in the Art of Contentment is this, A Christian comes to
Contentment, not so much by getting off his burden that is upon him, as by the
adding another burden to him: this is a way that flesh and blood has little
skill in. You will say, how is this? In this manner, art thou afflicted, and is
there a great load and burden upon thee by reason of thy affliction? thou
think there is no way in the world to get Contentment, but O that this
burden were but off, O it is a heavy load, and few know what a burden I have!
What do thou think there is no way for the Contentment of thy spirit, but
this getting off thy burden? O thou art deceived, the way of Contentment is to
add another burden, that is, labor to load and burden thy heart with thy sin,
and the heavyer the burden of thy sin is to thy heart, the lighter will the
burden of thy affliction be to thy soul, and so shall thou come to be content:
If thy burden were lightened that would content thee, thou think there is no
way to lighten it but to get it off, but thou art deceived, for if thou can
get thy heart to be more burdened with thy sin; thou will be less burdened with
thy afflictions: You will say this is a strange way, for a man or woman to get
ease to their condition when they are burdened, to lay a greater burden upon
them? You think there is no other way when you are afflicted, but to be jolly
and merry, and get into company, Oh no, you are deceived, your burden will come
again, alas this is a poor way to get his spirit quieted, poor man! the burden
will be upon him again; but if thou would have thy burden light, if thou
can get alone and examine thy heart for thy sin, and charge thy soul with thy
sin; if thy burden be in thy estate, for the abuse of it, or if it be a burden
upon thy body, for the abuse of thy health, and strength, and the abuse of any
mercies that now the Lord has taken away from thee, thou have not honored God
with those mercies that thou have had, but thou have walked wantonly and
carelessly; and so fall a bemoaning thy sin before the Lord, and thou shall
quickly find the burden of thy affliction to be lighter than it was before; do
but try this piece of skill and art, to get your souls contented with any low
condition that God puts you into; many times in a family, when any affliction
befalls them, O what a deal of coffeehouse is there between man and wise, if
crossed in their estates at Land, or ill news from Sea, or those that they
trusted are broke, and the like, and perhaps somewhat in the family falls cross
between man and wife, or in reference to the children or servants, and there is
nothing but brabling and discontent among them, now they many times are
burdened with their own discontent, and perhaps will say one to another This
life is very uncomfortable for us to live thus discontented so as we do; but
have you ever tried this way, the husband and the wife? have you ever got alone
and said, Come, O let us go, and humble our souls before God together, let us
go into our chamber and humble our souls before God for our sins, whereby we
have abused those mercies that God has taken away from us, and we have
provoked God against us, O let us charge our selves with our sin, and be
humbled before the Lord together, have you tried such a way as this is? Oh you
would find the cloud would be taken away, and the Sun would shine in upon you,
and you would have a great deal more Contentment than ever yet you had: If a
man's estate be broken, either by plunderers, or any other way; now how shall
this man have Contentment? how? By the breaking of his heart; God has broken
thy estate, Oh seek to him for the breaking of thy heart likewise; Indeed a
broken estate, and a whole heart, a hard heart, will not join together, there
will be no Contentment; but a broken estate, and a broken heart, will so suit
together, as there will be more Contentment than there was before; add
therefore to the breaking of thy estate, the breaking of thy heart what thou
can, and that is the way to be contented in a Christian manner, which is the
Third Mystery in Christian Contentation.

The fourth thing is this, It is not so much the removing of the affliction
that is upon us, as the changing of the affliction, the Metamorphosing of the
affliction, when it is quite turned and changed into another thing: I mean in
regard of the use of it, though for the matter the affliction abide still. The
way of Contentment to a carnal heart its only the removing of the affliction,
Oh that it may be gone; no but says a gracious heart, God has taught me a way
for Contentment, though the affliction shall continue still for the matter of
it, but there is a virtue of grace to turn this affliction into good; it takes
away but only the sting and poison of it; As now, Suppose poverty, A man's
estate is lost; well, is there no way to be contented til your estate be made
up again? Till your poverty be removed? Yes, certainly Christianity would teach
Contentment, though poverty continues, yet it will teach you how to turn your
poverty into spiritual riches; that you shall be poor still for your outward
estate; but this shall be altered, whereas before it was once a natural evil to
you, it comes now to be turned into a spiritual benefit to you, and so you come
to be content. It is a speech of Ambrose, Even poverty it self it is riches
unto holy men: Godly men do make their poverty turn to be riches, they get more
riches out of their poverty than ever they get out of their revenues, out of
all their trading in this world; they never had such incomes as they have had
out of their poverty; This a carnal heart will think strange, that a man shall
make poverty to be the most gainful trade that ever he had in the world; I am
persuaded that many Christians have found it so, that they have got more good
by their poverty than ever they got by all their riches, you find it in
Scripture, therefore think not this strange that I am speaking of, you do not
find any one godly man that came out of an affliction worse than when he came
into it, though for a while he was shaken, yet at last he was better for an
affliction: but a great many godly men you find have been worse for their
prosperity, scarce one Godly man that you read in Scripture of but was worse
for prosperity (except Daniel and Nehemiah, I do not read of any hurt they got
by their prosperity that they had) scarce (I think) is any one example of any
godly man but was rather worse for his prosperity than better; so that you see
its no such strange thing neither to one that is gracious, that they shall get
good by their affliction: Luther has such an expression in his Comment upon
the 5. Chapter of the Galathians, in the 17 verse, in his Comment upon that
place says, A Christian becomes a mighty Worker, and a wonderful Creator,
that is (says he) to create out of heaviness joy, out of terror comfort, out
of sin righteousness, out of death life, and brings light out of darkness. It
was Gods Pretogative and great Power, his Creating Power to command the light
to shine out of darkness; now a Christian is partaker of the Divine Nature, so
the Scripture says, Grace it is part of the Divine Nature, and being part of
the Divine Nature it has an impression of Gods Omnipotent Power, that is, to
create light out of darkness, to bring good out of evil, now by this way a
Christian comes to be content. God has given a Christian such a virtue, as can
turn afflictions into mercies, can turn darkness into light; if a man had the
power that Christ had when the water pots were filled, he could by a word turn
the water into wine; if you that have nothing but water to drink, yet if you
had a power to turn it into wine then you may be contented: Certainly a
Christian has received this power from God, to work thus miraculously; it is
the nature of Grace to turn water into wine, that is, to turn the water of your
affliction, into the wine of Heavenly consolation. If you understand this in a
carnal way, I know it will be ridiculous for a Minister to speak thus before
you, and many carnal people are ready to make such expressions as these to be
ridiculous, understanding them in a carnal way: Just as Nicodem us in the 3. of
John, What! can a man be born when he is old, can he enter the second time into
his mothers womb and be born? So when we speak of grace that it can turn water
into wine, and turn poverty into riches, and make poverty a gainful trade,
says a carnal heart, Let them have that trade if they will, and let them have
water to drink, and see if they can turn it into wine: Oh! take heed thou
speak not in a scornful way of the ways of God; grace has the power to
turn afflictions into mercies. Two men shall have one affliction, and to one
man it shall be as gall and wormwood, and it shall be wine, and honey, and
delightfulness, and joy, and advantage, and riches, to another. This is the
mystery of Contentment, not so much by removing the evil, as by metamorphosing
the evil, by changing the evil into good.

The fifth thing is this, A Christian comes to this Content meant by making up
the wants of his condition, by the performance of the work of his condition.
This is the way of Contentment. There is such a condition that I am in, many
wants, I want this and the other comfort, well, how shall I come to be
satisfied and content? A carnal heart thinks this, I must have my wants made
up, or else it is impossible that I should be content: No, but says a gracious
heart, What is the duty of the condition God has put me into? Indeed my
condition is changed, I was not long since in a prosperous condition, but God
has changed my condition: the Lord has called me no more Naomi, but Marah:
Now what am I to do? What can I think now? Are those duties that God requires
of me in the condition that he has now put me into? And let me put forth my
strength in the performance of the duties of my present condition. Others they
spend their thoughts in those things that shall disturb and disquiet them; and
so they grow more and more discontented; yea, but let me spend my thoughts in
thinking what my duty is, what is the duty of my present condition which I am
in: Oh! says a man whose condition is changed, and he has lost his estate,
Had I but my estate that I had heretofore, how would I use it to Gods glory!
But God has made me to see that I did not honor him with my estate as I ought
to have done, Oh! had I it again, I would do better than ever I did: but this
may be but a temptation, therefore you should rather think, What does God
require of me in the condition I am now brought into? And thou should labor
to bring thy heart to quiet and Contentment, by setting thy soul on work about
the duties of thy present condition; And the truth is, I know nothing more
availeable for the quieting of a Christian Soul, and getting Contentment, than
this, The setting thy heart on work about the duties of thy very present
condition that now thou art in, and take heed of thy thoughts about other
conditions as a mere Temptation. I cannot compare the folly of men and women
that think to get Contentment with their musing about other conditions, better
than to the way of Children; perhaps they are gotten upon an Hill, and they
look a good way off and see another Hill, and they think if they were on the
top of that, then they were able to touch the clouds with their Fingers; but
when they are on the top of that Hill, Alas then they are as far from the
clouds as they were before. So it is with many that think, If they were in such
a condition then they should have Contentment; and perhaps they get into that
condition, and then they are as far from Contentment as before: But then they
think if they were in another condition, they would be contented, and then when
they have got into that condition, they are still as far from Contentment as
before. No, no, let me consider what is the duty of my present condition, and
content my heart with this, and say, Well, though I am in a low condition, yet
I am serving the Counsels of God in that condition wherein I am; it is the
Counsel of God that has brought me into this condition that I am in, and I
desire to serve the Counsel of God in that condition. There is a notable
Scripture concerning David. It is said of him, That he served his Generation,
after David had served his Generation according to the Will of God, then he
slept. It is a Speech of Paul concerning him, in Act. 13.36. So it is in your
Books, After he had served his Generation according to the Will of God: But now
the word that is translated Will, it is the Counsel of God, and so it may be
translated as well, That after David in his Generation had served Gods
Counsel, then he fell asleep. We ordinarily take the words thus, That David
served his Generation; that is, He did the work of his Generation, that is to
serve a man's Generation. But it is more plain, if you read it thus: After David
in his Generation had served the Counsel of God, then David fell asleep. O that
should be the care of a Christian to serve our Gods Counsel. What is the
Counsel of God? The condition that I am in, God does put me into it by his own
Counsel, the Counsel of his own Will; Now I must serve Gods Counsel in my
Generation, look what is the Counsel of God in my condition, I must look to
serve that: and so I shall have my heart quieted for the present, and shall
live and die peaceably, and comfortably, if I be careful to serve Gods Counsel,

A sixth thing in the Mystery of Contentment is this, A gracious heart is
contented by the melting of his will and desires into Gods will and desires, by
this means he gets Contentment; and this is a Mystery to a carnal heart. It is
not by having his own desires satisfied as before, but by melting his will and
desires into Gods will: So that he comes to have (in one sense) his desires
satisfied though he has not the thing that before he did desire, yet he comes
to be satisfied in this, because he makes his will to be all one with Gods
Will. This is a little higher degree than submitting to the will of God. You
all say, you should submit to Gods will; but a Christian has gotten beyond
this; that is, he can make Gods will and his to be the same: so it is said of
Believers, that they are joined to the Lord, and are one spirit; that is, look
what Gods Will is, I do not only see reason to submit to it, but Gods Will is
my Will: When the Soul can make over (as it were) its Will to God, It must
needs then have Contentment. Others would fain get the thing they do desire, O!
but says a gracious heart, that that God would have I would have too; I will
not only yield to it, but I would have it too; A gracious heart has learned
this art, Not only to make the Commanding Will of God to be its own will, that
is What God commands me to do, I will do it; but to make the Providential will
of God, and the Operative will of God to be his will also: God commands this
thing, which perhaps you that are Christians may have some skill in, but
whatsoever God works, you must will as well as what God commands, you must make
Gods Providential will, and his Operative Will, as well your Will as Gods Will,
and so you must come to Contentment: Here a Christian makes over his Will to
God, and in making over his Will to God, he has no other Will but only Gods:
As suppose a man makes over his Debt to another man, if that man that I owe the
Debt to, be satisfied and contented, I am satisfied, because I have made it
over to him, and I need not be discontented and say, My Debt is not paid, and I
am not satisfied; Yes, you are satisfied, for he that you made over your Debt
to he is satisfied. Just thus it is for all the world between God and a
Christian, a Christians heart makes over his will to God; now then, if Gods
will be satisfied, then I am satisfied, for I have then no will of mine own, it
is melted into the Will of God; for so that is the excellency of Grace, Grace
does not only subject the Will to God, but it does melt the Will into Gods
will, so that they are now but one will; what a sweet satisfaction must the
soul have then in this condition, when all is made over to God: You will say,
This is hard. I will express it a little more: A gracious heart must needs have
satisfaction this way, because godliness does teach him this, To see that his
good is more in God, than in himself; the good of my life, and comforts, and my
happiness, and my glory, and my Riches is more in God than it is in my self:
(that perhaps we may speak to further, when we come to the Lessons that are to
be learned.) But upon this it is, that a gracious heart has Contentment, he
does melt his will into Gods; for salth he, if God have glory, I have glory,
Gods glory is my glory, and therefore Gods will is mine, if God have riches,
then I have riches, if God be magnified, then I am magnified, if God be
satisfied, then I am satisfied, Gods wisdom and holiness is mine, and therefore
his will must needs be mine, and my will must needs be his; here is the art of
a Christians Contentment, he melts his will into the will of God, and makes
over his will to God, O Lord, thou shall choose our inheritance for us, Psalm. 73.

The Seventh thing in the Art of Contentment is this, The Mystery consists not
so much by bringing any thing without, to make my condition more comfortable,
as to purge out something that is within. The men of the world now, when they
would have Contentment, and want any thing, Oh they must have somewhat from
without to content them; but says a godly man, let me get something out that is
in already, and then I shall come to Contentment; As suppose a man has an
aguish humor that makes his drink taste bitter, now says he, You must put some
Sugar into my drink, and his Wife puts in some, and yet the drink tastes
bitter, Why? Because the bitterness comes from a bitter choleric humor within;
but let the Physician come and give him a bitter Potion to purge out the
bitterness that is within, and then he can taste his drink well enough: Just
thus it is with the men of the world, Oh such a condition is bitter, and if I
could have such and such a mercy added to this mercy, then it would be sweet;
now if God should put a spoonful or two of Sugar in, it would be bitter still.
But the way to Contentment is to purge out thy lusts and bitter humors. Jam.
4.1. From whence are wars, and strifes, are they not from your lusts that are
within you? They are not so much from things without, but from within; as
sometimes I have said, It is not all the storms that are abroad that can make
an earthquake, but the vapors that are got within: and so if those lusts that
are within thy heart, if they were got out, thy condition would be a contented
condition. These are the mysterious ways of Godliness, that the men of the
world never think of, When did thou ever think of such a way as this is, for
to go and purge out the distempers of thy heart that are within: Here are Seven
particulars now named, there were a great many more that I had thought of. And
now without the understanding of these things, and the practice of them, you
will never come to a true Contentation in your way, Oh you will be bunglers in
this Trade of Christianity; but the right perceiving of these things, will help
you to be instructed in it as in a Mystery.

SERMON, III. at Stepney. Aug. 10. 1645.
PHIL. 4.11. For I have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be
content.

THE Mystery of Contentment will appear yet further. A gracious heart gets
Contentment in a mysterious way, a way that the world is not acquainted with.

Eighthly, He lives upon the dew of Gods blessing: It Is the similitude of one
Adrian Junius, setting out a contented man by a Grasshopper, leaping and
skipping up and down, that lives upon the dew, and he has this motto, I am
content with what I have, and hope for better. A Grasshopper does not live upon
the grass as other things do, you cannot know what it feeds upon; other things
though as little as Grasshoppers, yet feed upon seeds or little flies, and such
things, but the Grasshopper, you know not what it feeds upon: So a Christian can
get food that the world knows not of, in a secret way is a Christian fed by
the dew of the blessing of God, a poor man or woman what has but a little
which has grace, lives a more contented life than his rich neighbor that has
a great deal coming in, we find it so ordinarily, so that though they have but
a little, yet they have a secret blessing of God going in it, that they are not
able to express to any other man; if you would come to them and say, How comes
it that you live so comfortable as you do? they are not able to tell you what
they have, but they find there is a sweetness in what they do enjoy, and they
know this by experience, that they never had such sweetness in former times,
that though they had more plenty in former times than now they have, yet they
know they had not such sweetness; but how this comes they cannot tell; and we
may show some particulars, even in that Godly men do enjoy, that makes their
condition to be sweet.

As now, Take these four or five particulars that a Godly man finds Contentment
in what he has, though it be never so little.

1. Because in what he has, he has the love of God, he has Gods love to him
in what he has: If a King should send a piece of meat from his own table, it
is a great deal more comfortable to a Courtier than if he had twenty dishes at
ordinary allowance, if the King send but any little thing and say, Go and carry
this to such a man as a token of my love, Oh how delightful is that unto him!
Are your husbands at Sea, and send you a token of their love, it is more than
forty times so much that you have in your houses already: Every good thing the
people of God do enjoy, they enjoy it in Gods love, as a token of Gods love,
and coming from Gods eternal love unto them, this must needs be very sweet unto
them.

2. What they have it is sanctified to them for good; Other men have what they
enjoy in a way of common providence, but the Saints in a special way; Others
have what they have and there is all, they have meat, and drink, and houses,
and clothes, and money, and that is all. But a gracious heart finds contentment
in this, I have it, and I have a sanctified use of it too, I find God going
along with what I have to draw my heart nearer to him, and sanctify my heart
to him; If I find my heart drawn nearer to God by what I enjoy; its more a
great deal than if I have it without any sanctifying my heart by it; there is a
secret dew that goes along with it, there is the dew of Gods love in it, and the
dew of sanctification.

3. A gracious heart what he has, he has it upon free cost, he is not like to
be called to pay for what he has: The difference between what a godly man
has, and a wicked man, is in this: A godly man is as a child in an Inn; and
In-keeper has his child in his house, and the Father provides his diet, and
lodging, and what is fit for him; Now there comes a stranger, and the stranger
has Dinner and Supper provided, and Lodging, but the stranger must pay for
all; it may be the Childs fare is meaner than the fare of the stranger, the
stranger has boiled, and roast, and baked; but he must pay for it, there must
come a reckoning for it. Just thus it is, many of Gods people have but mean
fare; but God as a Father provides it, and it is on free cost, and they must
not pay for what they have, it is paid for before; but the wicked in all their
pomp, and pride, and bravery, they have what they call for, but there must come
a reckoning for all, they must pay for all in the conclusion: And is it not
better to have a little upon free cost, than to come to have all to pay for?
Grace does show a man that what he has, he has it on free cost, from God as
from a father, and therefore must needs be very sweet.

Fourthly, A godly man may very well be content, though he has but little, For
what he has he has it by right of Jesus Christ, by the purchase of Jesus
Christ, he has a right to it, another manner of right to what he has, than
any wicked man can have to what he has; a wicked man has these outward
things; I do not say they are usurpers of what they have, but they have a right
to it, and that before God, But how? It is a right by mere donation, that is,
God by his free bounty does give it to them; but the right that the Saints
have, it is a right of purchase, it is paid for, and it is their own, and they
may in a holy manner, and holy way, challenge whatsoever they have need of. We
cannot express the right of a holy man, the difference between his right and
the right of the wicked more fully than by this similitude: A Malefactor that
is condemned to die, yet he has by favor granted to him his supper provided
over night, and you cannot say though the Malefactor has forfeited all his
right to all things, to every bit of bread, yet if he shall have a supper
granted to him, he does not steal it, though all his right is forfeited by his
fault, after he is once condemned he has no right to any thing. So it is with
the wicked, they have forfeited all their right to all comforts in this world,
they are condemned by God as Malefactors and are going to execution; but if God
will in his bounty give them something to preserve them here in the world, they
cannot be said to be thieves or robbers: Now a man has granted to him a supper
over night before his Execution, but is that like the supper that he was wont
to have in his own house, when he Eat his own bread, and had his Wife and
Children about him? Oh! a dish of green Herbs at home would be a great deal
better than any dainties in such a Supper as that is; but now a Child of God
has not a right merely by Donation, but what he has it is his own through the
purchase of Christ; every bit of bread that thou eatest, if thou be a godly
man or woman, Jesus Christ has bought it for thee, thou go to market and
buyest thy meat and drink with thy Money, but know that before thou have bought
it, or paid Money, Christ has bought it at the hand of God the Father with his
blood; thou have it at the hands of men for Money, but Christ has bought it at
the hand of his Father by blood: and certainly it is a great deal better and
sweeter now though it be but a little.

Fifthly, There Is another thing that shows the sweetness that there is in that
little that the Saints have, by which they come to have Contentment, whereas
others cannot: that is, Every little that they have, it is but as an earnest
penny of all the glory that is reserved for them, it is given them by God, but
as the forerunner of those eternal mercies that the Lord intends for them, Now
if a man has but twelve pence given to him as an earnest penny for some great
possession that he must have; is not that better than if he had forty pounds
given unto him otherwise? So every comfort that the Saints have in this world,
it is an earnest penny to them of those eternal mercies that the Lord has
provided for them; as every affliction that the wicked have here it is but the
beginning of sorrows, and forerunner of those eternal sorrows that they are
like to have hereafter in Hell; to every comfort thou have, is a forerunner of
those eternal mercies thou shall have with God in Heaven; not only the
consolations of Gods Spirit as the forerunner of those eternal comforts thou
shall have in Heaven; But when thou sit at thy Table, and rejoycest with
thy Wife and Children, and Friends, thou may look upon every one of those
but as a forerunner, yea, the very carnest penny of Eternal life unto thee.
Now then if this be so, no marvel though a Christian be contented; (this is a
mystery to the wicked;) I have what I have out of the love of God, and I have
it sanctified to me by God, and I have it of free cost from God by the purchase
of the blood of Jesus Christ, and I have it as a forerunner of those eternal
mercies that are reserved for me; and in this my soul rejoices. There Is a
secret dew of Gods goodness and Blessing upon him in his estate, that others
have not: and by all this you may see the meaning of that Scripture, Prove.
16.8. Better is a little with righteousness, than great revenues without right.
A man that has but a little, yet if he has it with righteousness, it is
better than a great deal without right; yea, better than the great revenues of
the wicked: so you have it in another Scripture. That Is the next Particular in
Christian Contentment; the mystery is in this, That he lives upon the dew of
Gods blessing in all the good things that he does enjoy.

The Ninth thing wherein the Mystery of Christian Contentment consists, is
this: Not only the good things that he has, he has the dew of Gods blessing
in them, and they are very sweet to him; but all the afflictions, all the evils
that do be fall him, he can see love in them all; and can enjoy the sweetness
of love in his afflictions, as well as in his mercies. Yea, the truth is, The
afflictions of Gods People come from the same Eternal Love that Jesus Christ
did come from. And that speech of Hierom, He is a happy man that is beaten when
the stroke is a stroke of love. All Gods strokes are strokes of love and mercy,
All Gods ways are mercy and truth to those that fear him and love him, Psalm.
25.10. The ways of God, the ways of affliction, as well as the ways of
prosperity, are mercy and love to him. Grace gives a man an eye, a piercing eye
to pierce into the Counsels of God, those Eternal Counsels of God for good unto
him, even in his afflictions to see the love of God in every affliction as well
as in prosperity. Now this is a mystery to carnal hearts, they can see no such
thing perhaps they think God loves them when he prospers them, and makes them
rich; but they think God loves them not when he does afflict them, that is a
Mystery; but grace instructs men in that Mystery, grace enables men to see love
in the very frowns of Gods face, and so comes to receive Contentment.

In the tenth place, A godly man has Contentment in the way of a Mystery,
Because as he sees all his afflictions come from the same love that Jesus
Christ did: so he sees them sanctified in Jesus Christ, sanctified as a
Mediator, he sees (I say) all the sting and venom, and poison of them all to be
taken out by the virtue of Jesus Christ, the Mediator between God and Man: As
now for instance, Thus, a Christian when he would have Contentment falls a
working, What is my affliction? Is it poverty, that God strikes me withal?
Jesus Christ had not a house to hide his head in, the Fowls of the air had
nests, and the Foxes had holes, but the Son of Man not a hole to hide his head
in: now my poverty is sanctified by Christ's poverty, I can see by faith the
curse and sting and venom of my poverty, taken out by the poverty of Jesus
Christ, Christ Jesus he was poor in this world to deliver me from the curse of
my poverty, that it should not be cursed unto me, then my poverty is not
afflictive, if I can be contented in such a condition. That is the way, not to
stand and repine, because I have not what others have, no, but I am poor, and
Christ was therefore poor that he might bless my poverty to me.

And so again, Am I discouraged, dishonored; is my good name taken away? why
Jesus Christ he had dishonor put upon him, he was called Beelzebub, and a
Samaritan, and they said he had a Devil in him, all the foul aspersions that
could be were cast upon Jesus Christ, and this was for me, that I might have
the disgrace that is cast upon me to be sanctified unto me, whereas another man
his heart is overwhelmed with dishonor and disgrace, and he goes this way to
work to get Contentment; perhaps if you be spoken ill of, you have no other way
to ease and right your selves, but if they do rail upon you, you will rail upon
them again; and thus you think to ease your selves. Oh! but a Christian has
another manner of way to ease himself; Others rail and speak ill of me, but did
they not rail upon Jesus Christ, and speak evil of him? And what am I in
comparison of Christ? And the subjection of Christ to such an evil, it was for
me, that though such a thing should come upon me, I might know that the curse
of it is taken from me through Christ's subjection to that evil: thus a
Christian can be contented when any body speaks ill of him: Now this is a
Mystery to you, to get Contentment after such a manner as this is. So, if men
jeer and sceff at you, Did they not do so to Jesus Christ? they jeered and
scoffed at him, and that when he was in his greatest extremitic upon the Cross,
say they, Here Is the King of the Jews, and they bowed the knee, and said, Hail
King of the Jews, and put a reed into his hand and mocked him. Now I get
contentment in the midst of scorns and jeers, by considering that Christ was
scorned, and by acting Faith upon that which Christ did suffer for me. So, am I
in great pain of my body? Jesus Christ had as great pain upon his body as I
have, though its true, he had not such kind of sickness as we have, but yet he
had as great pain and tortures in his body, and that that was deadly to him, as
well as the sickness is to us: The exercising of Faith upon what Christ did
endure, that is the way to get Contentment in the midst of our pains: one lies
vexing and fretting and cannot bear his pain; art thou a Christian? have thou
ever tried this way of getting contentment, to act thy faith upon all the pains
and sufferings that Jesus Christ did suffer? this would be the way of
contentment; and a Christian gets contentment under pains after this manner;
sometimes one that is very godly and gracious, you shall have him lie under
grievous pains and extremities very cheerfully, and you wonder at it; this is
the way that he gets it, he gets it by acting his faith upon what pains Jesus
Christ did suffer. Thou art afraid of death; the way to get Contentment, it is,
by exercising thy faith upon the death of Jesus Christ. yea, it may be thou
have inward troubles in thy soul, and God withdrawes himself from thee, but
still thy faith is to be exercised upon the sufferings that Jesus Christ
endured in his Soul, he powered forth his Soul before God, then when he sweat
drops of water and blood, he was in an Agony in his very Spirit, and he found
even God himself in a way to forsake him; now the acting thy Faith upon Jesus
Christ thus, brings Contentment; And is not this a mystery to carnal hearts? A
gracious heart finds Contentment in a way of mystery: no marvel though Saint
Paul says, I am instructed in a Mystery, to be contented in whatsoever
condition I am in.

In the Eleventh place, There is yet a further mystery (for this I hope you
will find a very useful point unto you) and you will see what a plain way there
is, (before we have done) for one that is skilled in Religion to get
Contentment, though it is hard for one that is carnal. I say, the eleventh
Mystery in Contentment is this, A gracious heart has Contentment by fetching
strength from Jesus Christ, he is able to hear his burden by fetehing strength
from another. Now this is a riddle indeed, and it would be a ridiculous thing
to be spoken of in the Schools of Philosophers, to say, If there be a burden
upon you, you must fetch strength from another, indeed to have another to come
and stand under the burden, that way they would know; but that you shall be
strengthened by another's strength that is not near you to your outward view,
that they would think ridiculous: but now a Christian finds satisfaction in
every condition by getting strength from another, by going out of it self to
Jesus Christ, and by Faith acting upon Christ, and bringing the strength of
Jesus Christ into its own soul, and thereby is enabled to bear whatsoever God
lays upon him, by the strength that he finds from Jesus Christ, Of his
fullness do we receive grace for grace; there is strength in Jesus Christ not
only to sanctify and save us, but strength to support us under all our burdens
and afflictions, and Christ expects that when we are under any burden, that we
would act our Faith upon him to draw virtue and strength from him; the acting
of Faith, that is the great Grace that is to be acted under afflictions, its
true, other graces should be acted, but the grace of Faith it draws strength
from Christ, in looking upon him that has the fullness of all strength to be
conveyed into the hearts of all Believers. Now if a man has a burden upon him,
yet he can have strength added to him, if the burden be doubled, yet if he can
have his strength to be trebled, the burden will not be heavier but lighter
than it was before to our natural strength. Indeed our afflictions may be
heavy, and we cry out, O we cannot bear them, we cannot bear such an
affliction: Though thou can not tell how to bear it with thine own strength,
yet what can thou tell what thou shall do with the strength of Jesus Christ?
Thou say thou can not bear it, why do thou think that Christ could not
bear it? if Christ could bear it, why may not thou come to bear it? You will
say, can I have the strength of Christ: Yea, that is made over to thee by
faith, so the Scripture says, That the Lord is our strength, God himself is
our strength, and Christ is our strength, diverse Scriptures we have that way;
that Christ's strength is thine, made over to thee, that so thou may be able
to bear whatsoever lies upon thee, and therefore we find such a strange kind of
expression in the Epistle of St. Paul to the Collossians, praying for the
Saints, That they might be strengthened with all might, according unto his
glorious power, unto what? Unto all patience, and long-suffering with
joyfulness, Strengthened with all might, according to the Power of God, the
glorious Power of God, unto all patience and long-suffering with joyfulness:
You may not therefore be content with a little strength, so that you are able
to bear what a man might bear by the strength of reason and nature; but to be
strengthened with all might, according to the glorious Power of God, unto all
patience, and to all long-suffering: Oh you that are now under very heavy and
sad afflictions more than ordinary, look upon this Scripture, and consider how
this Scripture is made good in you, why may you not have this Scripture made
good in you, if you be Godly? You should not be quiet in your own spirits,
except that you in some measure do get this Scripture to be made good in you,
so that-you may with some comfort say, through Gods mercy I find that strength
coming into me that is here spoken of in this Scripture. You shall labor when
you are under any great affliction (you that are Godly) to walk so, that others
may see such a Scripture made good in you; here is the glorious Power of God
that does strengthen his servants to all ong-suffering; and that with
joyfulness. Alas it may be you do not exercise so much patience, as a wise man
or a wise woman that has but natural reason. But where is the power of God,
the glorious power of God? where is the strengthening with all might, unto all
long-suffering and patience, and that with joyfulness? It is true, the spirit
of a man may be able to sustain his infirmities, may be able to sustain and
keep up his spirits, the natural spirit of a man, but much more then when this
spirit is acted with grace and holiness, and when it is filled with the
strength of Jesus Christ, this is the way of a godly man's getting contentment,
the Mystery of it, it is by fetching in strength from Jesus Christ.

Twelfthly, Another Mystery that there is in it, it is, That a Godly heart
enjoyes much of God in every thing that it has, and does know how to make up
all wants in God himself: that is another Mystery, he has God in what he has;
that I spoke to somewhat before, in showing the dew of Gods blessing in what he
has, for God is able to let out a great deal of his power in little things,
and therefore the miracles that God has wrought, have been as much in little
things as in great; now as God lets out a great deal of his power in working
miracles in smaller things, so he lets out a great deal of goodness in mercy,
in comforting and rejoicing the hearts of his people in little things as well
as in great; there may be as much riches in a pearl as in a great deal of
lumber; but now this is a distinct thing.

Further, A gracious heart as he lives upon Gods dew in a little that he has,
so when that little that he has shall be taken from him, what shall he do
then? Then you will say, if a man have nothing, there can be nothing fetched out
of nothing: But if the children of God have their little taken from them, they
can make up all their wants in God himself: Such a man is a poor man, the
plunderers came and took away all that he had, what shall he do then when all
is gone? But when all is gone, there is an art and skill that godliness teaches
to make up all those losses in God. Many men that have their houses burnt, go
about gathering, and so get up by many hands a little; but a Godly man knows
whither to go to get up all, even in God himself, so as he shall enjoy the
quintessence of the same good and comfort as he had before, for a Godly man
does not live so much in himself as he lives in God. This is now a mystery to a
carnal heart; I say, a gracious man does not live so much in himself as he does
in God, he lives in God continually; if there be any thing cut off from the
stream, he knows how to go to the Fountain and makes up all there; God is All
in All while he lives; I say, it is God that is All in All. Am not I to thee
(says Elkanah to Hannah) instead of ten children? So says God to a gracious
heart, Thou want this, thy Estate is plundered: Why, Am not I to
thee-instead of ten Houses, and ten Shops? I am to thee in stead of All; yet
not only instead of All, but come to me and thou shall have All again in me.
This indeed is an excellent Art, to be able to draw from God what it had before
in the Creature: Christian, How did thou enjoy comfort before; Was the
Creature any other to thee but a Conduit, a Pipe that did convey Gods goodness
to thee? The Pipe is cut off says God, Come to me to the Fountain and drink
immediately, though the beams be taken away, yet the Sun remains the same in
the Firmament as ever it was: What is that that satisfies God himself, but
because he does enjoy all Fullness in himself? so he comes to have satisfaction
in himself: Now if thou enjoyest God to be thy portion, if thy soul can say
with the Church, in Lament. 3.24. The Lord is my portion, says my soul. Why
should thou not be satisfied and contented as God? God is contented, he is
in eternal Contentment in himself; now if thou had that God to be thy portion
why should not thou be contented with him alone? God is contented with
himself alone; if thou have him thou may be contented with him alone; and it
may be, that is the reason that thy outward comforts are taken from thee, that
God may be All in All in thee: It may be whilst thou had these things here,
they did share with God in thy affections, a great part of the stream of thy
affection ran that way; now God would have the full stream run to him: As you
know it is with a man that has water comes to his house, and if there be
several Pipes, upon which he finds the water comes but scantly into his
Wash-house, he will rather stop the other Pipes, that he may have all the water
come in where he would have it. So here it may be God had some stream of thy
affection that ran to him then when thou did enjoy these things: Yea, but a
great deal was let out to the Creature, a great deal of thy affections did run
waste; now the Lord would not have the affections of his Children to run waste;
he does not care for other men's affections, but for thine they are precious,
and God would not have them to run waste, therefore does he cut off thy other
Pipes, that thy heart might run wholly upon him: As if you have Children,
because you have servants perhaps do feed them, and give them things, you
perceive that your servants do steal away the Hearts of your Children, you
would hardly be able to bear it, you would be ready to turn away such a
servant, and when the Servant is gone, the Child is at a great loss, it has
not the Nurse; but the Father or Mother intends by her putting away, that the
affections of the Child might run the more strongly toward himself, or her
self; and what loss has the Child that the affections that run in a rough
Channel before toward the servant, it runs toward the Mother? So, those
affections that run toward the creature, God would have them run toward
himself, that so he may be All in All to thee here in this World. And a
gracious heart can indeed tell how to enjoy God to be All in All to him: that
is the happiness of Heaven, to have God to be All in All. The Saints in Heaven
have not Houses and Lands, and Money, and Meat, and drink, and Clothes. You
will say they do not need them: Why do they not? It is because God is All in
All to them immediately. Now while thou live in this world, thou may come
to enjoy much of God, you may have much of heaven, while we live here in this
life we maycome to enjoy much of the very life that there is in heaven, and
what is that but the enjoyment of God to be all in all to us? There is one text
in the Revelations that speaks of the glorious condition of the Church that is
like to be even here in this world, Rev. 21.22. And I saw no Temple therein,
for the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb, are the Temple of it; and the City had
no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it, for the glory of God
did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof. They had no need of the Sun
or Moon. It speaks of such a glorious condition that the Church is like to be
in here in this world; this does not speak of Heaven: and that appears plainly
that this is not spoken of Heaven, but of a glorious estate that the Church
shall be in here, in this world, for it follows presently in the 24. and 26.
verses, And they (speaking of the Kings of the earth:) And the Kings of the
earth do bring their glory and honor unto it: Why, the Kings of the Earth shall
not bring their glory and honor into Heaven; but this is such a time when the
Kings of the Earth shall bring in their glory and honor to the Church. And in
the 26. verse, And they shall bring the glory and honor of the Nation into it;
therefore it must needs be meant here in this world and not in Heaven. Now if
there be such a time here in this world, that God shall be All in All, that in
no comparison there shall be no such need of Creatures as now there is, then
the Saints should labor to live as near that life as possibly they can, that
is, to make up all in God: Oh that you would but mind this mystery, that it may
be a reality to the hearts of the Saints in such times as these are, they would
find this privilege, that they get by Grace, to be worth thousands of worlds:
Hence is that of Jacob that I mentioned in another case, it is remarkable, and
comes in fully here, in Genesis 33. that notable speech of Jacob when his brother
Esau did meet him, ye find in one place, that Esau he refused Jacobs present,
in the 8. verse, when Jacob gave his present to him, he refused it, and told
Jacob that he had enough; What meanest thou by all this drove which I meet? And
he said, These are to find grace in thy sight: And Esau said, I have enough.
Now in the 11, verse there Jacob urges it still, (and says Jacob) I beseech
thee take it, for I have enough; now in your books it is the same in English, I
have enough (says Esau;) and I have enough (says Jacob:) but in the Hebrew
Jacobs word is different from Esau's, Jacob's word signifies, I have all
things, and yet Jacob was poorer than Esau. Oh this should be a shame to us,
that an Esau should say, I have enough; but now a Christian should say, I have
not only enough; but I have all: how has he all? Because he has God that is
All; And it was a notable speech of one, He has all things, that has him that
has all things. Surely thou have all things because thou have him for thy
portion, who has all things: God has all things in himself, and thou have God
to be thine for thy portion, and in that thou have all, and this is the mystery
of Contentment: It makes up all wants in God, this is that that the men of the
world have little skill in.

Now I have diverse other things yet to open in the Mystery of Contentment. I
should show likewise that a godly man not only makes up all in God, but finds
enough in himself to make up all, to make up all in himself, not from himself,
but in himself, and that may seem to be stranger than the other: to make up all
in God is somewhat, nay to make up all in himself, not from himself, but in
himself, that is, a gracious heart has so much of God within himself, that he
has enough there to make up all his wants that are without. In Prove. 14.14 A
good man shall be satisfied from himself, from that that is within himself,
that is the meaning, a gracious man he has a bird within his own bosom that
makes him melody enough, though he wants music, The Kingdom of heaven is
within you: In Luke 17.21. He has a Kingdom within him, and a Kingdom of God:
you see him spoken ill of abroad, he has a conscience within him that makes up
the want of a name and credit, that is instead of a thousand witnesses.

Thirteenth, A gracious heart fetches Contentment from the Covenant that God
has made with him. Now this is a way of fetching Contentment that the men of
the world know not of: they can fetch Contentment, if they have the creature to
satisfy them: But to fetch Contentment from the covenant of grace that they
have little skill in. I should here have opened two things: First, how to fetch
Contentment from the covenant of grace in general. (But I shall speak to that
in the next Sermon, and now only a word to the second:) Secondly, how he
fetches contentment from the particular branches of the covenant, that is, from
the particular promises that he has for the supplying of every particular
want: there is no condition that a godly man or woman can be in, but there is
some promise or other in the Scripture to help him in that condition. And that
is the way of his Contentment, to go out to the promises and fetch from the
promise, that which may supply: But this is but a dry business to a carnal
heart; but it is the most real thing in the world to gracious heart; When he
finds want of Contentment he repairs to the Promise, and the Covenant; and
falls to pleading the Promises that God has made. As I should have showed
several promises that God has made, let the affliction be what it will, I will
but only mention one that is the saddest affliction of all; in case of the
Visitation and the Plague. In Psalm. 91. now those that cannot have their
friends come to them by reason of the plague, and that cannot have other
comforts, in other afflictions they might have their friends and other things
to comfort them, but in that they cannot, Psalm. 91.10. There wall no evil
befall thee, neither shall any plague come nigh thy dwelling; Then here is a
promise for the pestilence in the 5. and 6. verses, this is a Scripture to
those that are in danger of it. You will say, this is a promise, that the
plague shall not come nigh them, but mark these two are joined, There shall no
evil befall thee; neither shall the plague come nigh thee, The evil of it shall
not come nigh thee.

Object. You will say, It does come to many godly men, and how can they make
use of this Scripture? it is rather a Scripture that may trouble them, because
here is a promise that it shall not come nigh them, and yet it does come nigh
them as well as others.

Answ. First, This is the answer I would give, The promises of outward
deliverances that were made to the people of God in the time of the Law were to
be understood then a great deal more literally, and fulfilled more literally,
than in the times of the Gospel, God makes it up otherwise with as much mercy;
though God made a covenant of Grace and eternal life in Christ with them, yet I
think there was another covenant too, that God speaks of as a distinct covenant
for outward things to deal with his peopleby, according to their ways either
in outward prosperity, or in outward afflictions, more than now, in a more
punctual set way, than in the times of the Gospel; and therefore when the
Children of Israel did but sin against God, they were sure to have public
judgments to come upon them, and if they did well, always public mercies; the
general constant way of God was to deal with the People of the Jews according
as they did well or ill, (in an ordinary way) with outward judgments and
outward mercies: but it is not so now in these times of the Gospel; we cannot
bring such a certain conclusion, that God did deal so severely with men by such
and such afflictions, that he will deal so with them now: and so that they
shall have outward prosperity as they had then: therefore that is the first
thing for the understanding of this and all other texts of that kind.

The second answer I would give is this: It may be their faith does not reach
to this promise; and God brings many times many outward afflictions, because
the faith of his people does not reach the promise, and that not only in the
old Testament, but in the time of the new Testament; Zachariah his time may be
said to be in the time of the new Testament, when he was struck with dumbness
because he did not believe, and that is given to be the cause why he was struck
with dumbness. But you will say now, Has Faith warrant to believe deliverance,
that it shall be fully delivered? I dare not say so, but it may act upon it, to
believe that God will make it good his own way; perhaps you have not done so
much, and so upon that, this promise is not fulfilled to you.

Thirdly, When God does make such promises to his people, yet still it must be
with this reservation, that God must have liberty to these three things.

1. That notwithstanding his promise, he will have liberty to make use of any
thing for your chastisement. 2. That he must have liberty to make use of your
estates, or liberties, or lives, for the furtherance of his own ends: If it be
to be a stumbling block to wicked and ungodly men, God must have liberty;
though he has made a promise to you, he will not lose the propriety that he
has in your estates and lives. 3. God must have so much liberty to make use of
what you have, for to show that his ways are unsearchable, and his judgments
past finding out, God reserves these three things in his hand still.
Object. But you will say, What good is there then in such a promise that God
makes to his people?

Answ. 1. That thou art under the protection of God more than others. Obj. But
what comfort is this if it does befall me?

Answ. Thou have this comfort, that the evil of it shall be taken from thee,
that if God will make use of this affliction for other ends, yet he will do it
so as he will make it up to thee some other way. Perhaps you have given your
children such a thing, but yet afterward if you have use of that thing, you
will come and say, I must have it, Why father may the child say, you gave it
me? But says the father I must have it, and I will make it up to you some
other way: Now the child does not think that the fathers love is ever a whit
the less to him. So when there is any such promise as this is, that God by his
promise gives thee his protection, and yet for all that such a thing befalls
thee, it is but as if the father should say, I gave you that indeed, but let me
have it and I will make it up to you some other way that shall be as good;
says God, let me have your health and liberty, and life, and it shall be made
up to you some other way.

Secondly, When ever the plague or pestilence comes to those that are under
such a promise, it is for some special and notable work, and God requires of
them to search and examine in a special manner to find out his meaning; there
is so much to be learned in the promise that God has made concerning this
particular evil, that the people of God they may come to quiet and content
their hearts in this affliction. I read in this Psalm that God has made a
promise to his people, to deliver them from the plague and pestilence, and yet
I do find it to come: It may be I have not made use of my faith in this promise
heretofore: and if God do bring afflictions upon me, yet God will make it up
some other way, God made a promise to deliver me, or at least to deliver me
from all the evil of it, now if this thing does befall me and yet I have a
promise of God, certainly the evil of it is taken away, this promise tells me
that if it does befall me, yet it is for some notable end, and because God has
use of my life, and intends to fetch about his glory some way that I know not
of: And if he will come in a fatherly way of chastisement, yet I will be
satisfied in the thing: So a Christian heart by reasoning out of the Word,
comes to satisfy his soul in the midst of such a heavy hand of God, and in
such a distressed condition as that is. Now carnal hearts they find not power
in the Word, that healing virtue that there is in the Word, to heal their
distracted cares, and the troubles of their spirits; but now, those that are
godly when they come to hear the Word, they find out, that in the Word there
is a plaster to all their wounds, and so they come to have ease and
contentment, in such conditions as are very grievous and miserable unto others.
But now, for other particular promises, and more generally for the Covenant of
Grace, how, and in what mysterious way the Saints do work to fetch out
Contentment and satisfaction to their souls, we shall refer to the next time.

SERMON, IV. at Stepney. Aug. 17. 1645.
PHIL. 4.11. For I have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be
content.

IN the last exercise we spoke of diverse things in the mystery of Contentment,
and in the close we spoke of two more, but we could not have time to open
either of them, I shall open them a little more largely, and then proceed to
some few more, and so to other things in the point.

That is the next thing, A Christian heart has not only contentment in God
(and certainly, he that has God, must have all, he that has him that has
all, he has all) But he is able to make up all his outward wants of
Creature Comforts from what he finds in himself: That may seem to be more
strange; It is true, perhaps we may convince men though they do not feel by
experience what it is to make up all in God, yet we may convince them that if
they have him that has all things, then they have all; for there is such a
fullness in God, he being the infinite first Being of all things that may make
up all their wants. But here is another thing, that is further: I say, A Godiy
man can make up whatsoever he wants without the creature, he can make it up in
himself, in Proverbs 14. verse. 14. A good man is satisfied in himself: as now,
If he wants outward comforts, good cheer, feasting; a good Conscience is a
continual feast, he can make up the want of a feast by that peace he has in
his own Conscience: if he wants melody abroad, he has a bird within him that
sings the most meldious songs that are in the world, and the most delightful.
And then, Does he want honor? he has his own Conscience witnessing for him,
that is as a thousand witnesses, the Scripture says in Luke 17. verse 21.
Neither shall they say, Lo, here; or Lo, there: for behold the Kingdom of God
is within you: A Christian then whatsoever he wants he can make it up, for he
has a Kingdom in himself, the Kingdom of God is within him. If one that is a
King should meet with a great deal of trouble when he is abroad, yet he
contents himself with this, I have a Kingdom of mine own; now here it is said,
the Kingdom of God is within a man, truly, upon this Scripture of the Kingdom
of God being within, those that are learned, if they would but look into that
Comment upon the Gospel that we have of a learned man, they shall find a very
strange conceit that he has about this very Text, he confesses indeed it is
inutterable; and so indeed it is: The Kingdom of God is within you: he makes it
that there is such a presence of God and Christ within the soul of a man, that
when the body dies (he says) that the soul goes into God and Christ that is
within him; the Souls going into God and Christ, and enjoying of that communion
with God and Christ that is within its self, that is Heaven to it (says he.)
He confesses he is not able to express himself, nor others cannot understand
fully what he intends; but certainly for the present before death, there is a
Kingdom of God within the soul, such a manifestation of God in the soul, that
is enough to content the heart of a Godly man in the world, the Kingdom to
content has now within him, he shall not stay till afterward, till he goes to
Heaven; but certainly there is a Heaven in the soul of a Godly man, he has
Heaven already: Many times when you go to comfort your friends in their
afflictions, you will say, Heaven will pay for all; nay, you may certainly find
Heaven pays for all already: there is Heaven within the souls of the Saints,
that is a certain truth, no soul shall ever come to Heaven, but that soul that
has Heaven come to it first. When you die you hope you shall go to Heaven:
But if you shall go to Heaven when you die, Heaven will come to you before you
die. Now this is a great mystery to have the Kingdom of Heaven in the soul, no
man can know this but that soul that has it; that Heaven which is within the
soul for the present (I say) it is like the white stone and the new name, that
none but those that have it can understand it: It is a miserable condition, my
Brethren, to depend upon creatures altogether for our Contentment; you know
rich men account it a great happiness, if they need not go to buy things by the
penny as others do, they have all things for pleasure or profit upon their own
ground, and all their inheritance lies entire together, they have no body comes
within them, but they have all within themselves, there lies their happiness:
whereas other poorer people are fain to go from one market to another to
provide them necessaries, but yet great rich men they have Sheep and Beeves,
Corn, and Clothing, and all things else of their own within themselves, and
herein they place their happiness: But this is the happiness of a Christian
that he has that within himself that may satisfy him more than all these;
That place which we have in the first of James, seems to allude to that
condition of men that have all their estates within themselves; James 1.4. But
let patience have her perfect work, that we may be perfect and entire, wanting
nothing: the word there used signifies to have the whole inheritance to our
selves, not a broken inheritance, but that where all lies within themselves; as
a man that has not a piece of his estate here, and a piece there, but he has
it all lies together; and the heart being patient under afflictions, finds it
self to be in such an estate as this is, finds his whole inheritance to be
together, and all entire within its self. And now still to show this by further
similitudes; it is with him being filled with good things, just like as it is
with many a man that enjoys abundance of comforts at home at his own house, God
grants to him a convenient habitation, a comfortable Yoke fellow, and fine
Walks and Gardens, and has all things at home that he could desire; now this
man cares not much for going abroad: other men are fain to go abroad to take
the air, but he has a sweet air at home; and they are fain to go abroad to see
friends, because they have railings and contendings at home; many ill husbands
will give this reason (if his wife make any moan and complaint of his ill
husbandry) of their bad husbandry, and will make that their excuse to go
abroad, because they can never be quiet at home. Now we account those men most
happy that have all at home; those that have close houses that are unsavory,
and smells ill, they delight to go into the fresh air; but it is not so with
many others, that have those at home; those that have no good clear at home,
they are fain to go abroad to friends, but those that have their tables
furnished, they had as leive stay at home: So a carnal man, he has but little
Contentment in his own spirit; it is Austines similitude, says he, An ill
conscience is like a scoulding Wife; a man (says he) that has an ill
conscience, he cares not to look into his own soul, but loves to be abroad, and
looks into other things, but never looks to himself; but one that has a good
conscience, he delights in looking into his own heart, he has a good
conscience within him: And so a carnal heart, because there is nothing but
filthyness, a filthy stink in himself, nothing but vileness and baseness within
him, upon this it is that he seeks his Contentment elsewhere: and as it is with
a vessel that is full of Liquor, if you strike upon it, it will make no great
noise; but if it be empty, then it makes a great noise: So it is with the
heart, An heart that is full of grace and goodness within, such a one will bear
a great many strokes and never make any noise; but an empty heart, if that be
struck, that will make a noise; those men and women that are so much
complaining, and always whining, it is a sign that there is an emptiness in
their hearts; but if their hearts were filled with Grace, they would not make
such a noise as now they do. As a man that has his bones filled with Marrow,
and veins filled with good blood, he complains not of cold as others do: so a
gracious heart having the Spirit of God within him, and his heart filled with
grace, he has that within him that makes him find Contentment. It is a speech
of Seneca, Indeed those things that I suffer will be incredibly heavy when I
cannot bear my self: but now if I be no burden to my self, if I have all quiet
within mine own heart, then I can bear any thing: many men through their
wickedness they have burdens without, but the greatest burden is the wickedness
of their own hearts, they are not burdened with their sins in a godly way, that
would case their burden, but they have still their wickedness in the power of
it, and so they are burdens to themselves. The distempers of men's hearts are
mighty burdens to them; many times a godly man has enough within to content
him; Virtue it is content with its self for to live well; (It is a speech of
Cicero, and it is in one of his Paradoxes) It finds enough within its own
sphere for the living happily: but how few are acquainted with this Mystery?
Many think, Oh if I had that that another man has, how happily and comfortably
should I live. Oh but if thou be a Christian, whatsoever thy condition be,
yet thou have enough within thy self. You will say such and such men that have
all things, they need not be beholding to any body, you shall have many that
will labor and take pains when they are young, that they might not be beholding
to others, I love to live of my self; now a Christian may do so; not that he
does not live upon God (I mean not so) but upon that which he has of God
within himself, that he can live upon, although he does not enjoy the comforts
that are without himself, that is it which I mean, and those that are godly and
keep close to God in their communion with him, they understand what I mean by
this, that a Christian has supply of all his wants within himself; and here
you may see that the spirit of a Christian is a precious spirit, a godly spirit
is precious, why? because it has enough to make him happy within himself.

The next thing that the Mystery of Contentment consists in, is this, That a
gracious heart fetches supply of all from the Covenant, and so comes to have
Contentment: which is a dry thing to a carnal spirit. Now there are two things
here.

First, he fetches Contentment from the covenant in general, that is, from the
great covenant that God has made with him in Christ.

Secondly, From the particular promises that God has made with him in the
Covenant.

First, From the Covenant in general. I Will give you one Scripture for that, it
is very remarkable, in the 2 of Sam. 23. verse. 5. Although my house be not so
with God, yet he has made with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all
things, and sure: for this is all my Salvation, and all my desire, although he
make it not to grow. It is a most admirable Scripture of David, that yet had
not the Covenant of Grace opened so fully as we have. But yet mark what David
says, Although I find not my house so, that is, so comfortably every way as I
would, although it be not so, what has he to content his spirit? says he, He
has made with me an everlasting Covenant; this is that that helps all: I am
not (may some men say) thus and thus with God, I do not find God come in so
fully, or it is not with my house and family as I hoped it might be, perhaps
there is this or that affliction upon my house; suppose you should have the
Plague come into your house, and your house is not safe, and you have not that
outward comfort in your house as formerly you had, but can you read this
Scripture, and say, Although my house be not so blessed with health as other men's
houses are; although my house be not so, yet he has made with me an
everlasting Covenant, I am one yet in Covenant with God, the Lord has made
with me an everlasting Covenant: as for these things in this world, I see they
are but momentary, they are not everlasting, I see in a family when all was
well but a week ago, now all is down, and the Plague has swept away a great
many of them, and the rest are left in sadness, and mourning: we see there is
no trusting in the things of this world, yet the Lord has made with me an
everlasting covenant ordered in all things: I find disorder in my heart, in my
family; but the everlasting Covenant, that is ordered in all things; yea, and
that is sure; Alack, there is no sureness here in these things, I can be sure
of nothing here, especially in these times, we know that a man can be sure of
little that he has, who can be sure of his estate? perhaps some of you here
that have lived well and comfortably before, and all was well about you, and
you thought your mountain was strong, but you see within a day or two all taken
away from you, so that there is no sureness in the things of this world: But
says he, the Covenant is sure: what I venture to the Sea that is not sure, but
here is an Assurance Office indeed, here is a great Assurance Office for the
Saints, and they are not at charge, but only the exercising of Grace, for they
may go to this Assurance Office to assure everything that they venture, either
to have the thing it self, or be paid for it: In an assurance Office you cannot
be assured to have the very goods come in that you insured, but if they be lost
the Insurers do engage themselves to make it good to you. And this Covenant of
grace that God has made with his people, it is Gods Assurance Office, and the
Saints in all their fears may, and ought to go to the Covenant to assure all
things to them, to assure their estates, and assure their lives. You will say,
How are they sure, their lives and estates go as well as others? But God
engages himself to make up all; And then mark what follows, This is all my
salvation; Why David, will thou not have salvation from thine Enemies and
outward dangers, from pestilence and plague? The frame of his spirit is
quieted, as if he should say, If that salvation comes, well and good, I shall
praise God for it, but that that I have in the Covenant, that is my salvation,
I look upon that as enough: Yea and then further, This is all my salvation, and
all my desire, Why David, is there not something else that thou would have
besides this Covenant? No says he, It is all involved in this. Now surely
those men or women must needs live contented lives that have all their desires;
now says the holy man here, this is all my desire, And though he make it not
to grow. But for all this Covenant perhaps you will not prosper in the world as
other men do: True, but I am at a point for that: Though God does not make my
house to grow, I have all my desires.

Thus you see how a Godly heart finds Contentment in the Covenant. Many of you
speak of the Covenant of God and of the Covenant of Grace, but have you found
it so effectual to your souls? have you sucked this sweetness from the Covenant
and content to your hearts in your sad condition? It is a special sign of the
truth of Grace in any soul, that when any affliction does befall him, in a kind
of natural way, he does presently repair to the Covenant; just as a Child as
soon as ever it is in danger, you shall not need to tell him and say, when you
are in danger you must go to your father or mother, nature tells him so: so it
is with a gracious heart, as soon as it is in any trouble or affliction there
is a new nature that does carry him to the Covenant presently, and there it
finds ease and rest: and if you find that your hearts do thus work, presently
to be running to the Covenant, it is an excellent sign of the truth of grace:
that is for the general.

But now for particular promises in the Covenant of Grace. A gracious heart
looks upon every promise as coming from the root of the great Covenant of Grace
in Christ. Other men look upon some particular promises, that God will help
them in straights and keep them, and the like; but they look not upon the
connection of such particular promises, to the root, the covenant of grace: Now
Christians do miss of a great deal of comfort they might have from the
particular promises in the Gospel, if they would look upon their connection to
the root, the great Covenant that God has made with them in Christ. Now I
remember I spoke a little about that, that in outward promises in the time of
the Law, they might rest more upon them than we can in the time of the Gospel.
I gave you the reason why we that live in the time of the Gospel cannot rest so
fully, for a literal performance of outward promises that we meet withal in
the old Testament, as they might in the time of the Law: for there was a
special Covenant that God pleased to call a new Covenant by way of distinction
from the other Covenant that is made with us in Christ for eternal life: And so
even the Law was given them in a more peculiar way for an external Covenant of
outward blessings in the Land of Canaan, and so God did deal with them in a
more external Covenant than he does now with his people. Yet godliness has the
promise of this life, and that which is to come. We may make use of the
promises for this life, but yet not so much to rest upon the literal
performance of them as they might; but that God will make them good some way or
other, in a spiritual way, if not in an outward way. We must lay no more upon
outward promises than this, and therefore if we will lay more we make the
Promise to bear more than it will bear out. For to give some instance; To
believe fully and confidently that the Plague shall not come nigh such a house
(I say) it is to lay more upon such a promise than it will bear. I opened that
promise in Psalm. 91. Now if I had lived in the time of the Law, perhaps I might
have been somewhat more confident of the literal performance of the promise
than I can now in the time of the Gospel, the promise now bears no more than
this, That God has a special protection over his People, and that he will
deliver them from the evil of such an affliction; and if he does bring such an
affliction, it is more then an ordinary providence. It Is some special
providence that God has in it. I had thought to have given you diverse promises
for the Contentment of the heart in the time of affliction, Isa. 43.2. When
thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee, and through the rivers,
they shall not overflow thee: when thou walk through the fire, thou shall
not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. Certainly though this
promise was made in the time of the Law, yet it will be made good to all the
Saints now, one way or other, either in the letter or some other way. For so we
find it plainly, that promise that was made to Joshua, I will not fail thee nor
forsake thee, Josh. 1.5. It Is applied to the Christians in the time of the
Gospel. So that here is the way of faith in bringing Contentment by the
Promises, that all the Promises that ever were made to our forefathers, from
the beginning of the world, the Saints of God have an interest in them, they are
their inheritances, and so goes on from one generation to another, and by that
they come to have Contentment, because they do inherit all the promises made in
all the Book of God: So Heb. 13.5. shows plainly, that it is our inheritance,
and we do not inherit less now than they did in Joshua's time, but we inherit
more, for you shall find in that place of the Hebrews, there is more said than
is to Joshua; to Joshua God says, He will not leave him, nor forsake him; now
in that place of the Hebrews in the Greek there is five negatives, I will not,
not, not, not, not, again there is the elegancy of it very much, in the Greek I
say there is five negatives in that little sentence; as if God should say, I
will not leave you, no, I will not, I will not, I will not, with such
earnestness five times together: So that we have not only the same promises
that they had, but we have them more enlarged and more full, though still not
so much in the literal sense, for that indeed is the last part of the promise.
In Isa. 54.17. there God made a promise, that no weapon formed against his
people should prosper, and everytongue that shall rise against them in
judgment thou shall condemn (and mark what follows) this is the heritage of
the servants of the Lord, and their righteousness is of me, says the Lord:
This is a good promise for Soldiers, though still not to lay too much upon the
literal sense: True, it holds forth thus much, that Gods protection is in a
special manner over Soldiers that are godly, And every tongue that shall rise
against thee in judgment, thou shall condemn: and this is against false
witness too: Oh you, that your friends never left you any thing, you will say,
my friends died and left me not a groat, but I thank God, God has provided for
me; but though thy father or mother died and left thee no heritage, yet thou
have a heritage in the promise, This is their heritage. So that there is no Godly
man or woman, but is a great Heir. Therefore when thou look into the Book of
God, and find any Promise there, thou may make that thine own. Just as an
Heir that rides over diverse fields and meadows, says he, This meadow is my
heritage, and this Corn-field is my heritage: and then he sees a fair house,
and says he, this fair house is my heritage; and he looks upon them with
another manner of eye than a stranger that shall ride over those fields. So a
carnal heart reads the Promises, and reads them but merely as stories, not that
they have any great interest in them: But a godly man every time he reads the
Scriptures (remember this Note when you are reading the Scripture) and there
meets with a Promise, he ought to lay his hand upon it, and say, this is a
part of my heritage, it is mine, and I am to live upon it, and this will make
you to be contented. Here Is a Mysterious way of Contentment. So in Psalm. 34.10.
and 37.6. there is diverse other Promises that brings Contentment. In Isa. 58.10.
And thus much for the Mystery of Contentment by way of the Covenant.

There is two or three things more that show how a Godly man has Contentment
after another kind of way than any Carnal heart in the world has, it is a
Mysterious way, as thus.

He has Contentment by reallizing the glorious things of Heaven to him, he
has the Kingdom of Heaven as present, and the glory that is to come, by faith
he makes it as present, So the Martyrs they had Contentment in their
sufferings, for said some of them. Though we have but a hard breakfast, yet we
shall have a good dinner, we shall presently be in Heaven, do but shut your
eyes (says one) and you shall be in Heaven presently. 2 Cor. 4.16. We faint
not (says the Apostle) Why? Because these light afflictions that are but for a
moment, work for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. They see
Heaven before them and that contents them. You Mariners when you can see the
Haven before you, though you were mightily troubled before you could see any
land, yet when you come nigh the shore and can see a landmark, that contents
you exceedingly; a godly man in the midst of the waves and storms that he
meets withal, he can see the Glory of Heaven before him, and so contents
himself; one drop of the sweetness of Heaven is enough to take away all the
sour and bitter of all the afflictions in the world: Indeed here we know that
one drop of sour, or one drop of gall will make bitter a great deal of honey,
put a spoonful of Sugar into a cup of gall or wormwood, that will not sweeten
it, but if you put a spoonful of gall into a cup of Sugar it will imbitter
that; now it is otherwise in Heaven, one drop of sweet will sweeten a great deal
of sour affliction, but a great deal of sour and gall will not imbitter a soul
that sees the glory of Heaven that is to come: now a carnal heart has no
Contentment but from what he sees before him in this world, but a godly heart
has Contentment from that that he sees laid up for him in the highest Heavens.

The last thing that I would name, is this, A godly man has Contentment by
opening and letting out of his heart to God: other men or women they are
discontented, but how do they help themselves? by railing, by ill language,
such an one crosses them, and they have no way to help themselves but by
railing, and by bitter words, and so they ease themselves that way, when they
are angry, but a godly man when he is cross't, how does he ease himself? he is
sensible of his cross as well as you, and he goes to God in Prayer, and there
opens his heart to God, and lets out his sorrows and fears, and then can come
away with a joyful countenance; now do you find that you can come away from
prayer and not look sad? As it is said (in 1 Samuel 1.18.) of Hannah, that when
she had been at prayer her countenance was no more sad, there she was
comforted; and this is the right way of Contentment. Thus we have done with the
Mystery of Contentment. Now if you can put these things together that we have
spoken of, you may see fully what an Art Christian Contentment is; Paul had
need learn it; you see Contentment is not such a poor business as many make it,
to say you must be content, etc. But it is a great Art and Mystery of Godliness
to be contented in the way of a Christian, and it will appear yet further to be
a Mystery, when we come to the Third Head; and that is to show what those
lessons are that a gracious heart does learn when it learns to be contented, I
have learned to be contented: Learned, What Lessons have you learned? As now a
Scholar that has great learning and understanding in Arts and Sciences, how
did he begin it? he began (as we use to say) his ABC. and then afterward he
came to his Testament, and Bible, and Accidence, and so to his Grammar, and
afterward to his other Books; so he learned one thing after another: So a
Christian coming to Contentment is as a Scholar in Christ's School, and there
are diverse Lessons to teach the soul to bring it to this learning: every godly
man or woman is a Scholar, it cannot be said of any Christian that he is
illiterate, but he is literate; a learned man, a learned woman: now the lessons
that Christ teaches, to bring us to Contentment, are these:

The first great lesson is, The lesson of Self-denial: and though it be a great
and hard lesson; as you know a child at first cries, It Is hard, It Is that that
I remember Bradford the Martyr says, Whosoever has not learned the Lesson of
the Cross, has not learned his ABC in Christianity. Here Christ begins with
his Scholars, yea those in the lowest form must begin with this; if you mean to
be Christians all, you must buckle to this or you can never be Christians:
There is none can be a Scholar except be does learn his ABC: so thou must learn
the lesson of self-denial or thou can never come to be a Scholar in Christ's
School, to be learned in this Mystery of contentment: That is the first lesson
that Christ teaches any soul: Oh self denial, that brings contentment, that
brings down and softens a man's heart: a thing (you know) that is soft, if you
strike upon it, it makes no noise, but if you strike upon a hard thing it makes
a noise; so the hearts of men that are full of themselves, and hardened with
self love, if they have any stroke they make a noise; but a self-denying
Christian yields to Gods hand, and makes no noise; as when you strike upon a
Wool-sack it makes no noise, because it yields to the stroke; so a self-denying
heart yields to the stroke, and thereby comes to this contentment. Now in this
lesson of self-denial there are diverse things: I will not enter into the
doctrine of self-denial, but only show you how Christ teaches self-denial, and
how that brings Contentment.

First, Such a one learns to know that he is nothing; he comes to this, to be
able to say, Well, I see I am nothing in my self, now that man or woman which
indeed knows that he or she is nothing, and has learned it thoroughly, will be
able to bear any thing: The way to be able to bear any thing, is to know our
selves to be nothing in our selves. Says God to us, Will thou set thine heart
upon that which is nothing? Prove. 23.5. speaking of riches; why blessed God,
do not thou do so? thou have set thy heart upon us, and yet we are nothing.
God would not have us set our hearts upon riches because they are nothing, and
yet God is pleased to set his heart upon us, and yet we are nothing, that is
Gods Grace, free grace, and therefore it is no great matter what I suffer, for
I am as nothing.

Secondly, I deserve nothing. I am nothing, and I deserve nothing, suppose I
have not this and that that others have, I am sure I deserve nothing except it
be Hell; you will answer any of your servants, so that is not content, I marvel
what you deserve? or your children, Do you deserve it, that you are so eager
upon it? you think to stop their mouths thus; so we may easily stop our own
mouths, we deserve nothing, and therefore why should we be impatient if we have
not what we desire, if we had deserved any thing, we might have some trouble of
spirit, as a man that has deserved well of the State, or of his friends, and
he finds not answerable encouragement, it troubles him mightily, but if he be
conscious to himself that he has deserved nothing, he is content with a
repulse.

Thirdly, I can do nothing. Without me you can do nothing, says Christ Joh.
15.5. Why should I stand much upon it, to be troubled and be discontented if I
have not this or that, when the truth is, I can do nothing? If you should come
to one that is angry because he has not such diet as he desires, and is
discontented with it, you will answer him, I marvel what you do, what use are
you of? Shall one that will sit still and be of no use, yet for all that he
must have all his supply that possible he can desire? Do but consider of what
use you are in the world; if you consider what little need God has of you, and
what little use you are of, you will not be much discontented: If you have
learned this lesson of self-denial, though God does cut me short of such and
such comforts, yet since that I do but little, why should I have much? This
very thought will bring down a man's spirit as much as any thing.

Fourthly, So vile I am, that I can receive no good neither of my self; I am
not only an empty vessel, but a corrupt and unclean vessel that would spoil any
thing that comes into it: So are all our hearts, every one of our hearts is not
only empty of good, but are like a musty vessel, that if any good liquor be
poured into it, it spoils it.

Fifthly, If God does cleanse us in some measure, and does put into us some
good liquor, some Grace of his spirit, yet, We can make use of nothing, neither
can we have it, if God does but withdraw himself: If God does but leave us one
moment, after he has bestowed upon us the greatest gifts, and whatsoever
abilities we can desire, If God should say, I will give you them, now go and
trade, now I have given you these and these abilities, we cannot stir one foot
further neither if God does but leave us. Does God give us gifts and parts?
Then let us fear and tremble lest God should leave us to our selves, for then
how foully should we abuse those gifts and parts? You think other men and women
have memory, and gifts, and parts, and you would fain have them. But suppose
God should give you these, and there leave you, you would utterly spoil them.

Sixthly, We are worse than nothing, For by sin we come to be a great deal
worse than nothing; sin makes us more vile than nothing, sin makes us contrary
to all good: now it is a great deal worse to have a contrariety to all that is
good, than merely to have an emptiness of all that is good; we are not empty
pitchers in respect of good, but we are like pitchers filled with poison, and
is it much for such as we are to be cut short of outward comforts?

In the seventh place, If we perish, there will be no loss of us. If God should
annihilate me, what loss would there be of me? God can raise up another in my
place, to do him other manner of service than I have done. Now put but these
seven thing together and then has Christ taught you self-denial: I may call
these the several words in our lesson of self-denial, Christ reaches the soul
this, so that as in the presence of God upon a real sight of it self it can say
Lord I am nothing, Lord I deserve nothing, Lord I can do nothing, I can receive
nothing, I can make use of nothing, I am worse than nothing, and if I come to
nothing and perish, there will be no loss at all of me, and therefore what
great matter is it for me to be cut short here? A man that is little in his own
eyes, such a man or woman will account every affliction to be little, and every
mercy to be great: Saul, There was a time (the Scripture says) that he was
little in his own eyes, and then his afflictions were but little to him, when
some would not have had him to be King, but spoke contemptuously of him, he
held his peace, but when Saul began to be big in his own eyes, then the
affliction began to be great upon him. There was never any such contented man
or woman as this self-denying man or woman: There was never any denied himself
so much as Jesus Christ did, he gave his cheeks to the smiters, he opened not
his mouth, he was as a lamb when he was led to the slaughter, he made no noise
in the street: Oh he denied himself above all, and was willing to empty
himself; and so he was the most contented that ever any was in the world, and
the nearer we come to learn to deny our selves as Christ did, the more
contented shall we be, and by knowing much of our own vileness, we come to
learn to justify God, whatever the Lord shall lay upon us, yet righteous is
the Lord, for he has to deal with a most wretched creature. A discontented
heart he is troubled because he has no more comfort; but one that is a
self-denying man, he rather wonders that he has so much as he has: Oh says
one, I have but a little; I, but says he that has learned his lesson of
selfdenyal, I rather wonder that God bestows upon me the liberty of breathing
in the air, knowing how vile I am, and knowing how much sin the Lord does see
in me: and that is the way of contentment, by learning self-denial.

Eighthly, There is a further thing in self-denial which brings contentment.
Because thereby the soul comes to rejoice and take sat is faction in all Gods
ways (I beseech you observe this) If a man be selfish and have self-love
prevail in his heart, those things that suits with his own ends he will be glad
of them; but a godly man that has denied himself he will suit with, and be
glad of all things that shall suit with Gods ends: Says a Gracious heart, Gods
ends are my ends; and I have denied mine own ends, and so he comes to find
contentment in all Gods ends and ways, and his comforts are multiplied, whereas
the comforts of other men are single, it is but very rare that Gods ways shall
suit with a man's particular ends, but always Gods ways suit with his own ends;
now if you will only have contentment when Gods ways suit with his own ends,
you can have it but now and then, but a self-denying man denies his own ends
and only looks at the ends of God, and therein is contented: When a man is
selfish he cannot but have a great deal of trouble and vexation, for if I
regard my self, my ends are so narrow that I shall have a hundred things will
come and justle me, and I cannot have room in those narrow ends of mine own; as
you know in the City what a deal of stir there is in the narrow streets, as
Thames street being so narrow they justle and wrangle and fight one with
another, because the place is so narrow, but now in the broad streets there
they can go quietly; so men that are selfish, they meet and so justle one with
another, one man is for self in one thing, and another man is for self in
another thing, and so they make a great deal of stir; but those whose hearts
are enlarged and make public things their ends, and can deny themselves, they
can walk at breadth and never justle one with another so as the other do. The
lesson of self-denial is the first Lesson that Jesus Christ does learn men in
the seeking of Contentment.

The second Lesson is, The vanity of the Creature: That is, the second Lesson
in Christ's School, that he teaches those that he would make Scholars in this
Art: The vanity of the Creature, That whatsoever there is in the Creature has
an emptiness in it, Vanity of vanities, that all is vanity; that is the lesson
the Wise man learned, that the creature in its self, can do us neither good nor
hurt, but it is all but as a wind, there is nothing in the creature that is
suitable to a gracious heart to feed upon for the good and happiness of it: My
Brethren, the reason why you have not Contentment in the things of the world,
it is not because you have not enough of them, that is not the reason, but the
reason is, because they are not things proportionable to that immortal soul of
yours that are capable of God himself; many men think when they are troubled
and have not Contentment, that it is because they have but a little in the
world, and if they had more, then they should be content: That were just thus,
Suppose a man is an hungry, and to satisfy his craving stomach he should gape
and hold open his mouth, to take in the wind, and then should think the reason
why he is not satisfied, is, because he has not enough of the wind; no, the
reason is, because the thing is not suitable to a craving stomach; Truly there
is the same madness in the world; the wind that a man takes in by gaping, will
as soon satisfy a craving stomach which is ready to famish, as all the
comforts in the world can satisfy a soul that knows what true happiness means.
You would be happy, and you seek after such and such comforts in the creature:
well, have you got them? do you find your heart satisfied as having that
happiness that is suitable to you? No, no, it is not here, but you think it is,
because you want such and such things: O poor deluded man! It is not because
you have not enough of it, but because it is not the thing that is
proportionable to that immortal soul that God has given you. Why do you lay
out your money for that which is not bread (Isa. 55.2.) and your labor for
that which satisfies not? You are mad people, you seek to satisfy your
stomachs with that that is not bread, you follow the wind, you will never have
Contentment, all the creatures in the world say, Contentment is not in us,
riches says Contentment is not in me, pleasure says Contentment is not in me,
if you look for Contentment in the creature you will fail: No, Contentment is
higher: when thou come into the School of Christ, Christ teaches thee that
there is a vanity in all things in the world, and the soul that by coming into
the School of Christ, by understanding the glorious mysteries of the Gospel,
comes to see the vanity of all things in the world, that is the soul that comes
to true Contentment. I could tell you of abundance of sentences from Heathens
that shows the vanity of all things in the world, and yet they did not learn
the vanity of the creature in the right School. But now when a soul comes into
the School of Jesus Christ, and there comes to see a vanity in all things in
the world, then such a soul comes to have Contentment. If you seek Contentment
elsewhere, you do like the unclean spirit, seek for rest but find none.

A third Lesson that Christ teaches a Christian when he comes into his School,
is this: He learns him to understand what that One thing is that is necessary,
which he never came to understand before: you know what he says to Martha, O
Martha, thou cumbrest thy self about many things, but there is one thing
necessary. The soul before sought after this and the other thing, but now says
the soul, I see really that it is not necessary that I should be rich, but it
is necessary that I should make up my peace with God: it is not necessary that
I should live a pleasurable life in this world, but it is absolutely necessary
that I should have pardon of my sin; it is not necessary that I should have
honor and preferment, but it is necessary that I should have God to be my
portion, and have my part in Jesus Christ; it is necessary that my soul should
be saved in the day of Jesus Christ: the other things are pretty fine things
indeed, and I should be glad if God would give them me, a fine habitation, and
comings in, and clothes, and promotion for my wife and children, these are
comfortable things, but these are not the necessary things, I may have these
and yet perish for ever, but the other is abolutely necessary; no matter though
I be poor, so be it I may have that that is absolutely necessary; thus Christ
instructs the soul. There is many of you have had some thoughts about this that
it is indeed necessary for you to provide for your soul, but when you come into
Christ's School, there Christ causes the fear of eternity to fall upon you, and
there he causes such a real sight of the great things of eternity, and the
absolute necessity of those things, that possesses your hearts with fear, and
that takes you off from all other things in the world. Now I should have shown
you how that will bring Contentment to the soul when it comes to be instructed
in the thing that is absolutely necessary, but thus much for this time.

SERMON, V. at Stepney. Aug. 24. 1645.
PHIL. 4.11. For I have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be
content.

I Mentioned three Lessons the last time, that Christ teaches those Scholars
that come into his School, whereby they might come to get Contentment.

First, The Lesson of Self-denial. Secondly, the Lesson of the vanity of the
creature. Thirdly, the right understanding of that One thing that is Necessary.
A little to enlarge this one, and so to proceed to others.
It is said of Pompey, that when he was to carry corn to Rome in time of
dearth, he was in a great deal of danger by storms at Sea, but says he, We
must go on, it is necessary that Rome should be relieved, but it is not
necessary that we should live. So it would be certainly when the soul is once
taken up with the things that are of absolute necessity, it will not be much
troubled about other things. What are the things that do disquiet us here, but
some By matters in this world; and it is, because our hearts are not taken up
with that one Absolute Necessary thing. Who are the men that are most
discontented, but idle persons, persons that have nothing to take up their
minds, every little thing disquiets and discontents them? But now a man that
has business of great weight and consequence, if all things go well with his
great business that is in his head, he is not sensible of meaner things in the
family; but now a man that lies at home and has nothing to do, he finds fault
with every thing: So it is with the heart; when the heart of a man has no
thing to do but to be busy about Creature comforts, every little thing
troubles him; but now, when the heart is taken up with the weighty things of
Eternity, the great things of eternal life, the heart being taken up with them,
these things that are here below, that did disquiet it before, are things now
of no consideration with him, in comparison to the other, so as how things fall
out here is not much regarded, with him, if the One thing that is Necessary be
provided for.

The fourth lesson that the soul is instructed in to come to this knowledge in
the Art of Contentment, is this: The soul comes to understand, in what relation
it stands in here to the world: by that I mean thus, God comes to instruct the
soul effectually through Christ by his Spirit, upon what terms it lives here in
the world, in what relation it is that it does stand: as thus, While I live in
the World my condition is to be but a pilgrim, a stranger, a traveller, and a
soldier: Now the right understanding of this, and being taught this, not only
by rote, that I can speak the words over, but when I come indeed to have my
soul possessed with the consideration of this Truth, That God has set me in this
world, not as in my home, but as a mere stranger and a pilgrim, that I am
traveling here to another home, and that I am here a soldier in my warfare;
it is a mighty help to Contentment in whatsoever befalls one: as now to
instance in all these conditions, When a man is at home, if he has not things
according to his desire he will be finding fault, and is not contented; but if
a mantravels abroad, perhaps he meets not with conveniences as he desires, the
servants in the house are not at his beck, or are not so diligent as his own
servants were, and his diet is not as at home, and his bed not as at home, yet
this very thought may moderate a man's spirit, I am a Traveller, and I must not
be finding fault, I am but in another man's house, and it were not manners for
one to find fault when he is abroad in another bodies family, though things be
not so as in my own family; If a man meets with ill weather he must be content;
it is Travelers fare (we use to say) both fair weather and foul weather, this
is the common Travelers fare, and we must be content with it; but if a man
were at home and it should drop down in his house, he would account it an ill
thing, an affliction to him, and he cannot bear it: but when he is traveling
abroad, though he meet with rain and storms he is not so much troubled: When
you are abroad at Sea, though you have not those many things that you have at
home, you are not troubled at it, you are contented; Why? you are abroad at
Sea, you are not troubled at storms that do arise, and though you have many
things otherwise than you would have them at home, but still you are quieted
with that, you are at Sea. Mariners when they are at Sea they care not what
clothes they have then, though they be pitched and tar'd, and but a clout about
their necks, and any mean clothes, but they think when they come home, then
they shall have their fine silk stocking, and brave suits, and laced bands and
such things, and shall be very fine; and so they are contented abroad upon that
thought, that it shall be otherwise with them when they come home, and though
they have nothing but salt meat, and a little hard fare, yet when they come to
their houses, then they shall have any thing: Thus it should be with us in this
world: the truth is, we are all in this world but as Seafaring men, tossed up
and down on the waves of the Sea of this world, and our Haven is Heaven, and we
are here traveling, but our home it is another world, that long home. Indeed
some men have better accommodations than others have in traveling: it is true,
it is a great mercy of God to us in England in that we can travel with such
delight and accommodations more than they can in other Countries; and through
Gods mercy we have as great accommodation in our traveling to Heaven in
England as any place under Heaven has, but yet though we do meet with
travelers fare sometimes, yet it should not be grievous to us: The Scripture
tells us plainly that we must behave our selves here but as pilgrims and
strangers. In 1 Pet. 2.11. Dearly beloved, I beseech you as strangers and
pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul: Consider what
your condition is, you are pilgrims and strangers, do not think to satisfy
your selves here. A man when he comes into an Inn, If there be a fair cupbord
of plate he is not troubled that it is not his own. Why? Because he is going
away; so let us not be troubled when we see other men have great estates, but
we have not, Why? we are going away, into another Country, you are lodging here
but as it were for a night, if you should live an hundred years in comparison
of eternity, it is not so much as a night, it is but as you were traveling,
and were come into an Inn: And were not this a madness for a man to be
discontent because he has not what he sees there, seeing it may be he is to go
away again within half a quarter of an hour? So you find it in David, this was
the argument that brought off David's heart from the things of this world, and
set him upon other manner of things, Psalm. 119.19. I am a stranger in the
earth, hide not thy Commandments from me: I am a stranger in the earth (what
then) then Lord let me have the knowledge of thy Commandments and it is
sufficient, as for the things of the earth I stand not upon them whether I have
much or little, but hide not thy Commandments from me, Lord let me know the
rule that I should guide my life by.

Again, We are not only Travelers but Soldiers, this is the condition of the
life in which we are here in this world, and therefore we are to behave our
selves accordingly. So the Apostle makes use of this argument in writing unto
Timothy, 2 Timothy 2.3. Thou therefore endure hardness as a good Soldier of Jesus
Christ. The very thought of the condition of a man that is a Soldier, does
still his disquiet of heart: when he is abroad, he has not that accommodations
in his quarters as he has in his own family; perhaps a man that had his bed
warm and curtains drawn about him, and all accommodations in his chamber; now
perhaps sometimes he must be put to lie upon straw, and he thinks with
himself, I am a Soldier, and it is suitable to my condition; he must have his
bed warmed at home, but he must lie abroad in the fields when he is a Soldier;
and the very thought of this condition in which he stands, quiets him in all
things, yea, and he goes rejoicing, to think, this is but suitable to my
condition in which God has put me: so it should be with us in respect of this
world. Now, would it not be an unseemly thing to see a Soldier go whining up
and down with the finger in the eye, and complaining, that he has not hot meat
every meal, and his bed warmed as he had at home; Now Christians they know that
they are in their warfare, they are here in this world fighting and combating
with the enemies of their souls and eternal condition, and they must be willing
to endure hardness here. The right understanding of this, that God has put
them into such a condition, it is that that will content them, especially when
they consider that they are certain of the victory, and that ere long they
shall triumph with Jesus Christ, and then all their sorrows shall be done away,
and their tears wiped from their eyes. A Soldier is content to endure hardness,
though he knows not that he shall have the victory? but a Christian knows
himself to be a Soldier, and knows that he shall conquer and triumph with
Jesus Christ to all eternity. And that is the fourth Lesson that Christ does
teach the soul when he brings it into his School, to learn the Art of
Contentment, he makes him understand thoroughly the relation in which he has
placed him in, in this world.

The Fifth Lesson that Christ teaches, it is this, He teaches us wherein
consists any good that is to be enjoyed in any creature in the world. It Is
true, before it has been taught that there is a vanity in the Creature; that
is, take the Creature considered in it is self, but yet though there be a vanity
in the Creature in it is self, in respect of satisfying the soul for its
portion, yet there is some goodness in the Creature, though there be a vanity,
there is some desirableness: But wherein does that consist? It consists not in
the nature of the Creature it self, for that is nothing but vanity; but it
consists in the reference it has to the first being of all things. This is a
Lesson that Christ teaches, If there be any good in an estate, or in any
comforts in this world, it is not so much that it pleases my sense, that it is
suitable to my body, but the reference it has to God the First being, that by
these creatures there should be somewhat of Gods Goodness conveyed to me, and I
may have a sanctified use of the creature to draw me nearer to God, and that I
enjoy more of God, and be made more serviceable for the Glory of God in the
place where God has set me, here is the good of the Creature; Oh were we but
instructed in this Lesson, did we but understand, and thoroughly believe this to
be a truth, that there is no creature in all the world has any goodness in it
any further than it has reference to the first infinite Supreme Good of all,
that so far as I can enjoy God in it, so far it is good to me, and so far as I
do not enjoy God in it, so far there is no goodness in any thing that I have in
the creature: how easy were it then for one to be contented; As thus, Suppose
a man had a great estate but a few years ago, and now it is all gone, I would
but appeal to this man, When you had your estate, wherein did you account the
good of that estate to consist? a carnal heart would say, any body might know
that; that it brought me inso much a year, and that I could fare of the best,
and be a man of repute in the place where I live, and men would regard what I
said, I might be clothed as I would, and lay up portions for my children, in
this consisted the good of my estate; this man now never came into the School
of Christ to know wherein the good of an estate did consist, no marvail if he
be disquieted when he has lost his estate: But now a Christian that has been
in the School of Christ, and has been instructed in the Art of contentment,
when such a one has an estate, he thinks, in that I have an estate above my
brethren, in this consists the good of it to me, in that I have an opportunity
to serve God the better, and I enjoy a great deal of Gods mercy to my Soul
conveyed to me through the creature, and hereby I am enabled to do a great deal
of good, and therein I account the good of my estate. Now God has taken this
away from me; now if God will be pleased to make up the enjoyment of himself
another way; that is, will call me to honor him by suffering, and if I may do
God as much Service now in my way of suffering, that is, to show forth the
Grace of his Spirit in the way of my suffering as I did in the way of
prosperity, I have as much of God as I had before; if I may be led to God in my
low condition, as much as I was in my prosperous condition, I have as much
Comfort and Contentment as I had before.

Object. But you will say, Its true, If I could honor God in my low estate as
much as in my prosperous estate, then it were somewhat; but how can that be?

Answ. You must know, the special honor that God has from his Creatures in
this world, it is, The manifestation of the Graces of his Spirit; It Is true,
God has a great deal of honor when a man is in a public place, and so he is
able to do a great deal of good, To countenance Godliness, and discountenance
Sin; but the main thing is, In our showing forth the virtues of him that has
called us out of darkness into his mavelous light. Now if I can say, That
through Gods mercy in my affliction I find the Graces of Gods Spirit working as
strongly in me as ever they did when I had my estate, I am where I was, yea, I
am fully in as good a condition, for I have that good now that I had in my
prosperous estate, for I accounted the good of it, but in my enjoyment of God,
and honoring of God, and now God has blessed the want of it to stir up the
Graces of his Spirit in my Soul, and this is the work that now God calls me to;
and I must account God is most honored when I do the work that he calls me to;
He sets me a work in my prosperous estate at that time, to honor him in this
condition: and now he sets me awork at this time, to honor him in this
condition: Now God is most honored, when I can turn from one condition to
another, according as he calls me to it: Would you account your selves to be
honored by your servants, when you set them about a work that has some
excellency, and they will go on, and on, and you cannot get them off from it?
Now let the work be never so good, yet if you will call them off to another
work, you do expect that they should manifest so much respect to you, as to be
content to come off from that, though they be set about a meaner work, if it be
more suitable to your ends. So, you were in a prosperous estate, and there God
called you to some service that you took some pleasure in; but suppose God
says, I will use you in a suffering condition, and I will have you honor me in
that way; now here is the honoring of God that you can turn this way or that
way, as God calls you to it; thus now you having learned this, That the good of
the Creature consists in the enjoyment of God in it, and the honoring of God by
it, you can be content, because you have the same good that you had before. And
that is the Fifth Lesson.

The Sixth Lesson that Christ does teach the soul that he brings into this
School, is this; He does instruct such a man or woman in the knowledge of their
own hearts: you must learn this or you will never learn Contentment; you must
learn to know your own hearts well, to be good Students of your own hearts; you
cannot all be Scholars in the Arts and Sciences in the world, but you may all
be Students in your own hearts; you cannot read in the book (many of you) but
God expects that every day you should turn over a leaf in your own hearts; you
will never come to get any skill in this Mystery, except you study the book of
your own hearts: Mariners, they have their books that they study, those that
will be good Navigators; and Scholars they have their books; those that study
Logic, they have their books according to that; and those that would study
Rethorick and Philosophy have their books according to that; and those that
study Divinity, they have their books whereby they come to be helped in the
Study of Divinity: but a Christian (next to the Book of God) is to look into
the book of his own heart, and to read over that, and this will help you to
Contentment these three ways: 1. By the studying of thy heart, thou will come
presently to discover wherein thy discontent lies; when thou art discontented
thou will find out the root of any coffeehouse if thou do study thy heart
well: many men and women they are discontented, and the truth is they know not
wherefore, they think this and the other thing is the cause, but a man or woman
that knows their own heart, they will find out presently where the root of
their discontent lies, that it lies in such a corruption, and distemper of my
heart, that now through Gods mercy I have found out; It is in this case as it
is with a little child that is very froward in the house, if a stranger comes
in he does not know what the matter is, perhaps the stranger will give the
Child a Rattle, or a Nut, or such a thing to quiet it, but when the Nurse
comes she knows the temper and disposition of the Child, and therefore knows
best how to quiet it: So it is here just thus for all the world, when we are
strangers with our own hearts we are mightily discontented, and know not how to
quiet our selves, because we know not wherein the disquiet lies: And indeed
when we are strangers to our own hearts we cannot tell how to quiet our selves,
but if we be very well versed in our own hearts, when any thing falls out so as
to disquiet us, we find out the cause of it presently, and so quickly come to
be quiet. So a man that has a Watch, and he understands the use of every wheel
and pin, if it goes amiss he will presently find out the cause of it; but one
that has no skill in a Watch, when it goes amiss he knows not what the matter
is, and therefore cannot mend it. So indeed our hearts are as a Watch, and
there are many wheels, and windings and turnings there, and we should labor to
know our hearts well, that when they are out of tune we may know what the
matter is. 2. This knowledge of our hearts will help us to Contentment, because
by this We shall come to know what is most suitable to our condition. As thus, A
man that knows not his own heart, he thinks not what need he has of
affliction, and upon that he is disquieted; but that man or woman that has
studied their own hearts, when God comes with afflictions upon them, they can
say, I would not for any thing in the world have been without this affliction,
God has so suited this affliction to my condition, and has come in such a way,
that if this affliction had not come, I am afraid I should have fallen into
sin: A poor ignorant man that takes Physic, the Physic works, and he thinks
it will kill him, because he knows not the ill humors that are in his body, and
therefore he understands not how suitable the Physic is to him; but a Physician
takes a Purge, and it makes him extremely sick, says the Physician, I like
this the better, it does but work upon the humor that I know is the cause of my
disease, and upon that such a man that has knowledge and understanding of his
body, and the cause of his distemper, he is not troubled or disquieted; So
would we be if we did but know the distempers of our own hearts; Carnal men and
women they know not their own spirits, and therefore they fling and vex upon
every affliction that does befall them, they know not what distempers are in
their hearts, that may be healed by their afflictions, if it please God to give
them a sanctified use of them. 3. By knowing their own hearts, they know what
they are able to manage, and by this means they come to be content; the Lord
(perhaps) takes away many comforts from them that they had before, or denies
them some things that they hoped to have got; now they by knowing their hearts,
know this, That they were not able to manage such an estate; and they were not
able to manage such prosperity, God saw it, and (says a poor soul) I am in
some measure convinced, by looking into mine own heart, that I was not able to
manage such a condition. A man desires greedily to gripe more perhaps than he
is able to manage, and so undoes himself: As Country men do observe, that if
they do over-stock their Land, it will quickly spoil them; and so a wise
Husbandman that knows how much his ground will bear, he is not troubled that
he has not so much stock as others, why? because he knows he has not ground
enough for so great a stock, and that quiets him: So many men and women that
know not their own hearts, they would fain have a prosperous estate as others
have, but if they knew their own hearts, they would know that they were not
able to manage it: If one of your little Children of three or four years old
should be crying for the coat of her that is twelve or fourteen years old, and
say, Why may not I have a coat as long as my Sisters? If she had, it would soon
trip up her heels, and break her face; but when the child comes to
understanding, she is not discontented because her coat is not so long as her
Sisters, but says, my coat is fit for me, and therein takes content: So if we
come to understanding in the School of Christ we will not cry, Why have not I
such an estate as others have? the Lord sees that I am not able to manage it,
and I see it my self by the knowing of mine own heart. You shall have children,
if they see but a Knife, they will cry for it, because they know not their
strength, and that they are not able to manage it, but you know they are not
able to manage it, and therefore you will not give it them, and when they come
to so much understanding as to know that they are not able to manage it, they
will not cry for it; so we would not cry for such and such things if we knew
that we were not able to manage them: when you vex and fret for what you have
not, I may say to you as Christ says, you know not of what Spirit you are of.
It was a speech of Oecolampadius to Parillus, says he (when they were speaking
about his extreme poverty) Not so poor, though I have been very poor, yet I
would be poorer, I could be willing to be poorer than I am, for the truth is
(as if he should say) the Lord knew that that was more suitable to me, and I
knew that my own heart was such, that a poor condition was more suitable to me
than a rich; certainly would we say if we knew our own hearts, that such and
such a condition is better for me than if it had been otherwise.


The seventh Lesson, Is the burden of a prosperous estate. Such a one that
comes into Christ's School to be instructed in this Art, never comes to attain
to any great skill in this Art till he comes to understand the burden that is
in a prosperous estate.

Object. You will say, What burden is there in a prosperous estate.

Answ. Yes certainly a great burden, and there needs a great strength to bear
it: as men had need have strong brains that can bear strong Wine, so they had
need of strong spirits that are able to bear prosperous conditions, and not to
do themselves hurt; there is a fourfold burden in a prosperous estate. Many men
and women look at the shine and glittering of prosperity, but they little think
of the burden, but there is a fourfold burden.

1. There Is Aburden of trouble. A Rose has its prickles; and so the Scripture
says, That he that will be rich, pierces himself through with many sorrows, 1 Timothy 6.10. If a man's heart be set upon it that he must be rich, and he will be
rich; such a man will pierce himself through with many sorrows; he looks upon
the delight and glory of riches that appears outwardly, but he considers not
what piercing sorrows he may meet withal in them: The consideration of the
trouble in a prosperous condition I have diverse times thought of, and I cannot
tell by what similitude to express it better, than by traveling in some
Champion Country, where round about is very fair and sandy ground, and you see
there a Town a great way off in a bottom, and you think, O how bravely is that
Town seated! but when you come and ride into the Town, you shall ride through a
dirty lane, and through acompany of fearful dirty holes, and you could not see
the dirty lane and holes when you were two or three miles off: so sometimes we
look upon the prosperity of men and think such a man lives bravely and
comfortably, but if we did but know what troubles he meets withal in his
family, in his estate, in his dealings with men, we would not think his
condition so happy, One may have a very fine new Shoo, but no body knows where
it pinches him, but he that has it on: so you think such and such men are
happy, but they may have many troubles that you little think of.

2. There is a burden of Danger in it. Men that are in a prosperous condition
they are in a great deal of danger: you see sometimes in the evening when you
light up your Candles, the Moths and the Gnats will be flying up and down in
the Candle but they scorch their wings, and there they fall down dead; so there
is a great deal of danger in a prosperous estate, those men that are set upon a
pinnacle on high, these men they are in greater danger than other men are. Honey
we know does invite Bees and Wasps unto it; and so the sweet of prosperity does
invite the Devil and Temptation. Men that are in a prosperous estate, are
subject to many temptations that other men are not subject to. The Scripture
calls the Devil Beel-zebub, that is, the God of Flies; and so Beelzebub comes
where the honey of prosperity is: They are in very great danger of temptations
that are in a prosperous condition. The dangers of men that are in a prosperous
estate, that have more than others, should be considered of by those that are
lower, think with thy self, Though they be above me, yet they are in more
danger than I am; the tall Trees are more shattered a great deal than low
shrubs: so you know the ship that has all the sails up, the top sail and all,
in a storm, this is in more danger than that that has all the sails drawn in:
And so men that have their Top-gallant, and all up and brave, they are more
like to be drowned, drowned in perdition than other men are; and therefore you
know what the Scripture says, how hard it is for a rich man to enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven: such a text should make poor people to be contented with
their estates. We have a notable example for that in the Children of Kohath,
you shall find that they were in a more excellent estate than the other of the
Levites, but they were in more danger than the other, and more trouble.

First, That the Children of Kohath were in a higher condition than other of
the Levites, that I Will show you out of the fourth of Numb. 4. verse. there you
shall find what their condition was. This shall be the service of the sons of
Kohath in the Tabernacle of the Congregation about the most holy things. Mark,
the Levites were exercised about holy things; but the sons of Kohath, their
service was about the most holy things of all: and you shall find in the 21. of
Joshua, verse. 10. That God did honor the sons of Kohath in a more special
manner than he did honor the other Levites, which honor the Children of Aaron
(being of the families of the Kohathites, who were of the Children of Levi)
had, for theirs was the first Lot, and they were preferred before the other
families of Levi, those that were employed in the most honorable employment,
they had the most honorable Lot, the first Lot fell to them: Thus you see God
honored the Children of the Kohathites. But (might other Levites say) how has
God preferred this family before us? They were honored more than the other
were: But now, mark their burden that comes with heir Honor, and that I will
show you out of two Scriptures, first is, Number. 7.6, 7, 8, 9. And Moses took the
Wagons and Oxen, and gave them unto the Levites: Two Wagons and four Oxen he
gave unto the sons of Gershon, according to their service: and four Wagons and
eight Oxen he gave unto the sons of Merari, according unto their service, under
the hand of Ithamer the son of Aaron the Priest. But says he (verse. 9.) Unto
the sons of Kohath he gave none; because the service of the Sanctuary that
belonged unto them, was, That they should bear upon their shoulders. Mark, the
other Levites had Oxen and Wagons given unto them, to ease them of their
service: but (says he) to the sons of Kohath he gave none, but they should
bear their service upon their shoulders; and that is the reason why God was so
displeased, because that they would have more ease in Gods service than God
would have them; for whereas they should carry it upon their shoulders, they
would carry it upon a Cart; Mark here, you see the first burden that they had,
beyond what the other Levites had. And those that are under them, think not of
their burden that they are to carry upon their shoulders, when as others have
means to ease them; and many times those that are employed in the Ministry, or
Magistracy, that sit at the Stern to order the great Affairs of the
Commonwealth and State, you think they live bravely: They lie awake when you
are asleep; if you knew the burden that lies upon their spirits, you would
think that your labor and burden were very little in comparison of theirs.

2. There Is another burden of danger more than the rest, and that you shall
find in Numb. 4.17. And the Lord spoke unto Moses and unto Aaron saying, Cut ye
not eff the tribe of the families of the Kohathites from among the Levites, but
thus do unto them that they may live and not die: When they approach unto the
most holy things, Aaron and his Sons shall go in and appoint them every one to
his service and to his burden; but they shall not go in to see when the holy
things are covered, lest they die. Mark this text: says the Lord to Moses and
Aaron, Cut ye not off the tribe of the family of the Kohathites from among the
Levites. Cut them not off, why? what had they done? had they done any thing
amiss? No, they had not done any thing that provoked God: but the meaning is
this; Take a great care of the family of the Kohathites to instruct them in
their duty that they were to do; for (says God) they are in a great deal of
danger, being to serve in the most holy things: If they should go in to see the
holy things more than God would have them, it is as much as their lives are
worth, and therefore if you should but neglect them, and not inform them
thoroughly in their duty, they would be undone: says God, They are to
administer in the most holy things, and if they should but dare to presume to
do any thing otherwise than God would have them about those services, it would
cost them their lives; and therefore be not you careless of them, for if you
neglect them you will be a means, of cutting them off. Thus you see the danger
that the family of the Kohathites were in; they were preferred before others,
but they were in more danger. So you think there are such men in a Parish that
bear the sway, and are employed in public service, and they carry all before
them; but you consider not their danger. And so the Ministers, they stand in
the forefront of all the spite and malice of ungodly men: indeed God imploys
them in honorable service, and that service that the Angels would take delight
in; but though the service be honorable, above the employment of other works,
yet the burden of danger that likewise is greater than the danger of men that
are in an inferior condition. Now when the Soul comes to get wisdom from Christ
to think of the danger that it is in, then it will be content in that low
estate in which it is. A poor man that is in a low condition, thinks, I am low,
and others are raised, but I know not what their burden is: and so, if he be
rightly instructed in the School of Christ he comes to be contented.

3. In a prosperous estate there is the burden of Duty. You look only at the
sweet and comfort that they have, and the honor and respect that they have that
are in a prosperous condition; but you must consider of the duty that they owe
to God: God requires more duty at their hands than at yours; you are ready to
be discontented that you have not such parts and abilities as such have, but
God requires more duty of them that have more parts, God requires more duty of
them that have greater estates than of you that have not such estates, Oh! you
would fain have the honor, but can you carry the burden of the Duty?

4. The last is, The burden of Account in a prosperous Estate. There is a great
account that they are to give to God that enjoy great estates and a prosperous
condition: Now we are all Stewards; and one is a Steward to a meaner man,
perhaps an ordinary Knight; another is a Steward to a Nobleman, an Earl: now
the Steward of the meaner man, he has not so much as the other has under his
hand: now shall he be discontented because there comes not so much under his
hand as under the others? No thinks he, I have less, and I am to give the less
account: So your account in comparison of the Ministers and Magistrates will be
nothing; you are to give an account of your own Souls, and so are they; but you
are to give an account for your own family and so are they; but you are not to
give account for Congregations, and for Towns, and Cities, and Countries. You
think of Princes and Kings, Oh! what a glorious condition they are in. But what
do you think of a King to give account for all the disorder, and wickedness in
a Kingdom that he possibly might have prevented? What abundance of Glory might
a Prince bring to God if so be that he bent his soul and all his thoughts to
lift up the Name of God in a Kingdom; now what God looses for want of this,
that King, Prince, or Governor he must give an account for. It Is a speech of
Chrysostom in that place of the Hebrews, where it is said that men must give an
account for their Souls, he wonders that any men in public place can be saved,
because their account is so great that they are to give. And I remember I have
read a speech of Philip that was King of Spain (though the story says of him,
that he had such a Natural conscience, that he professed he would not do any
thing against his conscience, no not in secret for the gaining of a world, yet
when this man was to die) Oh says he, that I had never been a King; Oh that I
had lived a solitary and private life all my days; then should I have died a
great deal more securely, I should with more confidence have gone before the
Throne of God to give my account: but here is the fruit of my Kingdom, that I
had all the glory of it, it has made my account to be harder to give to God:
and thus he cries out when he was to die. And therefore you that live in
private conditions remember this, If you come into Christ's School, and be
taught this Lesson, you will be quiet in your afflictions, or private estate,
in regard your account is not so great as others. Its a speech I remember I
have met withal in Latimers Sermons that he was wont to use, That the half is
more than the whole. That is, when a man is in a mean condition, he is but half
way toward the height of prosperity that others are in: yet says he, this is
more safe though it be a meaner condition than others. Those that are in a high
and prosperous condition, there is annexed to it the burden of trouble, and of
danger, and of duty, and of account. And thus you see how Christ trains up his
Scholars in his School, and though they be weak otherwise, yet by his Spirit he
gives them wisdom to understand these things a right.

The eight lesson is this, Christ teaches them what a great and dreadful evil
it is to be given up to ones hearts desires. The understanding this Lesson that
it is a most dreadful evil, one of the most hideous and fearful evils that can
befall any man upon the face of the Earth, for God to give him up to his hearts
desires: when the Soul understands this once, and together with it (for it goes
along together) that spiritual Judgments are more fearful than any outward
judgments in the world, the understanding of this, will teach any one to be
content in Gods crossing of them in their desires. Thou art crossed in thy
desires, now thou art discontented and vexed and fretted at it, Is that thy
only Misery that thou art crossed in thy desires? No, no, thou art infinitely
mistaken, the greatest misery of all is, for God to give thee up to thy hearts
lusts and desires, to give thee up to thine own counsels: so you have it in
Psalm. 81.11, 12. But my people would not hearken to my voice, and Israel would
none of me [what then?] So I gave them up unto their own hearts lusts, and they
walked in their own counsels. Oh says Bernard, Let me not have such a misery
as that is, for to give me what I would have, to give me my hearts desires, it
is one of the most hideous judgments in the world for a man to be given up to
his hearts desires. We have not indeed in Scripture any certain evident sign of
a Reprobate, we cannot say (except we knew a man had committed the sin against
the Holy Ghost) that he is a Reprobate, for we know not what God may work upon
him; but the nearest of all, and the blackest sign of a Reprobate is this, for
God to give up a man to his hearts desires, all the pain of Diseases, all the
calamities that can be thought of in the world, are no judgments in comparison
of this, for a man to be given up to his hearts desires; now when the Soul
comes to understand this, the Soul then cries out, Why am I so troubled that I
have not my desires? There is nothing that God conveys his wrath more through
than a prosperous Estate. I remember I have read of a Jewish Tradition that
they say of Uzziah, when God struck Vzziah with a Leprosy, they say that the
beams of the Sun was darted upon the forehead of Vzziah, and he was struck with
a Leprosy with the darting of the beams of the Sun upon his forehead; the
Scripture says, Indeed the Priests looked upon him; but they say there was a
special light and beam of the Sun upon the forehead that did discover the
Leprosy to the Priests, and they say it was the way of conveying of it.
Whether that were true or no, I am sure this is true, that the strong beams of
the Sun of prosperity upon many men makes them to be leprous; Would any poor
man in the Country have been discontented that he was not in Vzziahs condition?
He was a great King, I but there was the Leprosy in his forehead; the poor
man may say, though I live meanly in the Country, yet I thank God my body is
whole and sound, would not any man rather have russet and skins of beasts to
cloth him with, than to have satin and velvet that should have the Plague in
it? The Lord conveyes the Plague of his curse through prosperity, as much as
through any thing in the world, and therefore the soul coming to understand
this, this makes it to be quiet and content.

And then, Spiritual Judgments are the greatest Judgments of all; the Lord
says such an Affliction upon my outward estate, but what if he had taken away
my life? A man's health is a greater mercy than his estate; and you that are
poor people you should consider of that, But is the health of a man's body
better than his estate? what is the health of a man's soul? that is a great deal
better; the Lord has inflicted external judgments, but he has not inflicted
spiritual Judgments upon thee, he has not given thee up to hardness of heart,
and taken away the spirit of prayer from thee in thine afflicted estate, Oh
then be of good comfort though there be outward afflictions upon thee, yet thy
soul, thy more excellent part is not afflicted. Now when the soul comes to
understand this, that here lies the sore wrath of God, to be given up to a man's
desires, and for Spiritual Judgments to be upon a man, this quiets him, and
contents him, though outward afflictions be upon him; perhaps one of a man's
children has the fit of an ague, or the toothache, but perhaps his next
neighbor has the plague, or all his children are dead of the plague, now shall
he be so discontented, because his children have the toothache when his
neighbors children are dead? Now think thus, Lord thou have laid an afflicted
condition upon me, but Lord thou have not given me the plague of a hard heart.
Now take these eight things before mentioned, and lay them together, and you
may well apply that Scripture in Isa. 29. the last verse, says the text there
They also that erred in Spirit, shall come to understanding, and they that
murmured shall learn Doctrine. Has there been any of you (as I fear many may
be found) that have erred in spirit, even in regard of this truth that now we
are preaching of, and many that have murmured, Oh that this day you might come
to understand, that Christ would bring you into his School, and teach you
understanding, And they that murmured shall learn Doctrine: what Doctrine shall
they learn? These eight Doctrines that I have opened to you. And if you will
but thoroughly study these lessons that I have set before your eyes: It will be
a special help and means to cure your murmuring against, and repinings at the
hand of God: And so you will come to learn Christian Contentment. The Lord
teach you thoroughly by his Spirit these Lessons of Contentment.

SERMON, VI. at Stepney. Aug. 31. 1645.
PHIL. 4.11. For I have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be
content.

I Shall only add one Lesson more in learning of Contentment, and then I shall
come to the Fourth Head, The Excellency of Contentment.

The Ninth and last Lesson that Christ teaches those that he does instruct in
this Art of Contentment, It is the right knowledge of Gods Providence, and
therein are these four things.

1. The Universality of Providence, that the soul must be thoroughly instructed
in to come to this Art, to understand the Universality of Providence, that is;
how the Providence of God goes through the whole world, extends it self to
every thing: Not only that God by his providence does rule the world, and
govern all things in general, but that it reaches to every particular, not
only to Kingdoms, to order the great affairs of Kingdoms, but it reaches to
every man's Family, it reaches to every person in the Family, it reaches to
every condition, yea, to every passage, to every thing that falls out
concerning thee in every particular, not one hair falls from thy head, not a
Sparrow to the ground without the providence of God. There Is nothing befalls
thee, good or evil, but there is a providence of the Infinite Eternal
First-being in that thing, and therein indeed is Gods Infiniteness, that it
reaches to the least things, to the least worm that is under thy feet: Then
much more it reaches unto thee that art a rational Creature, the Providence of
God is more special toward rational Creatures than any others: The
understanding in a spiritual way the universality of providence in every
particular passage from morning to night every day; that there is not any thing
that does befall thee, but there is a hand of God in it, it is from God, it is a
mighty furtherance to Contentment. Every man will grant the truth of the thing
that it is so, but as the Apostle says in Heb. 11.3. By faith we understand
that the worlds were made, by faith we understand it; why by faith? we can
understand by reason that no finite thing can be from it self, And therefore
that the world could not be of it self, but we can understand it by says in
another manner than by reason. So whatsoever we understand of God in way of
providence, yet when Christ does take us into his School we come to understand
it by faith in a better manner than we do by reason.

2. The efficacy that there is in providence; that is, That the providence of
God goes on in all things with strength and power, and it is not to be altered
by our power; let us be discontented and vexed and troubled, and fret, and rage,
yet we must not think to alter the course of providence by our discontent. Some
of Jobs friends said to him, Shall the earth be forsaken for thee, and shall
the rock be removed out of his place? Job 18.4. when they saw him to be
impatient. So I may say to every discontented impatient heart, What, shall the
providence of God change its course for thee? Do thou think it such a weak
thing, that because it does not please thee, it must alter its course? Be thou
content or not content, the providence of God will go on, it has an efficacy
of power and virtue, to carry all things before it. Can thou make one hair
black or white with all the stir that thou keep? When you are in a Ship at
Sea that has all her Sails spread with a full gale of wind, and swiftly
sailing; Can you make it stand still with running up and down in the Ship? No
more can you make the providence of God to alter and change its course with
your vexing and fretting, but it will go on with power do what thou can. Do
but understand the power and efficacy of providence and it will be a mighty
means for the helping to learn this lesson of Contentment.

3. The infinite variety of the works of providence, and yet the order of
things one working toward another; there is infinite variety of the works of
God in an ordinary providence, and yet all work in an orderly way; we put these
two together, for God in the way of his providence causes a thousand thousand
things one to depend upon another, there are infinite several Wheels (as I may
say) in the works of providence, all the works that ever God did from all
eternity or ever will do, put them all together, and all make up but one work,
and they have been as several wheels that have had their orderly motion to
attain the end that God from all eternity has appointed. We indeed look at
things by pieces, we look at one particular and do not consider the reference
that one thing has to another; but God he looks at all things at once, and
sees the reference that one thing has to another: As a Child that looks upon
a Clock, looks first upon one wheel, and then upon another wheel, he looks not
at all together, or the dependence that one has upon another, but the workman
has his eyes upon all together and sees the dependence of all one upon
another, and the Art that there is in the dependence of one upon another; so it
is in Gods providence. Now observe how this works to Contentment; where there
is such a passage of providence befalls me, that is one wheel, and it may be if
this wheel should be stopped, there might a thousand other wheels come to be
stopped by this: as in a Clock, stop but one wheel and you stop every wheel,
because they have dependence one upon another: so when God has ordered a thing
for the present to be thus and thus, how do thou know how many things do
depend upon this thing? God may have some work that he has to do twenty years
hence that may depend upon this passage of providence, that falls out this day,
or this week. And here (by the way) we may see a great deal of evil that there
is in discontent, for thou would have Gods providence altered in such and
such a particular, indeed if it were only in that particular, and that had
reference to nothing else it were not so much, but by thy desire to have thy
will in such a particular, it may be thou would cross God in a thousand
things that he has to bring about, because it is possible there may be a
thousand things depend upon that one thing that thou would fain have to be
otherwise than it is; just as if a child should cry out and say, Let but that
one wheel stop; though he says but one wheel, yet if that stop, it is as much
as if he should say, they must all stop: So in providence, let but this one
passage of Providence stop, it is as much as if a thousand stopped: Let me
therefore be quiet and content, for though I be crossed in some one particular,
God attains his end, at least his end may be furthered in a thousand things by
this one thing that I am crossed in; therefore let a man consider, this is an act
of providence, and how do I know what God is about to do, and how many things
depend upon this providence? Now we are willing to suffer our friends will to
be crossed in one thing, so that our friend may attain to what he desires in a
thousand things: If thou have a love and friendship to God, be willing to be
crossed in some few things, that the Lord may have his Work go on in the
universal, in a thousand of other things. Now that is the third thing to be
understood in Gods providence, that Christ does learn those that he teaches in
the Art of Contentment.

4. Christ teaches them the knowledge of Providence, that is, The knowledge of
Gods usual way in his dealing with his People more particularly. The other is,
the knowledge of God in his Providence in general: But the right understanding
of the way of God in his providence toward his People and Saints, is a notable
Lesson to help us in the Art of Contentment. If we come once to know a man's way
and course, we may better suit and be contented to live with him than before we
came to know his way and course: As when a man comes to live in a society with
men and women, it may be the men and women may be good, but till a man comes to
know their way and course and disposition, many things may fall very cross, and
we think they are very hard, but when we come to be acquainted with their way
and spirit, then we can suit and concur with them very well? and the reason of
our trouble is, because we do not understand their way. So it is with you,
those that are but as strangers to God, and do not understand the way of God,
they are troubled with the providence of God, and they think them very
strange, and cannot tell what to make of them; because they understand not the
ordinary course and way of God toward his People. If a stranger sometimes
comes into a family, and sees such and such things done, he wonders what the
matter is, but those that are acquainted with it, it troubles them not at all.
So servants, when they come first together and know not one another, it may be
they are froward and discontented, but when they come to be acquainted with one
another ways, then they are more contented: Just so it is when we come first
to understand Gods ways.

Object. But you will say, What do you understand by Gods ways?

Answ. By that I mean these three things. And when we come to know them, we
shall not wonder so much at the providence of God, but be quiet and contented
with them.

1. The first thing is this: Gods ordinary course is, That his people in this
world should be in an afflicted condition: God has revealed in his Word, and
we may there find he has set it down to be his ordinary way, even from the
beginning of the world to this day (but more especially in the times of the
Gospel) that his People here should be in an afflicted condition. Now men that
do not understand this, they stand and wonder to hear of the People of God that
they are afflicted, and the enemies prosper in their way; for those that seek
God in his way, and seek for Reformation, for them to be afflicted, routed and
spoiled, and the enemies to prevail, they wonder at it: But now, one that is in
the School of Christ, he is taught by Jesus Christ, that God by his eternal
Counsels has set this to be his course and way, to bring up his People in this
world in an afflicted condition, and therefore says the Apostle, Account it
not strange concerning the fiery trial, 1 Pet. 4.12. We are not therefore to be
discontented with it, seeing God has set such a course and way, and we know
such is the will of God that it should be so.

The second thing that is in Gods way is this, Usually when God intends the
greatest mercy to any of his People, he does bring them into the lowest
condition. God does seem to go quite cross and work in a contrary way; when he
intends the greatest mercies to his People, he does first usually bring them
into very low conditions, if it be a bodily mercy, an outward mercy that he
intends to bestow, he uses to bring them bodily low, and outwardly low, if it
be a mercy in their estates that he intends to bestow, he brings them low in
that, and then raises them; and in their names he brings them low there, and
then raises them; and in their spirits, God does ordinarily bring their spirits
low, and then raises their spirits; usually the People of God before the
greatest comfort, have the greatest afflictions and sorrows, now those that
understand not Gods ways, they think that when God brings his People into sad
conditions, that God leaves and forsakes them, and that God does intend no
great matter of good to them; but now a Child of God that is instructed in
this way of God, he is not troubled; my condition is very low, but (says he)
this is Gods way when he intends the greatest mercy, to bring men under the
greatest afflictions. When he intended to raise Joseph to be the Second in the
Kingdom, God cast him into a dungeon a little before. So when God intended to
raise David and set him upon the Throne, he made him to be hunted as a
Partridge in the mountains, 1 Samuel 26.20. God went this way with his Son;
Christ himself went into Glory by suffering, Heb. 2.20. And if God deal so with
his own Son, much more with his People; As a little before break of day you
shall observe it is darker than it was any time before; so God does use to make
our conditions darker a little before the mercy come. When God bestowed the
last great mercy at Nazby, we were in a very low condition, God knew what he
had to do beforehand, he knew that his time was coming for great mercies; it
is the way of God to do so. Be but instructed aright in this course and tract
that God uses to walk in; and that will help us to Contentment exceedingly.

The Third thing that there is in Gods way and course is this, It is the way of
God to work by contraries, to turn the greatest evil into the greatest good. To
grant great good after great evil is one thing, and to turn great evils into
the greatest good that is another; and yet that is Gods way, the greatest good
that God intends for his People, many times he works it out of the greatest
evil, the greatest light is brought out of the greatest darkness: and Luther (I
remember) has a notable expression for this (says he) it is the way of God,
he does humble that he might exalt, he does kill that he might make alive, he
does confound that he might glorify; this is the way of God (says he) but
(says he) every one does not understand this, this is the Art of Arts, and the
Science of Sciences, the knowledge of knowledges to understand this, that God
does use when he will bring life, he does use to bring it out of death, he
brings joy out of sorrow, and he brings prosperity out of adversity, yea, and
many times he brings Grace out of Sin, that is, makes use of sin to work
furtherance of Grace; it is the way of God to bring good out of evil; not only
to overcome the evil, but to make the evil to work toward good: here is the way
of God: now when the soul comes to understand this, it will take away our
murmuring, and bring Contentment into our spirits: But I fear there are but few
that understand it aright, perhaps they read of such things, and hear of such
things in a Sermon, but they are not by Jesus Christ instructed in this, that
this is the way of God, To bring the greatest good out of the greatest evil.

Thus having dispatched the Third Head, the Lessons that we are to learn; we
come to the Fourth, and that is, The excellency of this Grace of Contentment:
And there is a great deal of excellency in Contentment; that is a kind of Lesson
too for us to learn. And this Head likewise will be somewhat long.

Says the Apostle, I have learned. As if he should say, Blessed be God for
this: Oh! it is a mercy of God to me that I have learned this Lesson, I find so
much good in this Contentment, that I would not for a world but have it: (I
have learned it says he.)

Now the very Heathens had a sight of a great Excellency that there is in
Contentment. I remember I have read of Antisthenes a Philosopher, that desired
of his Gods (speaking after the Heathenish way) nothing in this world to make
his life happy, but CONTENTMENT; and if he might have any thing that he would
desire to make his life happy, he would ask of them, That he might have the
spirit of Socrates, that he might have such a spirit as Socrates had, to be
able to bear any wrong, any injuries that he met withal, and to continue in a
quiet temper of spirit whatsoever befell him; for what was the temper of
socrates, whatever befell him he continued the same man, whatever cross befell
him no body could perceive any alteration of his spirit, though never so great
crosses did befall him. This a Heathen did attain to by the strength of Nature,
and a common work of the spirit: Now this Antisthenes saw such an excellency in
this spirit: As when God said to Solomon, What shall I give thee? he asked of
God wisdom: so says he, If the Gods should put it to me to know what I would
have, I should desire this thing, that I might have the spirit of Socrates: he
saw a great excellency that there was in this. And certainly a Christian may
see abundance of excellency in it: I shall labor to set it out to you in this
Sermon that you may be in love with this Grace of Contentment.

In the first place, By Contentment we come to give God that Worship that is
due to him: See this opened at large in Gospel Worship on Levit. 10.3.
It is a special part of Divine Worship that we owe to God, If we be content in
a Christian way according as has been opened to you; I say it is a special
part of the Divine Worship that the Creature ows to the infinite Creator, in
that I do render that respect that is due from me to the Creator. The words
that the Greeks have that signifies to Worship, it is as much as to come and
crouch before another, as a Dog should come crouching unto you, and be willing
to lie down at your feet; so the Creature in the apprehension of its own
baseness, and the infinite Excellency that there is in God above it; when it
comes to worship God, it comes and crouches to this God, and it lies down at
the feet of God, then does the Creature worship God. When you see a dog come
crouching to you, and you can make him with holding your hand over him to lie
down at your feet; then consider, thus should you do before the Lord, you
should come crouching to him, and lie down at his feet even upon your backs or
bellies, to lie down in the dust before him, so as to be willing that he should
do with you what he will; as sometimes you may turn a dog this way and that
way, up and down with the hand, and there he lies before you, according to your
showing him with your hand: So when the Creature shall come and lie down thus
before the Lord, then a Creature worships God, does render up that worship that
is due to God. Now in what disposition of heart do we thus crouch to God more,
then when we have this Contentation in all conditions that God disposes us
unto? This is a crouching unto Gods dispose, to be like the poor woman of
Canaan, when Christ said, it is not fit to give Childrens meat to dogs, but
(says she) the dogs have crumbs. I am a dog I confess, I but let me have but a
crum. And so when the soul shall be in such a disposition as to lie down and
say, Lord, I am but as a dog, yet let me have a crum, then does it highly honor
God. It may be some of you have not your table spread as others have, but God
gives you crumbs; now says the poor woman, dogs have crumbs, and when you can
find your hearts thus subjecting unto God, to be but as a dog, and can be
contented and bless God for any crum, I say, this is a great worship of God,
you worship God by this more than when you come to hear a Sermon, or spend half
an hour, or an hour in prayer, or when you come to receive a Sacrament; These
are the Acts of Gods Worship, I but these are but external Acts of Worship, to
Hear, and Pray, and receive Sacraments: But now this is the Soul-worship, to
subject it self thus to God. You that often will worship God by Hearing, and
Praying, and receiving Sacraments, and yet afterward will be froward and
discontented, know, that God regards not that worship, he will have the
Soul-worship in this subjecting of the soul to God. Observe it I beseech you;
in active Obedience, there we worship God by doing that that pleases God, but
by passive Obedience we do as well worship God by being pleased with that which
God does. Now when I perform a duty, I worship God, I do what pleases God: why
should I not as well worship God when I am pleased with what God does? As it
was said of Christ's obedience, Christ was active in his passive Obedience, and
passive in his active obedience: So the Saints they are passive in their active
obedience; they are first passive in their reception of Grace, and then active:
And when they come to passive obedience they are active, they put forth Grace
in active obedience, when they perform actions to God, then says the Soul, Oh!
that I could do that that pleases God, when they come to suffer any cross, On
that what God does might please me. I labor to do what pleases God, and I
labor that what God does shall please me, here is a Christian indeed that shall
endeavor both these: now this is but one side of a Christian, to endeavor to do
what pleases God, but you must as well endeavor to be pleased with what God
does, and so you shall come to be a complete Christian when you can do both.
And that is the first thing in the excellency of this Grace of Contentment.

The second thing in opening of this Excellency of Contentment is, That in
Contentment there is much exercise of Grace, There is much strength of Grace,
yea there is much beauty of Grace in Contentment, there is much exercise of
Grace, strength of Grace, and beauty of Grace, I put all these together.

1. Much exercise of Grace, There is a composition of Grace in Contentment,
there is faith, and there is humility, and love, and there is patience, and
there is wisdom, and there is hope, all Graces almost are compounded, it is an
oil that has the ingredients of all kind of graces, and therefore though you
cannot see the particular Grace, yet in this oil you have it all; God sees the
Graces of his Spirit exercised in a special manner, and this pleases God at the
heart to see the Graces of his Spirit exercised. In some one action that you do
you may exercise some one grace especially, but now in Contentment you exercise
a great many Graces at once.

2. There is a great deal of strength of Grace in Contentment. It argues a
great deal of strength in the body, the body to be able to endure hard weather
and whatsoever falls out, and yet not to be much altered by it; so it argues
strength of Grace to be content; You that complain of weakness of memory, and
weakness of parts, you cannot do what others do in other things, but have you
this gracious Heart-contentment, that has been opened to you? I know that you
have attained to strength of Grace in this, when it is so spiritual as has
been opened to you in the explication of this point. As it is with a man's
brain, if a man be distempered in his body and has many obstructions in his
body, has an ill stomach, and his spleen and liver obstructed, and yet for all
this his brain is not distempered, it is an argument of a great strength of
brain, and though there be many ill fumes that rise from his corrupt stomach,
yet still his brain is not distempered, but he continues in the free exercise
of the use of his reason and understanding; every one may understand that this
man has a very strong brain, that such things shall not distemper him, whereas
other people that have a weak brain, if they do not digest but one meals meat,
the sumes that do arise from their stomachs, do distemper their brain, and make
them unfit for every thing, whereas you shall have others that have strong
heads, and strong brains, though their stomachs be ill that they do not digest
meat, yet still they have the free use of their brain, this argues strength: So
it is in a man's spirit, you shall have many that have weak spirits, and if they
have any ill fumes, if accidents befall them, you shall presently have them out
of temper, but you shall have other men that though things do fume up, yet
still they keep in a steady way, and have the use of reason and of other
graces, and possess their souls with patience. As I remember it is reported of
the Eagle, it is not like other Fowls, other Fowls when they are hungry make a
noise, but the Eagle is never heard to make a noise, though it wants food, and
it is from the magnitude of his spirit, that will not make such complaints as
other Fowls will do when they want food, it is because it is above hunger, and
above thirst: So it is an argument of a gracious magnitude of spirit, that
whatsoever befalls it, yet it is not always whining and complaining so as
others are, but goes on still in its way and course, and blesses God and keeps
in a constant tenor whatsoever thing befalls it: such things as causes others
to be dejected, and fretted and vexed, and takes away all the comfort of their
lives, it makes no alteration at all in the spirits of these men and women, I
say this is a sign of a great deal of strength of Grace.

3. It Is also an argument of a great deal of beauty of Grace. It Is a speech
that Seneca a Heathen once had, says he, When you go abroad into groves and
woods: and there you see the tallness of the trees and their shadows, it
strikes a kind of awful fear of a Deity in you, and when you see the vast
rivers and fountains, and deep waters that strikes a kind of fear of a God in
you, but (says he) do you see a man that is quiet in tempests, and that lives
happily in the midst of adversities, why do not you Worship that man? He does
think him a man even to be honored that shall be quiet and live a happy life
though in the midst of adversities. The Glory of God appears here more than
in any of his Works? there is no Works that God has made, the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, and all the World, wherein so much of the Glory of God does appear, as
in a man that lives quietly in the midst of adversity. That was that that
convinced the King, when he saw the three children could walk in the midst of
the fiery furnace and not to be touched, the King was mightily convinced by
this, that surely their God was a great God indeed, and that they were highly
beloved of their God that could walk in the midst of the furnace and not be
touched, whereas the others that came but to the mouth of the furnace were
devoured; so when a Christian can walk in the midst of fiery trials, and not
his garments singed, but have comfort and joy in the midst of all (as Paul in
the stocks) can sing (that wrought upon the Jailer:) so it will convince men
when they see the power of Grace in the midst of afflictions, such
afflictions as would make others to roar under them, yet they can behave
themselves in a gracious and holy manner; Oh! it is the glory of a Christian. It
is that that is said to be the glory of Christ (for so by Interpreters it is
thought to be meant of Christ) In Micah 5.5. And this man (the text says)
shall be the peace, when the Assyrian shall come into our Land, and when he
shall tread in our Palaces. This man shall be the peace when the Assyrian
shall come into our land; for one to be in peace, when there is no Enemies,
it is no great matter, but says the text when the Assyrian shall come into our
Land, then this man shall be the peace; that is, when all shall be in an hubbub
and uproar, yet then this man shall be peace. That Is the trial of Grace when
you find Jesus Christ in your hearts to be peace, when the Assyrian shall come
into the Land. You may think you find peace in Christ when you have no outward
troubles, but is Christ your peace when the Assyrian comes into the Land, when
the Enemy comes? Suppose you should hear the enemy come marching to the City,
and had taken the Works, and were plundering, what would be your peace? Jesus
Christ would be peace to the soul, when the enemy comes into the City, and into
your houses: If there be any of you that have been where the enemy has come,
What has been the peace of your souls? That which is said of Christ may be
applied to this grace of Contentment, when the Assyrian, the Plunderers, the
Enemies, when any affliction, trouble, distress does befall such a heart, then
this Grace of Contentment brings peace to the soul; at that time brings peace
to the soul, when the Assyrian comes into the Land. The Grace of Contentment
it is an excellent Grace, there is much beauty, much strength in it; there is a
great deal of worth in this Grace, and therefore be in love with it.

The third thing in the Excellency of Contentment, is this: By Contentment the
soul is fitted to receive mercy, and to do service. I Will put these two
together, Contentment makes the soul fit to receive mercy, and to do service;
no man or woman in the world is so fit for to receive the Grace of God, and to
do the Work of God, as those that have contented spirits.

1. Those are fitted to receive mercy from the Lord that are contented: as now;
If you would have a vessel to take in any liquor, you must hold the vessel
still, if the vessel stir and shake up and down you cannot power in any thing,
but you will bid, hold still that you may power it in, and not lose any: So, if
we would be the vessels to receive Gods mercy, and would have the Lord power in
his mercy to us, we must have quiet, still hearts, we must not have hearts
hurrying up and down in trouble, discontent, and vexing, but we must have still
and quiet hearts if we would receive mercy from the Lord: If a Child flings
and throws up and down for a thing, you will not give it him then when he cries
so, but first you will have the Child quiet; though perhaps you do intend the
Child shall have the thing he cries for, but you will not give it him till he
is quiet, and comes and stands still before you, and is contented without it,
and then you will give it him: And truly so does the Lord deal with us (for our
dealings with him are just as your froward Children are with you) as soon as
you would have a thing from God, if you have it not you are disquieted
presently and all in an uproar (as it were) in your spirits: God intends mercy
to you, but says God, you shall not have it yet, I will see you quiet first,
and then in the quietness of your hearts, come to me and see what I will do
with you. I appeal to you, you that are any ways acquainted with the ways of
God, Have you not found this to be the way of God toward you, when you have
been troubled for want perhaps of some Spiritual comfort, and your hearts were
vexed at it, you get nothing from God all this while; but now, if you have got
your heart into a quiet frame, and can say, Well, it is fit the Lord should do
with us poor Creatures what he will, I am under his feet, and am resolved to do
what I can to honor him; and let him do with me what he will, I will seek him
as long as I live, I will be content with what God gives, and whether he gives
or no I will be content; yea, are you in this frame says God? now you shall
have comfort, now I will give you the mercy. A prisoner must not think to get
off his fetters by pulling and tearing, he may gall his flesh and rend it to
the very bone, certainly he will be unfettered never the sooner, but if he
would have his fetters taken off, he must quietly give up himself to some man
to take them off. If a beggar after he has knocked once or twice at the door
and you come not, and thereupon he is vexed and troubled and thinks much that
you let him stand a little while without any thing, you think that this beggar
is not fit to receive an alms; but if you hear two or three Beggars at your
door, and if you hear them out at your window say, Let us be content to stay,
perhaps they are busy, it is fit that we should stay, it is well if we have any
thing at last, we deserve nothing at all, and therefore we may well wait a
while; you would then quickly send them an alms: So God deals with the heart,
when it is in a disquiet way, then God does not give; but when the heart lies
down quietly under Gods hand, then is the heart in a fit frame to receive
mercy: Your strength shall be, to sit still says God; you shall not be
delivered from Babylon but by your sitting still.

2. As fit to receive mercy, so fit to do service; Oh! the quiet fruits of
Righteousness, the peaceable fruits of Righteousness; they indeed do prosper
and multiply most when they come to be peaceable fruits of Righteousness. As
the Philosophers say of every thing that moves, nothing that moves but it moves
upon something that is immovable; as a thing that moves upon the earth, if the
earth were not still it could not move.

Object. The Ships move upon the Sea, and that is not still.

Answ. But the Seas they move upon that which is still and immovable, there is
nothing moves but it has something immovable that does uphold it: the wheels
in a Coach they move up and down, but the Axle-tree that moves not up and down;
so it is with the heart of man. As they say of the Heaven, it moves up and down
upon a Pole that is immovable; so it is in the heart of man, if he will move
to do service to God he must have a steady heart with him, that must help him
to move in the service of God, those that have unsteady disquiet spirits that
have no stedfastness at all in them, they are not fit to do service for God,
but such as have stedfastness in their spirits they are men and women fit to do
any service, and that is the reason that when the Lord has any great work for
any servants of his to do, usually he does first quiet their spirits, he does
bring their spirits into a quiet sweet frame to be contented with any thing,
and then he sets them about employment.

The fifth excellency is this, Contentment it does deliver us from abundance of
temptations. Oh the temptations that men of discontented spirits are subject
to. The Devil loves to fish in troubled waters. That Is our proverb of men and
women, their disposition is to fish in troubled waters, they say it is good
fishing in troubled waters, this is the maxim of the Devil, he loves to fish in
troubled waters, where he sees the spirits of men and women troubled and vexed,
there the Devil comes (says he) there is good fishing for me, when he sees men
and women go discontented up and down and he can get them alone, then he comes
with his temptations (says he) Will you suffer such a thing? take such a
shifting indirect way, do not you see how poor you are, others are brave, you
know not what you shall do against winter, to provide fuel and get bread for
you and your children, and so he tempts them to unlawful courses: this is the
special distemper that the Devil fastens upon, when he brings men and women to
give up their souls to him, it is upon discontent: That the ground of all those
that have been witches, and so have given up themselves to the Devil, the rise
of it has been their discontent, and therefore it is observable that those the
Devil works upon to make them Witches, usually they are old and melancholy
people, and women especially, and those that are of the poorer sort that are
discontent at home, their Neighbors trouble them and vex them, and their
spirits are weak and they cannot bear it, so upon that the Devil fastens his
temptations and draws them to any thing, if they be poor, then he promises
them money, if they have revengeful spirits, then he tells them that he will
revenge them upon such and such persons, now this quiets and contents them. Oh!
there is matter of temptation for the Devil where he meets with a discontented
spirit. As Luther says of God, God does not dwell in Babylon, but in Salem,
Babylon signifies confusion, and Salem signifies peace, now God does not dwell
in spirits that are in a confusion, but he dwells in peaceable and quiet
spirits, O if you would free your selves from temptations labor for
Contentment: It is the peace of God that guards the heart from temptation. I
remember I have read of one Marius Curio that when he had bribes sent him to
tempt him to be unfaithful to his Country, he was sitting at home at dinner
with a dish of turnips; and they came and promised him rewards, says he; that
man that can be content with this fare that I have, will not be tempted with
your rewards, I thank God I am content with this fare, and as for rewards let
them be offered to those that cannot be content to dine with a dish of turnips:
So the truth is we see it apparently, that the reason why many do betray their
trust, as in the Parliament service and Kingdom, is, because they cannot be
contented to be in a low condition. Let a man be contented to be in a low
condition, and to go meanly clothed if God sees it fit, such a man is
shot-free (as I may so say) from thousands of temptations of the Devil, that do
prevail against others to the damning of their souls: Oh in such times as those
are when men are in danger of the loss of their estates I say those men that
have not got this grace, are in a most lamentable condition, they are in more
danger for their souls than they are for their outward estates, you think it is
a sad thing to be in danger of your outward estates that you may lose all in a
night, but if you have not this contented spirit within you, you are in more
danger of the temptations of the Devil, to be plundered that way of any good,
and to be led into sin; Oh when men think thus, they must live as brave as they
were wont to do, these men make themselves a prey to the Devil; but such as can
say, let God do with me what he pleases, I am content to submit to his hand in
it, the Devil will scarce meddle with such men. It Is a notable speech of a
Philosopher that lived upon mean fare, and as he was eating herbs and roots,
says one to him, If you would but please Dyonisius you need not eat herbs and
roots: but he answered him thus, If you would but be content with such mean
fare, you need not flatter Dyonisius. So temptations will no more prevail upon
a contented man, than a dart that is thrown against a brazen wall. That Is the
fifth particular.

The sixth Excellency is, The abundant comforts in a man's life that Contentment
will bring: Contentment will make man's life exceeding sweet and comfortable,
nothing more than the Grace of Contentment; many ways I will show how it brings
in Comfort.

1. As first, What a man has, he has it in a kind of Independent way, not
depending upon any creature for his comfort. 2. A contented man whose estate is
low, if God raises his estate he has the love of God in it, and then it is
abundantly more sweet than if he had it and his heart not contented; or if he
had not the love of God in it: for it may be God grants to a discontented man
his desire, but he cannot say it is from love; if a man has quieted his spirit
first, and then God grant him his desire, he may have more comfort in it, and
more assurance that he has the love of God in it. 3. This Contentment is a
comfort to a man's spirit in this, That it does keep in his comforts, and keep
out whatsoever may damp his comforts, or put out the light of them. I may
compare this Grace of Contentment to a Mariners Lanthorn, a Mariner when he is
at sea, let him have never so much provision in his Ship, yet if he be
thousands of leagues from land, or in a rode that he shall not meet with a Ship
in three or four months, if he has never a Lanthorn in his Ship, nor nothing
whereby he may keep a Candle light in a storm, he will be in a sad condition,
he would give a great deal to have a Lanthorn, or something that may serve
instead of it. When a storm comes in the night, and he cannot have any light
come above board, but it is puffed out presently, his condition is very sad: so
many men can have light of comfort when there is no storm, but let there come
but any affliction, any storm upon them, their light is puffed out presently, and
what shall they do now? when the heart is furnished with this Grace of
Contentment, this Grace is (as it were) the Lanthorn, and it keeps comfort in
the spirit of a man, light in the midst of a storm and tempest. When you have a
Lanthorn in the midst of a storm you can carry a light every where up and down
the ship to the top of the Mast if you will, and yet keep it light; so the
comfort of a Christian when it is enlivened with the Grace of Contentment, it
may be kept light whatever storms or tempests come, yet he can keep light in
his soul, Oh! this helps thy comforts exceeding much.
Seventhly, There is this excellency in Contentment, that it fetches in the
comfort of those things we have not really in possession; and perhaps many that
have not outward things have more comfort than those have that do enjoy them
themselves: As now a man by distilling herbs, though he has not the herbs
themselves, yet having the water that is distilled out of them, he may enjoy
the benefit of the herbs: So though a man has not the real possession of such
an outward estate, an outward comfort, yet he by the grace of Contentment may
fetch it in to himself. By the Art of Navigation we can fetch in the riches of
the East and West Indies to ourselves; so by the Art of Contentment we may
fetch in the comfort of any condition to our selves, that is, we may have that
comfort by Contentment, that we should have if we had the thing it self. There
is a notable story you have for this in Plutarch, in the life of Pyrrhus; one
Sineus comes to him, and would very fain have had him desist from the wars, and
not war with the Romans; says he to him, May it please your Majesty, it is
reported that the Romans are very good men of War, and if it please the gods we
do overcome them, what benefit shall we have of that victory? Pyrrhus answered
him, we shall straight then conquer all the rest of Italy with ease, says
Sineus, indeed it is likely which your Grace speaks, but when we have won
Italy will then our wars end? If the gods were pleased Pyrrhus, that the
victory were achieved, the way were then broad open for us to attain great
conquests, for who would not afterward go into Africa, and so to Carthage? But
(says Sineus) when we have all in our hands, what shall we do in the end? then
Pyrrhus laughing, told him again, we will then be quiet, and take our ease, and
make feasts every day, and be as merry one with another as we can possible;
says Sineus, what lets us now to be as quiet, and merry together, since we
enjoy that presently without further travel and trouble which we should go seek
for abroad, with such shedding of blood, and so manifest danger, cannot you fit
down and be merry now? so a man may think, if I had such a thing, then I would
have another, and if I had that, then you would have more, and what if you got
all you desire; then you would be content, why? you may be content now without
them: Certainly our Contentment does not consist in the getting of the thing we
desire, but in Gods fashioning our spirits to our conditions, there is some men
that have not a foot of ground of their own, yet will live better than other
men that are heirs to a great deal of land. I have known it in the Country
sometimes, that a man lives upon his own land, and yet lives very poorly, but
you shall have another man that shall farm his land, and yet by his good
husbandry, and by his care, shall live better sometimes than he that has the
land of his own: So a man by this Art of Contentment may live better without an
estate, than another man can of an estate: Oh! it adds exceeding much to the
comfort of a Christian: and that I may show it further, there is more comfort
in the Grace of contentment, than there is in any possessions whatsoever; a man
has more comfort in being content without a thing; than he can have in the
thing, that he in a discontented way does desire.

You think if I had such a thing then I should be content. I say there is more
good in Contentment, than there is in the thing that you would fain have to
cure your discontent, and that I shall open in diverse particulars. As thus.

1. I would fain have such a thing, and then I could be content: but if I had
it then it were but the creature that did help to my Contentment; but now it is
the Grace of God in my soul that makes me content: and surely it is better to
be content with the Grace of God in my soul, than with the enjoying of an
outward comfort. 2. If I had such a thing, indeed my estate might be better,
but my soul would not be better; but by Contentment my soul is better, that
would not be bettered by an estate, or lands, or friends; but Contentment makes
my self to be better: and therefore Contentment is a better portion than the
thing is that I would fain have to be my portion. 3. If I get Content by having
my desire satisfied, that is but self-love; but when I am Contented with the
hand of God, and am willing to be at his dispose, that comes from my love to
God, in having my desire satisfied, there I am contented through self-love, but
through the Grace of Contentment I come to be contented out of love to God; and
is it not better to be contented from a principle of love to God, than from a
principle of self-love? 4. If I am contented because I have that that I have a
desire to, perhaps I am contented in that one particular, but that one
particular does not furnish me with Contentment in another thing? perhaps I may
grow more dainty and nice, and froward in other things: if you give children
what they would have in some things, they grow so much the more coy and dainty,
and discontented if they have not other things that they would have; but if I
have once overcome my heart, and am contentted through the Grace of God in my
heart, then this does not content me only in particular, but in general,
whatsoever befalls me. I am discontented, and would fain have such a thing, and
afterward I have it: now does this prepare me to be contented in other things?
No, but when I have gotten this Grace of Contentment I am prepared to be
contented in all conditions: and thus you see that Contentment does bring
comfort to a man's life, fills a man's life full of comfort in this world; yea,
the truth is, it is even Heaven upon Earth, why what is Heaven, but the rest
and quiet of a man's spirit; what is the special thing that is in Heaven, but
rest, and joy, that makes the life of Heaven, there is rest, and joy, and
satisfaction in God: so it is here in a contented spirit, there is rest, and joy,
and satisfaction in God: In Heaven, there is singing praises to God; a contented
heart is always praising and blessing God; thou have Heaven while thou art upon
Earth when thou have a contented spirit, yea, in some regards it is better than
Heaven. How is that you will say? there is some kind of honor that God has in
it, and some excellency that he has not in Heaven, and that is this.
In Heaven there is no overcoming of temptations, they are not put to any
trials by afflictions: there in Heaven they have exercise of Grace, but they
have nothing but encouragement to it, and indeed those that are there their
grace is perfect, and in that they do excel us, but there is nothing to cross
their grace, they have no trials at all to tempt them to do contrary; but now
for a man or woman to be in the midst of afflictions, temptations and troubles,
and yet to have grace exercised, and yet to be satisfied in God and Christ, and
in the Word and Promises in the midst of all they suffer, this may seem to be
an honor that God has from us, that he has not from the Angels and Saints in
Heaven. Is it so much for one that is in Heaven that has nothing else but good
from God, has nothing to try them, no temptations, is that so much for them to
be praising and blessing God, as for the poor soul that is in the midst of
trials and temptations, and afflictions, and troubles? for this soul to go on
praising, and blessing, and serving God, (I say) it is an excellency that thou
shall not have in Heaven, and God shall not have this kind of glory from thee
in Heaven, and therefore be contented, and prize this Contentment, and be
willing to live in this world as long as God shall please, and do not think, Oh
that I were delivered from all these afflictions and troubles here in this
world! if thou were, then thou should have more ease to thy self: but here is
a way of honoring God, and manifesting the excellency of Grace here when thou
art in this conflict of temptation that God shall not have from thee in Heaven,
and therefore be satisfied and quiet, be contented with thy Contentment: I want
such and such things that others have, but blessed be God I have a contented
heart that others have not, then I say be content with thy Contentment, for
that is a rich portion that the Lord has granted unto them, if the Lord should
give unto thee thousands here in this world, it would not be such a rich
portion as this, that he has given thee a contented spirit: Oh go away and
praise the name of God, and say, Lord, it is true, these and these comforts that
others have I should be glad if I had them, but thou have cut me short, but
though I want these, yet thou have given me that that is as good and better,
thou have given me a quiet contented heart, to be willing to be at thy dispose.

SERMON, VII. at Stepney. Sept. 7. 1645.
PHIL. 4.11. For I have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be
content.

WE proceed now. There are some two or three things more of the excellency of
Contentment, and then we are to proceed to Application of the Point.

The eight Excellency is, Contentment is a great blessing of God upon the soul.
There is Gods blessing upon those that are content, the blessing of God is upon
them, and their estates, and upon all that they have. We read in Deuteronomy. of the
blessing of Judah the principle Tribe; this is the blessing of Judah, And he
said, hear Lord the voice of Judah, and bring him unto his people, let his
hands be sufficient for him, and be thou an help to him from his enemies. Let
his hand be sufficient for him, that is, bring in a sufficiency of all the good
unto him that he may have of his own, that is the blessing of Judah. So when God
gives thee a sufficiency of thine own, (as every contented man has) there is
the blessing of God upon thee, the blessing of the principal Tribe of Judah is
upon thee. It is the Lord that gives us all things to enjoy, we may have the
thing, and yet not enjoy it except God come in with his blessing, now
whatsoever thou have, thou do enjoy it: Many men have estates and do not
enjoy them, it is the blessing of God that gives us all things to enjoy, it is
God that through his blessing, has fashioned thy heart and made it suitable to
thy condition.

The ninth Excellency, Those that are content, they may expect reward from God,
that God shall give unto them the good of all those things that they are
contented to be without, and this brings in abundance of good to a contented
spirit; There is such and such a mercy that thou think would be very
comfortable unto thee if thou had it, but can thou bring thy heart to
submit to God in it; thou shall have the blessing of the mercy one way or
other; if thou have not the thing it self in re, thou shall have it made up one
way or other, thou shall have a Bill of exchange to receive somewhat in lieu of
it, there is no comfort that any soul is content to be without, but the Lord
will give either the comfort or somewhat in stead of it: Thou shall have a
reward to thy soul for what ever good thing thou art content to be without. You
know what the Scripture says of active obedience, and the Lord does accept (of
his servants) their will for the deed, though we do not do a good thing, yet if
our hearts be upright, to will to do it, we shall have the blessing though we
do not do the thing: You that complain of weakness, you cannot do as others do,
you cannot do as much service as others do, if your hearts be upright with God,
and would fain do the same service that you see others do; you would account it
a great blessing of God upon you, the greatest blessing in the world if you
were able to do as others do; now you may comfort your selves with this, having
to deal with God in the way of the Covenant of Grace, you shall have from God
the reward of all you would do, as a wicked man shall have punishment for all
the sin he would commit, so thou shall have the reward for all the good thou
would do. Now, may we not draw an argument from active obedience to passive?
There is as good reason why thou should expect that God will reward thee for
all thou art willing to suffer, as well as for all that thou art willing to do;
now if thou be willing to be without such a comfort and mercy when God sees
it fit, thou shall be no looser, Certainly God will reward thee either with the
comfort, or with that that shall be as good to thee as the comfort, therefore
consider, how many things have I that others want? and can I bring my heart
into a quiet contented frame to want what others have? I have the Blessing of
all that they have, and I shall either possess such things as others have, or
else God will make it up one way or other, either here or hereafter in eternity
to me: Oh! what riches are here! with Contentment thou have all kind of riches.

Tenthly and lastly, By Contentment the soul comes to an Excellency near unto
God himself, yea the nearest that may be, for this word that is Translated
Content, is a word that signifies a Self-sufficiency (as I told you in the
opening of the words.) A contented man is a self-sufficient man. What is the
great glory of God, but to be happy and self-sufficient of himself! Indeed he
is said to be All-sufficient, but that is but a further addition of the word All,
rather than of any matter; for to be sufficient, is All-sufficient: Now is this
the Glory of God, to be Sufficient, to have Sufficiency in Himself, El-shaddai,
to be God, having Sufficiency in himself? Now thou come near to this, thou
partakest of the Divine Nature, as by Grace in general, so in a more peculiar
manner by this Grace of Christian Contentment, what is the Excellency and Glory
of God but this? Suppose there were no creatures in the world, and that all the
creatures in the world were annihilated, God would remain the same blessed God
that he is now, he would not be in a worse condition if all Creatures were
gone; neither would a contented heart if God should take away all creatures
from him, a contented heart has enough in the want of all creatures, and would
not be more miserable than now he is. Suppose that God should continue thee
here, and all creatures that are here in this world were taken away, yet thou
still (having God to be thy portion) would be as happy as now thou art, and
therefore Contentation has a great deal of Excellency in it.

Thus we have showed in many particulars the Excellency of this Grace, laboring
to present the beauty of it before your souls that you may be in love with it.

Now my brethren what remains but the practice of this, for this Art of
Contentment it is not a speculative thing, only for contemplation, but it is an
art of Divinity, and therefore practical, ye are now to labor to work upon your
hearts, that there may be this Grace in you, that you may honor God and honor
your profession with this Grace of Contentment, for there is none does more
honor God, and honor their profession than those that have this Grace of
Contentment. Now that we may fall upon the practice, there is required,

First, That we should be humbled in our hearts for the want of this, that we
have had so little of this Grace in us. For there is no way to set upon any
duty with profit, till the heart be humbled for the want of the performance of
the duty before; many men when they hear of a duty they should perform, they
will labor to perform it, but first you must be humbled for the want of it,
therefore that is the thing that I shall endeavor in the Application, to get
your hearts to be humbled for the want of this Grace; Oh had I had this Grace
of Contentment, what a happy life I might have lived? what abundance of honor I
might have brought to the Name of God, and how might I have honored my
profession? and what a deal of comfort might I have enjoyed, but the Lord knows
it has been far otherwise, Oh how far have I been from this grace of
Contentment that has been opened to me? I have had a murmuring, a vexing, and
fretting heart within me, every little cross has put me out of temper and out
of frame, Oh the boisterousness of my spirit, what a deal of evil does God see
in my heart, in the vexing and fretting of my heart, and murmuring and repining
of my spirit? Oh that God would make you to see it: Now to the end that you
might be humbled for the want of this, I shall endeavor in these particulars to
speak unto it.

First, I shall set before you, The evil of a murmuring spirit, there is more
evil then you are aware of.

In the second place, I will show you some aggravations of this evil, It Is evil
in all, but in some more than in others.

Thirdly, I shall labor to take away the Pleas that any murmuring discontented
heart has for this distemper of his.

There Is these Three things in this Use of humiliation of the soul for the want
of this Grace of Contentment.

For the first, now at this time. The great evil that there is in a murmuring
discontented heart.

In the first place, This thy murmuring and discontentedness it argues, much
corruption that is in the soul; as Contentment argues much Grace, and strong
Grace, and beautiful Grace? so this argues much Corruption, and strong
Corruption, and very vile Corruption in thy heart. As it is in a man's body, If
a man's body be of that temper that every scratch of a pin makes his flesh to
rankle and to be a sore, you will say, surely this man's body is very corrupt,
his blood and flesh is corrupt that every scratch of a pin shall make it
ranckle, so it is in thy spirit; if every little trouble and affliction shall
make thee discontented and make thee murmur, and even cause thy spirit within
thee to ranckle; or as it is in a wound of a man's body, the evil of a wound it
is not so much in the largness of the wound, and in the abundance of blood that
comes out of the wound, but in the inflammation that there is in it, or in a
fretting and corroding humor that is in the wound; an unskilful man when he
comes and sees a large wound in the flesh, looks upon it as a dangerous wound.
And when he sees a great deal of blood gush out, he thinks these are the evils
of it, but when a Chyrurgion comes and sees a great gash, says he, this will
be healed within a few days, but there is a less wound and there is an
inflammation or a fretting humor that is in it, and this will cost time (says
he) to cure, so that he does not lay Balsom and healing Salves upon it, but his
great care is to get out the fretting humor, or inflammation, so that the thing
that must heal this wound it is some drink to purge? But (says the patient)
what good will this do to my wound? You give me somewhat to drink, and my wound
is in my arm, or in my leg, what good will this do that I put in my stomach?
Yes, it purges out the fretting humor, or takes away the inflammation, and till
that be taken away the salves can do no good. So it is just for all the world
in the souls of men, it may be there is some affliction upon them that I
compare to the wound; now they think that the greatness of the affliction is
that which makes their condition most miserable: Oh no, there is a fretting
humor, an inflammation in the heart, a murmuring spirit that is within thee, and
that is the misery of thy condition, and that must be purged out of thee before
thou can be healed, and let God do with thee what he will, till he purges out
that fretting humor thy wound will not be healed; a murmuring heart is a very
sinful heart, so that when thou art troubled for such an affliction, thou had
need turn thy thoughts, rather to be troubled for the murmuring of thy heart,
for that is the greatest trouble, there is an affliction upon thee and that is
grievous, but there is a murmuring heart within, that is more grievous. Oh that
we could but convince men and women that a murmuring spirit is a greater evil
than any affliction; let the affliction be what it will be. We shall show more
afterward that a murmuring spirit is the evil of the evil, and the misery of
the misery.

Secondly, The evil of murmuring is such, that God when he would speak of
wicked men, and describe them, and show the brand of a wicked ungodly man or
woman, he instances in this sin in a more special manner: I might name many
Scriptures but that Scripture in Jude is a most remarkable one, in the 14.
verse, and so forward, there it is said, That the Lord comes with ten thousands
of his Saints, to execute judgment upon all, and convince all that are ungodly
among them, of all their ungodly deeds, which they have ungodlily committed,
and of all their hard speeches, which ungodly finners have spoken against him.
Mark here in this 15. verse, there is four times mentioned ungodly ones; All
that are ungodly among them, all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly
committed, and of all their hard speeches, which ungodly sinners have spoken
against him: This is in the general. But now he comes in the particular to show
who these are, these are (says he) Murmurers; that is the very first. Would you
know who are ungodly men, that God when he comes with ten thousand of Angels
shall come to punish for all their ungodly deeds that they do, and those that
speak ungodly things against them? These ungodly ones are Murmurers. Murmurers
in the Scripture are put in the fore front of ungodly ones, its a most dreadful
Scripture, that the Lord when he speaks of ungodly ones puts Murmurers in the
very fore front of all, you had need look to your spirits, you may see that
this Murmuring, which is the vice contrary to this Contentment is not so small
a matter as you think, you think you are not so ungodly as others, because you
do not swear and drink as others do, but you may be ungodly in Murmuring, its
true, there is no sin but some seeds and remainers of it are in those that are
godly, but when they are under the power of this sin of murmuring, it does
convince them to be ungodly, as well as if they were under the power of
drunkenness, or whoredom, or any other sin, God will look upon you as ungodly
for this sin as well as for any sin whatsoever. This one Scripture should make
thy heart shake at the thought of the sin of Murmuring.

Thirdly, As its made a brand of ungodly men, so you shall find in Scripture
that God counts it rebellion, that is contrary to the worship that there was in
contentedness: that is worshipping of God crouching to God and falling down
before him, even as a dog that would crouch when you hold a staff over him: but
a Murmuring heart its a rebellious heart, and that you shall find if you
compare two Scriptures together, they are both in the Book of Numb 16.41. But
on the morrow (says the text) all the congregation of the Children of Israel
murmured against Moses and against Aaron saying, Ye have killed the people of
the Lord, They all murmured; now compare this with Chap. 17. and verse 10. And
the Lord said unto Moses Bring Aarons rod again, before the testimony to be
kept for a token against the Rebels. In the 16. Chap. they murmured against
Moses and Aaron, and in the 17. Chap. bring the rod of Aaron again, before the
testimony, for a token against the Rebels. So that to be a Murmurer, and to be
a Rebel you see in Scripture phrase is all one, it is a rebellion against God:
as it is the beginning of rebellion and sedition in a Kingdom when the people
are discontent, and when coffeehouse comes it grows to murmuring, and you
can go into no house almost but there is murmuring when men are discontent, so
that within a little while it breaks forth into sedition or rebellion.
Murmuring it is but as the smoke of the fire, there is first a smoke and smother
before the flame breaks forth, and so before open rebellion in a Kingdom there
is first a smoke of Murmuring, and then it breaks forth into open rebellion;
but because it has rebellion in the seeds of it, therefore it is accounted
before the Lord to be rebellion. Will thou be a Rebel against God; When thou
feel thy heart discontented and Murmuring against the dispensations of God
toward thee, thou should check thy heart thus, Oh thou wretched heart, what
will thou be a Rebel against God? will thou rise in a way of rebellion against
the infinite God? yet thus thou have done, charge thy heart with this sin of
rebellion, you that are guilty of this sin of Murmuring you are this day by the
Lord charged as being guilty of rebellion against him, and God expects that
when you go home you should humble your souls before him for this sin, that you
should charge your souls for being guilty of rebellion against God, many of you
may say, I never thought that I had been a Rebel against God before, I thought
that I had many infirmities, but now I see the Scripture speaks of sin in
another manner than men do, the Scripture makes men (though but murmurers) to
be Rebels against God, Oh this rebellious heart that I have against the Lord
that has manifested it is self in this way of murmuring against the Lord.
That Is a third particular in the evil of coffeehouse.

A fourth particular in the evil of Coffeehouse, It is a wickedness that is
exceeding contrary to Grace, and especially contrary to the work of God, in
bringing of the soul home to himself; I know no distemper more opposite and
contrary to the Work of God in conversion of a sinner, than this is.

Quest. What Is the work of God when he brings a sinner home to himself?

Answ. The usual way is, for God to make the soul to see and be sensible of the
dreadful evil that there is in sin, and the great breach that sin has made
between God and it, for certainly Jesus Christ can never be known in his beauty
and excellency till the soul know that. I do not speak what secret work of the
holy Ghost there may be in the soul, but before the soul can actually apply
Jesus Christ to its self, it is impossible but it must come to know the evil of
sin, and the excellency of Jesus Christ: there may be a seed of faith put into
the soul, but the soul must first know Christ, and know sin, and be made
sensible of it. Now how contrary is this sin of murmurring to any such work of
God; has God made me see the dreadful evil of sin, and made my soul to be
sensible of the evil of sin as the greatest burden? how can I then be so much
troubled for every little affliction? Certainly if I saw what the evil of sin
was, that sight would swallow up all other evils, and if I were burdened with
the evil of sin, it would swallow up all other burdens; what am I now murmuring
against Gods hand (says such a soul) when as a while ago the Lord made me see
my self to be a damned wretch, and apprehend it as a wonder that I am not in
Hell?

2. Yea, It Is mighty contrary to the sight of the infinite excellency and glory
of Jesus Christ, and the things of the Gospel. What am I that soul that the
Lord has discovered such infinite Excellency of Jesus Christ to? and yet what
shall I think such a little affliction to be so grievous to me, when I have had
the sight of such glory in Christ that is more worth than ten thousand worlds?
(for so will a true convert say) Oh! the Lord at such a time has given me that
sight of Christ that I would not be without for ten thousand thousand worlds;
but has God given thee that, and will thou be discontent for a trifle in
comparison of that?

3. A third work when God brings the soul home to himself it is, By taking the
heart off from the Creature, the disingaging the heart from all
Greature-comforts: That is the Third work ordinarily that the soul may perceive
of its self. It Is true, Gods Work may be altogether in the seeds in him, but in
the several actings of the soul in turning to God it may perceive these things
in it, the disingagement of the heart from the Creature, that is the calling off
the soul from the world, whom the Lord has called he has justified: What Is
the calling of the soul but this, the soul that was before seeking for
Contentment in the world, and cleaving to the Creature, now the Lord calls the
soul out of the world, and says, Oh soul, thy happiness is not here, thy rest
is not here, thy happiness is elsewhere, and thy heart must be loosned from all
these things that are here below in the world; and this is the work of God in
the soul to disingage the heart from the Creature, and how contrary is a
murmuring heart to such a thing; a thing that is glued to another you cannot
take off, but you must rend it; so its a sign thy heart is glued to the world,
that when God would take thee off, thy heart rends, if God by an affliction
should come to take any thing in the world from thee, if thou can part from
it with ease without rending, its a sign then that thy heart is not glued to
the world.

4. A Fourth Work of God in converting of a sinner, is this, The easting the
soul upon Jesus Christ for all its good: I see Jesus Christ in the Gospel the
Fountain of all Good, and God out of free Grace tendering him to me for life,
and for salvation, and now my soul casts its self, rouls its self upon the
infinite Grace of God in Christ for all good? now have thou done so? has God
converted thee, and drawn thee to his Son to cast thy soul upon him for all thy
good, and yet art thou discontented for the want of some little matter in a
Creature-comfort? art thou he that has cast thy soul upon Jesus Christ for all
good? as he says in another case, Is this thy faith?

5. The soul is subdued to God; and then it comes to receive Jesus Christ as a
King, to rule, to order and dispose of him how he pleases, and so the heart is
subdued unto God. Now how opposite is a murmuring discontented heart to a heart
subdued to Jesus Christ as a King, and receiving him as a Lord to rule and
dispose of him as he pleases.

6. There is in the work of thy turning to God, the giving up of thy self to
God in an everlasting Covenant* as thou take Christ the head of the Covenant
to be thine, so thou give up thy self to Christ; In the work of Conversion,
there is the resignation of the soul wholly to God in an everlasting Covenant
to be his; have thou ever surrendered up thy self to God in an everlasting
Covenant? then certainly this thy fretting, murmuring heart is mighty opposite
to it, certainly thou forgettest this Covenant of thine, and the Resignation of
thy self up to God; It would be a mavelous help to you, to humble your souls
when you are in a murmuring condition; if you could but obtain so much liberty
of your own spirits as to look back to see what the work of God was in
Converting you, there is nothing would prevail more than to think of that. I am
now in a murmuring discontented way. But how did I feel my soul working when
God did turn my soul to himself? Oh how opposite is this to that work, and how
unbeseeming? Oh what shame and confusion would come upon the spirits of men and
women, if they could but compare the work of corruption in their murmuring and
discontent, with the work of God that was upon their souls in Conversion? Now
we should labor to keep the work of God upon our souls that was at our
Conversion; for Conversion must not be only at one instant at first, men are
deceived in this, if they think their Conversion is finished merely at first,
thou must be in a way of Conversion to God all the days of thy life, and
therefore Christ says to his Disciples, Except ye be converted and become as
little children: Ye be converted: Why were they not converted before? Yes, they
were converted, but they were to continue the work of conversion all the days
of their lives, and what work of God there is at the first Conversion, it is to
abide afterward. As thus, Always there must abide some sight and sense of sin,
it may be not in the way which you had, which was rather a preparation than any
thing else; but the sight and sense of sin it is to continue still, that is you
are still to be sensible of the burden of sin, as it is against the Holiness
and Goodness and Mercy of God unto thee, and the sight of the Excellency of
Jesus Christ is to continue, and thy Calling out of the Creature, and the
Casting thy soul upon Christ as a King, still receive him day by day, and the
Subduing of thy heart, and the Surrendering of thy self up to God in the way of
Covenant; now if this were but daily continued, there would be no space nor
time for Murmuring to work upon thy heart. That's the Fourth Particulan.

The Fifth thing in the evil of Coffeehouse, Murmuring and coffeehouse is
exceeding below a Christian: Oh! it is too mean and base a distemper for a
Christian to give place to it. Now it is below a Christian in many respects.

1. How below the relation of a Christian? The relation to which thou stand.
With what relation (you will say?)

First, The relation thou stand in to God: Do not thou call God thy
Father? and do not thou stand in relation to him as a child? what, thou
murmurer! In 2 Samuel 13.4. It Is a Speech of Jonadab to Ammon, Why art thou,
being the Kings Son, lean from day to day, will thou not tell me? and so he
told him; (but that was for a wicked cause) he perceived that his spirit was
troubled, for otherwise he was of a fat and plump temper of body, but because
of trouble of spirit he was even pined away, why what is the matter? thou that
stand in this relation to the King, and yet any thing should trouble thy
heart (that is his meaning) is there any thing that should disquiet thy heart
and yet stand in such a relation to the King, the Kings Son? So I may say to
a Christian, Art thou the Kings Son, the Son, the Daughter of the King of
Heaven, and yet so disquieted and troubled, and vexed at every little thing that
falls out? as if a Kings Son should cry out, he is undone for losing a babble,
what an unworthy thing were this? So do thou, thou criest out as if thou were
undone, and yet a Kings Son, thou that stand in such relation to God, as
unto a Father, thou do dishonor thy Father in this; as if so be either he
had not wisdom, or not power, or not mercy enough to provide for thee.

2. The relation that thou stand in to Jesus Christ, thou art the Spouse of
Christ: what! one married to Jesus Christ and yet troubled and discontented.
Have thou not enough in him? does not Christ say to his Spouse, as Elkanah said
to Hannah, (1 Samuel 1.8.) Am not I better to thee than ten sons? So does not
Christ thy Husband say to thee, Am not I better to thee than thousands of
riches and comforts? such comforts as thou murmurest for want of; has not God
given thee his Son? and will he not with him give thee all things? has the
love of God been to thee to give thee his Son in way of marriage? why art thou
discontented and murmuring? consider thy relation to Jesus Christ as thou art a
Spouse and married to him, his Person is thine, and so all the riches of Jesus
Christ is thine; as the riches of a husband are the wives, and though there are
some husbands so vile as the wives may be forced to sue for maintenance;
certainly Jesus Christ will never deny maintenance to his Spouse: it is a
dishonor for a Husband to have his Wife go whining up and down; what, thou art
matched with Christ and art his Spouse and will thou murmur now and be
discontented in thy spirit? You shall observe among those that are newly
matched, when there is discontent between the wife and the husband, their
friends will shake their heads and say, they do not meet with that that they
did expect, ye see ever since they were married together how the man looks, and
the woman looks, they are not so cheerily as they were wont to be, surely (say
they) it is like to prove an ill match. But its not so here, it shall not be so
between thee and Christ: Oh Jesus Christ does not love to see his Spouse to
have a lowering countenance: no man loves to see coffeehouse in the sace of
his Wife, surely Christ does not love to see coffeehouse in the face of his
Spouse.

3. Thou stand in relation to Christ, not only as a Spouse but as a Member,
Thou art bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh; and to have a Member of
Jesus Christ to be in such a condition, its exceeding unworthy.

4. He is thy Elder brother likewise, and so thou art a Coheir with him.

5. The relation that thou stand in to the Spirit of God, thou art the
Temple of the holy Ghost, the holy Ghost is thy Comforter, it is he that is
appointed to convey all comfort from the Father and the Son, to the souls of
his people. And art thou the Temple of the holy Ghost, and does he dwell in
thee, and yet for all that thou murmurest for every little matter?

6. The relation that thou stand in to the Angels, thou art made one body
with them: for so Christ has joined principalities and powers with his Church,
they are Ministering Spirits for good to his people, to supply what they need,
and thou, and they are joined together, and Christ is the head of you and
Angels.

7. The relation that you stand in to the Saints, you are of the same body with
them, they and you make up but one mystical body with Jesus Christ, and if they
be happy you must needs be happy; On how beneath a Christian is a Murmuring
spirit if he considers his relations in which he stands.

Secondly, A Christian should consider, That murmuring and discontentedness is
below the high dignities that God has put upon him: Do but consider the high
diguity that God has put upon thee; the meanest Christian in the world is a
Lord of Heaven and Earth; he has made us Kings unto himself, Kings unto God,
not Kings unto men to rule over them, and yet I say every Christian is a Lord
of Heaven and Earth, yea of life and death. That is, As Christ he is a Lord of
all, so he has made those that are his Members to be Lords of all, All are
yours says the Apostle, even life and death, every thing is yours. Its a very
strange expression that death should be theirs, Death is yours, that is, you
are as it were Lords over it, you have that that shall make death to be your
servant, your slave, even death it self, your greatest enemies are turned to be
your slaves. Faith makes a Christian to be as Lord over all, to be lifted up in
excellency above all creatures that ever God made, except the Angels, yea and
in some respect above them, I say the poorest Christian that lives is raised to
an estate above all the Creatures in the world, except Angels, yea, and above
them in diverse respect, too, and yet discontented, that thou who were as a
firebrand of Hell, and might have been scorching and velling and roaring there
to all eternity, yet that God should raise thee to have a higher excellency in
thee than there is in all the works of Creation that ever he made, except
Angels, and other Christians that are in thy condition, yea and thou art nearer
the Divine Nature than the Angels, because thy nature is joined in an
hypostatical union to the Divine Nature, and in that respect thy nature is more
honored than the nature of the Angels. And the death of Christ is thine, he
died for thee, and not for the Angels, and therefore thou art like to be raised
above the Angels in diverse respects: yea, thou art in such an estate as this
is, thou that art set apart to the end that God might man fest to all eternity
what the infinite power of a Deity is able to raise a creature to; for that's
the condition of a Saint, a Believer, his condition is such as he is set apart
to the end that God might manifest to all eternity what his infinite power is
able to do to make the creature happy; art thou in such a condition? Oh! how
low and beneath this condition is a murmuring and discontented heart for want
of some outward comforts here in this world: How unseemly is it that thou
should be a slave to every cross, that every affliction shall be able to say
to thy soul, Bow down to us: We accounted that a great slavery, when men would
say to our souls, Bow down: As the cruel Prelates were wont to do in imposing
things upon men's consciences, they did in effect say, Let your consciences,
your souls bow down to us, that we may tread upon them: that is the greatest
slavery in the world, that one man should say to another, let your consciences,
your souls bow down that we may tread upon them; but will thou suffer every
affliction to say, bow down that we may tread upon thee? Truly its so, when thy
heart is overcome with murmuring and discontent: Know that those afflictions
which have caused thee to murmur, have said to thee, Bow down that we may tread
upon thee; nay, not afflictions, but the very Devil does prevail against you in
this: Oh! how beneath is this to the happy estate that God has raised a
Christian unto! What! the son of a King shall he have every base fellow to come
and bid him bow down that he may tread upon his neck? thus do thou in every
affliction: the affliction, the cross, and trouble that does befall thee,
says, Bow down that we may come and tread upon thee.

Thirdly, Murmuring its below the spirit of a Christian. Below his Spirit, the
spirit of every Christian should be like the spirit of his father; every father
loves to see his spirit in his child, loves to see his Image, not his Image of
his body only, to say, here is a child for all the world like the father, but
he has the spirit of his father too: a father that is a man of spirit, Loves
to see his spirit in his child, rather than the feature of his Body: Oh the
Lord that is our Father, loves to see his spirit in us: Great men love to see
great spirits in their children, and the great God loves to see a great spirit
in his Children; we are one Spirit with God, and with Christ, and one Spirit
with the holy Ghost, therefore we should have a spirit that might manifest the
Glory of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost in our spirits; that's the spirit of a
Christian indeed. The spirit of a Christian should be a Lyon-like spirit, as
Jesus Christ is the Lion of the Tribe of Judah (so he is called) so we should
manifest somewhat of the Lyon-like Spirit of Jesus Christ; he manifested his
Lyon-like Spirit in passing through all afflictions and troubles whatsoever,
without any murmuring against God. When he came to drink that bitter cup, and
even the dregs of it, he prayed to God (indeed) that if it were possible it
might pass from him, but presently, Not my will, but thy will be done: As soon
as ever he did mention the passing of the cup from him (though it were the most
dreadful cup that ever was drunk since the world began,) yet at the mentioning
of it, not my will, but thy will be done; here Christ showed a Lyon-like
Spirit, in going through all kind of afflictions whatsoever without any
murmuring against God in them: Now a murmuring spirit is a base dejected
spirit, cross and contrary to the Spirit of a Christian, and its very base. I
remember that the Heathens account it very base, Plutarch does report of a
certain people that did use to manifest their disdain to men that were
overmuch dejected by any affliction, they did condemn them to this punishment,
To wear woman's clothes all their days, or such a space of time at least they
should go in women's clothes in token of shame and disgrace to them; because
they had such effeminate spirits, they thought it against a manlike spirit, and
therefore seeing they did un-man themselves they should go as women. Now shall
they account it an unman-like spirit, to be overmuch dejected in affliction:
and shall not a Christian account it an unchristian-like spirit to be overmuch
dejected by any affliction whatsoever? I remember another compares murmuring
spirits, to children when they are weaning, What a deal of stir have you with
your children when you wean them? how froward and vexing are they? So when God
would wean thee from some outward comforts in this world, Oh how fretting and
discontented art thou! Children will not sleep themselves, not let their
mothers sleep when they are weaning; and so when God would wean us from the
world, and we fret, vex, and murmur, this is a childish spirit.

Fourthly, Its below the profession of a Christian. The profession of a
Christian, what is that? A Christians profession is, To be dead to the world,
and to be alive to God, that is his profession, to have his life to be hid with
Christ in God, to satisfy himself in God; What, is this thy profession? and
yet if thou have not every thing that thou would have, to murmur and be
discontent, thou do in that even deny thy profession.

Fifthly, It is below that special Grace of Faith. Faith is that that does
overcome the world, it is that that makes all the Promises of God to be ours:
Now when thou tookest upon thee the profession of Religion, Did God ever
promise thee that thou should live at ease, and quiet, and have no trouble?
I remember Austin has such an expression, What is this my faith? what did I
ever promise thee (says he) that thou should ever flourish in the world?
art thou a Christian to that end? and is this thy faith? I never made any such
promise to thee when thou tookest upon thee to be a Christian; Oh its mighty
contrary to thy profession, thou have never a promise for this, that thou
should not have such an affliction upon thee: And a Christian should live by
his faith; it is said, that the just does live by faith: now thou should not
look after any other life but the life that thou have by faith; now thou have
no ground for thy faith, to believe that thou should be delivered out of such
an affliction; and then, why should thou account it such a great evil to be
under such an affliction? Certainly that good that we have in the ground for
our faith, it is enough to content our hearts here, and to all eternity: A
Christian should be satisfied with that that God has made to be the object of
his faith, the object of his faith is high enough to satisfy his soul, were it
capable of a thousand times more than it is: Now if thou may have the object
of thy faith full, thou have enough to content thy soul: and know that when
thou art discontented for want of such and such comforts, if thou would but
think thus, God did never promise me that I should have these comforts, and at
this time, and in such a way as I would have, but I am discontented because I
have not these which God did never yet promise me, and therefore I sin much
against the Gospel, and against the Grace of Faith.

There is yet another thing, Its below the hopes of Christians: Oh! the most
glorious things that the Saints hope for.

And against the helps that Christians have. Christians have great helps that
may help them against murmuring.

And it is against that, which God expects from Christians. God expects other
manner of things from them than this.

Yea, and it is below that that God has from other Christians. These things I
shall open at another time.

SERMON, VIII. at Stepney. Sept. 21. 1645.
PHIL. 4.11. For I have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be
content.

I Mentioned diverse things the last day to set out the evil of discontent; I
shall name Two or Three more.

Sixthly, It is below a Christian in this, Because its below those helps that a
Christian has more than others have; they have the Promises to help them that
others have not; its not so much to have a Nabal have his heart sink, because
he has nothing but the Creature to uphold him, but its much for a Christian
that has Promises and Ordinances to uphold his spirit which others have not.

Seventhly, Its below the expectation that God has of Christians, for God
expects not only that they should be patient in afflictions, but that they
should rejoice and triumph in them: now Christians, when God expects this from
you, for you not so much as to have attained to contentedness under
afflictions, Oh this is beneathe the expectation of God from you.

Eighthly, It is below that that God has had from other Christians. Others
have not only been contented with little crosses, but they have triumphed
under great afflictions, they have suffered the spoiling of their goods with
joy, read but the latter part of the 11. of the Hebrews, and you shall find
what great things God has had from his people, and therefore not to be content
with smaller crosses, this must needs be a great evil.

The Sixth evil that there is in a murmuring spirit, is this, By murmuring you
undo your prayers, for it is exceeding contrary to the prayers you make unto
God: When you come to prayer to God, you acknowledge his Sovereignty over you,
you come there to profess your selves to be at Gods dispose, what do you pray
for except you acknowledge that you are at his dispose, except you will stand
(as it were) at his dispose, never come to petition to him, if you will come to
petition to him, and yet will be your own carver, you go cross to your prayers,
to come as if you would beg your bread at your Fathers gates every day, and yet
you must do what you list, this is the undoing of the prayers of a Christian. I
remember I have read of Latimer that speaking concerning Peter that he denied
his Master (says he) Peter forgot his paternoster, for that was Hallowed be
thy Name, and thy Kingdom come: So we may say, when you have murmuring and
discontented hearts, you forget your prayers, you forget what you have prayed
for, for you must make the Lords Prayer to be as a pattern for your Prayers,
though you say not always the same words, what do you pray, but give us this
day our daily bread? for that's Christ's intention that we should have that as a
pattern, and is a directory (as it were) how to make your prayers; now God does
not teach any of you to pray, Lord give us so much a year, or let me have such
kind of cloth, and so many dishes at my table, Christ does not teach you to
pray so, but he teaches us to pray, Lord give us our bread, showing that you
should be content with a little: What have you not bread to eat? I hope there is
none of you here but have that.

Obj. But I do not know if I should die what should become of my Children: Or
if I have bread now I know not where I shall have it the next week, or where I
shall have provision for the Winter.

Answ. Where did Christ teach us to pray, Lord give us provision for so long a
time? no, but if we have bread for this day Christ would have us content:
Therefore when we murmur because we have not so much variety as others have, we
do (as it were) forget out Paternoster; Its against our prayers, we do not in
our lives hold forth the acknowledgement of the Sovereignty of God over us as
we seem to acknowledge in our prayers; therefore when at any time you find your
hearts murmuring then do but reflect upon your selves and think thus, Is this
according to my prayers, wherein I held forth the Sovereign Power and Authority
that God has over me?

The seventh thing that I add for the evil of coffeehouse, is, The woeful
effects that comes to a discontented heart from murmuring. I Will name you five:
There are five evil effects that comes from a murmuring spirit.

1. By murmuring and discontent in your hearts, you come to lose a great deal
of time; How many times do men and women when they are discontented let their
thoughts run, and are musing and contriving through their present
discontentedness; then let their discontented thoughts be working in them, for
some hours together, and they spend their time in vain. When you are alone you
should spend your time in holy meditation, but you are spending your time in
discontented thoughts; you who complain that you cannot meditate, you cannot
think on good things, but if you begin to think of them a little, presently
your thoughts are off from them, but if you be discontented with any thing,
then you can go alone. and muse and roll things up and down in your thoughts to
feed a discontented humor: Oh labor to see this evil effect of murmuring, the
losing of your time. 2. It does unfit a man for duty: A man or woman that is in
a contented frame, you may turn such a one to any thing at any time, he is fit
for to go to God at any time; but when one is in a discontented condition, then
a man or woman is exceeding unfit for the service of God. And it causes many
distractions in duty, it unfits for duty, and when you come to perform duties,
Oh the distractions that are in your duties, when your spirits are
discontented; when you hear of any ill news from Sea and cannot bear it, or of
any ill from a friend, or any loss or cross, Oh what distractions do they cause
in the performance of holy duties! When you should be enjoying communion with
God, you are distracted in your thoughts about the cross that has befallen
you, whereas had you but a quiet spirit, though there should great crosses
befall you, yet they would never hinder you in the performance of any duty. 3.
Consider what wicked risings of heart, and resolutions of spirit there are many
times in a discontented fit. In some discontented fits the heart rises against
God, and against others, and sometimes has even desperate resolutions what to
do to help themselves. If the Lord should have suffered you to have done
(sometimes in a discontented fit) what you had thought to do, what wonderful
misery had you brought upon your selves: Oh it was a mercy of God that did stop
you, had not God stopped you, but let you go on when you thought to help your
selves this way and the other way, Oh it had been ill with you, do you but
remember those risings of heart and wicked resolutions that sometimes you have
had in a discontented mood, and learn to be humbled upon that. 4.
Unthankfulness, that is an evil and a wicked effect that comes from discontent.
Unthankfulness the Scripture does rank among very great sins. For men and women
that are discontent though they enjoy many mercies from God, yet they are
thankful for none of them, for this is the vile nature of coffeehouse, to
lessen every mercy of God, to make those mercies they have from God to be as
nothing to them, because they have not what they would have. Sometimes its so
even in spiritual things, if they have not all they would have, the comforts
that they would have, then what they have is nothing to them, do you think that
God will take this well? If you should give a friend, a kinsman, a purse of
money to go and trade withal, and he should come and say, What do you give me?
they are but a few counters, they will do me no good: you cannot bear this at
his hand if he should do so, because he has not so much money as he would: So
for you to be ready to say, All that God has given me is nothing worth, will
do me no good, they are but counters; though they are precious Graces of Gods
spirit, that are more worth than thousands of worlds, yet for you to say, they
are nothing, they are but common gifts, and all is but in hypocrisy, all
counterfeit, Oh! what an unthankful thing is this! the Graces of Gods Spirit
are nothing to a discontented heart that has not all that it would have; and
so for outward blessings, though God has given you health of Body, and
strength, and bath given you some competency for your family, some way of
livelihood, yet because you are disappointed in somewhat that you would have,
therefore all is nothing unto you; Oh! what unthankfulness is here? God expects
that every day you should spend some time in blessing his Name for what mercy
he has granted unto you, there is not any one of you who are in the lowest
condition, but you have abundance of mercies to bless God for, but
discontentedness makes them nothing. Its an excellent speech that I remember
Luther has (says he) This is the Rhetoric of the Spirit of God (its a very
fine speech of his) to extenuate evil things, and to amplify good things; if
there falls out a cross, to make the cross to be but little, but if there be a
mercy to make the mercy to be great; as thus, If there be a cross, if the
Spirit of God prevails in the heart, such a man or woman will wonder that it is
no greater, and will bless God that though there be such a cross, yet that it
is no more; that is the work of the Spirit of God: and if there be a mercy,
wonders at Gods goodness that God granted so great a mercy: The Spirit of God
extenuates evils and crosses, and does magnify and amplify all mercies, and
makes all mercies seem to be great, and all afflictions seem to be little. But
(says he) the Devil goes quite contrary, the Rhetoric of the Devil is quite
otherwise, he does lessen Gods mercies, and amplify evil things, as thus, A
godly man wonders at his cross that it is no more, a wicked man wonders his
cross is so much, Oh (says he) none was ever so afflicted as I am! If there be
a cross, the Devil puts the soul upon musing on it, and making it greater than
it is, and so it brings discontent: And then on the other side, if there be a
mercy then its the Rhetoric of the Devil to lessen the mercy, Indeed (says
he) the thing is a good thing, but what is it? It is no great matter, and for
all this I may be miserable. Thus the Rhetoric of Satan does lessen Gods
mercies, and does increase afflictions: And for this I Will give you a notable
example that we have in Scripture, it is the example of Korah, Dathan, and
Abiram, In Numb. 16.12, 13. And Moses sent to call Dathan and Abiram the sons
of Eltab: which said, We will not come up. Is it a small thing that thou have
brought us up out of a Land that flows with milk and honey, to kill us in the
wilderness, except thou make thy self altogether a Prince over us? Mark, they
slighted the Land that they were going into, the Land of Canaan, that was the
Land that God promised them that should flow with milk and honey: But mark here
their discontentedness, because they met with some troubles in the wilderness,
Oh it was to slay them, they made their affliction in the wilderness to be
greater than it was, Oh it was to kill them, though it were indeed to carry
them to the Land of Canaan. But now their deliverance from Egypt though it was
a great mercy, they made that mercy to be nothing, for say they, You have
brought us out of a Land that flows with milk and honey, what land was that?
It was the land of Egypt, the Land of their bondage, but they call it a Land
that flowed with milk and honey, though it were the Land of their most cruel
and unsupportable bondage; whereas they should have blessed God as long as they
had lived for Gods delivering them out of the Land of Egypt, yet meeting with
some cross, they make their deliverance from Egypt no mercy; no, it was rather
a misery to them, Oh (say they) Egypt was a Land that flowed with milk and
honey. Oh what baseness is there in a discontented spirit! a discontented
spirit out of envy to Gods Grace will make mercies that are great to be little,
yea to be none at all. Would one ever have thought that such a word should have
come from the mouth of an Israelite, that had been under bondage and cried
under it, and yet when they meet with a little cross in their way to say, you
have brought us out of the Land that flows with milk and honey, to say they
were better before than now, and yet before they could not be contented
neither; this is the usual unthankful expression of a discontented heart: And
it is so with us now when we meet with any cross in our estates, and taxations
and troubles, especially if any among you have been where the enemy has
prevailed, you are ready to say, We had plenty before, and we are now brought
to a condition of hardship, we were better before when we had the Prelates and
others to domineer: and so we endanger our selves to be brought into that
bondage again; Oh let us take heed of this, of a discontented heart, there is
this woeful cursed fruit of discontent to make men and women unthankful for all
the mercies God has granted to them, and this is a sore and grievous evil. And
lastly, There Is this evil effect in murmuring, It causes shiftings of spirit:
they that murmur and are discontent, are liable to temptations, to shift for
themselves in sinful and ungodly ways, discontent is the ground of shitting
courses and unlawful ways. How many of you may have your consciences condemn
you of this, that you in the time of your afflictions have sought to shift for
your selves by ways that have been sinful against God, and your discontent was
the bottom and ground of it? If you would avoid shiftings for your selves by
wicked ways, labor to mortify this sin of discontent, to mortify it at the
root.
The Eight evil that there is in murmuring and discontent is this, There is a
great deal of folly, extreme folly in a discontented heart, its a foolish sin.
I shall open the folly of it in many particulars.

1. It takes away the present comfort of what you have, because you have not
somewhat that you would have. What a foolish thing is this, that because I have
not what I would have, I will not enjoy the comfort of what I have? Do not you
account this folly in your children, you give them some victuals and they are
not contented, perhaps (they say) its not enough, they cry for more, and if you
do not presently give them more they will throw away that they have, and though
you account that folly in your Children, yet you deal thus with God; God gives
you many mercies, but you see others have more mercies than you, and therefore
you cry for more; I but God gives you not what you would have, and upon that
you throw away what you have, Is not this folly in your hearts? It is
unthankfulness. 2. There Is a great deal of folly in coffeehouse, for by all
your discontent you cannot help your selves, you cannot get any thing by it.
Who can by taking any carking care add one cubit to his stature, or make one
hair that is white, to be black? You may vex and trouble your selves, but you
can get nothing by it. Do you think that the Lord will come in a way of mercy
ever a whit the sooner because of the murmuring of your spirits? Oh no, but
mercy will be rather deferred the longer for it; though the Lord were before in
a way of mercy, yet this distemper of your hearts were enough to put him out of
his course of mercy, and though he had thoughts that you should have the thing
before, yet now you shall not have it. If you had a mind to give such a thing
to your child, yet if you see him in a discontented fretting way, you will not
give it him; and this is the very reason why there are so many mercies denied
to you, because of your coffeehouse, you are discontented for want of them,
and therefore you have them not, you do deprive your selves of the enjoyment of
your own desires because of the discontent of your hearts, because you have not
your desires, And is not this a foolish thing? 3. There Is a great deal of folly
in this, There are many foolish carriages commonly that a discontented hear is
guilty of: They carry themselves foolishly toward God and toward men; there
are such expressions, and such kind of behavior comes from them, as makes their
friends to be ashamed of them many times; their carriages are so unseemly, they
are a shame to themselves, and their friends. 4. There is a great deal of folly
in discontent and murmuring: for it does eat out the good and sweetness of a
mercy before it comes. If God should give a mercy that we are discontented for
the want of, yet the blessing of the mercy is as it were eaten out before we
come to have it. Discontent is like a worm that eats the meat out of the Nut,
and when the meat is eaten out of it, then you shall have the shell. If a
child should cry for a Nut that has the meat eaten out, or all worm-eaten,
what good would the child have by having the Nut? so such an outward comfort
you would fain have, and you are troubled for the want of it, but the very
trouble of your spirit, is the worm that eats out the blessing of the mercy,
and then perhaps God gives it you, but gives it you with a curse mixed with it,
that you were better not have it; than have it. That man or woman that is
discontented for want of some good thing, if God does give that good thing to
them before they be humbled for their discontent that did proceed from them,
such a man or woman can have no comfort of the mercy, but it will be rather an
evil than a good to them: And therefore for my part if I should have a friend
or brother, or one that were as dear to me as my own soul that I should see
discontented for the want of such a comfort, I should rather pray, Lord keep
this thing from them, till thou will be pleased to humble their hearts for
their discontent, let not them have the mercy till they come to be humbled for
their discontent for the want of it, for if they have it before that time; they
will have it without any blessing: And therefore it should be your care when
you find your hearts discontented for want of anything, to be humbled for it,
thinking thus with your selves, Lord, if that that I do so immoderately desire,
should come to me before I be humbled for my discontent for want of it, I am
certain I can have no comfort of it, but I shall rather have it as an
affliction to me. Many things which you desire as your lives, and think that
you should be happy if you had them, yet when they do come, you find not such
happiness in them, but they prove to be the greatest crosses and afflictions to
you that ever you had, and upon this ground, because your hearts were
immoderately set upon them before you had them. As it was with Rachel, she must
have children or else she died, well says God, seeing you must, you shall have
them, but though she had a child she died according to what she said, Give me
children or else I die. So in regard of any other outward comforts, people may
have the thing, but oftentimes they have it so as it proves the heaviest cross
to them that ever they had in all their lives, such a child as you were
discontent for the want of it, it may be it was sick, and your hearts were out
of temper for fear that you should lose it, and God restores it, but he
restores it so as he makes it a cross to your hearts all the days of your
lives. One observes concerning Manna, when the people were contented with their
allowance that God allowed them, then it was very good, but when they would not
be content with Gods allowance, but would gather more then God would have them;
then (says the text) there was worms in it: So when we are content with our
conditions, and that which God disposes of us to be in, there is a blessing in
it, then its sweet to us, but if we must needs have more, and keep it longer
than God would have us to have it, then there will be worms in it, and no good
at all. 5, There Is a great deal of folly in discontentedness, for it makes our
affliction a great deal worse than otherwise it would be; it no way removes our
affliction, nay, while they do continue they are a great deal the worse and
heavier, for a discontented heart is a proud heart, and a proud heart will not
pull down his sails when there comes a tempest and storm: If a Martinet when a
tempest and storm comes should be froward and would not pull down his sails,
but is discontented with the storm, Is his condition the better because he is
discontented and will not pull down his sails? Will this help him? Just so it
is for all the world with a discontented heart, a discontented heart is a proud
heart, and he out of his pride is troubled with his affliction, and is not
contented with Gods dispose, and so he will not pull down his spirit at all,
and make it bow to God in this condition in which God has brought him; now is
his condition the better because he will not pull down his spirit? No certainly
abundantly worse, a thousand to one but the tempest and storm overwhelms his
soul. And thus you see what a great deal of folly there is in the sin of
coffeehouse.
The ninth evil of murmuring and coffeehouse is this, There is a mighty deal
of danger in the sin of coffeehouse, for it exceedingly provokes the wrath
of God; its a sin that does much provoke God against his creature; we find most
sad expressions in Scripture (and examples too) how God has been provoked
against many for their discontent; in Numb. 14. you have a notable text, and
one would think that that were enough for ever to make you fear murmuring, in
the 26. verse, it is said, The Lord spoke unto Moses and Aaron, saying, what
did he say? How long shall I bear with this evil Congregation which murmur
against me? How long shall I bear with them says God, This evil Congregation;
Oh that's an evil Congregation that murmurs against me! And how long shall I
bear with them? they do murmur and they have murmured: as those that have
murmuring spirits and murmuring dispositions, they will murmur again, and
again, How long shall I bear with this evil Congregation that murmur against
me? How justly may God speak of many of you that are this morning before the
Lord, How long shall I bear with this wicked man or woman that does murmur
against me, and has usually in the course of their lives murmured against me,
when any thing falls out otherwise than they would have it? And mark what
follows after, I have heard the murmuring of the Children of Israel: You
murmur, it may be others hear you not, nay, it may be you speak not at all, or
but half words, yet God hears the language of your murmuring hearts, and those
muttering speeches, and those half words that come from you. And further
observe in this verse; how the Lord repeats this sin of murmuring, How long
shall I bear with this evil Congregation which murmur against me? Secondly, I
have heard their murmuring: Thirdly, which they murmur against me: Murmur,
Murmur, Murmur, Three times in one verse he repeats it; and this is to show his
indignation against the thing: When you express indignation against a thing,
you will repeat it over again, and again; now the Lord, because he would
express his indignation against this sin, he repeats it over again, and again,
and it follows in ver. 28. Say unto them, as truly as I live says the Lord,
As ye have spoken in mine ears, so will I do to you. Mark, God swears against a
murmurer; sometimes in your discontent you will be ready to swear (it may be)
do you swear in your discontent? So does God swear against you for your
discontent. And what was it that God would do unto them? ver. 29, 30. Doubtless
your carcasses shall fall in the wilderness, and you shall not come into the
Land concerning which I swear, to make you dwell therein: as if God should say,
if I have any life in me, your lives shall go for it, as I live it shall cost
you your lives. A discontented murmuring fit of yours may cost you your lives.
You see how it provokes God, there is more evil in it than you are aware of, it
may cost you your lives, and therefore look to your selves, and learn to be
humbled at the very beginnings of such distempers in the heart. So in Psalm.
106.24, 25. Yea, they despised the pleasant Land, they believed not his word;
but murmured in their tents, and hearkened not unto the voice of the Lord;
therefore he lifted up his hand against them to overthrow them in the
wilderness. Here are diverse things observable in this Scripture.

First, That which we spoke to before, How a murmuring heart does slight Gods
mercies, so it is here, They despised the pleasant Land: and that a murmuring
heart is contrary to faith, they believed not his word, but (says the text)
they murmred in their tents, and hearkened not unto the voice of the Lord. Many
men and women will hearken to the voice of their own base murmuring hearts,
that will not hearken to the voice of the Lord; if you would hearken to the
voice of the Lord, there would not be such murmuring as there is: but mark what
follows upon it, you may not think to please your selves in your murmuring
discontentedness, and think that no evil shall come of it; Therefore he lifted
up his hand against them to overthrow them: you that are discontented, you lift
up your hearts against God, and you cause God to lift up his hand against you;
perhaps God lays his finger upon you softly in some afflictions that are upon
you in your families or elsewhere, and you cannot bear the hand of God that
lies upon you as tenderly as a tenderhearted Nurse that lays her hand upon
the child, you cannot bear the tender hand of God that is upon you in a lesser
affliction; it were just with God to lift up his hand against you in another
manner of affliction; Oh a murmuring spirit provokes God exceedingly. There is
another place in 16. of Numb. compare the 41. verse. and the 46. verse. together,
But on the morrow all the Congregation of the Children of Israel murmured
against Moses and against Aaron saying, Ye have killed the people of the Lord:
And mark in the 46. verse, And Moses said unto Aaron, Take a Censer and put
fire therein from off the Altar, and put on incense, and go quickly unto the
Congregation and make an atonement for them, for there is wrath gone out from
the Lord, the plague is begun; mark how Gods wrath is kindled; in the 41.
verse, the Congregation had murmured; and they murmured but against Moses and
Aaron, (perhaps you murmur more directly against God) and that was against God
in murmuring against Gods Ministers, it was against God but not so directly;
but it may be the murmuring of your hearts is more directly against Gods
dealings with you: if you murmur against those that God makes instruments
(because you have not every thing that you would have) as against the
Parliament, or such and such that are public Instruments, its against God; it
was but against Moses and Aaron that the Israelites murmured, and they said
that Moses and Aaron had killed the people of the Lord, though it was the hand
of God that was upon them for their former wickedness, in murmuring. It is
usual for wicked vile hearts to deal thus with God, that when Gods hand is a
little upon them for to murmur again and again, and so to bring upon themselves
even infinite kind of evils? but now the anger of God was quickly kindled, Oh
says Moses, Go take the Censer quickly, for wrath is gone out from Jehovah,
the plague is begun; so while you are murmuring in your families, the wrath of
God may quickly go out against you, quickly, in a morning or evening, when you
are a murmuring, the wrath of God may come quickly out upon your families or
persons; you are never so prepared for present wrath as when you are in a
murmuring discontented fit, those that stand by and see you in a murmuring
discontented fit, have cause to say, Oh let us go and take the Censer, let us
go to prayer, for we are afraid that wrath is gone out against this family,
against this person: And it were a very good thing for thee that art a godly
wise when you see your husband come home and fall to murmuring, because things
go not according to his desire, to go to prayer, and say, Lord pardon the sin
of my husband: and so for the husband to go to God in prayer falling down and
beseeching of him that wrath may not come out against his family for the
murmuring of his wife. And the truth is, at this day there has been (at least
lately) as much murmuring in England as ever was, and even in this very
particular the plague is begun, and this very judgment it does come many times
upon murmuring, upon those that are so discontented in their families, and are
always grumbling and murmuring at any thing that falls out amiss (I say) this
text of Scripture in Numbers does clearly hold forth this, That the Lord brings
the Plague upon men for this sin of murmuring, he does it in Kingdoms and
Families, and upon particular persons. Though we cannot always point out the
particular sin that God brings this for, yet this should be examined how far we
are guilty of this sin of murmuring; because the Scripture holds forth this so
clearly, that Moses when he did but hear that they murmured, Do they murmur?
(says he) Go forth quickly, and seek to pacify the anger of God, For wrath is
gone out, and the plague is begun. And 1 Cor. 10.10. there you have a notable
example of Gods heavy displeasure against murmuring, Neither murmur ye as some
of them also murmured, and were destroyed of the destroyer. Take heed of
murmuring as some of them did (he speaks of the people of Israel in the
wilderness) but says he, what came of it? They were destroyed of the
destroyer. Now the destroyer is thought to be the fiery Serpents that were sent
among them: They murmured, and God sent fiery Serpents to sting them. What do
you think that such a cross and affliction does sting you? Perhaps such an
affliction is upon you, and it seems to be grievous for the present, What? do
you murmur and repine? God has greater crosses to bring upon you: Those people
that murmur for the want of outward comforts, for want of water (sometimes) and
for the want of bread, they murmur, but the Lord sends fiery Serpents among
them. I may say to a murmuring heart, Woe to thee that Strivest with thy Maker:
Woe to that man, that woman that strives against their Maker; What do thou
else, but strive against thy Maker? Thy Maker has the absolute dispose of
thee, and will thou strive against thy Maker? What does this murmuring
discontented heart of thine do otherwise but wrangle, and contend, and strive,
even with God himself? Oh woe to him that strives against his Maker! I may
further say to thee, as God speaks to Job: Job 38.1.2. When Job was impatient,
Now God spoke (says the text) out of the whirlwind, and said, who is this that
darkeneth counsel by words without knowledge? So do thou speak against Gods
ways, and his providence that has fallen out concerning thy estate and
outward comforts? who is this; who is this that darkeneth counsel by words
without knowledge? Where Is that man or woman whose hearts are so bold and
impudent, as dare speak against the administration of Gods providence?

The tenth Evil of murmuring and discontent is this, There Is a great curse of
God upon it, so far as it does prevail in one that is wicked, it has the curse
of God upon it. In Psalm. 59.15. see there what the curse of God is upon wicked
and ungodly men, Let them wander up and down for meat and grudge if they be not
satisfied. That is the imprecation and curse upon wicked and ungodly men, that
if they be not satisfied they shall grudge; when thou art not satisfied in thy
desires and find thy heart grudging against God, apply this Scripture, What,
is the curse of the wicked upon me? This is the curse that is threatened upon
wicked and ungodly ones, That they shall grudge if they be not satisfied. And
in Deuteronomy. 28.67. There it is threatened as a curse of God upon men, that they
cannot be content with their present condition, But they shall say in the
morning, would God it were even; and at even, would God it were morning; and so
they lie tossing up and down and cannot be content with any condition that they
are in, because of the sore afflictions that be upon them; and therefore it is
further threatened as a curse upon them, in the 34. verse. That they should be
mad for the sight of their eyes which they should see: This is but the
extremity of their discontentedness: that is, They shall be so discontented; as
they shall be even mad. Many men and women in discontented moods are mad kind
of people, and though you may please your selves in such a mad kind of
behavior, yet know, that it is a curse of God upon men to be given up to a kind
of madness for evils that they-suppose are upon them, and that they fear. In
the 47. verse. there is a notable expression for to show the curse of God upon
murmuring hearts; the Lord threatening the curses that shall be upon them (says
he) verse, 45, 46, and 47. The Curso shall pursue thee, and they shall be upon
thee for a sign, and for a wonder, and upon thy seed for ever: Because thou
servedst not the Lord thy God with joyfulness, and with gladness of heart for
the abundance of all things. God here threatens to bring his curse so upon
them, as to make them a wonder and a sign to others, Why? because they have not
served the Lord with joyfulness of heart (that may be added to that of the
wrath of God upon men) therefore God would bring such a curse upon them as
would make them a wonder to all that were about them. Oh how far art thou then
that have a murmuring heart, from serving the Lord with joyfulness?

The eleventh evil of discontent and murmuring is this, There is much of the
spirit of Satan in a murmuring spirit. The Devil is the most discontented
creature that is in the world; He is the proudest creature that is, and the
discontentedst creature, and the most dejected creature. Now therefore so much
coffeehouse as thou have, so much of the spirit of Satan thou have. It was
the unclean spirit that went up and down and found no rest; so when a man or
woman's spirit has no rest, it is a sign that it has much of the unclean
spirit, of the spirit of Satan. And thou should think this with thy self, Oh
Lord what have I the spirit of Satan upon me: It is Satan that is the most
discontented spirit that is, and Oh! how much of his spirit have I upon me that
can find no rest at all?

Twelfthly, Murmuring and discontent has this evil in it, There is an absolute
necessity, that thou should have disquiet all the days of thy life. As if a
man that is in a great crowd should complain that other folks touch him. While
we are in this world God has so ordered things, that afflictions must befall
us, and if we will complain and be discontented upon every cross and
affliction, we must complain and be discontent all the days of our lives. Yea,
God in just judgment will let things fall out on purpose to vex those that
have vexing spirits, and discontented hearts, and therefore there is a
necessity that they should live disquiet all their days: and men will not much
care to disquiet those that are continually murmuring, Oh they will have
disquiet all their days.

Lastly, There Is this dreadful evil in discontent and murmuring, God may justly
with draw his care of you, and his protection over you, seeing God cannot
please you in his administrations. We use to say so to discontented servants;
Nay, if you be not pleased, mend your selves when you will, If you have a
servant not content with his diet, and wages, and work, you say, Mend your
selves. So may God justly say to us, we that profess our selves servants to
him, to be in his work, and yet are discontented with this thing or that in
Gods family, God might justly say, Mend your selves. What if God should say to
any of you, If my care over you do not please you, then take care of your
selves; if my protection over you will not please you, then protect your
selves: Now all things that do befall you, befall you through a providence of
God, and if you be those that belong to God, there is a protection of God over
you, and a care of God. Now if God should say, Well, you shall not have the
benefit of my protection any longer, and I will take no further care of you:
would not this be a most dreadful judgment of God from Heaven upon you? Take
heed what you do then in being discontent with Gods will toward you, and
indeed upon discontent this may befall you. And this is the reason why many
people, though Gods protection has bin very gracious over them for a time, and
they have thriven abundantly, yet afterward almost all that behold them may
say, that they live as if God had cast off his care over them, and as if God
did not care what befall them. Now then, my brethren, put all these together,
all that we were speaking of the last day, and these particulars that have been
added now this morning for the setting out of a Murmuring and Discontented
spirit; Oh what an ugly face has this sin of murmuring, and discontentedness?
Oh what cause is there that we should lay our hands upon our hearts, and go
away and be humbled before the Lord because of this! Whereas your thoughts were
wont to be exercised about providing for your selves, and getting more comforts
to your selves, let the stream of your thoughts now be turned to humble your
selves for your discontentedness, Oh that you may have your hearts break before
God, for otherwise you shall fall to it again, Oh the wretchedness of man's
heart! You will find in Scripture concerning the people of Israel, how
strangely they fell to their murmuring again and again, do but observe three
texts of Scripture, for that, the first in the 15. of Exodus at the beginning,
there you shall have Moses and the Congregation singing to God, and blessing
God for his mercy, Then sang Moses and the Children of Israel this song unto
the Lord, and spoke saying, I will sing unto the Lord, for he has triumphed
gloriously, the horse and his rider has he thrown into the Sea. And then, The
Lord is my strength and song, and he is become my Salvation, he is my God, and
I will prepare him an habitation; my Fathers God, and I will exalt him; and so
he goes on, And who is like unto thee, O Lord amongst the Gods? Who is like
thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders? Thus their
hearts triumphed in God: but mark before the Chapter is ended, in the 23.
verse, When they come to Marah (in the same Chapter) they could not drink of
the waters of Marah, for they were bitter, therefore the name of it was called
Marah, and the people murmured against Moses. After so great a mercy as this
was, what unthankfulness was there here in their murmuring! Then God gave them
water, but in the very next Chapter they fell to their murmuring (you read not
that they were humbled for their former murmuring, and therefore they murmur
again) Exodus 16.1. etc. all the congregation of the Children of Israel came to
the wilderness of Sin, etc. And the whole Congregation (in the second verse) of
the Children of Israel murmured against Moses, and against Aaron in the
wilderness, and the Children of Israel said unto them, would to God we had died
by the hand of the Lord in the Land of Egypt, when we sat by the fleshpots,
and when we did eat bread to the full. Now they want flesh (they wanted water
before, but now they want meat) they fell to murmuring again, they were not
humbled for this murmuring against God, neither when God gave them flesh
according to their defires, but they fell to murmuring again, they wanted
somewhat else. In the very next Chapter (they went not far) in the 17. of Exodus
beginning. And all the Congregation of the Children of Israel journyed from the
wilderness of Sin, and pitched in Rephadim, and there was no water for the
people to drink: Then in the second verse, Wherefore the people did chide with
Moses, and said, Give us water that we may drink, and Moses said unto them, Why
chide you with me? wherefore do you tempt the Lord: And in the third verse, And
the people thirsted there for water, and the people murmured against Moses and
said, wherefore is this, that thou have brought us up out of Egypt, to kill us,
and our Children, and our Cattle with thirst? So one time after another, still
as soon as ever they had received the mercy, then they were a little quieted,
but they were not humbled. I bring these Scriptures for this, to show, That if
we have not been humbled for murmuring, the next cross that we meet withal we
will fall to murmuring again,

There are diverse Aggravations of this sin of Murmuring, I Will mention but one
now, and I shall but begin that. The first Aggravation is this,

To murmur when we enjoy abundance of mercy, the greater and the more abundant
the mercy is that we enjoy, the greater, and the viler is the sin of murmuring.
As here now when God had newly delivered them out of the house of bondage, for
them now to murmur because they want some few particulars that they desire, Oh
to sin against God after a great mercy, this is a great aggravation, and a most
abominable thing. Now my brethren, the Lord has granted us very great mercies,
I Will but speak a word of what God has done of late, what mercies has the Lord
granted to us this Summer, heaped mercies upon us, one mercy upon another. What
a condition were we in at the beginning of this Summer? And what a different
condition are we in now! Oh what a mercy is it, that the Lord has not taken
advantages against us, that he has not made those Scriptures (before
mentioned) good upon us for all our murmuring, the Lord has gone on with one
mercy after another. We hear of mercy in Bristol, and mercy to our brethren in
Scotland: But still if after this we should have any thing befall us that is
but cross to us, that we should be ready to murmur again presently; Oh let us
not so require God for those mercies of his; Oh let us take heed of giving God
any ill requital for his mercies; Oh give God praise according to his excellent
greatness, to his excellent goodness and grace.

And now, Has God given to you the Contentment of your hearts? Take you heed
of being the cause of any grief to your Brethren, think not that because God
has been gracious unto you, that therefore he has given you liberty for to
bring them into bondage, Oh let not there be such an ill effect of Gods mercy
to you, as for you to exclude by petitioning, or any other way, your Brethren
that the Lord has been pleased to make Iustruments of your peace, let not that
be the fruit of it, nor to desire any thing that your selves do not yet
understand. God is very jealous of the glory of his mercy, and if there should
be an ill use made of the mercy of God after we enjoy it, Oh it would go to the
heart of God! nothing is more grievous to the heart of God than the abuse of
mercy: As now, if any way that is hard and rigid should be taken toward our
Brethren, and those especially that God has made such special instruments of
good to us, that have been willing to venture their lives, and all for us; now
when we have our turns served, let God and his People, and Servants that have
been a means to save us shift for themselves as well as they can: Oh! this is a
great aggravation of your sin, to sin against the mercies of God: But for this
Aggravation, and especially in this particular, we shall speak to (God willing)
the next day.

SERMON, IX. at Stepney. Sept. 21. 1645.
PHIL. 4.11. For I have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be
content.

NOW because it is very hard to work upon a murmuring spirit, there are diverse
Aggravations (I told you we are to consider of for the further letting out of
the greatness of this sin; I mentioned but only one the last day) now we shall
proceed in that.

The first Aggravation of the sin of discontent and murmuring is this, For men
and women to be discontent in the midst of mercies, in enjoyment of abundance
of mercies. To be discontent in any afflicted condition, is sinful and evil,
but to be discontent when we are in the midst of Gods mercies, when we are not
able to count the mercies of God, yet after to be discontent because we have
not all we would have, this is a greater evil. I only mentioned this the last
day, that I might show to you what a great sin it is at such a time as this.
The Lord this Summer has multiplied mercies one upon another, the Lord has
made this Summer to be a continual miracle of mercy; never did a Kingdom enjoy
(in so little space of time) such mercies one upon another: Now the public
mercies of God should quiet our hearts and keep us from discontent; and the sin
of discontent; for private afflictions is exceedingly aggravated by the
consideration of public mercies to the Land: When the Lord has been so
merciful to the land, will thou be fretting and murmuring, because thou have
not in thy family all the comforts that thou would have? As it is a great
aggravation of a man's evil, of him, to rejoice immoderately in his own private
comforts when the Church is in affliction, when the public suffers grievous
and hard troubles, if any man shall then rejoice and give liberty to himself,
at that time to satisfy his flesh to the uttermost in all outward comforts,
this is a great aggravation of his Sin: So on the contrary, for any man to be
immoderately troubled for any private affliction, when it goes well with the
public, with the Churches, this is a great aggravation of his sin: It may be
when the Church of God was lowest, and it went worse in other parts, yet thou
did abate nothing of the comfort of thy flesh, but gave full liberty to
satisfy thy flesh as formerly, know, this was thy great sin, so on the other
side, when we have received such mercies in public, we should have all our
private afflictions swallowed up in the public mercies, and we should think
with our selves, though we be afflicted for our particular, yet (blessed be
God) it goes well with the Church, and with the public? the consideration of
that should mightily quiet our hearts in all our private discontents, and if it
does not so, know that our sin is much increased by the mercies of God that are
abroad. Now shall Gods mercies aggravate our sins? This is a sad thing, this is
to turn the mercies of God to be our misery. Did not thou pray to God for
these mercies that God has sent of late to the public, these great victories
that God has given, did not thou pray for them? now thou have them, Is not
there enough in them to quiet thy heart for some private trouble thou meetest
withal in thy family? Is not there goodness enough there to cure thy
coffeehouse? Certainly they were not such mercies so worthy to be prayed
for, except they have so much excellency in them as to countervail some private
afflictions. Public mercies are the aggravations of private discontent, also
of public discontent too; if we receive so many public mercies, yet if every
thing goes not in the public according as we desire, if we be discontent at
that, it will exceedingly aggravate our sin, God may say, What shall I bestow
such mercies upon a people, and yet if they have not every thing they would
have, they will be discontent? Oh! its exceeding evil. So in particular, the
mercies that concerns thy self, thy family, if thou would consider thou have
a great many more mercies than thou had afflictions, I dare boldly aver it
concerning any one in this Congregation (suppose thy afflictions to be what
they will) there is never a one of you but that have more mercies than
afflictions.

Object. You will say, I, but you do not know what our afflictions are, our
afflictions are so as you do not conceive of them, because you feel them not?

Answ. Though I cannot know what your afflictions are, yet I know what your
mercies are, and I know they are so great, as I am sure there can be no
affliction in this world so great as the mercies you have: If it were but this
mercy, That you have this day of grace and salvation continued to you, its a
greater mercy than any affliction, set any affliction by this mercy and see
which would weigh heaviest, this is certainly greater than any affliction; that
you have the day of grace and salvation, that you are not now in Hell, this is
a greater mercy, that you have the sound of the Gospel yet in your ears; that
you have the use of your reason; this is a greater mercy than your afflictions;
that you have the use of your limbs, your senses, that you have the health of
your bodies, health of body is a greater mercy than poverty is an affliction;
there is no man that is rich but if he be wise, if he has a sickly body, he
would part with all his riches that he might have his health; therefore thy
mercies are more than thy afflictions. We find in Scripture how the holy Ghost
does aggravate the sin of discontent from the consideration of mercies, you
have a notable Scripture for it in the 16. of Numb. 8. verse, etc. Its a speech
of Moses to Korah and his company when they murmured, And Moses said unto
Korah, Hear I pray you, ye sons of Levi (there is somewhat that you are sons of
Levy) Seems it but a small thing unto you, that the God of Israel has
separated you from the Congregation of Israel, to bring you near to himself, to
do the service of the Tabernacle of the Lord, and to stand before the
Congregation to minister unto them? Korah and his company were murmuring, but
mark how Moses aggravates this; Seems it a small thing unto you, that the God
of Israel has separated you from the Congregation of Israel to bring you near
to himself to do the service of the Tabernacle of the Lord? etc. You see it is a
great honor that God puts upon a man, a great mercy that he does bestow upon
any man, to separate him from others for himself, to come near to him, to
employ him in the service of the Tabernacle, to minister to the Congregation in
holy things, this is a great mercy, and indeed it is such a mercy, as one would
think, there should be none that God bestows such a mercy upon, that should
have a murmuring heart for any affliction, Its true, many Ministers of God they
meet with hard things that might discourage them, and trouble and grieve their
spirits, but now this consideration that God is pleased to employ them in such
a service near to himself, that though they cannot do good to themselves, yet
they may do good to others, this should quiet them: And yet in verse. 10. And he
has brought thee near to him, and all thy Brethren, the sons of Levi with
thee; and seek ye the Priest hood also? Have not you enough already? but still
you are discontented with what you have, and must have more, seck ye yet more?
Seek ye the Priesthood also? for which cause both thou and all thy company are
gathered together against the Lord: And what is. Aaron that ye murmur against
him? What, has God given you such things, and yet will you be murmuring,
because you cannot have more? Methinks that this place should keep Ministers
from murmuring, though they should meet with never such afflictions and
crosses, and unkind dealings from men, yet still they should go on with hearts
quieted and comforted in the work that God has set them about, and labor to
countervail all their afflictions by being more abundant in the work of the
Lord. That is the first text of Scripture that shows how the mercies we enjoy
are Aggravations to the sin of murmuring.

And then a second Scripture is in the 2. of Job, verse. 10. A speech of Job to
his wife, what says Job when his wife would have had him curse God and dye?
(that was a degree beyond murmuring) why says he, Thou speak as one of the
foolish women, shall we receive good at the hand of God, and not evil? you see
Job did help himself against all murmuring thoughts against the ways of God
with this consideration, That he had received so much good from the Lord; what
though we receive evil, yet do not we receive good as well as evil? let us set
one against the other, that's the way we should go. In the 17. of Ecclesiastes
the 14. verse, you have a notable Scripture there whereby you may see what
course is to be taken when the heart rises in murmuring In the day of
prosperity be joyful, but in the day of Adversity consider, what should they
consider? (mark what follows) God also has set the one over against the other,
to the end that man should find nothing after him. God also has set the one
over against the other, that's thus, When thou art in prosperity, then indeed
every man can be joyful; but what if afflictions befalls him, what then? then
consider: Consider what? That God has set one over against the other, thou
have a great deal of affliction, and thou have had a great deal of prosperity,
thou have many troubles, and thou have had many mercies, make one column of
mercies, and one column of afflictions, and write one against the other, and
see if God has not filled one column as full as the other; you look altogether
upon your afflictions, but look upon your mercies also; for instance, It may be
God has afflicted you in one child, but he has been merciful to you in
another child, set one against the other; God afflicted David in Absalom, but
he was merciful to David in Solomon, and therefore when David cried our, Oh
Absalom my Son, my Son! If David had thought upon Solomon, and cried, Oh
Solomon my son, my son, it would have quieted him. And it may be God has been
merciful to thee in a Wife, or in thy Husband, set that against thy affliction,
it may be God crosses thee in thy Estate, but it may be he does employ thee in
his Service, it may be thou art afflicted in some of thy Friends, but thou have
other Friends that are great mercies to thee, and therefore you should set one
against the other, and it does concern you so to do, for those mercies will be
aggravations of your sins, and you had better make Gods mercies a means to
lessen your sins than to be the aggravation of your sins: If you make not the
mercies of God to help you against your murmuring, you will make them to be
aggravations of the sin of murmuring. I beseech you for this take but this one
consideration further, and if you will but work it upon your hearts, I hope you
may find a great deal of power in it. You find afflictions, and your hearts are
troubled and murmur, consider how Gods mercies do aggravate this sin, thus: In
the midst of our sins we do make account God should accept of our services, do
but consider thus, If in the midst of our many sins we hope that God will
accept of our poor services, why then should not we in the midst of our
afflictions bless God for his many mercies? Shall God be thus gracious to us
that notwithstanding our many sins, yet he will not cast away our poor duties
and services that we perform, then why should not we in the midst of our
sufferings accept of what mercies we have, and not slight them and disregard
them? If thou in the midst of Gods mercies shall not be willing to bear
afflictions that God lays upon thee, then it were just with God that in the
midst of thy sins he should not regard any of thy duties; now is there not as
much power in thy manifold sins to cause God to reject thy duties and services,
as there is power in afflictions (in the midst of many mercies) to take off thy
heart from being affected with Gods mercies? And that is the first aggravation
of the sin of murmuring, To murmur in the midst of mercies.

A second Aggravation of the sin of murmuring is, When we murmur for small
things. Says Naamans servant to him, Father (for so he called him) if the
Prophet had required you to do some great thing, would not you have done it?
how much more this little thing. So I say, if the Lord had required you to
suffer some great matter, would not you have been willing to suffer? How much
more this little thing. I remember I have read in Seneca a Heathen, he has
this similitude which is a very fine one to set out the great evil of murmuring
upon smaller afflictions (says he) Suppose a man has a very fair house to
dwell in, and he has fair Orchards and Gardens, and set about with brave tall
Trees for ornament, if this man now should murmur because the wind blows off a
few leaves off his Trees, what a most unreasonable thing were it for him to be
weeping and wringing his hands because he loses a few leaves off his Trees,
when he has abundance of all kind of fruit? Thus it is with many (says he)
though they have a great many comforts about them, yet some little matter, the
blowing off of a few leaves from them is enough to disquiet them. It was a
great evil when Ahab having a Kingdom, yet the want of his neighbors Vineyard
had such power to disquiet him: So for us to murmur, not because we have not
such a thing as we have, need of, but because we have not what possibly we
might have this is a very great sin. Suppose God gives a child that has all
the Limbs and parts complete, a Child that is very comely, and has excellent
parts, wit, and memory, but it may be there is a wart that grows upon the
finger of the child, and she murmurs at it, and Oh, what an affliction is this
to her! she is so taken up with that, as she forgets to give any thanks to God
for her Child, and all the goodness of God to her in the Child is swallowed
up in that; would not you say, this were a folly and a great evil in a woman so
to do? Truly our afflictions if we weighed them aright they are but such kind
of things in comparison of our mercies. Rebeckah she had a mighty desire to
have children, but because she found some trouble in her body when she was with
child, says she, Why am I thus? As if she should say, I had as good have
none, only because she found a little pain and trouble in her body. To be
discontent when the affliction is small and little, that increases very much
the sin of murmuring, it is too much for any one to murmur upon the heaviest
cross that can befall one in this world, but upon some small things to be
discontent and murmur, that's worse. I have read of one that when he lay upon a
heap of Damas Roses, he complained, there was one of the Rose leaves lay double
under him: So we are ready thus for very small things to make complaints and be
discontented with our condition. And that's the second Aggravation.

A third Aggravation is this, For men that are of parts and abilities, to whom
God has given wisdom, for them to be discontent and murmur, that's more than if
others do it. Murmuring and discontentedness is too much in the weakest, yet we
can bear with it sometimes in Children and Women that are weak; but for those
that are Men, Men of understanding, that have wisdom, that God imploys in
public service, that they should be discontent with every thing, this is an
exceeding great evil; for men in their families (to whom God has given parts
and wisdom) when things fall out amiss there, to be always murmuring and
repining, their sin is greater than for women and children to do it.

A Fourth aggravation is, The consideration of the freeness of all Gods Mercies
to us. What ever we have it is of free-cost, what though we have not all we
would have, seeing what we have is free? If what we have were earned, then it
were somewhat, but when we consider that all is from God, for us to murmur at
his dispensations, is very evil. Suppose a man were in a family entertained by
a friend, and he did not pay for his board, but he has it given him for
nothing, its expected such a one should not be ready to find fault with every
thing in the house, with servants or with meat at table, or the like, if such a
one that has plentiful provision, and all given him gratis, and pays nothing
for his diet, should be discontented, if a Cup should not be filled for him as
he would have it, or if he should stay a minute of an hour longer for a thing
than he would, this we would account a great evil: So it is with us, we are at
Gods Table every day, and it is upon free cost whatever we have. It is
accounted very unmannerly for a man at his friends table to find fault with
things, though at home he may be bold: Now when we are at the table of God (for
so all Gods administrations to us are his table) and are at free-cost, now for
us to be finding fault, and be discontented, this is a great Aggravation of our
sin.

A Fifth Aggravation of the sin of murmuring is this, When men and women
murmur, and are discontented and impatient, when they have the things that they
were discontented for the want of before they had them. So it is sometimes with
children, they will cry for such a thing, and when you give it them, they throw
it away, they are as much discontented as they were before. So it was with the
people of Israel, nothing would quiet them, but they must have a King, Samuel
persuaded them to the contrary, and told them what kind of King they should
have; and when they had a King, in Hos. 10.3. What shall a King do to us? they
were not contented when they had one. So Rachel, she must have children or else
she died, and when she had a little trouble she was discontented too; so that
we are neither well full nor fasting (as we use to say.)

The sixth aggravation of the sin of murmuring is this, For those men and women
to be discontent and murmur that God has raised from mean and low estates and
conditions: This is a very great aggravation if thou be discontent now: There
was a time when thou were low enough; and perhaps when thou were so low then
thou did say, O if God would deliver me from such an affliction, or give me
but a little more in my estate, I should think my self in a good condition: but
if God by his providence does raise thee, thou art as greedy of more still as
thou were before, and as much discontented as thou were before: this is an evil
thing for people that had mean breeding, and poor beginning for them to be so
nice, and dainty that nothing can please them, whereas there was a time not
long since that they were low and mean enough; But it is very ordinary for
those that are raised from a low and mean condition to be the more nice and
dainty, and more proud when they are raised than others that are of better
breeding. Its too much for a child to be discontented in his fathers house,
but if a man has taken a poor beggar boy, if you had taken such a one into
your house that lay begging at your door, and set him at your own table, could
you bear that such a one should complain that such a thing is not well dressed,
or the like; you could not bear it if your children should do it, but you could
bear it a great deal better with them than to hear such a one do it: but thou
art a poor beggar, and God has (as it were) taken thee into his great Family,
and if the Lord has been pleased to raise thee higher, that now thou have a
competency, that thou may live as a man, to be of use and service in the
place where God has set thee, now will thou be discontent because thou have
not every thing that thou desire? we know the Prodigal, when he came to
imself, Oh! says he, In my fathers house is bread enough, He did not say
there is good cheer enough, and a great deal of dainties; no, he thought of
nothing but bread, there is bread enough; So its ordinary for men and women when
they are in a low condition, they think that if they may have bread, any
competency, they will be contented and bless God, but when they have their
bread and things convenient, they must have more or else they are not
contented; know that this is an exceeding great aggravation to thy
coffeehouse, when you are raised from a very low condition, and yet you
cannot be contented with what you have.

A seventh aggravation of this sin is this, For them to be discontent that have
been very great sinners and ungodly in their former time. For men and women
that have much guiltiness upon them, the guilt of very many sins upon them,
that have provoked God exceedingly against them, and have brought themselves in
a most dreadful manner under the sentence of Gods Justice, and yet God being
pleased to reprieve them, for them to murmur and to be discontent with Gods
administrations toward them, this is exceeding evil, Oh it were consideration
enough to quiet any murmuring in our hearts, to think thus, We are but sinners,
why should not we be sufferers that are sinners? But then consider, we that are
such great sinners, guilty of such notorious sins, that it is a wonder that we
are out of Hell at this present, yet for us to be discontent and murmur, how
exceedingly does this increase our sins! Consider how we have crossed God in
our sins, then if God should cross us in the way of our sufferings, should not
we sit down quiet without murmuring Certainly thou never knew what it was to
be humbled for thy manifold sins, that art discontented at any administration
of God toward thee.

The Eight Aggravation of the sin of murmuring is, For those men that are of
little use in the world, for them to be discontented. If you have but a beast
that you make much use of, you will feed it well, but if you have but little
use of him, then you turn him into the Commons, little provision serves his
turn, because you make not use of him: If we lived so as to be exceeding useful
to God and his Church, we might expect that God would be pleased to come in, in
some encouraging way to us, but when our consciences tell us, we live and do
but little service for God, what if God should turn us upon the Commons, yet we
are fed according to our work, according to our employment; Why should any
creature be serviceable to thee, who art so little serviceable to God? This one
meditation would much help us, to think, I am discontent, because such and such
Creatures are not serviceable to me, but why should I expect that they should
be serviceable to me, when I am not serviceable to God? And that is the Eight
Aggravation.

A Ninth Aggravation of the sin of murmuring is this, For us to be discontent
at that time when God is to humble us. It should be the care of a Christian, to
observe what are Gods ways toward him, what is God about to do with me at this
time? Is God about to raise me, to comfort me? Let me close with Gods goodness,
and bless his Name, let me join with the work of God, when he offers mercy to
me, to take the mercy he offers. But again, Is God about to humble me? Is God
about to break my heart, and to bring my heart down to him? Let me join with
God in this work of his, this is for a Christian to walk with God. It is said
that Enoch, and Noah walked with God; walked with God, what is that? That is, To
observe what is the work of God that God is now about, and to join with God in
that work of his; so that according as God turns this way or that way, the
heart should turn with God, and have suitable workings unto the workings of God
toward him. Now then, I am discontented, and murmr, because I am afflicted;
Therefore thou art afflicted, because God would humble thee, and the great
design that God has in afflicting of thee, is, To break and humble thy heart;
And will thou now maintain a spirit quite opposite to the Work of God? for thee
to murmr and be discontented, is to resist the Work of God; God is doing thee
good, if thou could see it, now if he be pleased to sanctify thy
affliction, to break that hard heart of thine, and humble that proud spirit of
thine, it would be the greatest mercy that ever thou had in all thy life; Now
will thou yet stand out against God? Its even as if thou should say, Well,
the Lord is about to break me, and humble me, but he shall not; this is the
language of thy murmuring and thy discontentedness, though thou dare not say
so, but though thou say not so in words, yet it is certainly the language of
the temper of thy spirit: Oh! consider what an aggravation this is? I am
discontented when God is about to work such a work upon me as is exceedingly
for my good, but yet I stand out against him and resist him. That Is the Ninth
Aggravation.

The tenth Aggravation of the sin of murmuring and discontent is this, The more
palpable and remarkable the hand of God appears to bring about an affliction,
the greater is the sin of murmuring and discontent under an affliction. It Is a
great evil at any time to murmr and be discontent, but though it be a sin,
when I see but an ordinary providence working for me, not to submit to that,
but when I see an extraordinary providence working, that is a greater sin! that
is, when I see the Lord in some remarkable way working about such an
affliction, beyond what any could have thought of, shall I resist such a
remarkable hand of God? shall I stand out against God when I see God express
his will in such a remarkable manner that he would have me to be in such a
condition? Indeed before we see the Will of God apparent, we may desire to
avoid an affliction and may use means for it, but now, when we see God
expressing his Will from Heaven in a manner beyond ordinary, and more
remarkable, then certainly it is fit for us to fall down and submit to him, and
not to oppose; when God comes with a mighty stream against us, it is our best
way to fall down before him and not to resist; for as it is an argument of a
man's disobedience, when there is not only a Command against a sin, but when God
reveals his Command in a terrible way; the more solemn the Command of God is,
the greater is the sin in breaking that Command: so the more remarkable the
hand of God is in bringing an affliction upon us, the greater is the sin for us
to murmr and be discontented. Then God expects that we should fall down when
he (as it were) speaks from Heaven to thee by name, and says, Well, I will
have this spirit of thine down, do not you see that my hand is stretched out,
my eyes are upon you, my thoughts are upon you, and I must have that proud
spirit of thine down? Oh then it is fit for the creature to yield and submit
unto him. When you speak in an ordinary manner to your servants, or Children,
you expect they should regard what you say, but when you make them stand still
by you and you speak to them in a more solemn way, then if they should
disregard what you say, you are very impatient: So certainly God cannot take it
well when ever he does appear from Heaven in such a remarkable way to bring an
affliction, if then we do not submit to him.

The Eleventh Aggravation of the sin of murmuring is this, To be discontented
though God has been exercising of us long under afflictions, yet still to
remain discontented. For a man or woman at first when an affliction befalls them
to have a murmuring heart, then it is an evil; but to have a murmuring heart
when God has been a long time exercising them with afflictions, it is more
evil, Though an Heifer at first when the yoke is put upon him, he wriggles up
and down and will not be quiet, but if after many months or years it shall not
draw quietly, the Husbandman would rather feed, and fat, and prepare it for the
Butcher, than be troubled any longer with it: So though the Lord was content to
pass by that discontented spirit of thine at first, yet God having a long time
kept the yoke upon thee, thou have been under his afflicting hand (it may be)
diverse years; and yet thou remain discontent still; it were just with God that
he should bear thy murmuring no longer, and that thy discontent under the
affliction should be but a preparation to thy destruction. So you see when a
man or woman has been long exercised with afflictions, and yet are
discontented, that is an aggravation of the sin: Mark that text in Heb. 12.11.
Now (says the Scripture) No chastening for the present is joyous, but
grievous; nevertheless, afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of
righteousness, unto them which are exercised thereby. It Is true, our
afflictions are not joyous but grievous; though at first when our affliction
comes it is very grievous, but yet (says the text) afterward it yields the
peaceable fruit of righteousness to those that are exercised thereby: When thou
have been a long time in the School of afflictions, thou art a very Dullard in
Christ's School if thou have not learned this Contentment, I have learned (says
Saint Paul) in every state therewith to be content: Paul had learned this
lesson quickly, thou have been a learning many years, perhaps thou may say as
Heman did, That thou art afflicted from thy youth up, in 88. Psalm. Oh its a
very evil thing, if being exercised long with afflictions you are not yet
contented. The eye is as tender a part as any is in a man's body, but yet the
eye is able to continue in, and bear a great deal of cold, because it is more
used to it; so those that are used to afflictions, those that God exercises
much with afflictions (though they have tender spirits otherwise) yet they
should have learned Contentedness by this time. A new Cart may creek and make a
noise, but after the use of it a while it will not do so: So when thou were
first a Christian, and newly come into the work of Christ, perhaps thou made
a noise, and could not bear affliction; but art thou an old Christian, and
yet will thou be a murmuring Christian? Oh that is a shame for any that are
ancient professors, that have been a long time in the School of Jesus Christ,
to have murmuring and discontented spirits. And thus you have had Eleven
Aggravations of this sin of murmuring and coffeehouse.

But now my Brethren, because this discontented humor is a very tough humor,
and it is very hard to work upon; there is none that are discontented, but will
have something to say for their discontent: I shall therefore desire to take
away what every discontented heart has to say for himself.

The PLEAS of a discontented Heart.
In the first place, Says one that is discontented, It is not coffeehouse,
it is the sense of my condition, I hope you would have me sensible of my
condition: perhaps when God takes away a friend, or some other comfort, they
are inordinately sorrowful, and wringing their hands as if they were undone,
and let any one but speak to them, (say they) Would you not have me sensible of
my affliction? And thus many would hide their sinful murmuring under Gods hand
with this pretense, that it is but sensibleness of their affliction.

To that I answer, First, There is no sense of any affliction that will hinder
the sense of Gods Mercies, nay the more we are sensible of our afflictions, if
it be in a gracious manner, the more sensible we will be of Gods mercy; but
thou art so sensible of thy affliction, as it takes away the sense of all thy
mercies; Oh this is sinful discontent, this is not to be sensible of thy
condition as God would have thee, but it is to be sensible in a wicked way, you
go beyond your bounds: By this rule you may come to know when your sorrows and
troubles for your afflictions go beyond the bounds; we may be sorrowful when
God afflicts, but Oh! that I might know when my sorrow goes beyond the bounds
of it; truly thou may know it by this, Does the sense of thy afflictions
take away the sense of thy mercies? If it does, then it goes beyond the bounds.

Secondly, If it were but a bare sense of an affliction, it would not hinder
thee in the duties of thy condition, the right sense of our afflictions will
never hinder us in the performance of the duties of our condition, but thou art
so sensible of thy affliction, as thou art made unfit for the performance of
any duties of the condition that God has put thee in, surely it is more than
mere sense of thy affliction.

Thirdly, If it were but mere sense of thy affliction, yet then thou could
in this thy condition bless God for the mercies that others have, but thy
discontentedness usually breeds envy at it; when any one is discontented with
their condition, they have an envious spirit at the conditions of those that
are delivered from what afflictions they bear, certainly then it is turned to be
sour and naught, when thou art so sensible of thy afflictions, and unsensible
of mercies as thou art unfit for the duties of thy condition, and envious at
others that are not afflicted as thou art.

The Second PLEA.
But will a discontented heart say, I am not so much troubled with my
afflictions, but it is for my sin rather than my affliction, and I hope you
will give leave that we should be troubled and discontented with our sin; and
were it not for sin that I see in my self, I should not be so discontented as I
am, Oh! it is sin that is heavy upon me, and it is that that troubles me more
than my afflictions.

Deceive not thy own heart, there is a very great deceit in this, there is many
people that when Gods hand is out against them, they will say, they are
troubled for their sin, but the truth is, it is the affliction that does trouble
them rather than their sin, their heart does exceedingly deceive them in this
very thing: For, First, They were never troubled for their sin before this
Affliction came; but you will say, It Is true, I was not before, for my
prosperity blinded me, but now God has opened my eyes by afflictions: Has he
so? Secondly, Then thy great care will be rather for the removing of thy sin,
than of thy affliction; Art thou more solicitous about the taking away thy sin,
than the taking away of thine affliction? Thirdly, If it be thy sin that
troubles thee, If God should take away thy afflictions, yet except thy sin be
taken away, and thy heart be better, this would not content thee, thou could
not be satisfied: but we see it ordinarily, that if God removes their
afflictions, there is no more trouble for their sin. Oh, many do be-lye
themselves in this, in saying, that they are so troubled for their sin, and
especially those that are so troubled that they are in danger to miscarry, and
to make away themselves, there is not one in ten thousand that are in such a
condition as this is, but it is afflictions rather than sin that puts them to
it; indeed you lay all upon this, as if it were the work of the Word, or the
Spirit of bondage; I remember I heard not long since of a Divine that being
judicious, and used to such kind of things, there came a man to him mightily
troubled for his sin, and he could not tell what to do, he was ready to
despair; the Divine looks upon him, says he, Are you not in debt? he confessed
that he was; and at length the Minister began to find it out, that that was his
trouble rather than his sin, and so was a means to help him that way, that his
Creditors should not come upon him, and then the man was pretty quiet, and
would not make away himself any longer: For it is an usual thing, that if any
thing befalls a man that does cross him, Oh then it is their sin that does
trouble them. Sometimes it is thus with servants, if their Governors cross
them, then they are vexed and fret, and come to deal with them, Oh then they
will say they are sorrowful for their sin: but we must take heed of dallying
with God, that is the Seer and Searcher of the secrets of all hearts, many of
you go sullen and dumpish up and down your families, and then you say its your
sin that lies upon you, when God knows it is otherwise, it is because you cannot
have your wills as you would have. Fourthly, If thou be troubled for thy
sin, then it will be thy great care not to sin in thy trouble, not by thy
trouble to increase thy sin, but thou art troubled in such a way as the truth
is thou do increase thy sin in thy trouble, and since thou say thou were
troubled for thy sin, thou have committed more sin than thou did before. And
then lastly, If it be thy sin that troubles thee, then thou have the more need
to submit to Gods hand; and accept of the punishment of thine iniquity, as it
is in Levit. 26.41. There Is no such consideration to take away murmuring as to
look upon my sin as the cause of my affliction.


The Third PLEA.
O says another, I find my affliction is such, that God withdraws himself from
me in mine affliction, that is that that troubles me, and can any body be quiet
then? Can any body be satisfied with such a condition when the Lord shall
withdraw himself? Were my affliction never so great, yet if I find not God
withdrawing himself from me, I hope I could be content with any affliction, but
I cannot find the presence of God with me in this affliction, as sometimes I
have found, and it is that that troubles me, and makes me to be in such a
condition as I am.

Now to that I answer thus, First, it is a very evil thing for men and women
upon their affliction to conclude that God is departed from them, it may be
when it comes to be examined, there is no other reason why thou think that
God is withdrawn and departed, but because he does afflict thee; now for thee
to make such a conclusion, that every time God lays an affliction upon thee he
is departed, this is a sinful distemper of thy heart, and is very dishonorable
to God, and grievous to his Spirit. In the 17. of Exodus 7. verse. you may see
how God was displeased there with such a kind of distemper as this is, And he
called the name of the place Massah and Meribah, because of the chiding of the
children of Israel, and because they tempted the Lord, saying, Is the Lord
amongst us, or not? Mark, they did murmr, because they were brought into
afflictions, but see what the text says, therefore the place was called Massah
and Meribah, because they tempted the Lord, saying, Is the Lord amongst us, or
not? This was to tempt God. Sometimes we are afraid God is departed from us,
and it is merely because we are afflicted. I beseech you observe that
Scripture, God calls it a tempting of him, when he afflicts any, for them to
conclude and say, that God is departed from them. If a Child should cry out of
his Father, and say, that his father is turned to be an enemy to him, because
he does correct him, this would be taken ill. I beseech you consider of this
one place, it may be of very great use to you, that you may not be ready to
think that God is departed, because you are afflicted.

Secondly, If God be departed, the greatest sign of Gods departing is, because
you are so disquiet, you make your disquiet to be the fruit of Gods departing,
and if it comes to be examined your disquiet is the cause of Gods departing
from you, if you could but cure your disquiet, if you could but quiet your own
hearts, and get them into a better frame of contentedness under Gods hand in
afflicting of you, then you would find Gods presence with you, Will you be thus
disquiet till God comes again to you? your disquiet drives him from you, and
you can never expect Gods coming to manifest himself comfortably to your souls,
till you have gotten your hearts quiet under your afflictions: and therefore
here you see how crosly you reason; you reason, I am disquiet because God is
gone, when the truth is, God is gone because thou art disquiet; reason but the
other way, Oh my disquiet has driven God from me, and therefore as ever I
would have the presence of God to come again to me, let my heart be quiet under
the hand of God.

Thirdly, Do thou find God departing from thee in thine affliction? Will thou therefore depart from God too? Is this thy help? Can thou help thy self
that way? Because God is gone will thou go too? Do I indeed feel God departing
from me? It may be it is so, it may be God for thy trial is departed a little
from thee, and is it so indeed? What unwise course do I take? I commit further
sin, and so I go further off from God, what a case am I in? God goes from me,
and I from God: if the child sees the mother going from it, it is not for the
child to say, my mother is gone yonder, and I will go the other way; no, but
the child goes crying after the Mother, and so should the soul say, I see the
Lord is withdrawing his presence from me, and now it is best for me to make
after the Lord with all my might; and I am sure this murmuring humor is not a
making after God, but by this I go further and further off from God, and what a
distance is there like to be between God and me within a little while? These
are some of the Reasonings and Pleas of a murmuring and discontented heart.
There are many others that we shall meet withal, and endeavor to speak to
your hearts in them, that so this tough humor of discontent may (as it were) be
cut with the Word, and softened with the Word, that so it may pass away: for
that is the way of Physicians when they meet with a body that has any tough
humor, then they give that that has a piercing quality; when there is a tough
humor that stops the water that it cannot pass, they give that that has a
piercing quality that may make passage for it; and so thou have need of such
things that are piercing to make way through this tough humor that is in the
spirits of men and women whereby they come to live very uncomfortably to
themselves and others, and very dishonourably unto God.

SERMON, X. at Stepney. Sept. 21. 1645.
PHIL. 4.11. For I have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be
content.

NOW there are many Pleas and Reasonings yet remain, for there is a great deal
of do with a discontented murmuring heart. And I remember I find that the same
Hebrew word that signifies [to lodge, to abide] it signifies to murmr, they
use one word for both, for murmuring is a distemper that does lodge in men,
where it gets in once it lodges, abides, and continues, and therefore that
we may unlodge it, and get it out, we will labor to show what are the further
Reasonings of a discontented heart.

The Fourth PLEA.
Methinks I could be content with Gods hand (says one) so far as I see the
hand of God in a thing I can be content: but when men deal so unreasonably and
unjustly with me, I know not how to bear that; I can bear it that I should be
in Gods hands, but not in the hands of men; my friends or acquaintance when
they deal so unrighteously with me, Oh this goes very hard unto me, that I know
not how to bear it from men.

For the taking away of this reasoning, first, Though they be men that bring
this cross upon you, yet they are Gods Instruments, God has a hand in it, and
they can go no further than God would have them go. This was that that quieted
David when Shimei cursed him, says he, God has a hand in it, though Shimei be
a wicked vile man, yet I look beyond him to God. So, Is there any of your
friends that deal injuriously with you, and cross with you? look up to God, and
see that man but as an instrument in Gods hands.

Secondly, If this be your trouble that men do so wrong you, you are rather to
turn your hearts to pity them, than to murmr or be discontented; for the
truth is, if you be wronged by other men, you have the better of it, For it is
better to bear wrong, than to do wrong a great deal; If they wrong you, if your
heart can submit, you are in a better condition than they, because it is better
to suffer, than do wrong. I remember it is said of Socrates, that being very
patient when wrong was done to him, they asked him how he came to be so? Says
he, If I meet with a man in the street that is a diseased man, shall I be vexed
and fretted with him because he is diseased? Those that wrong me, I look upon
them as diseased men, and therefore pity them.

Thirdly, Though you meet with hard dealings from men, yet you meet with
nothing but kind, good and righteous dealing from God: When you meet with
unrighteous dealings from them, set one against another. And that is for the
Answer to the Fourth Plea.

The Fifth PLEA.
Oh! but that affliction that comes upon me, is an affliction that I never
looked for, I never thought to have met with such an affliction, and that is that
I know not how to bear, that is that which makes my heart so disquiet, because
was altogether unlookt for, and unexpected.

For Answer to this, First, It is thy weakness and folly that thou did not
look for it, and expect it: In Acts 20.22, 23. see what Saint Paul says
concerning himself, And now behold, I go bound in the spirit to Jerusalem, not
knowing the things that shall befall me there, save that the Holy Ghost
witnesses in every City, saying, That bonds and afflictions abide me. It Is
true, says he, I know not the particular affliction that may befall me, but
this I know, that the Spirit of God witnesses, That bonds and afflictions
shall abide me every where, I look for nothing else but bonds and afflictions
wheresoever I go; so a Christian should do, he should look for afflictions
wheresoever he is, in all conditions he should look to meet with afflictions,
and therefore if any affliction should befall him, though indeed he could not
foresee the particular evil, yet he should think, this is no more than I looked
for in the general. Therefore no affliction should come unexpectedly to a
Christian.

A second answer I shall give is this, Is it unexpected? then the less
provision thou made for it before it came, the more careful should thou be
to sanctify Gods Name in it now it is come: It is in this case of afflictions
as in mercies, many times mercy comes unexpected (and that might be a third
Answer) to you, set one against the other, I have many mercies that I never
looked for, as well as afflictions that I never looked for, why should not one
rejoice me as well as the other disturb me? As it is in mercies, when they come
unexpected, the less preparation there was in me for receiving mercy, the more
need I have to be careful, now to give God the glory of the mercy, and to
sanctify Gods Name in the enjoyment of the mercy; Oh so it should be with us
now, we have had mercies this Summer, that we never expected, and therefore we
were not prepared for them, now we should be so much the more careful to give
God the glory of them: so when afflictions come that we did not expect, then it
seems we laid not in for them beforehand, we had need be the more careful to
sanctify Gods Name in them, we should have spent some pains before to prepare
for afflictions, and we did not, then take so much the more pains to sanctify
God in this affliction now. And that is a fifth reasoning.

The Sixth PLEA.
Oh! but it is very great, mine affliction it is exceeding great, says one,
and however you say, we must be contented, it is true, you may say so that feel
not such great afflictions, but if you felt my affliction that I feel, you
would think it hard to bear and be content.

To that I answer, Let it be as great an affliction as it will, it is not so
great as thy sin, He has punished thee less than thy sins.

Secondly, It might have been a great deal more, thou might have been in
Hell: And it is (as I remember) Bernards speech, says he, It is an eafier
matter to be oppressed than perish. Thou might have been in Hell, and
therefore the greatness of the thing should not make thee murmr, grant it be
great.

Thirdly, It may be it is the greater because thy heart does so murmr: for
shackles upon a man's legs, if his legs be sore, it will pain him the more; if
the shoulder be sore, the burden is the greater. It is because thy heart is so
unsound, that thy affliction, is great unto thee, and that is the sixth
Reasoning.

The seventh PLEA.
But howsoever you may lessen my affliction, yet I am sure it is. far greater
than the afflictions of others.

First, It may be it is thy discontent that makes it greater, when (indeed) it
is not so in its self. Secondly, If it were greater than others; why is thy eye
evil because the eye of God is good? why should thou be discontented the
more, because God is gracious to others? Thirdly, Is thy affliction greater
than others? Then in this thou have an opportunity to honor God more than
others: So thou should consider, Does God afflict me more than other men?
God gives me an opportunity in this, to honor him in this affliction more than
other men, to exercise more grace than other men; let me labor to do it then.
Fourthly, If all afflictions were laid upon a heap together: It Is a notable
expression of Solon that wise Heathen (says he) Suppose all the afflictions
that are in the World were laid upon an heap, and every man should come and
take a proportion of those afflictions, every one equally, there is scarce any
man but would rather say, Let me have the afflictions that I had before, or
else he were like to come to a greater share, a greater affliction if so be he
should equally share with the whole world; Now for you that are poor (that are
not in extremity of poverty) if all the riches in the world were laid together,
and you should have an equal share, you would be poorer, but take all
afflictions and sorrows whatsoever, if all the sorrows in the world were laid
together in a heap, and you had but an equal share of them, your portion would
be rather more than it is now for the present: and therefore do not complain,
that it is more than others, so as to murmr because of that.
The Eighth PLEA.
Another Reasoning that murmuring hearts have is this, why they think that if
the affliction were any other than it is, then they would be more contented.

First, You must know that we are not to choose our own rod, that God shall beat
us with. Secondly, It may be if it were any other than it is, it were not so
fit for thee as this is, it may be therefore God chooses it because it is most
cross to thee, as seeing it most suitable for the purging out of that humor
that is in thee. If a Patient comes to take Physic, and finds himself sick by
it, shall he say, Oh! if it were any other potion I could bear it, it may be if
it were any other than it is, it would not fit thy disease; yea, if it did not
work as it does, it would not fit thy disease: so when thou say of an
affliction, if it were any other than it is thou could bear it; do but
answer thy self with this, it may be if it were any other than it is, it would
not be fit for me, it would not be right to that sinful humor that there is in
my soul, and therefore God sees this to be the fittest and the most suitable
for me. Thirdly, Know that this is the excellency of Grace in a Christian, To
be fitted for any condition; not only to say, If it were this or that, but if
it be any. As now, a Mariner if he has skill, he would not say, if it were
any other wind but this, if the wind blow in any point but this, I could tell
how to manage my ship, I could show skill in other points, but not in this;
would not Mariners laugh at such a one? it would be a shame for him to say,
that he has skill in any other point but this: So it should be a shame for a
Christian to say, that he has skill in any other affliction but this: A
Christian should be able to manage his Ship if the wind blow any way, to
guide his soul any way. The fourth and last answer is this, Know that the Lord
has rewards and Crowns for all Graces, and for the honoring them in all
conditions. It may be in such a way as thou think thou could honor God,
God has a Crown for that, and God has another Crown to set upon the heads of
those that honor him in such a way as this is, yea, he has several sorts of
Crowns (as I may so say) in Heaven, and those Crowns he must put upon some
bodies head, and therefore he exercises thee in variety of conditions, that so
thou might have the several rewards and Crowns that God has to reward and
Crown those that are faithful in several conditions.
The Ninth PLEA.
Oh! but the condition that God has put me in, makes me to be unserviceable,
and this troubles me; it is true, if it were only an affliction and trouble to
my self it were not so much, but I am put into such a condition by this
affliction, as I am unserviceable, and am like to do God no further service,
God puts me into a mean estate, and what good can I do? and how burdensome is
my life to me, because I can do no service for God! and this is grievous to me.

Indeed if it be true, that this is thy great grief, it is a good sign, If thou
can say as in the presence of God, above all afflictions here in this world
to be laid aside, and not to be employed in the service of God, I account that
the greatest affliction: I had rather bear any trouble in the world so I might
do more service, than to be freed from trouble, and to be laid aside and do
little service; can thou say so? It is a good sign of grace for a man to
account afflictions to be great, because he can do the Lord but little service.
Few men account that any affliction at all.

But yet there may be a temptation in this. To murmr at Gods dispose when
your Calling is low and mean, and you can do little service; this is many times
a temptation to those that are poor, those that are servants, and those that
are of weak parts, and are fain to work hard to provide bread for their
families; it is many times a grievous burden to them to think, such men the Lord
uses in public service, and I live in an obscure way, and to what purpose is
my life?

First, To help against this temptation that thou may not murmr against
this condition, Do but consider, though thy condition be low and mean, yet thou
art in the body, thou art a member of the body though thou be but a mean
member, the Toe, and the Finger has its use in the body, though it be not the
Eye, though it be not the Head, or the Heart, yet it has its use in the body.
And it is an excellent expression that I remember Austin has about this,
(says he) it is better to be the meanest member in the body, than to be the
highest member and more excellent and cut off from the body, it is better to be
a little sprig in the Tree joined to the Root, than to be an Arm cut off from
the Root. Now other men that have but common gifts in the world, that are not
members of Jesus Christ, (indeed) they seem to have more excellency than those
that are godly, that are in a mean condition, mean parts, mean callings, but
they are not of the body, they are not joined to the Root, and therefore their
condition is worse. As a great Arm of a Tree when it is cut off it has a great
many leaves upon it, and it seems a great deal more glorious than those little
sprigs that are upon the Tree, but that little Sprig is in a better condition,
why? Because joined to the Tree, and has sap from the root and flourishes,
but the other will wither and die within a while: So it is with all the men of
the world, they be but like great Boughs cut off from the Tree, though they
have excellent parts, and have great estates, and pomp, and glory in the world,
they have no union with Jesus Christ the Root: But now others that live in a
poor condition, a poor Tradesman, a poor servant, a poor laboring man that
labors for his family every day, yet he being godly, (says he) though I have
but little for the present, little glory, little credit, little comfort, yet I
am joined to the body, and there I have supply, and that that will feed me with
comfort, blessing, and mercy to all eternity: So all that are in a poor
condition in this world, if they be godly, do but think of that; though thou
be mean, yet thou art in the body and joined to the Root, thou art joined to
the principle of comfort, good, blessing, and mercy that will hold out to
Eternity, when thousand thousands of glorious pompous men in the world shall
wither and perish everlastingly, and therefore be not troubled at thy mean
condition.

Secondly; Though thou have but a mean calling in this world, and so art not
regarded as a man of use in the world, yet if thou be a Christian, God has
called thee to a higher calling; thy general calling it is a high calling,
though thy particular calling be but low and mean: And for that you have a
place in the Chapter before my text, Phil. 3.14. I press toward the mark
(says the Apostle) for the price of the High calling of God in Christ Jesus:
So that every Christian has an high calling of God in Christ Jesus, God has
called him to the highest thing that he has called any creature to that he
has made, the Angels in Heaven have not a higher calling than thou have. Thou
that perhaps spendest thy time in a poor business, in the meanest calling, if
thou be a dung-raker, to rake channels, or to cleanse places of filth, or
any other thing in the world, that is the meanest that can be conceived of, thy
general calling as a Christian does advance thee higher than any particular
calling can advance any man in the world; others indeed that are called to
manage the Affairs of the State, they are in a high Calling, or Ministers they
are in a high Calling, but thine in some respect is higher. A poor servant that
must be scraping all day about poor, mean things, many times may have such a
temptation as this is, Oh what a poor condition has God disposed me to? Will
God have regard to such a one that is in such a poor low place as I am? Oh yes,
Christ has regard to the meanest member; as a man has as true regard to the
Toe if it be in pain, and will tender that as truly and verily as any other
member; so Christ has regard to his lowest and meanest ones.

Thirdly, Thou art in a high calling, though thy outward calling be low in
respect of men, yet in respect of God thou art in the same calling with the
Angels in Heaven, and in some degree called to that that is higher, for the
Scripture says, that the Angels come to understand the Mystery of the Gospel
by the Church; thou that art a Christian in that general calling of thine, thou
art joined with Principalities and Powers, and with Angels, in the greatest
work that God has called any creature to, and therefore let that comfort thee
in this.

Fourthly, Thy calling is low and mean, yet be not discontented with that, for
thou have a principle within thee (if thou be a godly man or woman) of Grace
that does raise thy lowest actions to be higher in Gods esteem, than all the
brave glorious actions that are done in the world; the principle of Faith does
it, for any man or woman to go on in obedience to God in a way of Faith, in the
calling that God has set them, (I say doing this through a principle of Faith)
it does raise this action, and make it a more glorious action than all the
glorious victories of Alexander and Caesar, than all their Triumphs and
glorious pomp that they had in all their Conquests, it was not so glorious as
for thee to do the lowest action out of Faith. Or, as Luther speaks of a poor
Milk-Maid, and yet being a believer, and does it in faith, he compares that
action to all the glorious actions of Caesar, and makes that a great deal more
eminent and glorious in the eyes of God, therefore faith raises thy works that
are but mean, raises them to be very glorious.

Yea, And the truth is, There is more obedience to submit to God in a low
calling, than to submit to him in a higher calling; for its clear obedience,
mere obedience that makes thee go on in a low calling; but there may be much
self-love that makes men go on in a higher calling, for there is Riches, Credit,
and account in the world, and rewards comes in by that, which does not in the
other: to go on quietly in a low calling is more obedience to God.

Fifthly, Know further in the last place, There is like to be more reward: For
the Lord when he comes to reward, he does not come to examine what the work
has been that men and women have been exercised in, but what their
faithfulness has been, Well done good and faithful Servant, says the Lord; he
does not say, well done good servant for thou have been faithful to me in
public works, ruling Cities and States, and Affairs in Kingdoms, and
therefore thou shall be rewarded, No, but, Well done good and faithful servant;
now thou may be faithful in little as well as others are in more, by going
on and working thy days labor, when thou gettest but a couple of shillings to
maintain thy family, thou may be as faithful in this as those are that rule
a Kingdom; now God looks to a man's faithfulness, and thou may have as great
a reward for thy faithfulness that art a poor Servant in the Kitchen all the
day, as another that sits upon the Throne all day, and as great a Crown of
Glory thou may have at the day of Judgment, as a King that sits upon the
Throne, that has ruled for God upon his Throne; yea, thy faithfulness may be
rewarded by God with as great glory, as a King that has swayed his Scepter for
God; because (I say) the Lord does not so much look at the work that is done,
as at the faithfulness of our hearts in doing it; then why should not every one
of us go on comfortably and cheerfully in our low condition, for why may not I
be faithful as well as another? It Is true, I cannot come to be as rich a man,
and as honorable as others, but I may be as faithful as any other man, that
every one of you may conclude with your selves: What does let but that you that
are the poorest and meanest may be as faithful as the greatest, yea you may
have as glorious a Crown in Heaven, and therefore go on comfortably and
cheerfully in your way.

The Tenth PLEA.
There Is another reasoning that some may have, and that is this. Oh! I could
bear much affliction in some other way, but this is very grievous to me; the
unsetledness of my condition; though my condition were but low, yet if it were
in a settled way, I could be content, but it is so unconstant, and so unsettled,
that I can never know what to trust to, but am tossed up and down in the world in
an unsettled condition, and this is hard to be content with.

Now to that I answer, First, that the Psalmist says, That every man in his
settled estate is vanity, in Psalm 36.5. Your books have it, Every man at his
best estate is vanity, the word is, his settled Estate; you think if you were
but settled, Oh then you could be content, but the truth is, man in his settled
estate is vanity.

Secondly, I answer thus, That perhaps God sees it is better for thee to live
in a continual dependence upon him, and not to know what thy condition shall be
on the morrow, then for thee to have a more letled condition in respect of the
comforts of the creatures; do but remember that we spoke of before, that Christ
does not teach you to pray, Lord, give me enough that will serve me for two or
three years, but, this day our daily bread; to teach us we must live upon God
in a dependant condition every day for daily bread. Here was the difference
that is observable between the Land of Canaan and Egypt, the Land of Canaan
that depended upon God for the watering of it with showers from Heaven, but
Egypt had a constant way of watring the Country, that did not so much depend
upon Heaven for water, but upon the River Nylus, which did at some certain time
overflow the Country: and they knowing that the watering of their Country did
depend upon that river, and not upon Heaven they grew more proud: and therefore
the Scripture to express Pharoahs pride, brings him in saying, The river is
mine: he could order the River as he pleased, for it was his: Canaan, which was
a Country which was to depend upon God, though they had rain at one time, yet
they knew not whether they should have it at another time, and lived always in
a dependence upon God, not knowing what should become of them: Now God thought
this to be a better Land for his people than Egypt, and this is given as one
reason among others for it, because the Lord looked upon this as more suitable
to the state of his people that were to live by faith, to be continually
depending upon Heaven, upon Himself, and not to have a constant settled way in
the creature for their outward dependence. And we find it by experience, that
when those that are godly live in the greatest dependence upon God, and have no
settled comings in from the creature, they do exercise Faith more, and are in a
better condition for their souls than before. Oh! many times it falls out, that
the worse thy outward estate is, the better thy soul is, and the better thy
outward estate is, the worse thy soul is. We read in Ezra 4.13. the objection
that the enemies had against the people of Isreal's building of the wall of the
City: their writing to Artaxerxes against them, says, Be it known unto the
King, that if the City be builded. and the walls set up again, then they will
not pay toll, tribute, and custom: and so thou shall endamage the revenue of
the Kings. If the wall be built (say they) then they will refuse to pay toll,
tribute, and custom to the King: that is thus, so long as they live in such a
condition, where they have dependence wholly upon the King, and lie at the
Kings mercy, that is, they are in no City that has walls built, but the King
may come upon them when he will, so long they will pay custom to the King, but
if once they come to build a wall, and can defend themselves, and have not
their dependence upon the King as before, then they will deny paying toll,
tribute, and custom. So it is thus for all the world between God and men's
souls, when a soul lives in a way of mere dependence upon God, that sensibly he
sees God has him at advantage every moment, Oh then such a soul will pay toll
and custom, that soul exercises faith, and begs every day his daily bread; but
if God hedges that man about with an estate, with prosperity, perhaps he has
an inheritance befaln him, perhaps he has a constant Office that brings in so
much yearly to him duly paid, this man is not so sensible now of his dependence
upon God, he begins now to pay less toll and custom to God than before; God
has less service from this man now than before. God sees it better for his
people to live in a depending condition: we are very loath in respect of God to
be dependant, we would be all Independants this way, we would be of our selves,
and have no dependence upon the Lord, but God sees it better for us to live in
a depending condition.

Further, This may be thy comfort, though for outward things thou art mightily
unsettled, yet for the great things of thy soul and eternal estate, there thou
art settled, there thou have a settled way, a constant way of fetching supply, Of
his fullness we receive grace, for grace, thou have there abundance of treasure
to go to, and setch all that thou stand in need of, and observe it, that now
thy condition is more settled in the Covenant of grace than it was in the
Covenant of works; in the Covenant of works there God gave man a stock to trade
with, but he put it in his own hand, so that he might trade and get or lose;
but now in the Covenant of Grace God makes sure, the stock is kept in the hand
of Christ, and we must go to him for supply continually, for Christ keeps the
stock; perhaps we may trifle away somewhat in our trading, but God takes that
care still we should never spend the stock: As a man when his son breaks,
having squandred away his stock that he gave him before, afterward he puts his
stock into a friends hand, and, says he, you shall keep this stock, and it
shall not be at his dispose; so we are in a more settled condition, in respect
of our eternal estate, than Adam was in Innocence; therefore let that comfort
us in all our unsettled conditions in the matters of the world.

The Eleventh PLEA.
But yet there is another reasoning that many murmuring hearts think to seed
their humor withal, (say they) If I never had been in a better condition,
then I could bear this affliction, if God had always kept me in so low a
condition I could be content, Oh (...) there was a time that I prospered more,
and I had things at a more full hand, and therefore now it is harder to me to
be brought low, as in these times perhaps a man that had five or six hundred a
year, but now has had nothing for a great while, if that man had not been born
to so much, or never had prospered in any higher degree than now he is in, this
affliction had been less, perhaps he has some money and friends to live upon,
but if he had never been in a higher condition, he would not have accounted it
so great a matter to have been without it now; This many times is our greatest
wound that once we were in a better condition: and this is the most
unreasonable thing for us to murmr upon this ground of any.

For first, Is thy eye evil, because God has been good to thee heretofore?
It Is an ill thing for us to have our eye evil, because God is good to others,
but to look upon our condition with an evil eye now, because God was once good
to us; has God done thee any wrong, because he was formerly more good to thee
than he was to others?

Secondly, Thou did heretofore more prosper? Did God heretofore give thee
more prosperity? it was to prepare thee for afflictions; we should look at all
our outward prosperity as a preparation to afflictions, if thou had done so
then, it would not have been so difficult for thee to have endured affliction
now when thou had a great estate, yet if thou had made use of this mercy of
God to prepare thee for thy afflicted estate, then the change of thy estate
would not be so grievous. That every Christian should do: have I an estate now?
I should prepare for poverty. Have I health now? I should prepare for sickness.
Have I liberty? let me prepare my self for imprisonment: What know I what God
may call me to? Have I comfort and peace now in my conscience? Does God shine
upon me? While I have this, let me prepare for Gods withdrawing from me. Am I
delivered from temptations? Let me prepare now for the time of temptations; If
thou would do so, the change of thy condition would not be so grievous to
thee. Mariners that are in a calm will prepare for storms, would they say, if
we never had calms, we would bear storms? But now we have had calms so many
years or weeks together, this is grievous: In thy calm thou art to prepare for
storms, and the storm would be less, thou should reason quite contrary, and
say, Now I am in an afflicted condition, Oh but blessed be God, I was in a
comfortable condition, and blessed be God that he was aforehand with me in the
ways of his mercy, this one consideration may help murmuring hearts. Do thou
murmr because once thou were better? Know God was beforehand with thee in
the ways of mercy, thou should rather think thus, I have lived for these
many years (forty years perhaps or more) in a comfortable condition, I have
lived in health, and peace, and plenty, what though the remaining part of my
time has some sorrow and affliction? The Lord has granted to me a comfortable
sunshine all the day long till toward evening, and what if at seven or eight
a clock at night it begins to rain? Let me thank God I have had so fair weather
all day. You that are going a voyage, if you have a comfortable wind, and very
fair for many months together, what if you have a little storm when you are
within sight of land, will you murmr and repine? Oh no, but rather bless God
that you have had such a comfortable voyage so long: Oh this consideration
would help us all: If it were so that now God should say, Well, You shall never
see comfortable day more for outward things in this world, Oh then you have
cause to fall down and bless Gods Name that you have had so many comfortable
days: now you reason quite contrary, whereas you should bless God that you
have had so much comfort, you make what you have had before to be an
aggravation of your afflictions now, and so murmr and are discontented. That
which God gave you before, upon what terms did you hold it? Did you hold it so
as you have in your writings, To have and to hold for ever, God gives no such
thing, God gives to no man (I say) any thing but grace to run upon that tenor,
there is no such thing in all Gods writings for any outward comforts, To have
and to hold for you and your heirs; indeed for grace he does give it to your
selves, To have and to hold for ever; though not for every one that comes out
of your Loins to have and to hold for ever; God does not give any outward thing
so upon any such tenor as that is; if God gives me an understanding of
himself, and faith, and humility, and love, and patience, and such graces of
his spirit; he gives them me for ever, if he gives me himself, and his Christ,
and his Promise, and his Covenant, he gives me them for ever, what am I
therefore that the Sun should always shine upon me, that I must have fair
weather all my days? That which God gives to me, he gave it to me as a pledge
of his love, let me return in to him as a pledge of my obedience, there is all
the reason in the world for it, all that a godly man receives from God, he
receives it as a pledge of Gods love to him, therefore when he comes into an
afflicted condition, says God, Return to me as a pledge of your obedience that
you had from me as a pledge of my love; we should cheerfully come in to God,
and bless God that we have any thing to render unto him as a pledge of our
obedience, and say, O it is thy love, O Lord, that has given us any thing,
that does enable us to render a pledge of our obedience to thee. When God calls
for thy estate, or any comforts that thou have, God calls for it as a pledge of
thy obedience to him.

The Twelfth PLEA.
Another reasoning of a murmuring heart is this. Oh but after I have taken a
great deal of pains for such a comfort, yet then I am crossed in it, after a
great deal of labor and pains that I have taken now to be crossed, Oh this goes
very hard.

First, I answer, The greater cross, the more obedience and submission.
Secondly, When thou did take a great deal of pains, was it not with
submission to God? Did thou take pains with resolutions, that thou must have
such a thing when thou labourest for it? Then know that thou labourest not as a
Christian, but if thou did labor and take pains, was it not with resignation
to God? Lord, I am taking pains in the way of my calling, but with submission,
I depend wholly upon thee for success, and a blessing: And what was it that
thou did aim at in thy labor? Was it not that thou might walk with God in
the place that God has set thee? A Christian should do so in his outward
calling, I am diligent in my outward calling, but it is, that I might obey God
in it; it is true, I do it that I might provide for my family, but the chief
thing that I aim at is, That I might yield obedience to God in the way that God
has set me: Now if God calls thee to another condition to obey him in, though
it be by suffering, thou will do it if thy heart be right. Thirdly, There will
be the more Testimony of thy love to God, if so be thou shall now yield up thy
self to God in that that cost thee dear. Shall I offer that to God (says
David) that cost me nothing? Thy outward comforts has cost thee much, and thou
have taken much pains to obtain them, and now if thou can submit to God in
the want of them: (I say) in this thy love is the more shown, that thou can
offer that to God that cost thee dear. Now these are the principal reasonings
of a discontented heart.
The Thirteenth PLEA.
There Is one Plea more that may be named, and that is this, say some, Though I
confess my affliction is somewhat hard, and I feel some trouble within me, yet
I thank God I break not out in discontented ways to the dishonor of God, I keep
in, although I have much ado with my own heart.

Oh! do not satisfy your selves with that, for the distempers of your hearts,
and their sinful workings, are as words before God, My soul be silent to God;
That we spoke of in the beginning of the opening of this Scripture, it is not
enough for thy tongue to be silent, but thy soul must be silent, there may be a
sullen discontentedness of heart as well as a discontentedness manifested in
words; and if thou do but mortify that inward sullenness, if thou be
afflicted a little more, it will break forth at last.

And thus the Lord I hope has met with the chief Reasonings and Pleas for our
discontent in our conditions. I beseech you in the Name of God consider of
these things, and because they do concern your own hearts, you may so much the
better remember them, I had thought to have made a little Entrance into the
next Head, and that is some way of helping you to this Grace of Contentment. It
is a most excellent Grace, of admirable use, as you have heard; and the
contrary is very sinful and vile.

SERMON, X. at Stepney. October. 1. 1645.
PHIL. 4.11. For I have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be
content.

NOW we are coming to the close of this point of Contentment, that Jesus Christ
does teach those that are in his School: we have opened the point unto you, and
showed you wherein the Art, and Skill, and Mystery of Christian Contentment
lies: and diverse things in the way of application rebuking the want of this;
and the last day I finished that point of showing the several Reasonings of a
murmuring and discontented heart. I shall now (as being desirous to make an
end) leave what was said, and proceed to what remains. There are only these two
things for the working of your hearts to this Grace of Christian Contentment.

First, The propounding of several CONSIDERATIONS, for the contenting of the
Heart in any afflicted condition. Secondly, The propounding of DIRECTIONS, what
should be done for the working of our hearts unto this.
The First CONSIDERATION.
We should consider (in all our wants and inclinations to discontent) The
greatness of the mercies that we have, and the meanest of the things that we
want. The things we want, (if we be godly) they are things of very small
moment, in comparison of the things we have, and the things we have are things
of very great moment; for the most part, that that people are discontent and
murmr for the want of, it is, because they have not such things as reprobates
have, or may have; why should thou be troubled so much for the want of that
that a man or woman may have, and yet be a Reprobate, as that thy estate is not
so great, thy health not so perfect, thy credit not so much, thou may have
all those things, and yet be a Reprobate; now will thou be discontent for that
that a Reprobate may have? I shall give you the example of a couple of godly
men meeting together, Anthony and Diddimus, Diddimus was blind; and yet a man
of very excellent parts and graces, Anthony asked him if he was not troubled at
this his want of sight, he confessed he was; but (says he) shall you be troubled
at the want of what flies and dogs have, and not rather rejoice and be thankful
that you have what Angels have? God has given you those good things that makes
Angels glorious, is not that enough to you, though you want what things a fly
has? And so a Christian should reason the case with himself, What am I
discontented for? I am discontented for want of that that a dog may have, that
a devil may have, that a Reprobate may have, shall I be discontent for not
having that, when as God has given me that that makes Angels glorious? Blessed
be God (says the Apostle in Ephesians. 1.3.) That has blessed us with all
spiritual blessings in Heavenly places. It may be thou have not so great
blessings in earthly places as some others have, but if the Lord has blessed
thee in heavenly places, that should content thee, there is blessings in Heaven,
and he has set thee here for the present as it were in Heaven, in a Heavenly
place; The consideration of the greatness of the mercies that we have, and the
littleness of the things that God has denied us, is a very powerful
consideration to work this Grace of Contentment.

The Second CONSIDERATION.
The Consideration, That God is beforehand with us with his mercies, should
content us. (I spoke to this as an aggravation of our discontent, but now I
shall use it as a consideration to help us to Contentment) Thou want many
comforts now, but has not God been beforehand with thee heretofore? Oh thou
have had mercy enough already to make thee spend all the strength thou have,
and time thou shall live, to bless God for what thou have had already. I
remember I have read of a good man that had lived to fifty years of age, and
enjoyed his health for eight and forty years exceeding well, and lived in
prosperity, and the two last years his Body was exceedingly discased, he had
the Strangury, and was in great pain; but he reasoned the case with himself
thus; Oh Lord, thou might have made all my life to have been a life of
torment and pain, but thou have let me have eight and forty years in health: I
will praise thy mercies for what I have had, and will praise thy Justice for
what now I feel. Oh it is a good consideration for us to think that God is
beforehand with us in the way of mercy: Suppose God should now take away your
estates from some of you that have lived comfortably a great while, you will
say, That aggravates our misery that we have had estates; but it is through thy
unthankfulness that it does so; we should bless God for what we have had, and
not think that we are worse because we have had thus and thus, we might have
been always miserable, and certainly that man's condition is not very miserable,
that has no other greater aggravation of his misery, but because once he was
happy. If there be nothing else to make you miserable, that is no such
aggravation but that thou may bear it, for there is much mercy in that that
thou had once, and therefore let that content thee.

The Third CONSIDERATION.
The Consideration of the abundance of mercies that God bestows, and we enjoy.
It is a speech of Luther, (says he) the Sea of Gods mercy should swallow up
all our particular afflictions, name any affliction that is upon thee, there is
a Sea of mercy to swallow it up. If you power a pail full of water on the floor
of your house it makes a great show, but if you throw it into the Sea, there is
no appearance of it; so afflictions considered in themselves we think they are
very great, but let them be considered with the Sea of Gods mercies we do
enjoy, then they are not so much, they are nothing in comparison.

The Fourth CONSIDERATION.
Consider the way of God toward all creatures, God carries on all creatures in
a vicissitude of several conditions; as thus, we have not always Summer, but
Winter succeeds Summer; we have not always day, but day and night; we have not
always fair weather, but fair and foul; the vegetive creatures do not always
flourish, but the sap is in the root, and they seem as if they were dead:
there is a vicissitude of all things in the world: the Sun does not shine always
to us here, but there is darkness comes after light; now seeing God has so
ordered things with all creatures, that there is a mixture of conditions, why
should we think it much that there should be a vicissitude of conditions with
us, sometimes in a way of prosperity, and sometimes in a way of affliction.

The Fifth CONSIDERATION.
A further Consideration is this. The Creatures do suffer for us, why should
not we be willing to suffer, to be serviceable to God? God subjects other
creatures, they are fain to lose their lives for us, to lose what ever beauty
and excellency they have to be serviceable to us, why should not we be willing
to part with any thing in way of service for God; certainly there is not so
great a distance between other creatures and Mankind, as there is between
Mankind and God. It Is an expression of that Martyr Master Hooper, that we read
of in the Book of Martyrs, in laboring to work his own heart, and the hearts
of others to contentedness in the midst of his sufferings; he has this
similitude, and you may be put in mind of that every day, (says he) I look
upon the creature, and see what it suffers to be useful to me: as thus, The
bruit beasts must die, must be roasted in the fire, and boiled, must come upon
the trencher, be hackt all in pieces, must be chewed in the mouth, and in the
stomach turned to that which is loathsome, if one should behold it, and all to
nourish me, to be useful to my body; and shall not I be willing to be made any
thing for God, for his service; what abundance of alterations the creature
comes under to be made useful for me, to preserve me; then if God will do so
with me for his use, as he does subject the creatures to me for my use, why
should not I rest contented? If God will take away my estate, and make me poor,
if God will take away my life, hack me in pieces, put me in prison, whatsoever
he does, yet I shall not suffer more for God then the creature does for me, and
surely I am infinitely more bound to God than the creature is to me, and there
is not so much distance between me and the creature, as between me and God:
such Considerations as these wrought the heart of that Martyr to contentedness
in his sufferings. And every time the creature is upon your trenchers, you may
think, What! does God make the creature suffer for my use? not only for my
nourishment, but for my delight; what am I then in respect of the infinite God?

The Sixth CONSIDERATION.
Another Consideration for the working of Contentment, it is To consider that
we have but a little time in this world: If thou be godly, thou shall never
suffer but only in this world; why do but shut your eyes, and presently another
life is come, as that Martyr said to his fellow Martyr, Do but shut your eyes,
(says he) and the next time they are opened you shall be in another world.
Athanasius says, it is but a little cloud (when he was banished) and it will
be over (notwithstanding) presently. These afflictions they are but for a
moment. A Mariner when he is abroad does not think it much if a storm arises,
especially if he can see the Heavens clear beyond it, says he, it will be over
presently. Consider we have not long to live, it may be it may be over before
our days be at an end, but suppose it should not, death will put an end to
all, all afflictions and troubles will soon be at an end by death.

The Seventh CONSIDERATION.
Consider the condition that others have been in that have been our betters. We
made some use of that before, to show the evil of coffeehouse: But further
for to work this upon our hearts, it is a mighty Argument to work upon our
hearts a contentedness in any condition.

Thou many times do consider who are above thee, but consider who are under
thee.

Jacob that was the heir both of Abraham and Isaac, for the blessing was upon
him, and the promise ran along in him, yet was in a poor mean condition.
Abraham that was his Grandfather, was able to make a kind of Army of his own
household, 300. to fight with a King, yet Jacob his Grand child he goes over
Jordan with a staff, and lives in a very poor and mean condition for a long
time: and Moses that might have had all the treasures in Egypt, and as some
Historians say of him; Pharoahs Daughter adopted him for her Son, because
Pharaoh had no heir for the Crown, and so he was like to have come to the
Crown, yet what a low condition did he live in when he went to live with Jethro
his Father-in-law 40 years together, afterward when he returned to Egypt, he
and his wife and children, and all that he had, and yet he had but one beast to
carry him to Egypt, he went in a mean condition when he went from his Father-in
law to Egypt back again.

And Elijah we know how he was fed with Ravens, and how he was fain to shift
for his life from time to time, and run into the wilderness up and down, and so
did Elisha, he was diverse times in a very low condition, the Prophets of God
they were to be hid in a Cave by Obadiah, and there to be fed with bread and
water, and the Prophet Jeremiah put into a Dungeon, and Oh how was he used! and
it were an endless thing to name the particulars of the great sufferings of the
people of God. In former time we have sometimes made use of this Argument other
ways, the great Instruments of God in the first Reformation, they lived in
great straights, in a very low condition, even Luther himself when he was to
die (says he) Lord (though he were a man of such public use, and was a great
man in the Courts of Princes) Lord I have neither House, nor Lands, nor Estate,
to leave any thing to Wife or Children, but I commit them to thee: and so
Musculus that was a very choice instrument of God in his time, though he was a
man that was worth even a Kingdom for excellency of his spirit, and learning,
for he was one of the learned men of his time, yet sometimes he was put to
dig in the common ditch to get bread for his family. What would we do if we
were in such a condition as these men were? But above all set Christ before us,
that professes that the Birds of the Air had nests, and the Foxes had holes,
yet the Son of man had no place to hide his head in, that low condition he was
in; the consideration of such things as these are very useful. It is likewise
useful for men and women of estates to go to poor peoples houses, and see how
they live, to go to Hospitals, and to see the wounds of Soldiers and others,
and to see the lamentable condition that people live in that live in some
Almes-houses, and what poor fare they have, and what straights they are put to;
you hear sometimes of them, but if you went to see them, it would not only stir
up charity in your selves toward them, but stir up thankfulness in your hearts
toward God, it would be a special means to help you against any discontent,
you would go away and see cause to bless God and say, if I were in such a
condition as they are in, what should I do? How could I bear it? And yet what
reason is there that God does so order and dispose of things, that they should
be so low in their estates, and I so high: I know no reason but free Grace, God
will have mercy upon whom he will have mercy: These are some good
Considerations for the furtherance of Contentment.

The Eighth CONSIDERATION.
A further Consideration may be this, That before your conversion, before God
wrought upon your souls, you were contented then with the world without grace,
though you had no interest in God nor Christ, why cannot you now be contented
with grace and spiritual things without the world? If you your selves were
content with the world without grace, there is reason you should be content with
grace without the world? Certainly there is infinitely more reason. Yea, you see
that many men of the world have a kind of Contentment, do not murmr nor
repine when the world comes, though they have no interest in God and Christ.
Then can not thou have as much Contentment with God and Christ without the
world, as they can with the world without God and Christ? This is infinite
shame it should be so.

The Ninth CONSIDERATION.
Yea consider when God has given thee such Contentment, thou have not given
him the glory. When God has let thee have thy hearts desire, what have thou
done with thy hearts desire? thou have not been the better for it, it may be
thou have been the worse many times, and therefore let that satisfy thee: I
meet with crosses, but when I had contentment, and all things coming in, God
had but little or no glory from me, and therefore let that be a means now to
quiet me in my discontented thoughts.

The Tenth CONSIDERATION.
Yea lastly, Consider all the experience that you have had, of Gods doing good
unto you in the want of many comforts. When God crosses you, have you never had
experience of abundance of good in afflictions? It Is true, when a Minister only
tells men that God will work good out of their afflictions, they hear them
speak, and think they speak like good men, but they feel little or no good,
they feel nothing but pain; but when we cannot only say to you, that God has
said he will work good out of your afflictions, but we can say to you, that you
your selves have found it so by experience, that God has made former
afflictions to be great benefits to you, and that you would not have been
without them, or without the good that came by them for a world; such
experiences will exceedingly quiet the heart, and work it to contentment:
therefore think thus with thy self, Lord, why may not this affliction work as
great a good upon me as afflictions have done heretofore? Perhaps you may find
many other Considerations besides in your own meditations, these are the
principal ones that I have thought upon: I Will only add one word more to this,
of one that once was a great Merchant and Tradesman, and it happened on a time
that he suffered Shipwreck, and says he, I never made a better voyage, and
sailed better, than at that time that I suffered Ship wrack: this was a strange
speech (his name was Zeno) that he should never make a better voyage: it would
be a strange paradox to you that are Mariners, to say, that that is a good
voyage when you suffer Shipwreck: but he meant because he got so much good by
it, God was pleased to bless it so far to him that he gained so much unto his
soul by it, so much soul-riches, that he made account it was the best voyage
that ever he had: and truly, sometimes it is so, yea, to you that are godly, I
make no question but you find it so, that your worst voyages have proved your
best, when you have met with the greatest crosses in a voyage, God has been
pleased to turn them to a greater good to you in some other way. It Is true, we
may desire crosses that they may be turned to other advantages; but when God in
his providence does so order things, that you meet with ill voyages, you may
expect that God will turn them to a greater good, and those that have been
exercised in the ways of godliness any long time, I make no question but they
have abundance of experience that they have gained by them: You know sometimes
its better to be in a little Ship, for they have advantage of the greater ones
in storms, many times in a storm a little ship can thrust into a shallow place,
and so be safe, but your great ships cannot, they must be abroad, and tossed up
and down in the storm and tempest, and so many times split against the rocks.
And so it may be God sees there is a storm a coming, and if thou be in thy
great ship thou may be split upon rocks and sands, God therefore does put
thee into a lesser vessel that thou may be more safe. We will lay aside the
speaking of those Considerations now, but I would not have you lay them aside,
and put them out of your thoughts, but labor (those especially that most
concern you) to make use of them in the needful time, when you find any
discontentedness of spirit to arise in you.

But the main thing that I intend for this Exercise, It is propounding
Directions what to do for the helping of our hearts to contentment. For as for
any further considerations, we have prevented the speaking largely of them,
because we have opened the most things in showing what the lessons are that
Christ teaches men, when he brings them into his School, to teach them this
Art. I say there we have spoken of the special things that are most
considerable for the helping of us to this Grace of Contentment. Therefore now
all that I shall further do about this point, shall be the giving of some
directions what course to take that we may come to attain the Grace of
Contentment.

The First DIRECTION.
The first is this, All the rules and helps in the world will do us little good
except we get a good temper within our hearts; you can never make a ship go
steady with propping of it without, you know there must be ballast within the
ship, that must make it go steady: And so there is nothing without us that can
keep our hearts in a steady constant way, but that which is within us, Grace is
within the soul, and that will do it.

The Second DIRECTION.
Secondly, If you would get a contented life, do not gripe too much of the
world, do not take in more of the business of the world than God calls you to,
be not greedy of taking in a great deal of the world, if a man will go among
Thorns, when he may go in a plainer way, there is no reason that this man
should complain that he is pricked with them; thou go among Thorns, is it thy
way? Must you of necessity go among them? Then its another matter, but if thou will electively choose that way when thou may go another, then thou have no
cause to complain; so for men and women that will put themselves upon things of
the world that they need not, then no marvel though they be pricked, and meet
with that that does disquiet them? For such is the nature of all things here in
the world, that every thing has some prick or other in it, we are like to meet
with disappointments, and discontentments in every thing we meddle with, and
therefore those that have least to do in the world, (that is, except God calls
them to it, we must put in that) they are like to meet with many things that
will discontent them.

The Third DIRECTION.
Thirdly, Be sure of thy call to every business thou go about, though it be
in the least business, be sure of thy call to it: then whatever thou meetest
withal thou may quiet thy heart with this, I know I am where God would have
me; there is nothing in the world will quiet the heart so much as this; when I
meet with any crosses, I know I am where God would have me in my place and
calling, I am about the work that God has set me, Oh this will quiet and
content thee when thou meetest with trouble: that that God calls a man to, with
that he may have comfort whatever befalls him, God is to look to thee, and to
see thee blessed if thou be in the work God calls thee to.

The Fourth DIRECTION.
And especially if I add a Fourth Rule, and that is, That I walk by rule in
that work I am called to. I am called to such a business, but I must manage
this work that I am called to by Rule, I must walk by the Word, order my self
in this business according to Gods mind so far as I am able, then add this to
the other, and then the quiet and peace of that soul may be made even perfect
in a kind, when I know it is not the work I put my self upon, but God has
called me to it, and I walk by the rule of the World in it, then let come what
will come, God he is to take care of me there. It was a speech of a Heathen
(says he) if thou will subject all things to thy self, do thou subject thy
self to reason, and by that thou will make all things to be under thee: I may
add a little more to it, if you will subject all things under you, subject your
self to God, and then the truth is, all things are under you; It has been that
which many times we have hinted, the reason why many of our Gentry have been so
malignant among us is, because they are willing to be slaves themselves under
some above them at Court, so they may keep their neighbors under to be slaves
to them: for you know any man heretofore that was great at the Court, he could
crush any Countryman that he was angry withal. If there were an Arbitrary
Government, then all those that would be willing to be vassals and slaves to
the Prince, they can make all others vassals and slaves under them. Now be thou
willing to be a vassal and slave unto God, to be absolutely under Gods command,
and then (I say) all things in the world are under thee, All are yours (says
the Apostle) Life and Death, every thing is yours, and you are Christ's, and
Christ is Gods: All things in the world are serviceable to that man or woman
that is serviceable to God. It is a mighty commendation of Gods service, be
thou willing to be serviceable to God, and God makes all things in the world to
be thy servants, for so they are. You will say, How are they my servants, I
cannot command them? They are servants in this, that God does order them all to
work for thy good, there is nothing in the world: but (says God) it shall work
for thy good, and be serviceable to thee, if thou will be serviceable to me,
who would not be now Gods Servant; Subject thy self to God, and all things
shall be subjected to thee. Now so long as we keep within our bounds we are
under protection, but if once we break our bounds, we must expect it should be
with us as it is with the Deer in the Park; while the Deer keep within the
Pale, there are no dogs come upon them, but they can feed quietly, but let the
Deer be got without the Pale, and then every dog in the Country will be hunting
after them: So it is with men, let men and women keep within the bounds of the
Command of God, of the rule that God has set them in his word, and then they
are protected by God, and they may go about their business with peace, and
never be troubled for any thing, but cast all their care upon God, God provides
for them, but if they will go beyond the pale, if they will pass their bounds,
then they may expect to meet with troubles, and afflictions, and disconrent;
and therefore that is a fourth direction. Walk by rule.

The Fifth DIRECTION.
A fist Rule is this, Exercise much faith, that is the way for contentedness.
After thou have done with all considerations that reason may suggest to thee,
if thou find that these do not do it, Oh then call for the grace of faith, a
man may go very far with the use of Reason alone to help him to Contentment,
but when Reason is at a nonplus, then set Faith at work. It was a speech of
that reverend Divine Master Perkins that God made so instrumental in his time,
the Life of Faith (says he) it is a true life indeed, the only life. Exercise
Faith not only in that promise that all shall work together for good to them
that fear God, but likewise exercise faith in God himself, as well as in his
word in the Attributes of God. It was a speech of Socrates a Heathen, (says
he) since God is so careful for you, what need you be careful for any thing
your selves; It was a strange speech of a Heathen.

Oh Christian! if thou have any faith, in the time of extremity, think thus,
This is the time that God calls for the exercise of faith, what can thou do
with thy faith if thou can not quiet thy heart in discontent: It was the
speech of one Theodosius that had been a King, and afterward was brought to
such a low condition to get his living by being a Schoolmaster, one comes and
asks him, What have you got by your Philosophy from Plato and others; What have
I got (says he) I have got this, That though my condition be changed from so
high a condition to so low, yet I have got this, I can be content. So what
do thou get by being a Believer, a Christian? what can thou do by thy
faith? I can do this, I can in all estates cast my care upon God, cast my
burden upon God, I can commit my way to God in peace, faith can do this.
Therefore when reason can go no higher, let faith get upon the shoulders of
reason, and say, I see land though reason cannot see it, I see good that will
come out of all this evil.

Exercise faith in thy often resignation of thy self to God, in giving of thy
self up to God and his ways, the more thou do in a believing way surrender up
thy self to God, the more quiet and peace will thou have; that is the fifth thing.

The Sixth DIRECTION.
The sixth Direction for Contentment is, To labor to be spiritually minded;
that is, be often in meditation of the things that are above, If we be risen
with Christ (says the Scripture) let us seek the things that are above, where
Christ is that sits at the right hand of God, Col. 3.1. Be much in spiritual
thoughts, in conversing with things above; many Christians that have an
interest in the things of Heaven, yet converse but very little with them, their
meditations are not much upon heavenly things. It is that that some give as the
reason why Adam did not see his nakedness, some think that he had so much
converse with God, and with things above sense, that he did not so much mind or
think of nakedness what it was: but whether that were so or no I will not say,
but this I say and am certain of, the reason why we are so troubled with our
nakedness, with any wants that we have, it is because we converse so little with
God, so little with spiritual things, the conversing with spiritual things
would lift us above the things of the world; Those that are bit or stung with a
Snake, it is because they tread upon the ground, if they could be lifted up
above the earth, they need never fear to be stung with the Snakes that are
crawling underneath: so I may compare the sinful distemper of murmuring, and
the temptations and evils that come from thence to be like Snakes that crawl up
and down below, but if we could get higher we should not be stung by them. A
Heavenly Conversation is the way for Contentment.

The Seventh DIRECTION.
A seventh rule is, Do not promise to your selves too much beforehand, do not
make account of too great things: It is good for us to take hold very low, and
not think to pitch too high, do not soar too high in your thoughts beforehand,
to think, O if I had this and this, and imagine great matters to your selves,
but be as good Jacob, you know he was a man that lived a very contented life in
a mean condition, (says he) Lord, if I may but have clothes to put on, and
meat to eat; he looked no higher, he was content with that: so if we would not
pitch our thoughts high, and think that we might have what others have, so
much, and so much, when we meet with disappointments we would not be so much
troubled: and so Paul, If we have but meat and drink, and clothing, let us be
therewith content; he did not soar too high aloft, those that look at high
things in the world, they meet with disappointments, and so they come to be
discontent; be as high as you will in spiritual meditations, God gives liberty
there to any of you to be as high as you will, above Angels, but for your
outward estate God would not have you aim at high things, Seek thou great
things (says the Lord to Baruch) seek them not, you shall have your life for a
prey. In these times especially, it were a very great evil for any to aim at
great things, Seek them not, be willing to take hold low, and to creep low, and
if God does raise thee, thou shall have cause to bless him, but if thou
should not be raised there would not be much trouble, one that creeps low
cannot fall far, but it is those that are on high whose fall does bruise them
most; that is a good rule, promise not your selves great matters, neither aim
at any great things in the world.

The Eighth DIRECTION.
Labor to get your hearts mortified to the world, dead to the world: We must
not content our selves that we have gotten some reasoning above the vanity of
the creature, and such kind of things as these are, but we must exercise
mortification, and be crucified to the world, says Paul, I die daily; we
should die daily to the world, We are baptized into the death of Christ, that
is to signify, that we have taken such a profession, as to profess to be even
as dead men to the world; now there are no crosses that fall out in the world
that does trouble those that are dead, if our hearts were dead to the world, we
should not be much troubled with the changes of the world, nor the tossings
about of worldly things. As it is very observable in those Soldiers that came
to break the bones of Christ, they brake the legs of one that was crucified
with him, and of the other, but when they came to Christ they found he was
dead, and so they did not break his legs, there was a providence in it, to
fulfill a Prophecy, but because they found he was dead, they did not break his
bones. Let afflictions and trouble find thee with a mortified heart to the
world, and they will not break thy bones; the bones of those that are broken by
crosses and afflictions are those that are alive to the world, that are not
dead to the world; but one that has a mortified heart, and dead to the world,
no afflictions or troubles will break the bones of such a one, that is, they
will not be very grievous or painful to such a one as is mortified to the
world: This I fear is a mystery and riddle to many, for one to be dead to the
world, to be mortified to the world. Now it is not my work to open to you what
Mortification is, or death to the world is, but only thus, To have our hearts
so taken off from the things of the world, as to use them as if one used them
not, not to make account that our lives, our comforts, our happiness does
consist in these things, they are things that are of another nature that our
happiness does consist in, and we may be happy without these, this is a kind of
deadness to the world.

The Ninth DIRECTION.
Let not men and women pore too much upon their afflictions; that is, busy
their thoughts too much to look down into their afflictions; you shall have
many people that all their thoughts are taken up about what their crosses and
afflictions are, they are altogether thinking and speaking of them, it is just
with them as with a child that has a sore about him, his finger is always
upon the sore; and so men and women their thoughts are always upon their
afflictions, when they awake in the night their thoughts are upon their
afflictions, and when they converse with others (nay it may be when they are
praying to God) they are thinking of their afflictions. Oh! no marvel though
you live a discontented life, if your thoughts be always poring upon such
things, you should rather labor to have your thoughts upon those things that
may comfort you: You shall have many that if you propound any rule to them to
do them good, they take it well while they are with you, and thank you for it,
but when they are gone they soon forget it. It is very observable of Jacob,
that when his wife died in Childbirth, his wife called the Child Ben-oni,
that is, a son of sorrows; now Jacob, he thought with himself, If I should call
this child Ben-oni, every time that I name him, it will put me in mind of the
death of my dear wife, and of that affliction, and that will be a continued
affliction to me, therefore I will not have my child have that name; and so the
text says, that Jacob called his name Benjamin, and that was the son of my
right hand: now this is to show us thus much, that when afflictions befall us,
we should not give way to have our thoughts continually upon them, but rather
upon those things that may stir up our thankfulness to God for mercies. It is
the similitude of Basil a learned man; says he, It is in this case as it is
with men and women that have sore eyes, now it is not fit for those to be always
looking upon the fire, or upon the beams of the Sun; no (says he) one that
has sore eyes must get things that are suitable to him, and such objects that
are fit for one that has weak eyes, therefore they will get green colors, as
that being a more easy color and better for weak eyes, and they will hang a
green Sarsnet before their eyes because it is more suitable to them: So weak
spirits it is the very same, a man or woman that has a weak spirit, they must
not be looking upon the fire of their afflictions, upon those things that
deject, that cast them down, but they are to be looking rathe upon that which
may be suitable for the healing and helping of them, they should be considering
of those things rather than the other. It will be of very great use and benefit
to you if you do lay it to heart, not to be poring always upon afflictions, but
upon mercies.

The Tenth DIRECTION.
I beseech you observe this, though you should forget many others. Make a good
interpretation of Gods ways toward you; if there can be any good
interpretation made of Gods ways toward you, make it. You think it much if you
have a friend that should always make bad interpretations of your ways toward
him, you will take that ill: if you should converse with people that you cannot
speak a word in their hearing, but they are ready to make an ill interpretation
of it, and take it in an ill sense, you would think their company to be very
tedious to you. It is very tedious to the Spirit of God when we make such ill
interpretations of his ways toward us. If God deal with us otherwise than we
would have him, if there can be any sense worse than other made of it, we will
be sure to make it; as thus, When an affliction does befall you, there may be
many good senses made of Gods Works toward you, you should think thus, It may
be God intends only to try me by this, it may be God saw my heart too much set
upon the Creature, and so intends to show me what there is in my heart, it may
be that God saw that if my estate did continue I should fall into sin, that the
better my estate were, the worse my soul would be, it may be God intended only
to exercise some Grace, it may be God intends to prepare me for some great work
which he has for me. Thus you should reason.

But we on the contrary make bad interpretations of Gods thus dealing with us,
and say, God does not mean this, surely the Lord means by this, to manifest his
wrath and displeasure against me, and this is but a furtherance of further
evils that he intends toward me: Just as they did in the Wilderness, God has
brought us hither to slay us. This is the worst interpretation that possibly
you can make of Gods ways: Oh! Why will you make these worst interpretations
when there may be better? In 1 Cor. 13.5. When the Scripture speaks of love,
says the text, Love thinks no evil. Love is of that nature, that if there
may be ten interpretations made of a thing, if nine of them be naught, and one
good, Love will take that which is good, and leave the other nine; and so
though there might be ten interpretations presented to thee concerning Gods
ways toward thee, and if but one be good, and nine naught, thou should take
that one that is good, and leave the other nine. I beseech you consider, God
does not deal by you as you deal with him, should God make the worst
interpretation of all your ways toward him, as you do of his toward you, it
would be very ill with you, God is pleased to manifest his love thus to us, to
make the best interpretations of what we do, and therefore it is that God does
put a sense upon the actions of his people that one would think could hardly
be, as thus, God is pleased to call those perfect that have but any uprightness
of heart in them, he accounts them perfect, Be ye perfect as your heavenly
Father is perfect; uprightness in Gods sense is perfection. Now alas when we
look into our own hearts, we can scarce see any good at all there, and yet God
is pleased to make such an interpretation as to say, it is perfect: When we
look into our own hearts we can see nothing but uncleanness, God, he calls you
his Saints, he calls the meanest Christian that has the least grace under the
greatest corruption, his Saint; you say, we cannot be Saints here, but yet in
Gods esteem we are Saints: You know the usual title the Holy Ghost gives (in
several of the Epistles) to those that had any grace, any uprightness, is, To
the Saints in such a place; you see what an interpretation God puts upon them,
they are Saints to him, and so I might name in diverse other particulars, God
makes the best interpretation of things; if there be abundance of evil and a
little good, God rather passes by the evil, and takes notice of the good: That
sometimes I have made use of, which is a very observable place in Peter
concerning Sarah, Sarah had a speech to her husband in Genesis 18.12. She
called her husband Lord, but there was but that one good word in an ill speech,
it was an unbelieving speech, but yet when the Apostle mentions that speech in
1 Pet. 3.6. the Holy Ghost leaves all the ill, and commends her for calling her
husband Lord, for putting a reverent title upon her Husband; thus how
graciously does God deal with us? If there be but one good word among a great
many ill, what an interpretation God makes! so should we do, if there be but
any one good interpretation that we can make of a thing, we should rather make
use of the good one than of the ill; Oh my brethren, (I would I could now speak
only to such as are godly) retain good thoughts of God, take heed of judging
God to be a hard Master, make good interpretations of his ways, and that is a
special means to help you to contentment in all your courses.

The Eleventh DIRECTION.
Do not so much regard the fancies of other men, as what indeed you feel your
selves; For the reason of our coffeehouse many times, is rather from the
fancies of other men, than from what we find we want our selves, we think
poverty to be such a great evil, why? Because it is so esteemed by others, more
than what people feel in it themselves, except they be in extremity of poverty:
I Will give you an evident demonstration that almost all the discontent in the
world is rather from the fancies of others, than from the evil that is upon
themselves. You that think your estates to be low, and you are thereupon
discontent, and it is a grievous affliction to you, but if all the men in the
world were poorer than you, then you would not be discontent, then you would
rejoice in your estates, though you had not a penny more than you have: As take
a man that can get but his twelve pence a day, and you will say, this were but
a poor thing to maintain a Family? But suppose there were no man in the world
that had more than this, yea that all other men but your selves had somewhat
less wages than you, then you would think your condition pretty good; you
should have no more then than you have now, therefore it appears by this, that
it is rather from the fancies of other men, than what you feel, that makes you
think your condition to be so grievous, for if all the men in the world looked
upon you as happy, more happy than themselves, then you would be contented; Oh
let not your happiness depend upon the fancies of other men. It is a speech of
Chrysostom I remember in this very case, Let us not make the people in this
case to be our Lords, as we must not make men to be the Lords of our faith, so
not the Lords of our comforts; that is, that our comfort should depend more
upon their imaginations than upon what we feel in our selves. It may be others
think you to be in an afflicted condition, yea, but I thank God, for my self I
do not so apprehend it, were it not for the disgrace, disesteem and slighting
of other men, my condition would not be so bad to me as now it is; this is that
which makes my condition afflictive.

The Twelfth DIRECTION.
Be not inordinately taken up with the comforts of this world when you have
them. When you have them, do not take too much content in them; that is a
certain rule, that look how inordinate any man or woman is in sorrow when a
comfort is taken from them, so much immoderate were they in the rejoicing in
the comfort when they had it; as now for instance, God takes away a child, and
you are inordinately sorrowful, beyond what God allows in a natural or
Christian way, now though I never knew before how your heart was toward the
child, yet when I see this (though you be a mere stranger to me) I may without
breach of charity conclude, that your heart was immoderately set upon your
child or husband, or upon any other comfort that I see you grieving for, when
God has taken it away. If you hear ill tidings about your estates, and your
hearts are dejected immoderately, and you are in a discontented way because of
such and such a cross, certainly your hearts were immoderately set upon the
world, and so likewise for your credit, if you hear others report this or that
ill of you, and your hearts are dejected because you think you suffer in your
name, your hearts were inordinately set upon your name and credit, now
therefore the way for you not to be immoderate in your sorrows for afflictions,
it is not to be immoderate in your love and delights when you have prosperity.
And these are the principal Directions for our help that we may live quiet, and
contented lives.

My brethren, to conclude all for this point, If I could tell you that I knew
how to show you a way never to be in want of any thing, I make no question but
then we should have much flocking to such a Sermon, when a man should undertake
to manifest to people that they should never be in want any more, but I have
been now preaching unto you, that that comes to as much, that which
countervails this, that which is in effect all one. Is it not almost all one,
never to be in want, or never to be without Contentment? that man or woman that
is never without a contented spirit, truly, can never be said to want much; Oh!
the Word holds forth a way full of comfort and peace to the people of God even
in this world, you may live happy lives in the midst of all the storms and
tempests in the world, there is an Ark that you may come into, and no men in
the world may live such comfortable, cheerful, and contented lives as the
Saints of God: Oh that we had learned this Lesson: I have been many Sermons
about this Lesson of Contentment, but I am afraid that you will be longer in
learning of it, than I have been preaching of it; it is a harder thing to learn
it than it is to speak or preach it. (I remember) I have read of one man
reading of that place in the 39. Psalm. I will take heed that I offend not with
my tongue: says be, I have been this 38. years a learning this lesson, and
have not learned it thoroughly. The truth is, there are many (I am afraid) that
have been professors near eight and thirty years, have hardly learnt this
lesson; it were a good lesson for young Professors to begin to learn this
betimes. But now, this lesson of Christian Contentment it is as hard, and
perhaps you may be many years in learning it: I am afraid there be some
Christians that have not yet learned, Not to offend grossly with their tongues:
The Scripture says, All a man's Religion is vain, if he cannot bridle his
tongue; therefore, those that make any profession of godliness, one would think
they should quickly learn this lesson, such a lesson that except learned, it
makes all their Religion vain: But for this Lesson of Christian Contentment, it
may take up more time to learn, and there is many that are learning it all the
days of their lives, and yet are not Proficients; but God forbid that it
should be said of any of us concerning this Lesson, as the Apostle says of
Widows in Timothy, That they were ever learning, and never came to the
knowledge of the truth. Oh let us not be ever learning this lesson of
Contentment, and yet never come to have skill in it. You would think it much if
you had used the Sea twenty years, and yet to have attained to no skill in your
Art of Navigation, you will say, I have used the Sea 20 or 30 years, and I hope
I may know by this time what belongs to Sea; Oh that you would but say so in
respect of the Art of Christianity! When there is any thing that is spoken
concerning the duty of a Christian. Oh that Christians could but say, I have
been a Christian thus long, and I hope I am not to seek in such a thing that is
so necessary for a Christian; here is a necessary lesson for a Christian that
Paul said, He had learned in all estates therewith to be content. Oh! be not
content with your selves till you have learned this lesson of Christian
Contentment, gotten some better skill in it than heretofore.

Now there is in the text another Lesson, which is a hard Lesson, I have
learned to abound, that does not so nearly concern us at this time, because the
times are afflictive times, and there is now (more than ordinary) an
uncertainty in all things in the world, in such times as these are, there are
few that have such an abundance, that they need to be much taught in that
lesson.

FINIS.
AN EXACT ALPHABETICAL TABLE.
A Abundance. ABundance of mercies enjoyed, should make us content Page 189
Account. Account of prosperity Page 89 Account of great men Page 90 Actions,
see Heart Adversity, see Quiet

Affections. Men unsatisfied in their Affection, see Wad Page 10
Afflictions. Faith to be acted in afflictions Page 47 Gods people to be
ordinarily in afflictions Page 98 To be troubled for murmuring rather than
affliction Page 120 Afflictions, How made worse Page 141 How to moderate grief
in afflictions Page 152 Gods hand apparent in afflictions Page 162 Afflictions
are not to be pored on too much Page 201 See Fear, Love, Christ, Mercy, Look,
Great, Choose, Fit, Service, etc.

All in All. God All in All to his Children Page 51
All Sufficiency. All Sufficiency in the Saints, how Page 3
Angel. A Christian one with Angels Page 127 A Christian nearer the Divine
nature than Angels Page 128 A Saints Calling as high as Angels Page 177
Apparent, see Afflictions Assurance, see Covenant.

B Base A murmuring Spirit, a base Spirit. Page 130
Beams. Creatures convey comforts but as beams Page 50
Being. We enjoy Creatures in reference to the first being Page 80
Best. God interprets what we do to the best Page 102 Better, see Condition,
Soul.

Beauty. Beauty of grace, wherein seen Page 104
Bless. Sense of affliction will make us bless God for the mercies of others
Page 165 See Dew

Bread. We are to pray but for daily bread. Page 134
Broken. A broken heart brings content Page 33
Burden. Contentment, by adding a new burden Page 31 Burden of sin makes
affliction light Page 32

C Call, Calling. Calling, of the Soul, what Page 124 A Christians general
Calling high Page 177 To be sure of a Call in every thing Page 196

Change. To change affliction to another thing Page 34 All Creatures go on in a
way of change Page 189

Child. A murmuring Spirit like a weaning Child Page 130
Christ. What the Saints have, is purchased by Christ Page 42 Afflictions to
the godly, from the same hand that gave Christ Page 44 What hinders the sight
of the excellency of Christ Page 123 In Conversion, the Soul cast on Christ
Page 124 Christian, see Murmuring.

Choose. We must not choose our afflictions Page 174
Command The more solemn Gods Command, the greater the sin in breaking of it
Page 163
Complacency. A Christian takes Complacency in Gods dispose Page 17
Complain. We may complain to God in afflictions Page 5
Comfort. Content brings Comfort Page 110 Comfort, how kept in the Soul ib.
Comfort of what we have, how lost. See God. Page 138

Condition A Christian content in every condition Page 20 We should do the
works of our present condition Page 35 How to know what is most suitable to our
condition Page 83 Our condition better than our betters Page 193

Constraint. Not to submit in affliction by constraint Page 16
Contentment. Contentment, what it signifies Page 2 Contentment, to be skilled
in the Mystery of it Page 3 Contentment, what Page 4 Contentment, whereof it is
made Page 20 Contentment, the bottom of it Page 30 Contentment, the excellency
of it Page 100 Contentment, wherein it consists Page 112 To be humbled for want
of Contentment Page 118 Contentment of former Christians Page 183
Considerations to move Contentment Page 187 Directions to Contentment Page 195
See Worship, Soul, Condition, Comfort, etc.

Conversion. The work of God in Conversion Page 122 See Life.

Contrary. God works by Contraries Page 99
Corruption. Argument of corruption in the soul Page 119
Covenant. Christians comfort from Gods Covenant Page 53, 61 Gods Covenant his
assurance office Page 63 Particular promises, part of the Covenant Page 54 In
Conversion, we give our selves to God in Covenant Page 124 See Work.

Creature. To know the vanity of the Creature Page 73 To enjoy God in the
Creature Page 80 In Conversion, the heart taken from the Creature Page 123
Creatures suffer for us Page 189

Crowns. God has Crowns for all graces Page 174
Curse. Curse of God upon murmuring Page 164
D Daily, see Bread. Danger. Danger of Prosperity Page 89
Dear. A sign of love to give God that that cost us dear Page 185 Deliverance
may be sought in afflictions Denial, see Self

Depaited. We think God is departed when we are afflicted Page 168 Though God
were departed from us, we should not from him Page 169 See Disquiet.

Dependence. We should live in a continual Dependence upon God Page 179
Deserve. We deserve nothing of God Page 69
Desires. A Christian should take from his Desires Page 29
Devil. Devil, his Rhetoric Page 136 Devil most discontented Page 147

Dew. A Christian lives on the Dew of Gods blessing Page 40
Dignity. Dignity of a Christian Page 120
Discouragement. Disconragment opposed to Contentment Page 7
Discontent. Discontent, the reason of it Page 73 Discontent, a sin of idle men
Page 76 Discontent, the root of it Page 82 Discontent, how aggravated Page 153
Discontent, Pleas for it Page 165 See Grace, Shift, Foolish, Mercies, Devil.

Disgrace. Disgrace, how sanctified Page 45
Dishonor. A Christian discontented when God is dishonored Page 15 Dispose, see
Freely.

Disquiet. Disquiet, the cause of Gods departing Page 168 See Murmuring.

Duty. Duty of a Christian in prosperity Page 89 What unfits for Duty Page 134
God accepts of weak Duty Page 156 Sense of affliction hinders not duty Page 165

E Efficacy. Efficacy of Gods Providence Page 95
Ever. God gives grace for ever Page 184
Evil. Evil of afflictions taken from Gods children Page 56
Excellency. Excellency of God, how we come near it Page 117 Excellency of God,
what ibid

Expectation. Expectation of a Christian Page 132
F Faith. Ordinary works done in Faith precious Page 7 Murmuring below the
grace of Faith Page 131 Exercise of Faith brings Contentment Page 198 See
Affliction, Mean.

Faithfulness God in rewarding, looks to faith fullness Page 178
Father. God the Father of a Christian Page 126 We should labor for the spirit
of our Father Page 129

Feel What we feel to be preferred to others fancies Page 205 Fill, see God.

Fit. God knows what afflictions are fit Page 174 Grace makes fit for any
condition ib.

Foolish. Discontent a foolish sin. Page 138, 139
Frame. Contentment a frame of Spirit Page 2
Free, Freely, etc. A Christian freely submits to God Page 15 Freedom, what
Page 16 God gives freely Page 41 Freeness of Gods mercies aggravates sin Page
158.

Fretting Fretting (...) to quietness of spirit Page 6
G Glory What a Christian hash here, is an earnest of Glory Page 43 Glory of
God, wherein it appears Page 105 Glory to be given to God in the enjoyment of
Blessings Page 193

God To look up to God in all conditions Page 19 Nothing can fill the heart but
God Page 28 Happiness of a Saint in God Page 38 Saints enjoy all in God Page 40
Outward comsorts taken away, when they keep us from God Page 50 See Life,
Creature; Excellency, Walk.

Good (...) of themselves unfit to receive good Page 70 We should not be
discontent that God is good to others Page 173 God does good to his by
afflictions Page 193 See Sanctify, Christ,

Grace Grace much exercised in Contentment Page 103 Grace, the strength of it
ibid Grace better than the Creature Page 113 Discontent contrary to Grace Page
122 Grace should content us without the world Page 193 See Beauty.

Gracious Contentment a gracious frame of heart Page 13
Great Afflictions not so great as our sins Page 172 Afflictions greater for
murmuring Page 173 Not to promise our selves great things Page 200

H. Habitual Contentment an habitual frame Page 13 To praise God for what be
had Page 188

Heart Contentment quiets the heart Page 5 The heart to be let out to God Page
67 The knowledge of our own hearts Page 83 Benefits of knowing our own hears
Page 84 A great evil to be given up to our own heart Page 90 Rising of the
heart Page 135 Distemper of the heart, how esteemed with God Page 18^ See
Gracious.

Heaven Heaven in the Souls of the Saints here Page 56 Things of Heaven real to
a Saint Page 67 Heaven, what Page 11^ Contentment better than Heaven ib

Help Help of a Christian, what Page 13^ No Help by discontent Page 139 High,
see Calling, Angels.

Honor What is the greatest Honor God has of us in the world Page 81
Humble. We should not murmr when God would humble us Page 161 see
Contentment.

Idle, see Discontent Joy Joy immoderate, how known, Page 20^
Enjoy Godly men content with that they enjoy Page 4 Good men enjoy what they
have Page 116 see God

Inward Inward discontent Page 4 Inward concent ibid

Judgment Many not content in their Judgment see Afflictions Page 11
K Kind To submit to afflictions of every king Page 22
King The soul subdued to Christ as King Page 124 Every Christian a King Page
128

L Life Life of a Saint, where it is Page 56 Conversion, a work all our life
Page 125

Long Long afflictions not to be murmured at Page 163
Look Afflictions to be looked for Page 171 Care in afflictions not looked for
Page 172

Loss No loss if we perish Page 71
Love Love of God in what a Christian has Page 41 Love in afflictions to the
godly Page 44 Love in a Christians eslate Page 110 Love to God a sign of it
Page 113

Low, Lowest God brings lowest, when he intends the greatest mercies Page 98
Men raised from a low condition, should not murmr Page 139 Obedience seen
most in a low Calling Page 178 The soul often best in a low outward estate Page
180

M Man Man, Gods instrument in affliction Page 170 Manage, see Heart

Mean Actions of a mean Christian accepted Page 178 Faith makes mean works
glorious ib

Mercy How the soul is sitted to receive mercy Page 206 Mercies lessened by
discontent Page 135 Discontent deprives of Mercies Page 139 The greater
Mercies, the greater sin to murmr Page 150 Every man has, more mercies than
afflictions Page 154 Greatness of Mercies should make us content Page 187 God
is before hand with his Mercies to us Page 188 see Discontent

Member Every Christian a Member of Christ Page 127 Mean Christians Members of
Christ's Body Page 176

Mystery Contentment a Mystery Page ^26
Mortified To get out hearts mortified to the world. Page ^00
Murmuring Murmuring opposite to quietness of spirit Page 6 Murmuring the evil
of it Page 119 Murmuring a note of a wicked man Page 1^0 Murmuring bolow a
Christian Page 120 Murmuring the effects of it Page 134 Murmuring breeds
disquiet Page 147 Murmuring, the way to relapse into it Page 150 Murmuring,
aggravations of it ib See Affection, Rebellion, Loss, Child, Curse, Mercy,
^^^all.

N Nature, see Angels. Necessary The knowledge of one thing necessary Page 74
Nothing How a Christian comes to know he is nothing Page 69 A Christian of
himself can do nothing Page 70 Naturally we are worse than nothing Page 71 See
Deserve, Use

O Obedience When God gives in love, we should return in Obedience Page 184 The
greater affliction, the more Obedience ibid

One All Gods works from eternity but One Page 96
P Pain. Pain sanctified to a Christian, how Page 46
Parts Discontent aggravated in men of parts Page 158 Passage, see Portion

People. Gods dealing with his people Page 97 Three things in Gods way with his
people Perfection, see Uprightness.

Particular. The Creatures particular comforts Page ^^3
Pity Pity to men that deal ill with us Page 171
Plague. Promises concerning the plague Page 54, 55, 56 Plea, see Discontent.

Portion. A Christian not content with little for his portion Page 28
Possess. Men discontent for what they possess Page 159
Poverty. Poverty sanctified by Christ's poverty Page 45 See prosperity.

Prayers. How we undo our prayers Page 133 Praise, see Had.

Profession. Profession of a Christian Page 131
Promise. Promises performed more literally to the Jews Page 54, 64 Gods
liberty in performing temporal promises Page 55 See Covenant, Heritage.

Prosperity. Many good men worse for prosperity Page 34 The burden of
prosperity Page 85 Prosperity should prepare for afflictions Page 182 See
Trouble, Danger.

Protection. Protection of God, from whom withdrawn. Page 147 A great Judgment
to be out of Gods protection Page 148

Proud. A proud heart never content Page 30
Punishment. Ground of accepting our punishments Page 167
Providence. Knowledge of Gods providence what it teaches Page 94 Providence
of God not to be altered Page 95 See Rational, Effieacy, Variety, Universality.
Purchase, see Christ. Public, see Discontent.

Q Quiet. Quiet in adversity Page 195 See Content.

R Rational. Gods providence most over Creatures Rational Page 94 Real, See
Heaven.

Reason. Wherein Natural Reason may quiet the heart Page 14
Rebellion. Murmuring accunted rebellion Page 121
Rejoice. How the soul comes to rejoice in Gods ways Page 72 When a sin to
rejoice immoderately Page 152

Relation. Relation of a Christian Page 126
Reprobate. No certain sign of a Reprobate in Scripture Page 91
Reward. A Christian may expect a reward Page 116 He is rewarded for what he
would do ibid. Great Rewards for Christians in low callings Page 178

Rhetoric, see Devil. Right. What Right wicked men have to what they enjoy.
Page 42
Righteously. God deals righteously with us, though men do not Page 171
Risings. Desperate Risings in the heart against God Page 9
Rule. A Christian should walk by Rule Page 196
S Saints. A Christian one body with the Saints Page 127
Sanctified. What a Christian has is sanctified Page 41 All afflictions to the
godly are sanctified Page 45 See Poverty, Disgrace, Scorn.

Scorn. Scorn sanctified by Christ Page 46
Self. A Christian can make up his wants in himself Page 53, 37 See God.

Self-love. Contentment in the creature from Self-love Page 113
Self-denial. Self denial the way to contentment Page 68 Christ the pattern of
self-denial Page 71

Sense. Gods Children have sense of their afflictions Page 5 Want of sense in
afflictions, dangerous ibid

Serve, Service. What makes active in Gods service Page 14 What fits the soul
for service Page 107 Affliction grievous when it hinders Gods service Page 175
All things serve them that serve God Page 197

Settled. Our spiritual condition settled Page 181
Shifting. Shifting opposite to contentment Page 8 Shifting caused by murmuring
Page 138 Sight, see Sin.

Silent. Grace makes silent in trouble Page 68
Small. To murmur for small things Page 157
Sin Sight of Sin in a Christian while he lives Page 125 Great sinners should
not murmur Page 160 When trouble for affliction, and not for sin. Page 166 If
trouble be for sin, we will not sin after trouble. Page 167 See Duty, Command.

Sorrow. Sorrow, when beyond bounds Page 165 See Joy.

Soul. Contentment spread through the whole soul Page 10 Contentment betters
the soul Page 113 It is a blessing on the soul Page 11^ See Heaven Worship.

Soldiers. Every Christian a soldier Page 78
Spirit. Spiritual judgments worst Page 91 Spirit of a Christian Page 129
Spirit of the Devil Page 147 Spiritual mind brings content Page 199 See Father,
Base

Spouse. A Christian spouse of Christ Page 126
Stilness. Stilness Natural Page 13
Steadfast. Grace makes the soul steadfast Page 195
Stranger. A Christian a stranger here. Page 67
Strength. Strength from Christ to bear afflictions Page 47 A christian strong
by Christ's strength Page 48

Stupid. Many seem content that are stupid Page 17
Submit. To submit to God, what Page 17 Pains taken without submission to God
not Christian-like Page 185

Substraction. Contentment by substraction. Page 29
Sweetness. Sweetness of mercies eaten out Page 132
T Temple. A Christian the Temple of the Holy Ghost Page 127
Temptation. How to be delivered from Temptation Page 108
Thorns. The things of the world as Thorns Page 196
Time. To submit in afflictions in respect of the Time Page 23 Loss of Time by
murmuring Page 134 Our Time little in this world Page 190

Trouble. Burden of Trouble in prosperity Page 85 See Sin.

Tumult. Tumult of Spirit Page 6
V Vanity. Every man in his settled estate is vanity Page 179
Variety. To submit in variety of conditions, Page 25 Variety of Gods
providence Page 95

Unsatisfied. A Christian content, yet unsatisfied Page 27
Unsearchable. Gods ways unsearchable Page 55
Unsettled. Unsetledness of Spirit. Page 7
Uprightness. Uprightness accounted perfection Page 204
Use. We can make use of nothing if God withdraw his grace Page 70 Men of
little use not to murmur Page 161

Universal. Gods providence universal Page 94
Unthankfulness. Unthankfulness whence it is Page 135
W Walk. To walk with God, what Page 161
Want. How to possess what we want Page 111 Not to want and be content, all one
Page 207

Waste. The affections not to run waste Page 51
Way. To interpret well Gods ways. Page 203 See Rejoice.

Wicked. Wicked men may have that that Christians murmur for Page 187 See
Murmuring.

Will. To melt our will into Gods will Page 37
Within. Contentment by purging out that that is within Page 39 Without, see
Within.

Works. Difference between the Covenant of Grace, and the Covenant of Works
Page 181 See One.

World. A Christians relation in the world Page 76 We were once contented with
the world without Grace Page 193 Not to grasp the World Page 195 Not to be much
taken with the comforts of the World. Page 206

Worship. How we give God due Worship Page 101 Worship, what it signifies ibid.
Soul Worship required Page 102 Worship, active and passive ibid.

Wrath. Wrath of God, how provoked Page 141
Wrong. Better to suffer than to offer Wrong Page 171
FINIS.

